Nonlinearly Preconditioned Gradient Methods
under Generalized Smoothness
Konstantinos Oikonomidis 1 2 Jan Quan 1 2 Emanuel Laude 3 Panagiotis Patrinos 1 2
where ϕ∗ : Rn → R is convex and is called the dual reference function. The convex conjugate of ϕ∗ , ϕ is called
the reference function and its properties are crucial to our
analysis. This general framework was originally analyzed
in (Maddison et al., 2021) under the so-called dual relative
smoothness condition for convex and essentially smooth
functions. In the general nonconvex and composite nonsmooth setting, it was studied in (Laude & Patrinos, 2025)
under a condition called the anisotropic descent property,
which was itself first introduced in (Laude et al., 2023)
and can be regarded as a globalization of anisotropic proxregularity (Laude, 2021) for smooth functions.

Abstract
We analyze nonlinearly preconditioned gradient
methods for solving smooth minimization problems. We introduce a generalized smoothness
property, based on the notion of abstract convexity, that is broader than Lipschitz smoothness and
provide sufficient first- and second-order conditions. Notably, our framework encapsulates algorithms associated with the gradient clipping
method and brings out novel insights for the class
of (L0 , L1 )-smooth functions that has received
widespread interest recently, thus allowing us
to extend beyond already established methods.
We investigate the convergence of the proposed
method in both the convex and nonconvex setting.

Our analysis is mainly focused on two types of reference
functions that are both generated by a kernel function h :
R → R+ ∪ {∞}, thus resulting in two different families of
algorithms. The first one is given by the composition with
the Euclidean norm, i.e., ϕ = h ◦ ∥ · ∥ and is referred to
as the isotropic reference function. In this case, the main
iteration (2) takes the form of gradient descent with a scalar
stepsize that depends on the iterates.
PnThe second is a separable sum obtained via ϕ(x) =
i=1 h(xi ), henceforth
called the anisotropic reference function. In this case, (2)
becomes gradient descent with a coordinate-wise stepsize
that depends on the iterates of the algorithm. We remark
that although the anisotropic reference function makes the
analysis of the method more challenging, it generates more
interesting algorithms, akin to the ones that are often used
in practice.

1. Introduction and preliminaries
We consider minimization problems of the form:
min f (x),

x∈Rn

(1)

where f is a continuously differentiable and possibly nonconvex function. While gradient descent is a reliable solver
for this type of problems, in many cases it does not fully
take advantage of the cost function properties and requires
well-tuned or costly stepsize strategies to converge.
In this paper we thus focus on nonlinearly preconditioned
gradient methods that are tailored to the properties of the
cost function. Given stepsizes γ > 0 and λ > 0 and a
starting point x0 ∈ Rn , we consider the following iteration:
xk+1 = Tγ,λ (xk ) := xk − γ∇ϕ∗ (λ∇f (xk )),

1.1. Motivation
Unifying framework for clipping algorithms. Gradient
clipping and signed gradient methods have garnered attention in recent years due to their efficiency in neural network training and other applications (Bernstein et al., 2018;
Gorbunov et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020a;b;c; Koloskova
et al., 2023; Kunstner et al., 2024). The intuition behind
gradient clipping is straightforward, since by clipping one
does not allow the potentially very large (stochastic) gradients to hinder the training. Nevertheless, in many cases the
clipping threshold and stepsize should be carefully tuned
in practice, otherwise leading to suboptimal performance
(Koloskova et al., 2023). While algorithms of this type

(2)

1
Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT-STADIUS),
KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
2
Leuven.AI-KU Leuven Institute for AI, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
3
Proxima Fusion GmbH, Flößergasse 2, 81369 Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Konstantinos Oikonomidis <konstantinos.oikonomidis@kuleuven.be>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

