Nearly Optimal Sample Complexity for Learning with Label Proportions

Robert Busa-Fekete * 1 Travis Dick * 1 Claudio Gentile * 1 Haim Kaplan * 1 2 Tomer Koren * 1 2 Uri Stemmer * 1 2

Abstract

e-commerce, medical databases (Patrini et al., 2014), high
energy physics (Dery et al., 2018), election prediction (Sun
et al., 2017), medical image analysis (Bortsova et al., 2018),
remote sensing (Ding et al., 2017).

We investigate Learning from Label Proportions
(LLP), a partial information setting where examples in a training set are grouped into bags, and
only aggregate label values in each bag are available. Despite the partial observability, the goal
is still to achieve small regret at the level of individual examples. We give results on the sample
complexity of LLP under square loss, showing
that our sample complexity is essentially optimal.
From an algorithmic viewpoint, we rely on carefully designed variants of Empirical Risk Minimization, and Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithms, combined with ad hoc variance reduction
techniques. On one hand, our theoretical results
improve in important ways on the existing literature on LLP, specifically in the way the sample
complexity depends on the bag size. On the other
hand, we validate our algorithmic solutions on
several datasets, demonstrating improved empirical performance (better accuracy for less samples)
against recent baselines.

Though early contributions to LLP date back to the mid
2000s (e.g., (de Freitas & Kuck, 2005; Musicant et al.,
2007; Quadrianto et al., 2008)), it is only more recently
that we have seen a general resurgence of interest in this
problem (e.g., (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2019;
Scott & Zhang, 2020; Saket, 2021; 2022; Tsai & Lin, 2020;
Lu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Busa-Fekete et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2024; Havaldar et al., 2024)), often related to the
desire of preserving the privacy of user data/activity in dataintensive online businesses.
Relevant practical scenarios where LLP has started to play a
pivotal role relate to the ad conversion reporting systems proposed by Apple (SKAN, (app, 2025)) and Google Chrome
and Android (Privacy Sandbox (chr, 2021)), where user
conversions (like user purchases) are only available at the
aggregate level (e.g., by ad campaign), and training a conversion model is thus forced to leverage such aggregate
signals as much as possible. Still, the models trained this
way are required to perform well at the level of individual
conversions.

1. Introduction

This paper is inspired by two recently published works
in the LLP literature (Busa-Fekete et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2024), where regret guarantees are given under standard
statistical learning assumptions for randomly drawn (and
non-overlapping) bags of a given size. In the first paper, the
authors describe a general debiasing technique that applies
to any bounded loss function (or loss gradient) to turn aggregate label signal into an individual label signal at the cost of
an inflated variance of the resulting estimator. This allows
the authors to seamlessly adapt their technique to standard
learning methods like Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In particular, the
authors give regret guarantees in general non-realizable scenarios showing that when the learner deals with bags of
size k, the sample complexity of ERM and SGD with label
proportions increases by a factor of roughly k 2 .

Learning with Label Proportions (LLP) is a semi-supervised
learning setting where the learning algorithm only observes
label values of a training set at the resolution of groups of
feature vectors. Specifically, the training set is partitioned
into collections of unlabeled feature vectors, called bags
in the literature, and only the proportion of positive labels
within each bag are observed, instead of the individual labels.
The motivation comes from a number of practical scenarios where the access to individual labels is either costly or
impossible to achieve, or made available to a learner at an
aggregate level because of privacy-preserving concerns.
Among these practical scenarios, it is worth mentioning
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, New York, USA 2 Tel
Aviv University, Israel. Correspondence to: Claudio Gentile <cgentile@google.com>, Travis Dick <tdick@google.com>.

In (Li et al., 2024), the authors improve upon (Busa-Fekete
et al., 2023) when the loss function is the square loss, in that
their bounds yield fast rates of convergence in realizable

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

