Temperature-Annealed Boltzmann Generators

Henrik Schopmans 1 Pascal Friederich 1 2

Abstract

an advanced methodology, a key factor also lies in the availability of abundant experimental data, such as that in the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Burley et al., 2021).

Efficient sampling of unnormalized probability
densities such as the Boltzmann distribution of
molecular systems is a longstanding challenge.
Next to conventional approaches like molecular
dynamics or Markov chain Monte Carlo, variational approaches, such as training normalizing flows with the reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence, have been introduced. However, such
methods are prone to mode collapse and often
do not learn to sample the full configurational
space. Here, we present temperature-annealed
Boltzmann generators (TA-BG) to address this
challenge. First, we demonstrate that training
a normalizing flow with the reverse KullbackLeibler divergence at high temperatures is possible without mode collapse. Furthermore, we introduce a reweighting-based training objective to anneal the distribution to lower target temperatures.
We apply this methodology to three molecular
systems of increasing complexity and, compared
to the baseline, achieve better results in almost all
metrics while requiring up to three times fewer
target energy evaluations. For the largest system,
our approach is the only method that accurately
resolves the metastable states of the system.

However, not all scientific domains benefit from such wellcurated and extensive experimental datasets. In areas where
data scarcity is a persistent challenge, computational simulations play an essential role. Molecular dynamics (MD)
and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are the
primary tools used to explore complex biochemical and
physical systems and generate insights from limited experimental information. Despite their utility, these classical sampling approaches often come with significant computational
costs, as they rely on iterative trajectory-based exploration
of high-dimensional state spaces.
As a result, various approaches have been explored to speed
up these methods, including integrating machine learning
(ML)-based force fields (Reiser et al., 2022), enhanced sampling techniques (Barducci et al., 2011), and data-driven collective variables (Bonati et al., 2021). Furthermore, (transferable) generative models have been trained on equilibrium
samples from MD simulations (Noé et al., 2019; Mahmoud
et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2024; Klein & Noe, 2024).
While these advancements have significantly improved the
efficiency and utility of traditional simulations, there is a
growing interest in rethinking the paradigm altogether. Variational sampling methods, rooted in generative modeling,
offer a compelling alternative to classical MD and MCMC.
These approaches aim to learn the underlying probability
distribution without the availability of training data, bypassing the need for explicit trajectory-based sampling.

1. Introduction
Machine learning, and particularly generative models, have
become a transformative force across numerous domains. A
prime example of this impact is in structural biology, where
deep learning methods such as those in the AlphaFold family
(Jumper et al., 2021; Abramson et al., 2024) have revolutionized our ability to predict protein structures. While a
big part of AlphaFold’s success can surely be attributed to

The most straightforward variational approach is to train a
likelihood-based generative model, such as a normalizing
flow, using the reverse Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD).
However, this is known to yield mode collapse in many
scenarios (Midgley et al., 2023b; Felardos et al., 2023).
Recently, multiple variational sampling methods were developed (Blessing et al., 2024), based on normalizing flows
(Matthews et al., 2022; Midgley et al., 2023b), diffusion
models (Zhang & Chen, 2021; Richter & Berner, 2023;
Berner et al., 2023; Vargas et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023;
Akhound-Sadegh et al., 2024; Sendera et al., 2024), and
flow matching (Woo & Ahn, 2024).

1

Institute of Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Kaiserstr. 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany 2 Institute of
Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Kaiserstr. 12,
76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to: Pascal Friederich
<pascal.friederich@kit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

