Towards Understanding Parametric Generalized Category Discovery on Graphs

Bowen Deng * 1 2 Lele Fu * 2 Jialong Chen 1 Sheng Huang 2 Tianchi Liao 3 Tao Zhang 2 Chuan Chen 1

Abstract

2024; Hou et al., 2024) aims to identify and label novel
classes. However, GNCD assumes only new-class samples
during testing, which is often unrealistic. We introduce
Graph Generalized Category Discovery (GGCD), which
addresses both old and new-class nodes during testing.

Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to
identify both known and novel categories in unlabeled data by leveraging knowledge from old
classes. However, existing methods are limited
to non-graph data; lack theoretical foundations to
answer When and how known classes can help
GCD. We introduce the Graph GCD task; provide
the first rigorous theoretical analysis of parametric GCD. By quantifying the relationship between
old and new classes in the embedding space using the Wasserstein distance W , we derive the
first provable GCD loss bound based on W . This
analysis highlights two necessary conditions for
effective GCD. However, we uncover, through a
Pairwise Markov Random Field perspective, that
popular graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods inherently violate these conditions. To address this limitation, we propose SWIRL, a novel
GCL method for GCD. Experimental results validate our (theoretical) findings and demonstrate
SWIRL’s effectiveness.

Compared to GGCD, Visual GCD (VGCD) has made significant progress. VGCD methods consist of two main
parts: contrastive learning (CL) and classification. Based
on the classifier type, VGCD can be divided into: 1) nonparametric methods, such as Vanilla GCD (Vaze et al., 2022),
which use classifiers like Semi-Supervised K-means (SSKM); 2) parametric GCD methods, such as SimGCD (Wen
et al., 2023), that use parametric classifiers like MLPs. Regardless of the method or data type, a common consensus
is that leveraging knowledge from old classes aids in distinguishing new classes. However, the theoretical mechanisms
behind this consensus are unclear, motivating our research:
Question 1: When and how do old classes help (parametric) generalized category discovery on graphs?
Despite empirical progress, the theoretical foundations of
GCD remain limited. Chiaroni et al. (2023) proposed maximizing the mutual information between representations and
classifier predictions. Rastegar et al. (2024) derived and
minimized an upper bound on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the predicted distribution p̂(ŷi = ŷj ) and
the true one p(yi = yj ) over all (i, j) pairs. Both theories
fail to elucidate the intrinsic role of old-class knowledge
in new-class discovery and lack related provable GCD loss
bounds, due to the lack of formal analysis of the relationship
between old and new classess and its impact on GCD.

1. Introduction
Graph machine learning (GML) (Wu et al., 2021b; Liu
et al., 2022a) has made notable strides in many fields like
recommendation systems (Pal et al., 2020) and financial risk
management (Motie & Raahemi, 2024). Traditional GML
assumes all categories are known during training, limiting
its ability to handle unknown new classes during testing in
real-world open-world scenarios. Prior solutions, such as
Graph Open-set Recognition (Wu et al., 2021a; Zhang et al.,
2023a; 2024), detect and reject nodes from unseen classes,
while Graph Novel Category Discovery (GNCD) (Jin et al.,

Intuitively, when the embeddings of old classes l and l′
are well-separated, distinguishing between new classes u
and u′ can be achieved by aligning their embeddings with
those of l and l′ , respectively. Specifically, The closer the
predictions for u are to those for l, and for u′ to l′ , the
more effectively the knowledge for differentiating l and l′
transfers to u and u′ . Formally, we quantify this relationship, considering both embeddings and labels, using the
Wasserstein distance W between the joint (embedding, label) distributions of old and new classes. Following the
common practice of replacing discrete metrics with differentiable surrogate losses, we define a surrogate loss Eq. 5
that faithfully reflects GCD performance. We then derive

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 School
of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, China 3 School of Software Engineering, Sun YatSen University, Zhuhai, China. Correspondence to: Chuan Chen
<chenchuan@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

