MultiPDENet: PDE-embedded Learning with Multi-time-stepping
for Accelerated Flow Simulation
Qi Wang 1 Yuan Mi 1 Haoyun Wang 1 Yi Zhang 2 Ruizhi Chengze 2
Hongsheng Liu 2 Ji-Rong Wen 1 Hao Sun 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Complex spatiotemporal dynamical systems, e.g., climate
system (Schneider et al., 2017) and fluid dynamics (Ferziger
et al., 2019), are fundamentally governed by partial differential equations (PDEs). To capture the intricate behaviors
of these systems, various numerical methods have been developed. Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) is a widely
used method for solving PDEs. It requires specifying initial
conditions (ICs), boundary conditions (BCs), and PDE parameters, followed by discretizing the equations on a grid
using techniques like finite difference (FD), finite element
(FE), finite volume (FV), or spectral methods. Despite their
accuracy, traditional numerical methods face key challenges
of high computational costs (Goc et al., 2021), when addressing with high-dimensional problems or necessitating
fine spatial and temporal resolutions.

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) by
numerical methods meet computational cost challenge for getting the accurate solution since fine
grids and small time steps are required. Machine
learning can accelerate this process, but struggle with weak generalizability, interpretability,
and data dependency, as well as suffer in longterm prediction. To this end, we propose a PDEembedded network with multiscale time stepping
(MultiPDENet), which fuses the scheme of numerical methods and machine learning, for accelerated simulation of flows. In particular, we
design a convolutional filter based on the structure
of finite difference stencils with a small number of
parameters to optimize, which estimates the equivalent form of spatial derivative on a coarse grid
to minimize the equation’s residual. A Physics
Block with a 4th-order Runge-Kutta integrator
at the fine time scale is established that embeds
the structure of PDEs to guide the prediction. To
alleviate the curse of temporal error accumulation in long-term prediction, we introduce a multiscale time integration approach, where a neural
network is used to correct the prediction error
at a coarse time scale. Experiments across various PDE systems, including the Navier-Stokes
equations, demonstrate that MultiPDENet can
accurately predict long-term spatiotemporal dynamics, even given small and incomplete training data, e.g., spatiotemporally down-sampled
datasets. MultiPDENet achieves the state-of-theart performance compared with other neural baseline models, also with clear speedup compared to
classical numerical methods.

Recent advances in deep learning have introduced neuralbased approaches (Lu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Gupta
& Brandstetter, 2023) for solving PDEs. These data-driven
methods eliminate the need for explicit theoretical formulations, enabling networks to learn underlying patterns directly
from data through end-to-end training. While promising,
these approaches face notable challenges, including a heavy
dependence on large training datasets and limited generalization. For instance, achieving accurate predictions becomes
particularly challenging when models encounter unseen ICs
or scenarios beyond the training distribution.
A notable progress lies in the paradigm of Physics-informed
neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019), which incorporates physical prior knowledge (such as PDE residuals
and I/BCs) as constraints within the loss function. This
approach allows the network to fit the data while simultaneously maintaining a certain degree of physical consistency.
Variants of PINNs (Raissi et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020;
Eshkofti & Hosseini, 2023) have shown notable success
across various domains, reducing the dependency on extensive datasets to some degree. However, such methods still
face scalability and generalizability challenges when applied
to complex nonlinear dynamical systems. Additionally, optimizing complex loss functions (Rathore et al., 2024) and
ensuring model interpretability remain challenges.

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China 2 Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Hao Sun <haosun@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

