Diffusion Adversarial Post-Training for One-Step Video Generation

Shanchuan Lin 1 Xin Xia 1 Yuxi Ren 1 Ceyuang Yang 1 Xuefeng Xiao 1 Lu Jiang 1

Abstract

challenges. It deviates from the fundamental principle of
diffusion models, which rely on iterative denoising steps to
uncover the data distribution. While previous research has
demonstrated notable advancements for generating images
in a single step with promising results (Ren et al., 2024; Yin
et al., 2024a; Sauer et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2024), producing
high-quality images in one step remains challenging, particularly in achieving fine-grained details, minimizing artifacts,
and preserving the structural integrity.

The diffusion models are widely used for image
and video generation, but their iterative generation process is slow and expansive. While existing distillation approaches have demonstrated
the potential for one-step generation in the image
domain, they still suffer from significant quality
degradation. In this work, we propose Adversarial Post-Training (APT) against real data following diffusion pre-training for one-step video
generation. To improve the training stability and
quality, we introduce several improvements to
the model architecture and training procedures,
along with an approximated R1 regularization objective. Empirically, our experiments show that
our adversarial post-trained model can generate
two-second, 1280×720, 24fps videos in real-time
using a single forward evaluation step. Additionally, our model is capable of generating 1024px
images in a single step, achieving quality comparable to state-of-the-art methods. Our project
page: https://seaweed-apt.com/

Accelerated video generation, however, has seen limited
progress in the literature. Early efforts utilizing generative
adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), e.g.,
StyleGAN-V (Skorokhodov et al., 2021) can only generate
domain-specific data with poor quality in modern standards.
With the rise of diffusion methods, recent studies have begun exploring the extension of image distillation techniques
to video diffusion models. However, existing works have
only explored distillation on small-scale and low-resolution
video models that only generate 512×512 videos for a total
of 16 frames (Lin & Yang, 2024; Zhai et al., 2024). A concurrent work (Yin et al., 2024b) has attempted distillation of
large-scale video models at 640×352 12fps. These methods
still generally need 4 diffusion steps. Given the prohibitive
computational cost associated with high-resolution video
generation, e.g., generating just a few seconds of 1280×720
24fps videos can take multiple minutes even on the stateof-the-art GPUs like the H100, our work aims at generating
high-resolution videos in a single step.

1. Introduction
The diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) has
become the de facto method for large-scale image and video
generation. Reducing the generation cost is an important
research area. Among the various methods, diffusion step
distillation has emerged as an effective approach to reduce
the inference cost. Generally, these methods start with a pretrained diffusion model as a teacher that generates targets
through multiple diffusion inference steps. They then apply
knowledge distillation (Hinton, 2015) to train a student
model that can replicate the teacher’s output using much
fewer diffusion inference steps.

In this paper, we introduce a new approach for one-step
image and video generation. Our method utilizes a pretrained diffusion model, specifically the diffusion transformer (DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023), as initialization, and
continues training the DiT using the adversarial training
objective against real data. It is important to notice the
contrast to existing diffusion distillation methods, which
use a pre-trained diffusion model as a distillation teacher
to generate the target. Instead, our method performs adversarial training of the DiT directly on real data, using
the pre-trained diffusion model only for initialization. We
term this method Adversarial Post-Training or APT, as it
parallels supervised fine-tuning commonly performed during the post-training stage. Empirically, we observe that
APT provides two benefits. First, APT eliminates the substantial cost associated with pre-computing video samples

One-step generation is often considered the pinnacle of diffusion step distillation, yet it presents the most significant
1
ByteDance Seed. Correspondence to: Shanchuan Lin <peterlin@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

