Generalized Category Discovery via Reciprocal Learning and
Class-Wise Distribution Regularization

Duo Liu 1 Zhiquan Tan 2 Linglan Zhao # 1 Zhongqiang Zhang 1 Xiangzhong Fang 1 Weiran Huang † 1 3 4
(a) Parametric GCD: inferior base discrimination

Abstract

Labeled

Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to
identify unlabeled samples by leveraging the base
knowledge from labeled ones, where the unlabeled set consists of both base and novel classes.
Since clustering methods are time-consuming at
inference, parametric-based approaches have become more popular. However, recent parametricbased methods suffer from inferior base discrimination due to unreliable self-supervision. To address this issue, we propose a Reciprocal Learning Framework (RLF) that introduces an auxiliary branch devoted to base classification. During
training, the main branch filters the pseudo-base
samples to the auxiliary branch. In response, the
auxiliary branch provides more reliable soft labels
for the main branch, leading to a virtuous cycle.
Furthermore, we introduce Class-wise Distribution Regularization (CDR) to mitigate the learning bias towards base classes. CDR essentially
increases the prediction confidence of the unlabeled data and boosts the novel class performance.
Combined with both components, our proposed
method, RLCD, achieves superior performance
in all classes with negligible extra computation.
Comprehensive experiments across seven GCD
datasets validate its superiority. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/APORduo/RLCD.

Unlabeled

…
…

Image
Encoder

CLS

Self-supervision

All Class Logits

(b) Ours: enhanced base discrimination
Labeled

Unlabeled

…
…

CLS
Image
Encoder

Self-supervision
Aux-supervision

AUX
Base Class Logits

Figure 1. (a) Parametric Generalized Category Discovery (GCD)
methods rely on self-supervision for clustering unlabeled data but
exhibit weak base class discrimination. (b) Our approach introduces an auxiliary branch specialized in base class classification,
providing more reliable base logits to the main branch and thereby
significantly improving base discrimination.

Dosovitskiy, 2021). Generally, the models rely on abundant
annotated data in a closed scenario where the unlabeled
data share the same classes with the labeled training data.
However, these models have limitations in the real-world
scenario where unlabeled data comes from unknown classes.
In this way, Category Discovery (CD) has garnered attention in the machine learning community. Initially, Han et al.
(2019) propose Novel Class Discovery (NCD), which is
designed to cluster novel class data with the assistance of
labeled data exclusively. However, NCD assumes that the
unlabeled data all belong to novel classes, which is unrealistic in practical scenarios. Recently, Generalized Category
Discovery (GCD) (Vaze et al., 2022b) has emerged and it
allows the unlabeled data spanning both base and novel categories. Compared to the NCD task, GCD is more practical
and challenging in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning in recent years, models can perform well in traditional tasks such as image
recognition (He et al., 2016; 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017;
1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai Innovation Institute 4 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
BIGAI. # Project lead. † Correspondence to: Weiran Huang
<weiran.huang@outlook.com>.

Vaze et al. (2022b) first define the GCD problem and tackle
it using contrastive learning along with the semi-supervised
k-means clustering method. Wen et al. (2023)further propose an effective parametric framework, SimGCD, which
outperforms the clustering methods with reduced inference
time. Due to its effectiveness, the parametric framework

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

