Understanding Nonlinear Implicit Bias via Region Counts in Input Space

Jingwei Li * 1 2 Jing Xu * 1 Zifan Wang 1 2 Huishuai Zhang 3 Jingzhao Zhang 1 2

Abstract

implicit bias (Brutzkus et al., 2017; Soudry et al., 2018).
Implicit bias refers to the inherent tendencies in how neural
networks learn and generalize from the training data, even
without explicit regularizations or constraints.

One explanation for the strong generalization ability of neural networks is implicit bias. Yet, the
definition and mechanism of implicit bias in nonlinear contexts remains little understood. In this
work, we propose to characterize implicit bias
by the count of connected regions in the input
space with the same predicted label. Compared
with parameter-dependent metrics (e.g., norm or
normalized margin), region count can be better
adapted to nonlinear, overparameterized models,
because it is determined by the function mapping
and is invariant to reparametrization. Empirically, we found that small region counts align
with geometrically simple decision boundaries
and correlate well with good generalization performance. We also observe that good hyperparameter choices such as larger learning rates
and smaller batch sizes can induce small region
counts. We further establish the theoretical connections and explain how larger learning rate can
induce small region counts in neural networks.

The implicit bias of linear neural networks has been extensively studied. One of the classical setting is linear classification with logistic loss. Brutzkus et al. (2017); Soudry
et al. (2018); Arora et al. (2019) show that the parameter
converges to the direction that maximizes the L2 margin.
For regression problems, it is proved that gradient descent or
stochastic gradient descent converges to a parameter that is
closest to the initialization in terms of L2 norm (Gunasekar
et al., 2018a). The results of the linear regression model can
be extended to deep linear neural networks by generalizing
the definition of min-norm and max-margin solutions (Ji
& Telgarsky, 2018a; Vaskevicius et al., 2019; Woodworth
et al., 2020).
Compared to linear models, defining implicit biases in nonlinear networks poses significant challenges. One line of
work studies homogeneous networks and demonstrates that
gradient flow solutions converge to a KKT point of the maxmargin problem (Lyu & Li, 2019; Ji & Telgarsky, 2020;
Wang et al., 2021; Jacot et al., 2022). Further research extends this analysis, showing that gradient flow converges to
a max-margin solution under various norms (Ongie et al.,
2019; Chizat & Bach, 2020). Other studies focus on describing the implicit bias of neural networks using sharpness, such as (Foret et al., 2020; Montúfar et al., 2022;
Andriushchenko et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
One mystery in deep neural networks lies in their ability
to generalize, despite having significantly more learnable
parameters than the number of training examples (Zhang
et al., 2017a). The choice of network architectures, including factors such as nonlinearity, depth, and width, along
with training procedures like initialization, optimization algorithms, and loss functions, can result in vastly diverse
generalization performance (Sutskever et al., 2013; Smith
et al., 2017; Wilson et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019). The varied
generalization abilities exhibited by neural networks are
often explained by many researchers through the theory of

We note that previous definitions of implicit bias in neural
networks mostly focus on certain metrics of network parameters. While these approaches enable explicit analyses of
training trajectories, they encounter new challenges when
applied to nonlinear networks: reparametrization of the network can preserve the function mapping but give completely
different parameters, and consequently, different implicit
biases. We will discuss this point in detail in Section 3.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Jingwei Li <ljw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Jingzhao Zhang <jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Motivated by the above studies, we focus on leveraging
decision boundaries in the input space to characterize implicit bias. We adopt a metric called region count, which
measures the average number of connected components in
the decision regions of a predictor (see Figure 1). This idea
was initially introduced by Somepalli et al. (2022), who

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

