Matryoshka Quantization

Pranav Nair * 1 Puranjay Datta * 1 Jeff Dean 1 2 Prateek Jain 1 Aditya Kusupati 1

Abstract

Achiam et al., 2023) in a large number of scenarios. Due
to auto-regressive nature of LLMs, decode latency tends to
dominate inference cost. Decode latency itself is dominated
by communication cost of transferring model weights from
high-bandwidth memory (HBM) to the SRAM or due to
transferring weights/activations in a distributed cluster.

Quantizing model weights is critical for reducing
the communication and inference costs of large
models. However, quantizing models – especially
to low precisions like int4 or int2 – requires a
trade-off in model quality; int2, in particular, is
known to severely degrade model quality. Consequently, practitioners are often forced to maintain
multiple models with different quantization levels or serve a single model that best satisfies the
quality-latency trade-off. On the other hand, integer data types, such as int8, inherently possess
a nested (Matryoshka) structure where smaller
bit-width integers, like int4 or int2, are nested
within the most significant bits. Leveraging this
insight, in this paper, we propose Matryoshka
Quantization (MatQuant), a novel multi-scale
quantization technique that alleviates the aforementioned challenge. This technique allows us to
train and maintain a single quantized model but
serve it with the precision demanded by the deployment. Furthermore, leveraging MatQuant’s
co-training and co-distillation, int2 precision models extracted by MatQuant outperform standard
int2 quantization by up to 4% and 7% with OmniQuant and QAT as base algorithms respectively.
Finally, we demonstrate that by using an extra bit
to represent outliers, a model with an effective
precision of 2.05-bit improves further by 6% with
OmniQuant as the base algorithm.

Quantizing weights and/or activations can significantly reduce the overall communication load and is, therefore,
one of the most popular techniques for reducing inference
costs (Dettmers et al., 2022). While floating-point representations are standard for training, integer data types such as
int8, int4, and int2 are appealing alternatives for inference.
However, current methods for quantizing to these varying
integer precisions typically treat each target precision as an
independent optimization problem, leading to a collection
of distinct models rather than a single, versatile one. Furthermore, quantizing to extremely low precisions like int2
is known to be highly inaccurate. In this work, we pose the
question of whether both of the above challenges can be
addressed; that is, can we train a single model from which
we can extract multiple accurate lower-precision models?
We answer this question in the affirmative by introducing
Matryoshka Quantization (MatQuant), a novel multi-scale
training method that leverages the inherent nested (Matryoshka) structure (Kusupati et al., 2022) within integer
data types (Figure 1a). Specifically, slicing the most significant bits (MSBs) of an int8-quantized weight can directly
yield an int4 or int2 model. Existing quantization techniques
often neglect this structure, which limits the potential for
multi-scale adaptable models operating at various bit-widths
with optimal performance.
Instead, MatQuant simultaneously optimizes model
weights across multiple precision levels (e.g., int8, int4,
int2). At a high level, we represent each model parameter at different precision levels using shared MSBs, and
then jointly optimize the loss for each precision level. This
allows us to develop a single quantized model that can
effectively operate at any of the chosen bit-widths, offering a spectrum of accuracy-vs-cost options. MatQuant is
a general-purpose technique, applicable to most learningbased quantization methods, such as Quantization Aware
Training (QAT) (Jacob et al., 2018) and OmniQuant (Shao
et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Due to their impressive performance, there is a strong push
to deploy deep learning models, particularly large language
models (LLMs) (G Team et al., 2024; Dubey et al., 2024;
*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Pranav Nair <pranavajitnair@google.com>,
Puranjay Datta <puranjaydatta@google.com>, Jeff Dean
<jeff@google.com>, Prateek Jain <prajain@google.com>,
Aditya Kusupati <kusupati@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

