H-Tuning: Toward Low-Cost and Efficient ECG-based Cardiovascular Disease
Detection with Pre-Trained Models
Rushuang Zhou 1 2 Yuan-Ting Zhang 3 4 5 Yining Dong 6 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Fine-tuning large-scale pre-trained models provides an effective solution to alleviate the label scarcity problem in cardiovascular diseases
(CVDs) detection using electrocardiogram (ECG).
However, as the pre-trained models scale up, the
computational costs for fine-tuning and inference
become unaffordable on low-level devices deployed for clinical applications. Additionally,
maintaining the model performance under low
budgets in computational resources remains a significant challenge. However, a comprehensive
study that can address them in a joint framework is
still lacking. Here, we propose a holistic method
(H-Tuning) for low-cost and efficient fine-tuning
of pre-trained models on downstream datasets.
Then, the inference costs of the models fine-tuned
by H-Tuning are further reduced significantly using a knowledge distillation technique. Experiments on four ECG datasets demonstrate that
H-Tuning reduces the GPU memory consumption
during fine-tuning by 6.34 times while achieving
comparable CVDs detection performance to standard fine-tuning. With the knowledge distillation
technique, the model inference latency and the
memory consumption are reduced by 4.52 times
and 19.83 times. As such, the proposed joint
framework allows for the utilization of pre-trained
models with high computation efficiency and robust performance, exploring a path toward lowcost and efficient CVDs detection. Code is available at https://github.com/KAZABANA/H-Tuning

Acting as the number one cause of death, cardiovascular
diseases threaten the lives of millions of people worldwide
(Kelly et al., 2010; Mc Namara et al., 2019). In recent years,
deep-learning models have been successful in diagnosing
cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) using electrocardiography
(ECG)(Hannun et al., 2019; Ribeiro et al., 2020; Strodthoff
et al., 2020). However, gathering sufficient labeled data and
computational resources required to train and implement
deep learning models from scratch is still very expensive and
time-consuming, especially for developers from resourcelimited communities. Fortunately, fine-tuning large-scale
pre-trained models provides an effective solution to reduce
the requirement of labeled data in downstream datasets.
For example, Vaid et al. (2023) pre-trained a large-scale
vision transformer on a huge dataset with eight million ECG
recordings, which demonstrated better transferability and
performance than traditional network architectures. Subsequently, many studies have tried to transfer the success
of large pre-trained foundation models from the computer
vision and natural language processing domains to medical
intelligence domains. For example, foundation models in
retinal imaging (Zhou et al., 2023), cancer imaging (Pai
et al., 2024), and digital pathology (Wang et al., 2024) were
developed for enhancing disease diagnosis performance on
downstream datasets. In the field of ECG-based CVDs
detection, researchers also validated the effectiveness of
fine-tuning foundation models in reducing the requirement
on labeled data (Han & Ding, 2024; Mathew et al., 2024;
McKeen et al., 2024; Pham et al., 2024).
However, fine-tuning pre-trained models becomes computationally expensive as the pre-trained models scale up. Specifically, standard fine-tuning optimizes all the parameters of
pre-trained models using gradient backpropagation (firstorder optimization), requiring a large amount of GPU memory. Unlike industrial servers, such computational costs are
unaffordable for low-level devices. Hu et al. (2022) proposed the low-rank adaptation (LoRA) to alleviate this problem and maintain the model performance on downstream
datasets. Specifically, it freezes the pre-trained weights
and injects trainable low-rank matrices to fine-tune the pretrained models, reducing the number of trainable parame-

1

Department of Biomedical Engineering, City University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 Hong Kong Center for
Cerebro-Cardiovascular Health Engineering, Hong Kong, China
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 4 Hong Kong Institutes of Medical
Engineering, Hong Kong, China 5 The AICARE Bay Lab, Guangdong Medical University, Dong Guan, China 6 Department of
Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Yining Dong <yinidong@cityu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

