Active Learning with Selective Time-Step Acquisition for PDEs

Yegon Kim 1 Hyunsu Kim 1 Gyeonghoon Ko 1 Juho Lee 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In many scientific and engineering applications, accurately
solving partial differential equations (PDEs) in the form
of trajectories of states evolving over time is essential for
understanding complex phenomena (Holton and Hakim,
2013; Atkins et al., 2023; Murray, 2007; Wilmott et al.,
1995). The traditional approach involves running numerical solvers, which provide accurate solutions but are
computationally costly, taking several hours, days or even
weeks to run depending on the complexity of the problem
(Cleaver et al., 2016; Cowan et al., 2001). As a result,
there is significant interest in developing surrogate models
(Greydanus et al., 2019; Bar-Sinai et al., 2019; SanchezGonzalez et al., 2020; Z. Li et al., 2020; Brandstetter et
al., 2022b; Lippe et al., 2024) that can approximate the
solutions more efficiently. Surrogate models are obtained
by solving regression tasks on some “ground truth” data.
The ground truth data for PDEs are generated by numerical solvers, which are costly compared to those of standard
regression problems. As a result, the expense of data acquisition presents a major bottleneck in the development of
surrogate models for PDEs.

Accurately solving partial differential equations
(PDEs) is critical to understanding complex scientific and engineering phenomena, yet traditional numerical solvers are computationally expensive. Surrogate models offer a more efficient alternative, but their development is hindered by the cost of generating sufficient training data from numerical solvers. In this paper,
we present a novel framework for active learning (AL) in PDE surrogate modeling that reduces
this cost. Unlike the existing AL methods for
PDEs that always acquire entire PDE trajectories, our approach strategically generates only
the most important time steps with the numerical solver, while employing the surrogate model
to approximate the remaining steps. This dramatically reduces the cost incurred by each trajectory and thus allows the active learning algorithm to try out a more diverse set of trajectories given the same budget. To accommodate
this novel framework, we develop an acquisition function that estimates the utility of a set
of time steps by approximating its resulting variance reduction. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on several benchmark PDEs,
including the Burgers’ equation, Korteweg–De
Vries equation, Kuramoto–Sivashinsky equation,
the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation, and
the compressible Navier-Stokes equation. Experiments show that our approach improves performance by large margins over the best existing
method. Our method not only reduces average
error but also the 99%, 95%, and 50% quantiles
of error, which is rare for an AL algorithm. All
in all, our approach offers a data-efficient solution to surrogate modeling for PDEs.

Active Learning (AL, Chernoff, 1959; MacKay, 1992; Settles, 2009) can address this challenge by adaptively acquiring the most informative inputs, effectively reducing
the amount of ground-truth data required to obtain a highquality surrogate model. However, there is a general lack
of research in AL for regression tasks (Dongrui Wu, 2018;
Holzmüller et al., 2023), let alone PDEs. Existing studies
on AL for PDEs have predominantly dealt with univariate
outputs such as energy (Pestourie et al., 2020; Pickering
et al., 2022), or predictions at a single, fixed time point
(Bajracharya et al., 2024; Dongxia Wu et al., 2023). To
our surprise, the only work directly addressing AL for prediction of trajectories is that of Musekamp et al. (2024).
In this work, the surrogate model is set as an autoregressive model that predicts the evolved state of a PDE at time
t + ∆t given a state at an arbitrary time point t, and is
trained on data acquired by existing regression-based AL
methods (Holzmüller et al., 2023). Specifically, at each
round of acquisition, the AL method chooses initial conditions from which entire trajectories are acquired. However, we argue that querying all the states in a trajectory
is not sample-efficient, especially for autoregressive surro-

1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea.
Correspondence to: Yegon Kim
<yegonkim@kaist.ac.kr>, Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

