Limitations of Measure-First Protocols in Quantum Machine Learning

Casper Gyurik 1 2 3 Riccardo Molteni 1 2 Vedran Dunjko 1 2

Abstract

dorandom functions to prove that a learning separation also exists when dealing with physically
realizable states, which may be encountered in
experiments. From a machine learning perspective, our results are crucial for defining a physically meaningful task that shows fully quantum
machine learning processing is not only more
efficient but also necessary for solving certain
problems. The tasks at hand are also realistic, as
the algorithms and proven separations hold when
working with efficiently preparable states and remain robust in the presence of measurement and
preparation errors.

In recent times, there have been major developments in two distinct yet connected domains of
quantum information. On the one hand, substantial progress has been made in so-called randomized measurement protocols. Here, a number of
properties of unknown quantum states can be deduced from surprisingly few measurement outcomes, using schemes such as classical shadows.
On the other hand, significant progress has been
made in quantum machine learning. For example, exponential advantages have been proven
when the data consists of quantum states and quantum algorithms can coherently measure multiple
copies of input states. In this work, we aim to understand the implications and limitations of combining randomized measurement protocols with
quantum machine learning, although the implications are broader. Specifically, we investigate
quantum machine learning algorithms that, when
dealing with quantum data, can either process it
entirely using quantum methods or measure the
input data through a fixed measurement scheme
and utilize the resulting classical information. We
prove limitations for the general class of quantum
machine learning algorithms that use fixed measurement schemes on the input quantum states.
Our results have several implications. From the
perspective of randomized measurement procedures, we show limitations of measure-first protocols in the average case, improving on the stateof-the-art which only focuses on worst-case scenarios. Additionally, previous lower bounds were
only known for physically unrealizable states. We
improve upon this by employing quantum pseu-

1. Introduction
A central question in quantum machine learning revolves
around understanding the various types of advantages one
can achieve by exploiting quantum effects. Some of the
most interesting scenarios arise when the dataset itself comprises quantum states, which can then be processed fully
coherently, or through elaborate measurement strategies. In
this context, exponential advantages have been identified
when coherent measurements of multiple copies of a given
quantum state are allowed (Chen et al., 2022b; Huang et al.,
2022; 2020; King et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024a;b). In
a parallel related line, there have been significant breakthroughs in extracting useful classical information from
quantum states using the versatile toolkit of randomized
measurements (Elben et al., 2023). This toolkit includes the
groundbreaking concept of classical shadows (Huang et al.,
2020; 2022), which can extract an efficient classical description of quantum states that allows one to compute various
physical properties. These two distinct research lines cast
doubt on the advantages of quantum machine learning protocols that process quantum data directly compared to those
that use a fixed measurement procedure, which can also
allow for a coherent manipulation of quantum states before
the fixed measurement, in order to extract valuable classical
data1 . In particular we address the question: is it possible

1

applied Quantum algorithms, Leiden University, 2333
CA Leiden, Netherlands 2 LIACS, Universiteit Leiden,
2333 CA Leiden, Netherlands 3 Pasqal SaS, 7 rue Léonard
de Vinci, 91300 Massy, France.
Correspondence to:
Casper Gyurik <casper.gyurik@pasqal.com>, Riccardo
Molteni <r.molteni@liacs.leidenuniv.nl>, Vedran Dunjko
<v.dunjko@liacs.leidenuniv.nl>.

1
Technically, we allow that the processing of the classical data
is also done on a quantum computer. What is critical for the
“measure first” stage is that the data is measured out first, before
the possible quantum processing.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

