Byzantine-Resilient Federated Alternating Gradient Descent and Minimization
for Partly-Decoupled Low Rank Matrix Learning

Ankit Pratap Singh 1 Ahmed Ali Abbasi 1 Namrata Vaswani 1

Abstract

tions in many different modern ML and medical imaging
domains – recommender system design (Koren, Bell, &
Volinsky, 2009), multi-task representation learning for few
shot learning (Collins, Hassani, Mokhtari, & Shakkottai,
2021; Shome & Kar, 2021), federated sketching (Srinivasa,
Lee, Junge, & Romberg, 2019; Anaraki & Hughes, 2014;
Azizyan, Krishnamurthy, & Singh, 2014), accelerated dynamic MRI (Babu, Lingala, & Vaswani, 2023; Haldar &
Liang, 2010; Lingala, Hu, DiBella, & Jacob, 2011; Yao,
Xu, Huang, & Huang, 2018) and Fourier ptychography
(Jagatap, Chen, Nayer, Hegde, & Vaswani, 2019). All these
problems can be expressed as: learn an n × q rank r matrix X ∗ from measurements of the form yk := Ak x∗k or
|Ak x∗k |, k ∈ [q] with the matrix Ak defined differently.
For LRMC it is a 0-1 very sparse matrix, while for LRCS
and LRPR it is a random Gaussian matrix. These problems
can be federated horizontally or vertically. For LRMC,
both settings are analogous (due to row-column symmetry)
and both involves learning from data that is not identically
distributed at the different nodes. This so-called heterogeneous data setting is known to be more difficult to design secure (Byzantine-resilient) algorithms for. For LRCS
and LRPR, the horizontal setting is the easier homogeneous
data setting, while the vertical one involves heterogeneous
data. We consider the vertical one in this work. This is also
the practically relevant one.

This work has two contributions. First, we introduce novel provably Byzantine-resilient sampleand communication-efficient alternating gradient
descent (GD) and minimization based algorithms
for solving the federated low rank matrix completion (LRMC) problem. This involves learning a low rank (LR) matrix from a small subset of its entries. Second, we extend our ideas
to show how a simple modification of our algorithms also provably solves two other partlydecoupled vertically federated LR matrix learning problem, – LR column-wise sensing (LRCS),
also referred to as multi-task linear representation learning, and its phaseless generalization,
LR phase retrieval (LRPR). In all problems, we
consider column-wise or vertical federation, i.e.
each node observes a small subset of entries of a
disjoint column sub-matrix of the entire LR matrix.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning (ML) systems are vulnerable to
various kinds of failures. One natural and powerful attack
class is that of Byzantine attacks (Guerraoui, Rouault, et
al., 2018) This means that the adversarial nodes have complete knowledge of the data at every node and of the exact
algorithm (and all its parameters) implemented by every
node, including center; and all the adversarial nodes can
collude to use this information to design the worst possible attacks. In this work we develop, and analyze, secure (Byzantine resilient) algorithms for solving three different federated low rank matrix learning problems that
share certain common features - Low rank matrix completion (LRMC), LR column-wise sensing (LRCS), and
LR phase retrieval (LRPR). These find important applica-

Related Work.
Centralized LRMC problem has been
extensively studied. Solutions consist of convex relaxation (Candes & Recht, 2008), which was very slow, Alternating Minimization (AltMin) with a spectral initialization (Netrapalli, Jain, & Sanghavi, 2013), and gradient
descent (GD) based algorithms - Projected GD (ProjGD)
(Cherapanamjeri, Gupta, & Jain, 2017; Jain & Netrapalli,
2015) and Factorized GD (FactGD) (Yi, Park, Chen, &
Caramanis, 2016; Zheng & Lafferty, 2016). AltMin algorithms for LRPR and LRCS have been introduced and
studied theoretically in the last six years (Nayer, Narayanamurthy, & Vaswani, 2019; Nayer & Vaswani, 2021). The
works of (Nayer & Vaswani, 2023, on arXiv since Feb.
2021; Collins et al., 2021; Thekumparampil, Jain, Netrapalli, & Oh, 2021; Vaswani, 2024) introduced a much
faster and novel GD-based algorithm called alternating GD
and minimization (AltGDmin). This algorithm is also

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa
State University, Ames IA, USA. Correspondence to: Ankit
Pratap Singh <sankit@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

