Low-Dimension-to-High-Dimension Generalization
And Its Implications for Length Generalization

Yang Chen 1 Long Yang 1 Yitao Liang 2 3 Zhouchen Lin 1 2 4

Abstract

logic (Abbe et al., 2023; Garcez et al., 2022), and planning
(Zhao et al., 2023; Valmeekam et al., 2023). One of the most
significant challenges in learning to reason is length generalization (Anil et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022b), where
models trained on small-scale instances must generalize
to large-scale instances. Length generalization is crucial
because the size of sample spaces often increases exponentially with the complexity of reasoning problems, leading to
intractable sample complexity and computational costs for
models that do not achieve length generalization.

Low-Dimension-to-High-Dimension (LDHD)
generalization, a subset of Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) generalization, involves training on
a low-dimensional subspace and testing in a
high-dimensional space. Assuming instances
are generated from latent variables reflecting
problem scale, LDHD generalization captures
the inherent scaling challenge of length generalization. We theoretically show that LDHD
generalization is unattainable without appropriate
inductive bias. Focusing on Boolean functions,
we demonstrate that different architectures
trained with (S)GD converge to min-degree
interpolators w.r.t. different linearly independent
sets, achieving LDHD generalization only when
the target function aligns with this bias. From the
perspective of LDHD generalization for length
generalization, we explain the success of CoT in
restructuring latent space for improved LDHD
generalization. We further propose a principle for
designing position embeddings to address both
LDHD generalization and data format nuisances
separately. Following the principle, we introduce
RPE-Square, a novel embedding that enhances
RPE to better handle data formats.

Numerous works have investigated various techniques for
length generalization, including modifications to model architectures (Shaw et al., 2018; Jelassi et al., 2023; Kazemnejad et al., 2024), transformations in data formats (Lee et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023), prompt engineering for Large Language Models (LLMs) (Wei et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2024).
Although some of the above techniques work uniformly well
across a wide class of problems, many are fragile and even
ad-hoc, applicable only to specific problems with certain
formats (Zhou et al., 2024). This is due to the mismatch
between the inherent problem scale and the length of the
input string. We illustrate it in the next Example 1.
Example 1. Consider the addition learning problem where
the input is a string. For an N -digit-plus-N -digit (written
as N -addition) addition of two numbers x and y, where
x = xN −1 . . . x0 , y = yN −1 . . . y0 , xi , yi ∈ {0, . . . , 9}
(xN −1 > 0 or yN −1 > 0), consider two formats: the
Aligned and Reverse Format (ARF), where the instance is
represented as “x0 . . . xn−1 + y0 . . . yn−1 =”; and the Unaligned and Reverse Format (URF), where the instance
is represented as “x0 . . . xnx −1 + y0 . . . yny −1 =”, nc =
arg maxi {ci ̸= 0}, c ∈ {x, y}. However, the length of the
input strings in neither format faithfully reflects the problem scale: in ARF, the length of the input strings is always
invariant; in URF, a shorter string may correspond to a
larger scale than a longer string (e.g., s1 =“1 + 1234 =”
is 4-addition, s2 =“123 + 123 =” is 3-addition; s1 is of
larger scale than s2 but length(s1 ) < length(s2 )).
Example 1 demonstrates the sensitivity of length generalization to the data format. Developing robust and transferable
methods for scalable models requires a formulation that captures the inherent scaling challenge of length generalization
and is invariant to the data format nuisance.

1. Introduction
Learning to reason has gained significant popularity in the
machine learning community due to its impressive performance in reasoning tasks such as natural language processing (OpenAI, 2023a;b), mathematics (Frieder et al., 2023;
Jelassi et al., 2023), coding (Zhang et al., 2022a), symbolic
1
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Institute
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 3 Beijing Institute
for General Artificial Intelligence 4 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Correspondence to: Zhouchen
Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>, Yitao Liang <yitaol@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

