Circumventing Backdoor Space via Weight Symmetry

Jie Peng 1 Hongwei Yang 1 Jing Zhao 1 Hengji Dong 1 Hui He 1 Weizhe Zhang 1 2 Haoyu He 3
Backdoored Image
Model/Encoder

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to backdoor
attacks, where malicious behaviors are implanted
during training. While existing defenses can effectively purify compromised models, they typically
require labeled data or specific training procedures, making them difficult to apply beyond supervised learning settings. Notably, recent studies
have shown successful backdoor attacks across
various learning paradigms, highlighting a critical security concern. To address this gap, we
propose Two-stage Symmetry Connectivity (TSC),
a novel backdoor purification defense that operates independently of data format and requires
only a small fraction of clean samples. Through
theoretical analysis, we prove that by leveraging permutation invariance in neural networks
and quadratic mode connectivity, TSC amplifies
the loss on poisoned samples while maintaining
bounded clean accuracy. Experiments demonstrate that TSC achieves robust performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods in supervised
learning scenarios. Furthermore, TSC generalizes
to self-supervised learning frameworks, such as
SimCLR and CLIP, maintaining its strong defense
capabilities. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/JiePeng104/TSC.

Image-Label
Dataset
Label00
Label
Label
Label
00

Implanting
Backdoors
SGD with
CE loss

Clean Image
Model/Encoder

TSC
Algorithm
SGD with
CE loss

Obtaining a small fraction of clean samples

Image-on-Pair
Dataset

Implanting
Backdoors

TSC
Algorithm

SimCLR

SimCLR

……

Down stream
Classifier

Final
Model

Traditional Supervise Learning
Final
Model
Fine
Tuning

SimCLR Training

Image-on-Text
Dataset

Implanting
Backdoors

TSC
Algorithm

Label0
Label
A photo
of00
Label
the swan

CLIP

CLIP

……

Text Encoder

Final Model
(Zero-shot)
CLIP Training

Figure 1. Illustration of the application of TSC in three popular learning settings. We assume adversaries can perform either
data-poisoning attack or training-manipulation attack to implant
a backdoor into the weights of a classification model or an encoder.
Unlike most existing defenses requiring specific training procedures, TSC provides a framework to remove backdoors using
only a small fraction of clean samples and the original training
process. For instance, in SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) setting, a
TSC defender can directly remove the backdoor hidden in the
image encoder by combining TSC with the SimCLR training procedure. This allows for training the downstream classifier without
the adversarial influence inherited from upstream.

Nguyen & Tran, 2020) (i.e., training-manipulation attack).
For instance, recent advancements in self-supervised learning strategies often rely on large volumes of training data,
which, while circumventing the need for curated or labeled
datasets, can be time-intensive and incur high computational
costs (Radford et al., 2021; He et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2020). Therefore, many users prefer to delegate model training to third-party providers or fine-tune publicly available
models on downstream tasks. This practice exposes models to backdoor attacks. For example, malicious providers
can manipulate the training process to implant backdoors
and then force downstream classifiers to output adversarial
labels (Yao et al., 2019; Saha et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Modern classifiers require substantial data and computational resources to achieve high accuracy, providing adversaries with opportunities to implant backdoors into deep
neural networks (Gu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017). This
vulnerability arises from either injecting poisoned data (Gu
et al., 2017; Turner et al., 2019) (i.e., data-poisoning attack),
or manipulating the training process (Pang et al., 2019;
1

School of Cyberspace Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China. 2 Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
3
Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty of IT, Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Hui He
<hehui@hit.edu.cn>.

Consequently, many defenses have been developed to eliminate backdoors hidden within models. One of the most
prominent mechanisms is post-purification defenses, which
remove backdoors through post-training processes (Liu

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

