Natural Perturbations for Black-box Training of Neural Networks
by Zeroth-Order Optimization

Hiroshi Sawada 1 Kazuo Aoyama 1 Yuya Hikima 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel concept of natural
perturbations for black-box training of neural networks by zeroth-order optimization. When a neural network is implemented directly in hardware,
training its parameters by backpropagation ends
up with an inaccurate result due to the lack of
detailed internal information. We instead employ
zeroth-order optimization, where the sampling of
parameter perturbations is of great importance.
The sampling strategy we propose maximizes the
entropy of perturbations with a regularization that
the probability distribution conditioned by the
neural network does not change drastically, by
inheriting the concept of natural gradient. Experimental results show the superiority of our proposal on diverse datasets, tasks, and architectures.

Figure 1. Training neural network implemented in hardware

nal information cannot be accurately obtained even when
the hardware is simulated by an ordinary computer, for example, due to hardware-specific manufacturing variations
(Fang et al., 2019; Banerjee et al., 2023).
For such above cases, several black-box optimization methods have been used to train the parameters of neural networks on hardware, including genetic algorithm (Zhang
et al., 2019; 2021), bacterial foraging optimization (Cong
et al., 2022), covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) (Chen et al., 2022; Lupo et al., 2023), and
zeroth-order (ZO) optimization (Shen et al., 2017; Zhou
et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2020; 2021; Bandyopadhyay et al.,
2022). Among these methods, this paper focuses on ZO
optimization (Liu et al., 2020) because it is a local search
based on (approximate) gradient vectors like backpropagation and is expected to scale to training neural networks
with a moderately large number N of parameters.

1. Introduction
The backpropagation algorithm (Rumelhart et al., 1986;
Amari, 1993; LeCun et al., 2015) is a standard technique
for training the parameters of a neural network on CPU or
GPU-based ordinary computers. It computes the gradient
vectors with respect to the parameters by backpropagating the gradient information from the loss function defined
at the output. For the computation, it is necessary to obtain detailed internal information, such as the derivatives
of component-wise activation functions and layer-wise inputs to neurons generated during the forward computation.
On the other hand, when neural networks are implemented
directly in hardware (Figure 1), such as optical neural networks (Shen et al., 2017; Ashtiani et al., 2022) and analogbased in-memory computing (Li et al., 2018; Aguirre et al.,
2024), training the parameters by backpropagation ends up
with an inaccurate result. This is because detailed inter-

The core operation of the ZO optimization for computing
approximate gradient vectors is to slightly perturb the parameter vector θ ∈ RN to θ + µu with a smoothing hyperparameter µ > 0 and a perturbation vector u ∈ RN , and
perform a query to evaluate how the loss function changes
from ℓ(θ) to ℓ(θ + µu). Here, the perturbation vector u is
sampled from some distribution, typically from a multivariate standard normal distribution N (0, I) with an identity
matrix I (Duchi et al., 2015; Nesterov & Spokoiny, 2017)
or similarly from a uniform distribution on a unit sphere
(Fazel et al., 2018). While these sampling strategies are
plausible for a shallow neural network, they are not the best
way for a deep neural network because the parameters are
correlated in the optimization landscape. The reason for the
correlation is that many parameters are involved in a path
from an input element to an output element of the neural
network (Sawada et al., 2025). To mitigate the correlation of
parameters, the use of coordinate-wise perturbations (Lian

1

NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence to: Hiroshi Sawada
<sawada.hiroshi@ieee.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

