Diverging Preferences: When do Annotators Disagree and do Models Know?

Michael J.Q. Zhang 1 Zhilin Wang 2 Jena D. Hwang 3 Yi Dong 2 Olivier Delalleau 2
Yejin Choi 2 Eunsol Choi 1 Xiang Ren 4 Valentina Pyatkin 3 5

Abstract

prompt. Prior works on developing pluralistically aligned
LLMs have focused on the development of synthetic preference datasets, where disagreements are simulated based
on author-defined features and frequencies (Poddar et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2024). In this work, we take a step back
to ask the foundational question when and why do human
annotators disagree in their preferences?

We examine diverging preferences in humanlabeled preference datasets. We develop a taxonomy of disagreement sources spanning ten categories across four high-level classes and find that
the majority of disagreements are due to factors
such as task underspecification or response style.
Our findings challenge a standard assumption in
reward modeling methods that annotator disagreements can be attributed to simple noise. We then
explore how these findings impact two areas of
LLM development: reward modeling training and
evaluation. In our experiments, we demonstrate
how standard reward modeling (e.g., BradleyTerry) and LLM-as-Judge evaluation methods
fail to account for divergence between annotators. These findings highlight challenges in LLM
evaluations, which are greatly influenced by divisive features like response style, and in developing pluralistically aligned LLMs. To address
these issues, we develop methods for identifying
diverging preferences to mitigate their influence
in evaluations and during LLM training.

To make this research possible, we introduce MultiPrefDisagreements and HelpSteer2-Disagreements.1 With these
datasets, we also include a novel taxonomy of disagreement
sources spanning 10 categories and 4 high-level classes (Table 1). Based on our analysis of these datasets, we offer
two findings. First, we find that diverging preferences are
common, with over 30% of examples across both datasets
showing diverging preferences across annotators. Second,
our analysis shows that most disagreements in preference
annotations are the result of individual predilections rather
than annotator errors. We find that over 75% of disagreements are influenced by factors such as response complexity,
verbosity, or underspecified prompts.
Our findings, that most disagreements in preference annotations are the result of individual predilections rather than
annotation errors, run counter to how standard preference
learning pipelines and reward models are designed, where
dissenting opinions are treated as undesirable noise. We
demonstrate how standard reward modeling design decisions, such as aggregating labels via majority choice (Wang
et al., 2024b; Köpf et al., 2024), result in reward models
that predict decisive preference toward a single option, even
when annotators preferences diverge. These findings demonstrate that existing reward modeling approaches fail to distinguish diverging from high-agreement preferences and can
lead to breakdowns in pluralistic alignment, where LLMs
trained with such rewards provide responses for single user
perspective, even when preferences diverge.

1. Introduction
As large language models (LLMs) continue to rise in prominence and to serve millions of people on a daily basis, there
is an increasing need to ensure that systems are pluralistically aligned (Sorensen et al., 2024). Learning from human
preferences has emerged as the standard method for adapting LLMs to facilitate user-assistant interactions with much
success. Despite these advances, however, the field continues to struggle with the challenge of handling diverging
preferences, where users disagree on the ideal response to a

We introduce alternative methods for training reward models
that make the two following changes: (1) we utilize all user

1

New York University 2 NVIDIA 3 Allen Institute for
Artificial Intelligence 4 University of Southern California
5
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Michael J.Q.
Zhang <michaelzhang@nyu.edu>, Valentina Pyatkin <valentinap@allenai.org>.

1
Note that we did not collect new datasets but instead are releasing the individual annotations of these existing datasets (which
previously released only annotations aggregated across multiple
annotators for the same task), with support from the dataset creators.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

