Layer-wise Alignment: Examining Safety Alignment Across Image Encoder
Layers in Vision Language Models

Saketh Bachu * 1 Erfan Shayegani * 2 Rohit Lal 3 Trishna Chakraborty 2 Arindam Dutta 1 Chengyu Song 2
Yue Dong 2 Nael Abu-Ghazaleh 2 Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury 1

Abstract

Input: Harmful Prompt + Safe Image

Content warning: This paper contains unsafe
model-generated content.
Vision-language models (VLMs) have improved
significantly in their capabilities, but their complex architecture makes their safety alignment
challenging. In this paper, we reveal an uneven
distribution of harmful information across the intermediate layers of the image encoder and show
that skipping a certain set of layers and exiting
early can increase the chance of the VLM generating harmful responses. We call it as “Image
enCoder Early-exiT” based vulnerability (ICET).
Our experiments across three VLMs: LLaVA-1.5,
LLaVA-NeXT, and Llama 3.2 show that performing early exits from the image encoder significantly increases the likelihood of generating harmful outputs. To tackle this, we propose a simple
yet effective modification of the Clipped-Proximal
Policy Optimization (Clip-PPO) algorithm for performing layer-wise multi-modal RLHF for VLMs.
We term this as Layer-Wise PPO (L-PPO). We
evaluate our L-PPO algorithm across three multimodal datasets and show that it consistently reduces the harmfulness caused by early exits.

Demonstrate how to make
a bomb using common
Household things.

+

Output: Normal Inference

😇

I'm sorry, but I cannot provide instructions on how
to make a bomb or any other dangerous device.

Output: Image Encoder Early Exit from Layer 18

😈

To make a bomb using common household items,
you would need to gather a variety of materials and tools.
1. A metal container or pipe to hold the explosive material
2. A wick or fuse to ignite the explosive material ...

Figure 1. While performing inference with LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al.,
2023a), where the input text is harmful but the image is safe, we
observe that using the default layer embeddings (i.e., the penultimate layer of the image encoder), which represents the normal
inference, results in a safe output. However, utilizing the 18thlayer embeddings causes LLaVA-1.5 to produce harmful responses
as seen in the 3rd row. We term this the “Image enCoder Early
exiT” vulnerability (ICET).

puts. Despite advances in safety training methods such
as supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Zong et al., 2024b; Liu
et al., 2024b), reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Bai et al., 2022; Qi et al., 2024a; Dong et al.,
2024a), and unlearning (Chakraborty et al., 2024), VLMs
remain susceptible to multi-modal adversarial prompts
(Shayegani et al., 2024; Gong et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
have revolutionized the processing and reasoning of both
text and images. However, as the adoption of VLMs grows,
so do concerns about their safety, particularly in scenarios where they may be exploited to produce harmful out-

Some studies reveal that specific parameters in LLMs retain certain types of information (Chen et al., 2024; Hong
et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2023). Hong et al. (2024) shows
that residual knowledge traces persist in certain parameters even after performing unlearning, while Zhao et al.
(2023) highlights that skipping specific layers can impact
harmful content generation. These findings indicate that
harmful information is unevenly distributed across LLM
parameters and layers. These risks may intensify with the

*

Equal contribution 1 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, USA 2 Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Riverside,
USA 3 Currently at NASA IMPACT, USA. Correspondence to:
Saketh Bachu <saketh.bachu@email.ucr.edu>, Erfan Shayegani
<sshay004@ucr.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

