Position: AI Safety Should Prioritize the Future of Work

Sanchaita Hazra 1 Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder 2 Tuhin Chakrabarty 3

Abstract

restricted actions (Anil et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2024; Qi
et al., 2023) or how powerful AI systems can manipulate
and persuade humans towards undesirable outcomes (Salvi
et al., 2024; Palmer & Spirling, 2023). There has also been
an emphasis on evaluating the risks of AI against bioterrorism (Peppin et al., 2024), automated warfare, and possible
rogue AIs (Hendrycks et al., 2023). Researchers have also
studied how large language models (LLMs) learn to mislead
humans via RLHF (Wen et al., 2024) or how they fake alignment, i.e., generate desirable outputs while being trained,
only to later produce non-compliant outputs when not under
observation (Greenblatt et al., 2024). However, relatively
less emphasis has been placed on the medium and longterm impacts of generative AI on society. In this position
paper, we argue AI safety should prioritize the future of
work and recommend a systemic overhaul of AI research
practices as well as governance to protect meaningful labor.

Current efforts in AI safety prioritize filtering
harmful content, preventing manipulation of human behavior, and eliminating existential risks
in cybersecurity or biosecurity. While pressing,
this narrow focus overlooks critical human-centric
considerations that shape the long-term trajectory
of a society. In this position paper, we identify
the risks of overlooking the impact of AI on the
future of work and recommend comprehensive
transition support towards the evolution of meaningful labor with human agency. Through the
lens of economic theories, we highlight the intertemporal impacts of AI on human livelihood
and the structural changes in labor markets that
exacerbate income inequality. Additionally, the
closed-source approach of major stakeholders in
AI development resembles rent-seeking behavior
through exploiting resources, breeding mediocrity
in creative labor, and monopolizing innovation.
To address this, we argue in favor of a robust
international copyright anatomy supported by implementing collective licensing that ensures fair
compensation mechanisms for using data to train
AI models. We strongly recommend a pro-worker
framework of global AI governance to enhance
shared prosperity and economic justice while reducing technical debt.

The rapid proliferation of generative AI systems that create
images, text, and code at scale has led many to prematurely
anthropomorphize these tools and attribute consciousness or
sentience to them. The allure of such behavior stems from a
psychological tendency to seek agency in complex systems,
while the widespread adoption reflects basic economic principles of substitution, where firms naturally gravitate toward
technologies that can automate skilled and cognitive labor at
dramatically lower marginal costs. LLMs, like ChatGPT, are
transforming online labor markets by introducing automation capabilities that potentially impact traditional freelance
work roles. Recent work from Demirci et al. (2024) shows
that the introduction of ChatGPT led to a 21% decrease
in the number of writing and coding job posts, while the
introduction of Image-generating AI technologies led to a
significant 17% decrease in the number of image creation
jobs. AI tools are being adopted by creative industries,
with companies in gaming, movies, interior design, and advertising beginning to use them in place of human artists
(Edwards, 2023; Roose, 2022; Tobin, 2023).

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) researchers working on AI safety
primarily focus on misuse or existential risks posed by advanced AI models. By aligning AI with humans, the community of researchers aims to ensure AI systems are moral,
beneficial, and reliable. Significant research is conducted to
investigate how AI systems can be vulnerable to adversarial attacks that bypass their ethical guidelines and perform
1

2

Innovation is deemed a socially beneficial idea, where
the self-serving efforts of the private sector may result
in increased social benefit when directed through wellfunctioning market channels. The private advantage of innovators lies in being a monopolist, which requires special
skills and copious resources. Originated by Gordon Turlock in 1967 (Tullock, 2008) and made famous by Anne

3

University of Utah Allen Institute for AI Stony Brook University & Salesforce AI Research. Correspondence to: Sanchaita
Hazra <sanchaita.hazra@utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

