Active Reward Modeling: Adaptive Preference Labeling for
Large Language Model Alignment

Yunyi Shen * 1 Hao Sun * 2 Jean-François Ton 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

The safe and successful deployment of Large Language
Models (LLMs) across various application domains requires
alignment with human values. Current research working on
LLM alignment mainly focuses on reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a),
which rely on preference-based annotations provided by
human annotators (Bai et al., 2022b). However, obtaining
human feedback can be expensive, and the noisy and binary
nature of such data often limits its information density, posing a challenge for effective reward modeling (Wang et al.,
2024a; Liu et al., 2024).

Building neural reward models from human preferences is a pivotal component in reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) and large
language model alignment research. Given the
scarcity and high cost of human annotation, how
to select the most informative pairs to annotate
is an essential yet challenging open problem. In
this work, we highlight the insight that an ideal
comparison dataset for reward modeling should
balance exploration of the representation space
and make informative comparisons between pairs
with moderate reward differences. Technically,
challenges arise in quantifying the two objectives and efficiently prioritizing the comparisons
to be annotated. To address this, we propose
the Fisher information-based selection strategies,
adapt theories from the classical experimental
design literature, and apply them to the final linear layer of the deep neural network-based reward modeling tasks. Empirically, our method
demonstrates remarkable performance, high computational efficiency, and stability compared to
other selection methods from deep learning and
classical statistical literature across multiple opensource LLMs and datasets. Further ablation studies reveal that incorporating cross-prompt comparisons in active reward modeling significantly
enhances labeling efficiency, shedding light on
the potential for improved annotation strategies
in RLHF. Code and embeddings to reproduce
all results of this paper are available at https:
//github.com/YunyiShen/ARM-FI/.

Active learning, where the model queries most informative
labels based on its current state, offers a potential solution. It
typically involves three key components: an initial model, a
query strategy — often in the form of maximizing a scoring
function over unlabeled data, and a pool of unlabeled data.
The model selects a subset of data for labeling and retrains
iteratively until a stopping criterion is met.
In this work, we study the problem of active data acquisition in reward modeling. Technically, we introduce various
scoring rules inspired by both classical experimental design (Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995) and recent deep learningbased advancements (Sener & Savarese, 2017; Houlsby
et al., 2011; Kirsch et al., 2019). We adapt those methods to
the learning of Bradley-Terry (BT) reward models (Bradley
& Terry, 1952), which have been successfully applied in
large-scale alignment practices (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) and proven to be theoretically sound (Sun
et al., 2025a).
We benchmark 8 scoring algorithms using 2 datasets and 3
LLMs, ranging in size from 2B to 8B, and evaluate a wide
range of active learning setups. Our results show that two
classical experimental design methods — applied to the
final linear feature layer of deep models — achieve stateof-the-art performance and strong stability across different
setups, model architectures, and datasets.

*

Equal contribution 1 EECS, MIT, Cambrdige, MA, USA
University of Cambridge, Cambrdige, UK 3 ByteDance Research, London, UK. Correspondence to: Yunyi Shen
<yshen99@mit.edu>, Hao Sun <hs789@cam.ac.uk>, JeanFrançois Ton <jeanfrancois@bytedance.com>.
2

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• Formally, we characterize the problem of optimal prefer1

