Physics Aware Neural Networks for Unsupervised Binding Energy Prediction

Ke Liu 1 Hao Chen 1 Chunhua Shen 1

Abstract

case of small molecules, plenty of labeled samples exist;
thus, supervised methods are quite appropriate (Öztürk et al.,
2018; Monteiro et al., 2022; Pei et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2022).
However, for ligands like antibodies, few samples with an
affinity label are available, which causes the failure of supervised approaches.

Developing models for protein-ligand interactions
holds substantial significance for drug discovery.
Supervised methods often failed due to the lack
of labeled data for predicting the protein-ligand
binding energy, like antibodies. Therefore, unsupervised approaches are urged to make full use
of the unlabeled data. To tackle the problem, we
propose an efficient, unsupervised protein-ligand
binding energy prediction model via the conservation of energy (CEBind), which follows the
physical laws. Specifically, given a protein-ligand
complex, we randomly sample forces for each
atom in the ligand. Then these forces are applied
rigidly to the ligand to perturb its position, following the law of rigid body dynamics. Finally,
CEBind predicts the energy of both the unperturbed complex and the perturbed complex. The
energy gap between two complexes equals the
work of the outer forces, following the law of
conservation of energy. Extensive experiments
are conducted on the unsupervised protein-ligand
binding energy prediction benchmarks, comparing them with previous works. Empirical results
and theoretic analysis demonstrate that CEBind
is more efficient and outperforms previous unsupervised models on benchmarks.

To address the problem of data scarcity, Feng et al. (2024)
constructed a self-supervised reconstruction task in their
BindNet to learn binding representations. BindNet does not
provide the binding affinity but requires subsequent finetuning on downstream tasks. Furthermore, in DSMbind,
Jin et al. (2024) proposed the unsupervised protein-ligand
binding energy prediction problem. The problem can be
defined as given only the quaternary structure of proteinligand complexes without any affinity labels for training, the
model predicts the binding energy. Model performance is
evaluated in terms of the correlation between predicted binding energy and ground truth. DSMbind solves the problem
by considering the log-likelihood of SE(3) denoising score
matching as binding affinity. They train an energy model
by matching the forces, i.e., the gradient of the predicted
energy with respect to atom coordinates, with the likelihood.
Specifically, they perturbed the protein of the complex with
a randomly sampled rotation and translation. Then they
calculate the rotation caused by the predicted forces and
match the predicted force and rotation with the sampled
translation and rotation, respectively. However, DSMBind
made some approximations, and training a DSMBind model
is memory-intensive.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose a memory-efficient and physicsaware training framework dubbed Conservation of Energy
based Binding (CEBind), which tackles the problem of unsupervised protein-ligand binding energy prediction via the
law of conservation of energy. We focus on the unsupervised
protein-ligand binding prediction, including antibodies and
small molecules, following the settings of DSMBind (Jin
et al., 2024). Specifically, given a protein-ligand complex,
we randomly sample forces for each atom in the ligand,
which is then applied rigidly to the ligand following the
rigid dynamics. Then the energy model predicts the energy
of both the perturbed and unperturbed complexes. According to the energy conservation law, the difference between
the two energies is equal to the work of the outer forces. Besides, we also match the gradient of the energy with respect

Predicting protein-ligand binding is crucial to the discovery
of drugs (Zheng et al., 2020; Ballester & Mitchell, 2010;
de Freitas & Schapira, 2017). A protein is highly likely
to be bonded with a ligand if its conformation, i.e., quaternary structure, holds a high affinity or low binding energy (Chothia & Janin, 1975). Therefore, the protein-ligand
binding prediction comes down to the affinity or energy
prediction of the protein complex. The ligands encompass
proteins, such as antibodies, and small molecules. In the
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Hao Chen <haochen.cad@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

