Variational Learning of Fractional Posteriors

Kian Ming A. Chai 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 2

Abstract

posteriors (Grünwald & van Ommen, 2017; Bhattacharya
et al., 2019) have emerged as a generalization of Bayesian inference to address these. Unlike the Bayes posterior, which
fully incorporates the likelihood, a fractional posterior has
an exponent that weighs the likelihood to temper its influence. This approach has been shown to enhance robustness
in misspecified models and has strong connections to PACBayesian bounds (Bhattacharya et al., 2019), which control
generalization error in statistical learning.

We introduce a novel one-parameter variational
objective that lower bounds the data evidence and
enables the estimation of approximate fractional
posteriors. We extend this framework to hierarchical construction and Bayes posteriors, offering
a versatile tool for probabilistic modelling. We
demonstrate two cases where gradients can be obtained analytically and a simulation study on mixture models showing that our fractional posteriors
can be used to achieve better calibration compared
to posteriors from the conventional variational
bound. When applied to variational autoencoders
(VAEs), our approach attains higher evidence
bounds and enables learning of high-performing
approximate Bayes posteriors jointly with fractional posteriors. We show that VAEs trained with
fractional posteriors produce decoders that are
better aligned for generation from the prior.

This work introduces a new variational framework that generalises conventional variational inference (VI) by allowing the approximation of fractional posteriors, enabling improved posterior flexibility and calibration. As in standard
VI based on ELBO maximisation, our approach provides
a lower bound on the marginal likelihood and extends to
hierarchical construction (Ranganath et al., 2016) and Bayes
posteriors. Thus it offers a flexible trade-off between evidence maximization and posterior calibration, bridging the
gap between standard VI and fractional Bayesian inference.
We explore both analytical and empirical insights into variational learning of fractional posteriors. First, we identify
cases where gradients can be derived analytically, eliminating the need for gradient estimators (Roeder et al.,
2017). Next, we perform a simulation study on mixture
models, demonstrating that fractional posteriors achieve
better-calibrated uncertainties compared to conventional
VI. Finally, we consider variational autoencoders (VAEs)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014), showing that fractional posteriors not only give higher evidence bounds but also enhance
generative performance by aligning decoders with the prior—
a known issue in standard VAEs (Dai & Wipf, 2019).

1. Introduction
Exact Bayesian inference is intractable for most models of
interest in machine learning. Variational methods (Jordan
et al., 1999; Minka, 2001; Opper & Winther, 2005; Blei
et al., 2017) address this by casting the required integration
as optimisation. These methods have two objectives: to
estimate the marginal likelihood or data evidence (MacKay,
2003) for model comparison or model optimisation; and to
obtain an approximate Bayes posterior for prediction.
The widely used evidence lower bound (ELBO) (Jordan
et al., 1999) often leads to underestimated uncertainty
and suboptimal posterior calibration (Wang & Titterington, 2005; Bishop, 2006; Yao et al., 2018). These deficiencies can be compounded by challenges inherent to general
Bayesian modelling, such as misspecification. Fractional

This work advances the field of approximate Bayesian inference with a theoretically grounded and empirically validated
approach to fractional variational inference. It demonstrates
that fractional posteriors can improve model calibration and
yield better generative models, and it offers an alternative to
standard variational inference and learning approaches.

1
DSO National Laboratories, Singapore 2 CSIRO’s
Data61, Australia.
Correspondence to: Kian Ming A.
Chai <ckianmin@dso.org.sg>, Edwin V. Bonilla <edwin.bonilla@data61.csiro.au>.

Notation We use letter p for model distributions and letters q and r for approximate distributions. The tilde (˜)
accent is for the unnormalised version of the distribution
that it modifies; and the asterisk (*) superscript is for the
optimised versions. The unaccented letter Z is for the nor-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

