Idiosyncrasies in Large Language Models

Mingjie Sun * 1

Yida Yin * 2

Zhiqiu Xu 3

Abstract

J. Zico Kolter 1

Zhuang Liu 4

ferent LLMs, either between the outputs of entirely different
models or between those of different variants of the same
model family. If possible, the ability to distinguish between
source models in this manner would be valuable for a number of applications: it could shed light on the relative uptake
of different LLMs, beyond what is reported by individual
companies, and on the nature of data used to build different models. Additionally, it could offer insights into what
features of generated text are most “unique” to each LLM.

In this work, we unveil and study idiosyncrasies
in Large Language Models (LLMs) – unique patterns in their outputs that can be used to distinguish the models. To do so, we consider a simple
classification task: given a particular text output,
the objective is to predict the source LLM that
generates the text. We evaluate this synthetic task
across various groups of LLMs and find that simply fine-tuning text embedding models on LLMgenerated texts yields excellent classification accuracy. Notably, we achieve 97.1% accuracy on
held-out validation data in the five-way classification problem involving ChatGPT, Claude, Grok,
Gemini, and DeepSeek. Our further investigation reveals that these idiosyncrasies are rooted
in word-level distributions. These patterns persist
even when the texts are rewritten, translated, or
summarized by an external LLM, suggesting that
they are also encoded in the semantic content. Additionally, we leverage LLM as judges to generate
detailed, open-ended descriptions of each model’s
idiosyncrasies. Finally, we discuss the broader
implications of our findings, including training
on synthetic data, inferring model similarity, and
robust evaluation of LLMs. Code is available at
github.com/locuslab/llm-idiosyncrasies.

In this paper, we investigate whether LLMs exhibit idiosyncrasies that enable their outputs to be reliably differentiated.
Inspired by recent studies on dataset bias in computer vision
(Liu & He, 2025; Zeng et al., 2024), which showed that
images from different large-scale datasets can be accurately
distinguished by standard neural networks, we consider a
similar synthetic classification task to assess the separability
of responses generated between different LLMs. Specifically, we sample a large number of text outputs from each
LLM using the same set of prompts and then train a classifier to recognize which model generates a specific text.
Figure 1 provides an overview of our framework. The illustrated example on ChatGPT, Claude, Grok, Gemini, and
DeepSeek presents a five-way classification problem.
We find that a classifier based upon simple fine-tuning text
embedding models on LLM outputs is able to achieve remarkably high accuracy on this task. This indicates the
clear presence of idiosyncrasies in LLMs. The observation
is highly robust over a large variety of LLM combinations.
For instance, trained on the combined set of texts from
ChatGPT, Claude, Grok, Gemini, and DeepSeek, a model
can achieve 97.1% classification accuracy on the held-out
validation data, compared to a 20.0% chance-level guess.
Within the same model family, we obtain a non-trivial 59.8%
accuracy across 4 model sizes in Qwen-2.5 series (Qwen
et al., 2024). Further, we observe strong out-of-distribution
generalization of these classifiers when tested on responses
from prompts outside the training distribution.

1. Introduction
As the adoption of generative models such as LLMs accelerates, it becomes increasingly important to understand the
origin and provenance of such generated content. While a
great deal of past work has focused on the classification of
human-written and AI-written content (Krishna et al., 2023;
Mitchell et al., 2023; Sadasivan et al., 2025), there has been
little work on classifying between content generated by dif*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 UC Berkeley
University of Pennsylvania 4 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Mingjie Sun <mingjies@andrew.cmu.edu>, Yida Yin
<davidyinyida0609@berkeley.edu>.

We observe several interesting properties of this task. When
controlling the length and format of outputs through prompt
instructions, we still obtain high classification accuracy. Furthermore, for post-trained LLMs, the classifier demonstrates
non-trivial accuracy even with only the first few tokens of
the generated text. However, when classifying generations

3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

