Roll the dice & look before you leap:
Going beyond the creative limits of next-token prediction

Vaishnavh Nagarajan * 1 Chen Henry Wu * 2 Charles Ding 2 Aditi Raghunathan 2

Abstract

surprising and fresh connections never seen before. For
instance, consider responding to highly under-specified
prompts like “Generate a challenging high-school
word problem involving the Pythagoras Theorem.” or “Suggest some candidate therapeutic
or
antibodies targeting the HER2 antigen.”
“Provide a vivid analogy to differentiate
quantum and classical mechanics.” Creativity in
such tasks requires generating responses that are not just
correct or coherent, but are also diverse across responses
and are original compared to the training data. These
currently-sidelined desiderata will rise to prominence as we
explore LLMs for open-ended scientific discovery (Gruver
et al., 2023; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Hayes et al.,
2025), for generating novel training data (Yu et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2024c; Wang et al., 2023), and as we scale up
test-time compute approaches that benefit from diversity in
exploration, such as best-of-N (Cobbe et al., 2021; Chow
et al., 2024; Dang et al., 2025) and long chain-of-thought
reasoning (OpenAI, 2024; DeepSeek-AI, 2025; Snell et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2024).

We design a suite of minimal algorithmic tasks
that are a loose abstraction of open-ended realworld tasks. This allows us to cleanly and controllably quantify the creative limits of the presentday language model. Much like real-world tasks
that require a creative, far-sighted leap of thought,
our tasks require an implicit, open-ended stochastic planning step that either (a) discovers new connections in an abstract knowledge graph (like in
wordplay, drawing analogies, or research) or (b)
constructs new patterns (like in designing math
problems or new proteins). In these tasks, we
empirically and conceptually argue how nexttoken learning is myopic; multi-token approaches,
namely teacherless training and diffusion models, comparatively excel in producing diverse
and original output. Secondly, to elicit randomness without hurting coherence, we find that injecting noise at the input layer (dubbed seedconditioning) works surprisingly as well as (and
in some conditions, better than) temperature sampling from the output layer. Thus, our work offers
a principled, minimal test-bed for analyzing openended creative skills, and offers new arguments
for going beyond next-token learning and temperature sampling. We make part of the code available under https://github.com/chenwu98/
algorithmic-creativity

Unlike simple open-ended tasks like generating names and
basic sentences (Zhang et al., 2024b; Hopkins et al., 2023;
Bigelow et al., 2024), many creative tasks (like designing
a clever Olympiad problem) are said to involve a random
flash of creative insight termed variously as a leap of thought
(Wang et al., 2024a; Talmor et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2024),
a “eureka” moment (Bubeck et al., 2023), a mental leap
(Holyoak & Thagard, 1995; Callaway, 2013; Hofstadter,
1995) or an incubation step (Varshney et al., 2019). The
thesis of this paper is that learning to solve such creative
leap-of-thought tasks (defined shortly) is misaligned with
the current language modeling paradigm (a) in terms of
next-token learning, and (b) in how randomness is elicited.
We articulate these two concerns by designing a suite of
algorithmic tasks inspired by such creative tasks. We then
demonstrate how the creativity of language models suffers
in these tasks, and how this can be alleviated (to an extent,
within our tasks).

1. Introduction
Not all forms of intelligence are solely about being
correct or wrong. In open-ended tasks, what also matters
is finding creative ways to satisfy a request, making
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, US 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, US. Correspondence to: Vaishnavh Nagarajan <vaishnavh@google.com>, Chen Henry Wu
<chenwu2@cs.cmu.edu>.

Concretely, for the scope of this paper, a creative leap-ofthought task refers to tasks that involve a search-and-plan
process; crucially, this process orchestrates multiple random

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

