ReFrame: Layer Caching for Accelerated Inference in Real-Time Rendering

Lufei Liu 1 Tor M. Aamodt 1

Abstract

applies neural networks to upscale images to 4× resolution
and 4× frame rate, effectively rendering only one of every
16 pixels through traditional methods.

Graphics rendering applications increasingly
leverage neural networks in tasks such as denoising, supersampling, and frame extrapolation to
improve image quality while maintaining frame
rates. The temporal coherence inherent in these
tasks presents an opportunity to reuse intermediate results from previous frames and avoid redundant computations. Recent work has shown
that caching intermediate features to be reused in
subsequent inferences is an effective method to
reduce latency in diffusion models. We extend
this idea to real-time rendering and present ReFrame, which explores different caching policies
to optimize trade-offs between quality and performance in rendering workloads. ReFrame can
be applied to a variety of encoder-decoder style
networks commonly found in rendering pipelines.
Experimental results show that we achieve 1.4×
speedup on average with negligible quality loss
in three real-time rendering tasks. Code available:
https://ubc-aamodt-group.github.
io/reframe-layer-caching/

Real-time rendering applications are latency-sensitive, establishing an important trade-off between quality and performance. Neural network inferences now make up a significant portion of the rendering pipeline, especially with
ray tracing accelerated using dedicated hardware like the
NVIDIA RT Core. Any reduction of the inference latency
can be used to allocate more resources to traditional rendering and improve the final image quality or directly improve
the frame rate, both of which benefit user experience.
One approach to accelerate inference latency is by identifying sources of redundancy in the computation (LeCun
et al., 1989). Rendering workloads naturally exhibit temporal coherence, where the content of consecutive frames is
highly correlated (Scherzer et al., 2012). The inter-frame
similarities are particularly high with fast frame rates, at
which frame content changes slowly even with fast camera
movements. These similarities also persist deep within the
neural networks, exhibiting redundancy in the computation
of intermediate layers. Figure 1 shows a sequence of 20
frames in an Unreal Engine demo scene to visually illustrate
similarities between frames and slow scene changes.

1. Introduction

A similar observation was recently made in the context of
diffusion models, where intermediate layer outputs were
cached and reused in subsequent inferences of the model by
injecting cached results in concatenations with skip connections instead of computing deeper layers (Ma et al., 2024;
Wimbauer et al., 2024). This caching scheme was shown to
be effective in reducing the number of FLOPs required for
inference, leading to faster inferences and lower computational costs. We explore adapting this caching technique to
neural networks used in real-time rendering applications.

Real-time rendering is an important application that enables
high-quality visualizations and interactivity across many
industries such as gaming, virtual reality, design, and healthcare. In recent years, neural networks have become a critical
component in real-time rendering workloads. To achieve
high-quality renderings within a limited frame budget, only
a small fraction of the image is rendered through traditional techniques like ray tracing. The majority of the pixels
are actually generated using upsampling methods such as
frame extrapolation and supersampling neural networks.
The newest version of NVIDIA’s Deep Learning Super Sampling (DLSS) technology, DLSS 4.0 (Lin & Burnes, 2025),

Although the caching technique was originally designed
for U-Nets in diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach
et al., 2022), we show that it can be applied to a variety of
encoder-decoder style networks commonly found in rendering pipelines. Adapting the technique for rendering workloads comes with several challenges. Unlike diffusion models that rely on long sequences of inference iterations to
produce a single output, every inference iteration must produce a high-quality frame in real-time rendering. Therefore,

1

Department of ECE, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Lufei Liu <liulufei@student.ubc.ca>, Tor M. Aamodt <aamodt@ece.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

