MIRROR: Make Your Object-Level Multi-View Generation
More Consistent with Training-Free Rectification

+MIRROR

A cute steampunk
elephant , 3D asset.

More consistent

VideoMV

More consistent

SyncDreamer
+MIRROR

Tianchi Xing * 1 Bonan Li * 1 Congying Han 1 Xinmin Qiu 1 Zicheng Zhang 1 Tiande Guo 1

Figure 1: Generated multi-view images by applying MIRROR on SyncDreamer (Liu et al., 2023b) and VideoMV (Zuo
et al., 2024) for rectification. MIRROR effectively improves the consistency of generated results in both image-based and
text-based multi-view generation models.

Abstract

Technically, MIRROR comprises two core modules: Trajectory Tracking Module (TTM) for
pixel-wise trajectory tracking that labels identical
points across views, and Feature Rectification
Module (FRM) for explicitly adjustment of each
pixel embedding on noisy synthesized images by
minimizing the distance to corresponding block
features in neighboring views, thereby achieving
consistent outputs. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that MIRROR, through seamless integration with a variety of off-the-shelf object-level
multi-view diffusion models, achieves efficient
improvements in consistency and fidelity, thereby
functioning as a practical rectification tool.

Multi-view Diffusion has greatly advanced the development of 3D content creation by generating
multiple images from distinct views, achieving
remarkable photorealistic results. However, existing works are still vulnerable to inconsistent
3D geometric structures (commonly known as
Janus Problem) and severe artifacts. In this paper,
we introduce MIRROR, a versatile plug-and-play
method that rectifies such inconsistencies in a
training-free manner, enabling the acquisition of
high-fidelity, realistic structures without compromising diversity. Our key idea focuses on tracing
the motion trajectory of physical points across
adjacent viewpoints, enabling rectifications based
on neighboring observations of the same region.

1. Introduction

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan
Road, Shijingshan District, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Congying Han <hancy@ucas.ac.cn>.

Recently, 3D asset generation has become one of the most
promising fields in computer vision, and demonstrated extensive application in artworks and creation. Inspired by the
success in text-to-image generation (Rombach et al., 2022),
text-to-3D generation models have increasingly attracted
significant attention. Regarding the scarcity of 3D data, the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada, PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

