Human Body Restoration with
One-Step Diffusion Model and A New Benchmark

Jue Gong * 1 Jingkai Wang * 1 Zheng Chen 1 Xing Liu 2 Hong Gu 2 Yulun Zhang† 1 Xiaokang Yang 1
BRISQUE

Abstract

OID
VOC
COCO
Object365
CrowdHuman
DeepFashion
iDesigner
PERSONA (ours)

NIQE

CLIPIQ
A

Human body restoration, as a specific application
of image restoration, is widely applied in practice and plays a vital role across diverse fields.
However, thorough research remains difficult, particularly due to the lack of benchmark datasets. In
this study, we propose a high-quality dataset automated cropping and filtering (HQ-ACF) pipeline.
This pipeline leverages existing object detection datasets and other unlabeled images to automatically crop and filter high-quality human
images. Using this pipeline, we constructed a
person-based restoration with sophisticated objects and natural activities (PERSONA) dataset,
which includes training, validation, and test sets.
The dataset significantly surpasses other humanrelated datasets in both quality and content richness. Finally, we propose OSDHuman, a novel
one-step diffusion model for human body restoration. Specifically, we propose a high-fidelity
image embedder (HFIE) as the prompt generator to better guide the model with low-quality
human image information, effectively avoiding
misleading prompts. Experimental results show
that OSDHuman outperforms existing methods
in both visual quality and quantitative metrics.
The dataset and code are available at: https:
//github.com/gobunu/OSDHuman.

MA

NIQ

A

MU

SIQ

Figure 1. Comparison of no-reference image quality assessment
metrics across human-related datasets. The object detection
datasets specifically evaluate subsets with humans. Our proposed
PERSONA dataset outperforms others significantly.

recognition of human activities and the extraction of information from the image. Furthermore, degraded images
make other human-related downstream tasks more challenging, such as human-object interaction detection (Wang et al.,
2024d; Liu et al., 2025), human pose estimation (Samkari
et al., 2023; Atmosukarto et al., 2024), and 3D reconstruction (Wang et al., 2021a; Sun et al., 2024).
Despite its practical significance, progress in HBR remains
constrained, primarily due to the absence of task-specific
benchmark datasets. In natural scenarios, humans exhibit
a wide range of activities and complex interactions with
their surroundings. Therefore, the benchmark dataset for
HBR must be large, cover complex scenarios, and include
natural activities. Datasets in the fashion domain, such
as DeepFashion (Liu et al., 2016) and iDesigner (Dufour
et al., 2022), focus on runway or studio scenarios. As a
result, these datasets contain only limited types of human
actions, making them unsuitable for HBR. Moreover, human
images often involve multiple individuals interacting with
each other, adding further complexity to the restoration
task. Such complexity makes datasets focused on singleperson image generation, such as SHHQ (Fu et al., 2022)
and CosmicMan-HQ (Li et al., 2024b), less suitable for
HBR, as they mainly focus on single-person images.

1. Introduction
Human body restoration (HBR) aims to recover high-quality
(HQ) images from low-quality (LQ) inputs featuring human
figures. Unlike nature scene pictures, human figures naturally attract viewers’ attention in images. However, realworld images often suffer from degradation during capture
and transmission, such as blur, noise, resolution reduction,
and JPEG artifacts. These distortions severely impact the
*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd, China. Correspondence to:
†
Yulun Zhang <yulun100@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

