Unisoma: A Unified Transformer-based Solver for Multi-Solid Systems

Shilong Tao 1 Zhe Feng 1 Haonan Sun 1 Zhanxing Zhu 2 Yunhuai Liu 1
Implicit Modeling

Abstract
Multi-solid systems are foundational to a wide
range of real-world applications, yet modeling
their complex interactions remains challenging.
Existing deep learning methods predominantly
rely on implicit modeling, where the factors influencing solid deformation are not explicitly represented but are instead indirectly learned. However,
as the number of solids increases, these methods
struggle to accurately capture intricate physical
interactions. In this paper, we introduce a novel
explicit modeling paradigm that incorporates factors influencing solid deformation through structured modules. Specifically, we present Unisoma,
a unified and flexible Transformer-based model
capable of handling variable numbers of solids.
Unisoma directly captures physical interactions
using contact modules and adaptive interaction
allocation mechanism, and learns the deformation through a triplet relationship. Compared to
implicit modeling techniques, explicit modeling
is more well-suited for multi-solid systems with
diverse coupling patterns, as it enables detailed
treatment of each solid while preventing information blending and confusion. Experimentally, Unisoma achieves consistent state-of-the-art performance across seven well-established datasets and
two complex multi-solid tasks. Code is avaiable
at https://github.com/therontau0054/Unisoma.

Domain-wise Learning
Graph-wise Learning

Contact
Load
Contact
Explicit Modeling

Load

Deformation
Deformation

Figure 1. Implicit Modeling and Explicit Modeling. Yellow planes
are rigid solids. Orange and red balls are deformable solids.

in industry, robotic gripping (Zhang et al., 2020), and composite materials research (Clyne & Hull, 2019) are typical
application scenarios. From a scientific standpoint, multisolid systems can often be formulated as high-dimensional,
nonlinear Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). However,
the large solution space, strict contact conditions, and complex dynamics pose significant computational challenges for
traditional numerical methods (e.g., Finite Element Methods
(Sifakis & Barbic, 2012) and Material Point Methods (Sulsky et al., 1995)), making them difficult to meet real-time or
high-fidelity requirements (Umetani & Bickel, 2018). Recently, Deep Learning techniques have been increasingly
adopted in scientific computing, showing promise for various physical simulations (Cai et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2020a). Despite these advances, most research
to date has focused on few-solid systems or other physical
scenarios such as fluids. There remains a notable gap in
applying deep learning to multi-solid systems, and a systematic approach capable of characterizing complex physical
interactions among multiple solids is still underexplored.

1. Introduction

Multi-solid systems encompass multiple rigid and deformable solids with distinct mechanical properties (e.g.,
elastic, plastic, hyperelastic). The motion of these solids
and their contact interactions induce forces (also referred
to as loads), thereby driving deformations and changes in
the physical quantities of deformable solids, which are our
primary focus. In these systems, diverse material behaviors,
contact phenomena, and exerted loads converge into complex physical interactions, which in turn lead to intricate
deformation behaviors (Braess, 2001). Consequently, how
to effectively distinguish and capture these interactions is
the key challenge in multi-solid analysis.

Multi-solid (rigid and deformable) systems play an essential
role in a broad range of real-world scenarios, such as industrial manufacturing (Khan & Turowski, 2016), mechanical
manipulation (Mason, 2001), and aerospace (Mouritz, 2012).
For example, multi-point metal stamping (Li et al., 2002)
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 School of Electrical and Computer Science, University
of Southampton, UK. Correspondence to: Yunhuai Liu <yunhuai.liu@pku.edu.cn>, Zhanxing Zhu <z.zhu@soton.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Presently, research specifically dedicated to multi-solid sys1

