Non-asymptotic Error Bounds in W2 -Distance with Sqrt(d) Dimension
Dependence and First Order Convergence for Langevin Monte Carlo beyond
Log-Concavity

Bin Yang * 1 Xiaojie Wang * 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Generating samples from a high dimensional probability distribution is a fundamental task with
wide-ranging applications in the area of scientific computing, statistics and machine learning.
This article revisits the popular Langevin Monte
Carlo (LMC) sampling algorithms and provides
a non-asymptotic error analysis in W2 -distance
in a non-convex setting.
In particular, we prove
√
an error bound
O(
dh),
which
guarantees a mix√
ing time Õ( dϵ−1 ) to achieve the accuracy tolerance ϵ, under certain log-smooth conditions and
the assumption that the target distribution satisfies a log-Sobolev inequality, as opposed to the
strongly log-concave condition used in (Li et al.,
2019; 2022). This bound matches the best one
in the strongly log-concave case and improves
upon the best-known convergence rates in nonconvex settings. To prove it, we establish a new
framework of uniform-in-time convergence for
discretizations of SDEs. Distinct from (Li et al.,
2019; 2022), we start from the finite-time meansquare fundamental convergence theorem, which
combined with uniform-in-time moment bounds
of LMC and the exponential ergodicity of SDEs in
the non-convex setting gives the desired uniformin-time convergence. Our framework also applies
to the case when the gradient of the potential U
is non-globally Lipschitz with superlinear growth,
for which modified LMC samplers are proposed
and analyzed, with a non-asymptotic error bound
in W2 -distance obtained. Numerical experiments
corroborate the theoretical analysis.

Sampling from a complex, high dimensional target probability measure π(dx) ∝ e−U (x) dx, where U (·) : Rd → R is
a potential function, finds wide-ranging applications in the
area of scientific computing, statistics and machine learning (Durmus & Moulines, 2019; Song & Ermon, 2019;
Wibisono, 2018; Liang & Su, 2019; Kakade, 2003; Neal,
1992; Welling & Teh, 2011). The Langevin stochastic differential equation (SDE) associated with the target probability
measure π is defined by:
√
dXt = −∇U (Xt ) dt + 2 dWt , X0 = x0 , t > 0, (1)
T
where W· := W·1 , W·2 , · · · , W·d : [0, ∞) × Ω → Rd
is d-dimensional Brownian motion defined on the filtered
probability space (Ω, F, {Ft }t≥0 , P), satisfying the usual
conditions. The initial data x0 : Ω → Rd is assumed to
be F0 -measurable. Under mild conditions, the Langevin
SDE admits π as its unique invariant distribution (see, e.g.,
(Pavliotis, 2014)). However, sampling from the exact dynamics (1) directly is usually not accessible and the numerical discretization becomes a practical option. The popular
Langevin sampler is based on the Euler–Maruyama (EM)
discretization of (1), given by
√
Ȳn+1 = Ȳn − ∇U (Ȳn )h + 2hζn+1 , Ȳ0 = x0 , (2)
where h > 0 is the uniform timestep and ζk :=
(ζk1 , ζk2 , · · · , ζkd )T , k ∈ N, are i.i.d standard d-dimensional
Gaussian vectors. By combining gradient information with
noise, this algorithm, termed as Langevin Monte Carlo
(LMC), allows faster convergence and more efficient exploration of complex, high-dimensional distributions compared to the naive Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
The capability to generate high quality samples and improve
model training makes it popular in many applications such
as generative models.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics and Statistics, Hunan Research Center of the Basic Discipline for Analytical Mathematics, HNP-LAMA, Central South University, Changsha 410083,
China. Correspondence to: Xiaojie Wang <x.j.wang7@csu.edu.cn,
x.j.wang7@gmail.com>.

Related literature. The study of LMC sampling algorithms
has attracted considerable attention over recent years. A
central problem is to determine the number of iteration steps
(termed as mixing time) guaranteeing that the distribution
of the Markov chain is a good approximation of the target

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

