Automatic Differentiation of Optimization Algorithms
with Time-Varying Updates

Sheheryar Mehmood 1 Peter Ochs 1

Abstract

where we define A(x, u) := x − α∇x F (x, u) for solving
a parametric optimization problem of the form

Numerous optimization algorithms have a timevarying update rule thanks to, for instance, a
changing step size, momentum parameter or, Hessian approximation. Often, such algorithms are
used as solvers for the lower-level problem in
bilevel optimization, and are unrolled when computing the gradient of the upper-level objective. In
this paper, we apply unrolled or automatic differentiation to a time-varying iterative process and
provide convergence (rate) guarantees for the resulting derivative iterates. We then adapt these
convergence results and apply them to proximal
gradient descent with variable step size and FISTA
when solving partly-smooth problems. We test the
convergence (rates) of these algorithms numerically through several experiments. Our theoretical
and numerical results show that the convergence
rate of the algorithm is reflected in its derivative
iterates.

min F (x, u) ,

with a smooth objective F : X × U → R. In this case (Re )
reduces to the optimality condition ∇x F (x, u) = 0.
There is a wide range of practical applications in which,
problems of type (Re ) or (P) appear as a constraint within
a minimization problem with respect to the parameter u.
Usually, for some smooth ℓ : X × U → R, this can be
compactly stated as
min ℓ(ψ(u), u) ,

where, given any u ∈ U, ψ(u) is a solution of (Re ) or (P).
This kind of optimization, formally known as bilevel optimization (Dempe et al., 2015; Dempe & Zemkoho, 2020)
has emerged as a crucial tool in machine learning, playing a
foundational role in various applications such as hyperparameter optimization (Bengio, 2000; Domke, 2012; Maclaurin et al., 2015), implicit neural networks (Amos & Kolter,
2017; Agrawal et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2019; 2020; Winston
& Kolter, 2020), meta-learning (Hospedales et al., 2021),
and neural architecture search (Liu et al., 2019).

For some parameter u ∈ U, we consider the following
parametric iterative process

Solving (1) through gradient-based methods requires computing the gradient of the upper objective ℓ(ψ(u), u) with
respect to u which, in turn, requires computing the derivative of the solution mapping u 7→ ψ(u), that is, Dψ(u)
by using the chain rule. When ℓ and F (or A) satisfy certain smoothness and regularity assumptions, this can be
achieved by two different methods. (i) One is known as
Implicit Differentiation (ID) which leverages the classical
Implicit Function Theorem or IFT (Dontchev & Rockafellar,
2009, Theorem 1B.1) applied to (Re ) to estimate

(R)

for k ≥ 0, where x(0) ∈ X is the initial iterate and
A : X ×U → X is the update mapping. The iterates x(k) (u)
generated by (R) depend on u due to the dependence of A
on u. The goal of performing the iterations (R) is mainly
to solve the non-linear fixed-point equation
x = A(x, u) ,

(1)

u∈U

1. Introduction

x(k+1) (u) := A(x(k) (u), u) ,

(P)

x∈X

(Re )

with respect to x for each parameter u. A simple example is gradient descent with appropriate step size α > 0

Dψ(u) = (I − Dx A(x, u))

1

−1

Du A(x, u)

= −∇2x F (x, u)−1 Du ∇x F (x, u) ,

Department of Mathematics & Computer Science, Saarland
University, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Sheheryar
Mehmood <mehmood@math.uni-sb.de>.

(2)

where x := ψ(u) (see Theorem A.10 for more details).
The key assumption for IFT is the strict bound on the spectral radius ρ(Dx A(ψ(u), u)) < 1, which we call the contraction property since it is a sufficient condition for A

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

