SPMC: Self-Purifying Federated Backdoor Defense via Margin Contribution

Wenwen He * 1 2 Wenke Huang * 1 Bin Yang 1 Shukan Liu 3 Mang Ye 1

Aggregated Weight

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative
training with privacy preservation but is vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where malicious clients
degrade model performance on targeted inputs.
These attacks exploit FL decentralized nature,
while existing defenses, based on isolated behaviors and fixed rules, can be bypassed by adaptive
attackers. To address these limitations, we propose SPMC, a marginal collaboration defense
mechanism that leverages intrinsic consistency
across clients to estimate inter-client marginal
contributions. This allows the system to dynamically reduce the influence of clients whose behavior deviates from the collaborative norm, thus
maintaining robustness even as the number of attackers changes. In addition to overcoming proxydependent purification’s weaknesses, we introduce a self-purification process that locally adjusts suspicious gradients. By aligning them with
margin-based model updates, we mitigate the effect of local poisoning. Together, these two modules significantly improve the adaptability and
resilience of FL systems, both at the client and
server levels. Experimental results on a variety of
classification benchmarks demonstrate that SPMC
achieves strong defense performance against sophisticated backdoor attacks without sacrificing
accuracy on benign tasks. The code is posted at:
https://github.com/WenddHe0119/SPMC .

(a) Individual
Action

Server-side

Margin
Coalition

Ours

Out！
0

(b) Predefine Scale：

No scale rule

×1 .

Client-side
Detect

Purify

Ours

No-proxy
Purification

(c) Proxy Assistance
Drawback

Distance

Statistics

Target

Ours

(a) Only Individual Action
(b) Predefined Scale Requirement
(c) Proxy Assistance

✓
✓
✓

✓
✗
✗

✓
✓
✗

✗
✗
✗

Figure 1. Motivation. Illustration of the limitations of existing
defenses and the advantages of the proposed method from both
server-side and client-side. The comparison table highlights that
our method uniquely avoids reliance on three drawbacks.
denotes attacker and denotes benign client.

ables multiple devices to collaboratively train a global model
while preserving data privacy by storing data locally on end
devices. The general approaches (McMahan et al., 2017;
Blanchard et al., 2017) aggregate parameters from participating devices and subsequently redistribute the global model
(averaged parameters) for further training, aiming to learn a
high-quality model without centralizing private data. However, this distributed learning framework complicates the
verification of each participant’s trustworthiness, rendering
it vulnerable to backdoor attacks (Chen et al., 2017; Gu
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022; Fung et al., 2020). In such
attacks, an attacker may insert triggers into one or more
local models, causing the global model to exhibit specific
malicious behaviors when these triggers are activated. For
instance, in the context of autonomous driving, an attacker
could place special stickers (e.g., smiley faces) on a stop
sign, misleading the system into interpreting the stop sign as
a speed limit, thereby exemplifying a backdoor attack in a
real-world scenario (Gu et al., 2019). Therefore, effectively
addressing backdoor attacks is essential for ensuring the
reliability of federated learning in real-time applications.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL), as a decentralized machine learning paradigm (McMahan et al., 2016; Bonawitz, 2019), en*

Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center
for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China 2 School of National Cyber Security,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 3 School of Electronic Engineering, Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Bin Yang <yangbin cv@whu.edu.cn>, Mang Ye
<yemang@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

