Confounder-Free Continual Learning via
Recursive Feature Normalization
Yash Shah 1 Camila Gonzalez 1 Mohammad H. Abbasi 1 Qingyu Zhao 2 Kilian M. Pohl 1 Ehsan Adeli 1

Abstract

correlations introduce bias into learning algorithms, causing
the feature representations learned by deep neural networks
(DNNs) to be skewed (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Obermeyer et al., 2019; Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2021; Seyyed-Kalantari et al., 2020).

Confounders are extraneous variables that affect
both the input and the target, resulting in spurious correlations and biased predictions. There
are recent advances in dealing with or removing confounders in traditional models, such as
metadata normalization (MDN), where the distribution of the learned features is adjusted based
on the study confounders. However, in the context of continual learning, where a model learns
continuously from new data over time without
forgetting, learning feature representations that
are invariant to confounders remains a significant
challenge. To remove their influence from intermediate feature representations, we introduce the
Recursive MDN (R-MDN) layer, which can be
integrated into any deep learning architecture, including vision transformers, and at any model
stage. R-MDN performs statistical regression via
the recursive least squares algorithm to maintain
and continually update an internal model state
with respect to changing distributions of data and
confounding variables. Our experiments demonstrate that R-MDN promotes equitable predictions
across population groups, both within static learning and across different stages of continual learning, by reducing catastrophic forgetting caused by
confounder effects changing over time.

This problem is particularly relevant in medical studies, such
as those related to brain development (Casey et al., 2018), biological and behavioral health (Petersen et al., 2010; Brown
et al., 2015), and dermatoscopic images (Tschandl et al.,
2018), which are often confounded by demographic data
such as age, sex, socio-economic background, and by factors like acquisition protocols and disease comorbidities.
For example, a DNN trained to diagnose neurodegenerative
disorders from brain MRIs could disproportionately rely on
age instead of the underlying pathology. This may occur
due to the disease causing accelerated aging or a selection
bias, i.e., having different distributions in the diseased cohort versus the control group. This can lead to models that
are inequitable and inaccurate for certain populations (Rao
et al., 2017; Seyyed-Kalantari et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020;
Adeli et al., 2020b; Lu et al., 2021; Vento et al., 2022).
Given these challenges, it is crucial to develop techniques
that enable DNNs to focus on task-relevant features while remaining invariant to confounders, which are often available
as auxiliary information or metadata in the dataset.
Methods such as BR-Net (Adeli et al., 2020a), MDN (Lu
et al., 2021), P-MDN (Vento et al., 2022), and RegBN
(Ghahremani Boozandani & Wachinger, 2024) have previously been proposed to address the challenges posed by
confounders when training DNNs. However, in continual
learning, where data becomes available sequentially, traditional methods fail. This is because previous adversarial (BR-Net) or statistical (MDN, PMDN, etc.) methods
need to use the entire dataset (implemented in batch-level
statistics together with global memories) to estimate and
remove the distribution of the features with respect to the
confounders. In addition, because they require estimating
batch-level statistics, they are unsuitable for modern architectures like vision transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). A
continuum of data may arise in various contexts. For example, in a cross-sectional study (Tschandl et al., 2018), the
training process may be divided into distinct stages, each
stage featuring different data distributions. In contrast, in a

1. Introduction
Confounders are study variables that influence both input
and target, resulting in spurious correlations that distort the
true underlying relationships within the data (Greenland &
Morgenstern, 2001; Ferrari et al., 2020). These spurious
1
Stanford University, Stanford, United States 2 Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, United States. Correspondence
to: Yash Shah <ynshah@stanford.edu>, Ehsan Adeli <eadeli@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

