Identifying and Understanding Cross-Class Features in Adversarial Training

Zeming Wei 1 Yiwen Guo 2 Yisen Wang 3 4

Abstract

2016; Cohen et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2024) for defending
against this threat have been proposed. Adversarial training
(AT) (Madry et al., 2018), which adaptively adds adversarial
perturbations to samples in the training loop, has been considered one of the most effective ways to make the DNNs
more robust to adversarial attacks (Athalye et al., 2018).

Adversarial training (AT) has been considered
one of the most effective methods for making
deep neural networks robust against adversarial
attacks, while the training mechanisms and dynamics of AT remain open research problems.
In this paper, we present a novel perspective on
studying AT through the lens of class-wise feature attribution. Specifically, we identify the impact of a key family of features on AT that are
shared by multiple classes, which we call crossclass features. These features are typically useful
for robust classification, which we offer theoretical evidence to illustrate through a synthetic data
model. Through systematic studies across multiple model architectures and settings, we find that
during the initial stage of AT, the model tends
to learn more cross-class features until the best
robustness checkpoint. As AT further squeezes
the training robust loss and causes robust overfitting, the model tends to make decisions based
on more class-specific features. Based on these
discoveries, we further provide a unified view
of two existing properties of AT, including the
advantage of soft-label training and robust overfitting. Overall, these insights refine the current understanding of AT mechanisms and provide new perspectives on studying them. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
PKU-ML/Cross-Class-Features-AT.

Given the unique success in improving adversarial robustness and the complex optimization process of AT, several
studies have attempted to interpret AT through different perspectives like feature visualization (Ilyas et al., 2019; Bai
et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2023) and coverage analysis (Wang
et al., 2019). However, there are still a few mysterious properties of AT whose underlying mechanisms remain open
research problems. First, AT can lead to a phenomenon
known as robust overfitting (Rice et al., 2020). During AT,
a model may achieve its best test robust error at a certain
epoch, but the test robust error will gradually increase in the
latter stage of training. By contrast, the training robust error
consistently decreases, resulting in a large robust generalization gap. Furthermore, although one-hot labels are usually
adequate for standard training, integrating soft-label training
methods such as knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015)
into AT can significantly improve AT whilst mitigating robust overfitting (Chen et al., 2021) (e.g. 41% → 48% on
CIFAR-10 dataset). However, the reasons why soft labels
are typically advantageous for AT remain unclear.
In this paper, we explore the mechanisms of AT and offer
a unified understanding of the two properties from a new
aspect of class-wise feature attribution. Specifically, we
divide the features learned by the model into cross-class
features and class-specific features. The cross-class features
are shared among multiple classes in the classification task,
e.g. the feature wheels shared by the automobile and truck
classes in the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009).
We examine how these features are utilized across various
stages of AT. Intriguingly, we observe that at the initial stage,
the model gradually learns more cross-class features until
reaching the most robust checkpoint. In contrast, at later
checkpoints where robust overfitting occurs, the model tends
to make decisions based more on class-specific features and
decreases its dependence on cross-class features. Furthermore, we find that models trained with properly learned soft
labels, like knowledge distillation, can preserve more crossclass features during AT whilst mitigating robust overfitting.

1. Introduction
As the existence of adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) has led to significant safety concerns of deep neural networks (DNNs), a series of methods (Papernot et al.,
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Independent Researcher 3 State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking
University 4 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Yisen Wang <yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

