Efficient Diffusion Models for Symmetric Manifolds

Oren Mangoubi 1 Neil He 2 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 2

Abstract

manifold M, such as robotics (Feiten et al., 2013), drug
discovery (Cheng et al., 2021), and quantum physics (Cranmer et al., 2023), where configurations are often represented
on symmetric-space manifolds like the torus, sphere, special orthogonal group SO(n), or unitary group U(n) where
d ≈ n2 . A common approach enforces manifold constraints
by mapping samples from Euclidean space Rd to M, but
this often degrades sample quality due to distortions introduced by the mapping (see Appendix D for details).

We introduce a framework for designing efficient
diffusion models for d-dimensional symmetricspace Riemannian manifolds, including the torus,
sphere, special orthogonal group and unitary
group. Existing manifold diffusion models often
depend on heat kernels, which lack closed-form
expressions and require either d gradient evaluations or exponential-in-d arithmetic operations per
training step. We introduce a new diffusion model
for symmetric manifolds with a spatially-varying
covariance, allowing us to leverage a projection
of Euclidean Brownian motion to bypass heat kernel computations. Our training algorithm minimizes a novel efficient objective derived via Ito’s
Lemma, allowing each step to run in O(1) gradient evaluations and nearly-linear-in-d (O(d1.19 ))
arithmetic operations, reducing the gap between
diffusions on symmetric manifolds and Euclidean
space. Manifold symmetries ensure the diffusion
satisfies an “average-case” Lipschitz condition,
enabling accurate and efficient sample generation.
Empirically, our model outperforms prior methods in training speed and improves sample quality
on synthetic datasets on the torus, special orthogonal group, and unitary group.

To address this, several works have developed diffusion
models constrained to non-Euclidean Riemannian manifolds
(De Bortoli et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Lou et al., 2024;
Zhu et al., 2025; Yim et al., 2023). However, a significant
gap remains between the runtime and sampling guarantees
of Euclidean and manifold-based diffusion models. For instance, while Euclidean models have a per-iteration runtime
of O(d) arithmetic operations and O(1) evaluations of the
model’s gradient, objectives of manifold diffusion models
often require exponential-in-d arithmetic operations, or evaluating Riemannian divergence operators which require O(d)
gradient evaluations. Reducing this gap, particularly for
symmetric manifolds, remains an open challenge.
To understand the technical difficulty, first consider the Euclidean case. A diffusion model consists of two components:
a forward process that adds noise over time T > 0 until
the data is nearly Gaussian, and a reverse process that starts
from a Gaussian sample and gradually removes the noise
to generate samples approximating the original distribution
π. A discrete-time Gaussian latent variable model is used to
approximate the reverse diffusion. In the manifold case, the
forward process corresponds to standard Brownian motion
on the manifold, and the reverse diffusion is its time-reversal.
However, Gaussians are not generally defined on manifolds.
To address this, previous works move to continuous time,
where infinitesimal updates converge to a Gaussian on the
tangent space. The reverse diffusion is then governed by a
stochastic differential equation (SDE) involving the manifold’s heat kernel. The heat kernel pτ |b (·|b) represents the
density of Brownian motion at time τ , initialized at a point
b. Training the reverse diffusion model thus requires minimizing an objective function dependent on the heat kernel.

1. Introduction
Recently, denoising diffusion-based methods have achieved
significant success in generating synthetic data, including
highly realistic images and videos (OpenAI, 2023). Given a
dataset D sampled from an unknown probability distribution
π, a diffusion generative model aims to learn a distribution
ν that approximates π and generates new samples from ν.
While most diffusion models operate in Euclidean space Rd
(Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022), several applications
require data constrained to a d-dimensional non-Euclidean
1

Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA. 2 Yale University, USA.
Correspondence to: Oren Mangoubi <omangoubi@gmail.com>,
Nisheeth K. Vishnoi <nisheeth.vishnoi@gmail.com>.

Even in the Euclidean case, the training objective is nonconvex, and there are no polynomial-in-dimension runtime

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

