Learning Compact Semantic Information for Incomplete Multi-View Missing
Multi-Label Classification
Jie Wen 1 Yadong Liu 1 Zhanyan Tang 1 Yuting He 2 Yulong Chen 1 Mu Li 1 Chengliang Liu 1

Abstract

et al., 2023), and multimedia information retrieval (Fang
et al., 2022). Not only does multimodal data with significant
differences exhibit rich representational power, but multifeature data from the same sample also holds substantial
representational capabilities. The learning paradigm for
performing machine learning or data analysis tasks based on
such multimodal or multi-feature data is unified within the
theoretical framework of multi-view learning (Zhang et al.,
2019). And the success of this framework in downstream
tasks is largely attributed to extracting and leveraging multiview consistent semantic information (Hwang et al., 2021;
Zeng et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2023).

Multi-view data involves various data forms, such
as multi-feature, multi-sequence and multimodal
data, providing rich semantic information for
downstream tasks. The inherent challenge of incomplete multi-view missing multi-label learning
lies in how to effectively utilize limited supervision and insufficient data to learn discriminative
representation. Starting from the sufficiency of
multi-view shared information for downstream
tasks, we argue that the existing contrastive learning paradigms on missing multi-view data show
limited consistency representation learning ability,
leading to the bottleneck in extracting multi-view
shared information. In response, we propose to
minimize task-independent redundant information by pursuing the maximization of cross-view
mutual information. Additionally, to alleviate the
hindrance caused by missing labels, we develop
a dual-branch soft pseudo-label cross-imputation
strategy to improve classification performance.
Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks
validate our advantages and demonstrate strong
compatibility with both missing and complete
data.

In traditional single-label classification tasks, it is typically
assumed that each sample corresponds to a unique label.
However, in real-world applications, almost all samples
may be associated with multiple labels. For example, in
autonomous driving tasks, images captured by cameras may
contain multiple entities and be associated with several labels. Multi-Label Learning (MLL) tasks have attracted
increasing attention due to their strong practical significance
(Zhou et al., 2012), which aims to predict all possible relevant labels for an unlabeled example. Recent extensive research has witnessed significant progress of MLL in various
practical applications, e.g., document classification (Fallah
et al., 2023), emotion recognition (Zhang et al., 2021; Ameer
et al., 2022), and image annotation (Chen et al., 2019).
Combining the characteristics of the two tasks mentioned
above, multi-view multi-label classification (MVMLC)
methods (Wu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020) aims to
leverage multi-view semantic information of samples as
much as possible to enhance the performance of multi-label
classification. However, in real-world data collection processes, failures often occur inevitably due to various reasons. For example, in medical diagnosis, missing diagnostic
reports often occur due to privacy concerns or economic
factors. Additionally, manual annotation of labels may lead
to incomplete tagging. This leads to the necessity of incomplete Multi-view Missing Multi-Label Classification
(iM3C), which focuses on scenarios where some views and
labels are missing.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning aims to integrate data from different
modalities (such as images, text, speech, etc.) to enhance
the model’s understanding and decision-making capabilities.
This approach has shown significant potential in fields such
as medical diagnosis (Qiu et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023; Lin
et al., 2025), wearable devices (Wen et al., 2022; Fang et al.,
2024), sentiment analysis (Soleymani et al., 2017; Zhang
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518000 China 2 Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA. Correspondence to: Chengliang Liu <liucl1996@163.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Considering the incomplete multi-view problem, Zhao et
al. proposed a method named CDMM (Zhao et al., 2021),
1

