Learning Condensed Graph via Differentiable
Atom Mapping for Reaction Yield Prediction

Ankit Ghosh 1 Gargee Kashyap 1 Sarthak Mittal 2 Nupur Jain 1 Raghavan B Sunoj 1 Abir De 2

Abstract

& Sunoj, 2022; Schleinitz et al., 2022; Lu & Zhang, 2022)
have primarily relied on quantum chemically computed
molecular descriptors, molecular fingerprints, or SMILES
based representation rather than a more holistic representation built on molecular structure itself. In contrast, recent
approaches (Saebi et al., 2021; Gong et al., 2021; Kwon
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023) leverage graph neural networks
(GNNs) to compute the embedding using molecular graphs.

Yield of chemical reactions generally depends
on the activation barrier, i.e., the energy difference between the reactant and the transition state.
Computing the transition state from the reactant
and product graphs requires prior knowledge of
the correct node alignment (i.e., atom mapping),
which is not available in yield prediction datasets.
In this work, we propose Y IELD N ET, a neural
yield prediction model, which tackles these challenges. Here, we first approximate the atom mapping between the reactants and products using a
differentiable node alignment network. We then
use this approximate atom mapping to obtain a
noisy realization of the condensed graph of reaction (CGR), which is a supergraph encompassing
both the reactants and products. This CGR serves
as a surrogate for the transition state graph structure. The CGR embeddings of different steps
in a multi-step reaction are then passed into a
transformer-guided reaction path encoder. Our
experiments show that Y IELD N ET can predict the
yield more accurately than the baselines. Furthermore, the model is trained only under the distant
supervision of yield values, without requiring finegrained supervision of atom mapping.

Yield of a reaction depends strongly on the activation energy,
through Arrhenius equation (Arrhenius, 1889), which is associated with the potential energy of a transient chemical
entity called the ‘transition state’. It is possible to infer the
transition state graph from the reactant and product graphs
if we know the atom mapping, i.e., the correspondence between the atoms of the reactants and the products (Kim
et al., 2024). But most existing yield prediction datasets
only include the reactants and products, lacking both transition states and atom mappings. Furthermore, the computation of the true atom mapping from the graph structures
of reactants and products is a challenging task. Atom mapping computation involves solving various pairwise graph
matching tasks, which are NP hard problems (Astero &
Rousu, 2024). In practice, this is usually mitigated by using
expert-curated rules. However, such inputs require manual
intervention which could, in turn, limit their widespread deployment (Schwaller et al., 2021a). As a result, the existing
works on yield prediction do not consider atom mapping or
transition states into their model, leaving a significant room
for improvement.

1. Introduction
The yield of a chemical reaction is expressed as the percentage of conversion of the reactant(s) to product(s). Early
prediction of yield before wet-lab validation of reactions
can have an immense impact on ML-driven reaction discovery. It allows the identification and removal of low-yielding
reactions, thereby helping in the design and optimization of
chemical synthesis. Previous works on yield prediction (Ahneman et al., 2018; Nielsen et al., 2018; Zahrt et al., 2019;
Sandfort et al., 2020; Schwaller et al., 2020; 2021c; Singh

1.1. Our contributions
We address these challenges by designing a novel yield
prediction network (Y IELD N ET). Specifically, we make the
following contributions.
Differentiable approximation of atom mapping In the
context of a chemical reaction, atom mapping refers to an
alignment map between the reactant and product nodes,
which ensures that the atom composition is preserved. Such
an alignment can be obtained by solving a graph matching task between the reactants and the products (Körner
& Apostolakis, 2008; Astero & Rousu, 2024). However,
this necessitates an exploration of a vast permutation space,

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Chemistry, IIT Bombay
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay.
Correspondence to: Ankit Ghosh <ankitghosh@iitb.ac.in>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

