Graph-constrained Reasoning: Faithful Reasoning on Knowledge Graphs with
Large Language Models

Linhao Luo * 1 Zicheng Zhao * 2 Gholamreza Haffari 1 Yuan-Fang Li 1 Chen Gong 3 Shirui Pan 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive reasoning abilities in handling complex tasks (Qiao et al., 2023;
Huang & Chang, 2023), marking a significant leap that
bridges the gap between human and machine intelligence.
However, LLMs still struggle with conducting faithful reasoning due to issues of lack of knowledge and hallucination
(Huang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023). These issues result
in factual errors and flawed reasoning processes (Nguyen
et al., 2024), which greatly undermine the reliability of
LLMs in real-world applications.

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive reasoning abilities, but they
still struggle with faithful reasoning due to knowledge gaps and hallucinations. To address these
issues, knowledge graphs (KGs) have been utilized to enhance LLM reasoning through their
structured knowledge. However, existing KGenhanced methods, either retrieval-based or agentbased, encounter difficulties in accurately retrieving knowledge and efficiently traversing KGs
at scale. In this work, we introduce graphconstrained reasoning (GCR), a novel framework
that bridges structured knowledge in KGs with unstructured reasoning in LLMs. To eliminate hallucinations, GCR ensures faithful KG-grounded reasoning by integrating KG structure into the LLM
decoding process through KG-Trie, a trie-based
index that encodes KG reasoning paths. KG-Trie
constrains the decoding process, allowing LLMs
to directly reason on graphs and generate faithful reasoning paths grounded in KGs. Additionally, GCR leverages a lightweight KG-specialized
LLM for graph-constrained reasoning alongside
a powerful general LLM for inductive reasoning
over multiple reasoning paths, resulting in accurate reasoning with zero reasoning hallucination.
Extensive experiments on several KGQA benchmarks demonstrate that GCR achieves state-ofthe-art performance and exhibits strong zero-shot
generalizability to unseen KGs without additional
training1 .

To address these issues, many studies utilize knowledge
graphs (KGs), which encapsulate extensive factual information in a structured format, to improve the reasoning abilities
of LLMs (Pan et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024). Nevertheless,
because of the unstructured nature of LLMs, directly applying them to reason on KGs is challenging.
Existing KG-enhanced LLM reasoning methods can be
roughly categorized into two groups: retrieval-based and
agent-based paradigms, as shown in Figure 2 (a) and (b).
Retrieval-based methods (Li et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b;
Dehghan et al., 2024) retrieve relevant facts from KGs with
an external retriever and then feed them into the inputs of
LLMs for reasoning. Agent-based methods (Sun et al., 2024;
Zhu et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024) treat LLMs as agents
that iteratively interact with KGs to find reasoning paths and
answers.
Faithful Reasoning Path

Invalid - Format Error
Despite their success, retrievalInvalid - Relation Error
based
methods
require
additional accurate retrievers,
15.0%
which may not generalize
well to unseen questions or
18.0%
account for the graph structure
67.0%
(Mavromatis & Karypis, 2024).
Conversely,
agent-based
methods necessitate multiple
Figure 1. Analysis of rearounds of interaction between
soning errors in RoG (Luo
agents and KGs, leading to
et al., 2024).
high computational costs and
latency (Dehghan et al., 2024). Furthermore, existing works
still suffer from serious hallucination issues (Agrawal et al.,

*

1
Equal contribution
Monash University 2 Nanjing
University of Science and Technology 3 Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 4 Griffith University.
Correspondence to:
Shirui Pan <s.pan@griffith.edu.au>, Linhao Luo <linhao.luo@monash.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code and data are available at: https://github.com/
RManLuo/graph-constrained-reasoning

1

