Understanding High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization

Leonard Papenmeier 1 Matthias Poloczek 2 Luigi Nardi 1 3

Abstract

assumptions on the objective function that lower the data
demand, such as additivity (Duvenaud et al., 2011; Kandasamy et al., 2015; Hoang et al., 2018; Han et al., 2021;
Ziomek & Ammar, 2023; Bardou et al., 2024) or the existence of a low-dimensional active subspace (Wang et al.,
2016; Nayebi et al., 2019; Letham et al., 2020; Papenmeier
et al., 2022). Without such assumptions, it was widely believed that BO with a Gaussian process (GP) surrogate is
limited to approximately 20 dimensions for common evaluation budgets (Frazier, 2018; Moriconi et al., 2020). Recently,
Hvarfner et al. (2024) and Xu & Zhe (2024) reported that
simple BO methods perform well on high-dimensional realworld benchmarks, often surpassing the performance of
more sophisticated algorithms.

Recent work reported that simple Bayesian optimization (BO) methods perform well for highdimensional real-world tasks, seemingly contradicting prior work and tribal knowledge. This paper investigates why. We identify underlying challenges that arise in high-dimensional BO and explain why recent methods succeed. Our empirical
analysis shows that vanishing gradients caused by
Gaussian process (GP) initialization schemes play
a major role in the failures of high-dimensional
Bayesian optimization (HDBO) and that methods that promote local search behaviors are better
suited for the task. We find that maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of GP length scales suffices for state-of-the-art performance. Based on
this, we propose a simple variant of MLE called
MSR that leverages these findings to achieve stateof-the-art performance on a comprehensive set of
real-world applications. We present targeted experiments to illustrate and confirm our findings.

Due to its many impactful applications, high-dimensional
Bayesian optimization (HDBO) has seen active research in
recent years (Binois & Wycoff, 2022; Papenmeier et al.,
2023). While the boundaries have been pushed significantly, the causes of performance gains have not always
been thoroughly identified. For example, in the case of the
BODi (Deshwal et al., 2023) and COMBO (Oh et al., 2019)
algorithms, later work found that the methods benefited
from specific benchmark structures prevalent in their evaluation (Papenmeier et al., 2023). Similarly, an evaluation
of Nayebi et al. (2019) showed that the performance of some
prior methods is sensitive to the location of the optimum in
the search space.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has found wide-spread adoption for optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions that appear in aerospace engineering (Lukaczyk et al.,
2014; Lam et al., 2018), drug discovery (Negoescu et al.,
2011), robotics (Lizotte et al., 2007; Calandra et al., 2016;
Rai et al., 2018; Mayr et al., 2022) or finance (Baudiš &
Pošı́k, 2014).

This paper is motivated by the recent call for more scrutiny
and exploratory research (Herrmann et al., 2024). By exhaustive experimentation, we first identify underlying challenges arising in high dimensions and then examine stateof-the-art HDBO methods to understand how they mitigate
these obstacles. Equipped with these insights, we propose
a simpler approach that uses maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of the GP length scales called MLE Scaled with
RAASP (MSR). We demonstrate that MSR is sufficient for
state-of-the-art HDBO performance without the need for
specifying a prior belief on length scales as in maximum
a-posteriori estimation (MAP). We note that practitioners
usually do not possess such priors and instead rely on empirical performances on benchmarks.In particular, we change
the initialization of length scales to avoid vanishing gradients of the GP likelihood function that easily occur in highdimensional spaces but, so far, have been overlooked for BO.

While BO has proven reliable in low-dimensional settings,
high-dimensional spaces are challenging due to the curse
of dimensionality (COD) that demands exponentially more
data points to maintain the same precision with increasing problem dimensionality. Several approaches have extended BO to high-dimensional spaces under additional
1
Department of Computer Science, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden 2 Amazon (This research does not relate to Matthias’ work
at Amazon.) 3 DBtune. Correspondence to: Leonard Papenmeier
<leonard.papenmeier@cs.lth.se>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

