PertEval-scFM: Benchmarking Single-Cell Foundation Models
for Perturbation Effect Prediction
Aaron Wenteler * † 1 Martina Occhetta * † 1 Nikhil Branson † 1 2 Victor Curean 3 Magdalena Huebner 1
William Dee 1 William Connell 4 Siu Pui Chung 1 Alex Hawkins-Hooker 5 Yasha Ektefaie 6
César Miguel Valdez Córdova ‡ 7 8 Amaya Gallagher-Syed ‡ † 1
ment of biological foundation models. Among these, singlecell foundation models (scFMs) leverage vast amounts of unlabeled transcriptomic single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) data to learn contextualized representations through
self-supervised pre-training (Ericsson et al., 2022). Finetuning the resulting model on labeled data enhances the
performance on downstream applications, such as cell-type
classification, gene regulatory network inference, and the
prediction of cellular responses to perturbations (Yang et al.,
2022; Kedzierska et al., 2023; Theodoris et al., 2023; Rosen
et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2023; Hao et al.,
2023).

Abstract
In silico modeling of transcriptional responses to
perturbations is crucial for advancing our understanding of cellular processes and disease mechanisms. We present PertEval-scFM, a standardized framework designed to evaluate models for
perturbation effect prediction. We apply PertEvalscFM to benchmark zero-shot single-cell foundation model (scFM) embeddings against baseline
models to assess whether these contextualized
representations enhance perturbation effect prediction. Our results show that scFM embeddings
offer limited improvement over simple baseline
models in the zero-shot setting, particularly under distribution shift. Overall, this study provides
a systematic evaluation of zero-shot scFM embeddings for perturbation effect prediction, highlighting the challenges of this task and the limitations of current-generation scFMs. Our findings
underscore the need for specialized models and
high-quality datasets that capture a broader range
of cellular states. Source code and documentation can be found at: https://github.com/
aaronwtr/PertEval.

A perturbation refers to any intervention or event leading
to the phenotypic alteration of a cell. Perturbation response
prediction can provide invaluable insights into cellular mechanisms and disease progression, facilitating the mapping of
genotype to phenotype and the identification of potential
drug targets (Lotfollahi et al., 2019). Numerous models,
here referred to as narrow perturbation prediction models
(NPPMs), have been developed specifically for this task
(Gavriilidis et al., 2024). However, perturbation response
prediction is a challenging task, as demonstrated by the
difficulty of models to improve consistently over simpler
baseline methods (Wu et al., 2024; Branson et al., 2024;
Ahlmann-Eltze et al., 2024).
Recently, there has been a concerted effort to evaluate biological foundation models. The Therapeutic Data Commons,
an open science initiative, has curated some datasets, models
and benchmarks for single-cell analysis (Velez-Arce et al.,
2024). Additionally, Wu et al. (2024) and Ahlmann-Eltze
et al. (2024) show that simple baseline models perform comparably to scFMs in predicting transcriptomic response to
perturbations. However, their analysis does not account for
distribution shift and focuses only on predictions for highly
variable genes, many of which show little to no effect in
response to a perturbation (Nadig et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of foundation models in fields such
as natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2024) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), there has been an increase in the develop*

Equal contribution † Core contributor ‡ Senior author 1 Queen
Mary University of London 2 University of Oxford 3 University
of Medicine and Pharmacy of Cluj-Napoca 4 University of California, San Francisco 5 University College London 6 Harvard
University 7 Mila 8 McGill University.
Correspondence to:
Aaron Wenteler <a.wenteler@qmul.ac.uk>, Martina Occhetta
<m.occhetta@qmul.ac.uk >.

Yet, distribution shift is a well-documented issue with
scRNA-seq data (Boiarsky et al., 2023; Marklund et al.,
2020), which often hinders the deployment of models that
appear to perform well during evaluation. Distribution shift

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

