Differentiable Quadratic Optimization
For The Maximum Independent Set Problem

Yingjie Li

4

Ismail R. Alkhouri 1 2 Cedric Le Denmat 3
Cunxi Yu 4 Jia Liu 3 Rongrong Wang 2 Alvaro Velasquez 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

In his landmark paper (Karp, 1972), Richard Karp established a connection between Combinatorial Optimization
Problems (COPs) and the NP-hard complexity class, implying their inherent computational challenges. Additionally,
Richard Karp introduced the concept of reducibility among
combinatorial problems that are complete for the complexity
class NP.

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) addresses
many important problems, including the challenging Maximum Independent Set (MIS) problem. Alongside exact and heuristic solvers, differentiable approaches have emerged, often using continuous relaxations of quadratic objectives.
Noting that an MIS in a graph is a Maximum
Clique (MC) in its complement, we propose a new
quadratic formulation for MIS by incorporating an
MC term, improving convergence and exploration.
We show that every maximal independent set corresponds to a local minimizer, derive conditions
with respect to the MIS size, and characterize stationary points. To tackle the non-convexity of the
objective, we propose optimizing several initializations in parallel using momentum-based gradient descent, complemented by an efficient MIS
checking criterion derived from our theory. We
dub our method as parallelized Clique-Informed
Quadratic Optimization for MIS (pCQO-MIS).
Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method compared to
exact, heuristic, sampling, and data-centric approaches. Notably, our method avoids the out-ofdistribution tuning and reliance on (un)labeled
data required by data-centric methods, while
achieving superior MIS sizes and competitive runtime relative to their inference time. Additionally,
a key advantage of pCQO-MIS is that, unlike exact and heuristic solvers, the run-time scales only
with the number of nodes in the graph, not the
number of edges. Our code is available at the
GitHub repository (pCQO-MIS).

Although there exists a direct reduction between some COPs
– such as the case with the Maximum Independent Set
(MIS), Maximum Clique (MC), and Minimum Vertex Cover
(MVC) – which allows a solution for one problem to be directly used to solve another, other COPs differ significantly.
For example, there exists no straightforward reduction between MIS and the Kidney Exchange Problem (KEP) (McElfresh et al., 2019) (or the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
(Dantzig et al., 1954)).
In this paper, we focus on the MIS problem, one of the
most fundamental in combinatorial optimization, with many
applications including frequency assignment in wireless
networks (Matsui & Tokoro, 2000), task scheduling (Eddy
& Kochenderfer, 2021), and genome sequencing (Joseph
et al., 1992; Zweig et al., 2006).
The MIS problem involves finding a subset of vertices in a
graph G = (V, E) with maximum cardinality, such that no
two vertices in this subset are connected by an edge (Tarjan
& Trojanowski, 1977). In the past few decades, in addition to commercial Integer Programming (IP) solvers (e.g.,
CPLEX (IBM), Gurobi (Gurobi), and most recently CPSAT (Perron & Didier)), powerful heuristic methods (e.g.,
ReduMIS in (Lamm et al., 2016)) have been introduced to
tackle the complexities inherent in the MIS problem. Other
solvers can be broadly classified into branch-and-boundbased global optimization methods (Akiba & Iwata, 2016),
and approximation algorithms (Boppana & Halldórsson,
1992).

1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Michigan State University
Ohio State University 4 University of Maryland, College Park
5
University of Colorado, Boulder. Correspondence to: Ismail R.
Alkhouri <ismailal@umich.edu; alkhour3@msu.edu>.
3

More recently, differentiable approaches have been explored
(Bengio et al., 2021), falling into two main categories: (i)
data-driven methods, where a neural network (NN) is trained
to fit a distribution over training graphs, and (ii) dataless

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

