S ECOND: Mitigating Perceptual Hallucination in Vision-Language Models via
Selective and Contrastive Decoding

Woohyeon Park 1 Woojin Kim 1 Jaeik Kim 2 Jaeyoung Do 1 2

Abstract

Q: Is there a dog in the image?

Despite significant advancements in VisionLanguage Models (VLMs), the performance of
existing VLMs remains hindered by object hallucination, a critical challenge to achieving accurate
visual understanding. To address this issue, we
propose S ECOND: Selective and Contrastive Decoding, a novel approach that enables VLMs to effectively leverage multi-scale visual information
with an object-centric manner, closely aligning
with human visual perception. S ECOND progressively selects and integrates multi-scale visual
information, facilitating a more precise interpretation of images. By contrasting these visual information iteratively, S ECOND significantly reduces perceptual hallucinations and outperforms
a wide range of benchmarks. Our theoretical
analysis and experiments highlight the largely
unexplored potential of multi-scale application
in VLMs, showing that prioritizing and contrasting across scales outperforms existing methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/
AIDASLab/SECOND.

LLaVA-NeXT

Resize Small

×2

Patch
Selection

×2

Patch
Selection

×2

Patch
Selection

×2

Visual Patches

SECOND

Visual Patches

Figure 1. The comparison of LLaVA-NeXT (Liu et al., 2024a) and
S ECOND in utilizing visual patches. While LLaVA-NeXT uniformly incorporates patches at two scales, S ECOND accumulates
object-relevant patches through patch selection strategy.

nation—a phenomenon where models generate plausible
yet inaccurate responses that are not grounded in the visual
content—remains a persistent and critical challenge (Bai
et al., 2024; Leng et al., 2024). This limitation poses a significant barrier to their adoption in high-stakes applications
demanding reliability and interpretability.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have revolutionized Artificial Intelligence (Liu et al., 2024b;a) by effectively bridging vision and language modalities, enabling breakthroughs
in tasks such as visual question answering (VQA) (Antol
et al., 2015), image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015), and
open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (Zhang et al., 2023).
These advancements have been driven by cross-modal alignment strategies and the integration of large-scale vision and
language data. Despite these achievements, object halluci-

Several studies have explored methods to mitigate hallucination in VLMs. These approaches include designing robust
datasets to reduce model biases (Liu et al., 2023; Hu et al.,
2023), suppressing the influence of LLM priors (Huang
et al., 2024; Leng et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024a), and improving the performance of vision models integrated into
VLMs (Tong et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b). Moreover, recent VLMs, such as LLaVA-NeXT (Liu et al., 2024a), have
incorporated multi-scale vision techniques (Li et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024a), which have been effective in traditional
computer vision tasks like object detection (Guan et al.,
2022) and semantic segmentation (He et al., 2022b). However, prior research has largely focused on single-scale visual representations, overlooking the full potential of multiscale integration.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Interdisciplinary Program in
Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jaeyoung Do <jaeyoung.do@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

