(How) Do Language Models Track State?

Belinda Z. Li 1 Zifan Carl Guo 1 Jacob Andreas 1

Abstract

execution—to support prediction (Li et al., 2021; Nanda
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). However, the mechanisms
that LMs use to construct these representations are not understood. Do LMs simulate state evolution step by step
across successive hidden layers or token representations
(Yang et al., 2024)? Are states approximated through a complex collection of heuristics (jylin04 et al., 2024)? Is state
tracking an illusion (Bender & Koller, 2020)?

Transformer language models (LMs) exhibit
behaviors—from storytelling to code generation—
that seem to require tracking the unobserved state
of an evolving world. How do they do this? We
study state tracking in LMs trained or fine-tuned
to compose permutations (i.e., to compute the order of a set of objects after a sequence of swaps).
Despite the simple algebraic structure of this problem, many other tasks (e.g., simulation of finite
automata and evaluation of boolean expressions)
can be reduced to permutation composition, making it a natural model for state tracking in general. We show that LMs consistently learn one of
two state tracking mechanisms for this task. The
first closely resembles the “associative scan” construction used in recent theoretical work by Liu
et al. (2023) and Merrill et al. (2024). The second
uses an easy-to-compute feature (permutation parity) to partially prune the space of outputs, and
then refines this with an associative scan. LMs
that learn the former algorithm tend to generalize better and converge faster, and we show how
to steer LMs toward one or the other with intermediate training tasks that encourage or suppress
the heuristics. Our results demonstrate that transformer LMs, whether pre-trained or fine-tuned,
can learn to implement efficient and interpretable
state-tracking mechanisms, and the emergence
of these mechanisms can be predicted and controlled. Code and data are available at https:
//github.com/belindal/state-tracking.

This paper studies the implementation and emergence of
state tracking mechanisms in language models using permutation composition as a model system: given a fixed set
of objects, we train or fine-tune LMs to predict the final
position of each object after a sequence of rearrangements.
Previous work has used versions of this task to evaluate
LMs’ empirical state tracking abilities (Li et al., 2021; Kim
& Schuster, 2023; Li et al., 2023). Additionally, as shown
by Barrington (1989), many complex, natural, state-tracking
tasks—including simulation of finite automata and evaluation of Boolean expressions—can be reduced to permutation
tracking with five or more objects. This makes it a natural
model for studying state tracking in general.
Our analysis proceeds in several steps. §2 provides technical
preliminaries: §2.1 and §2.2 introduce state tracking problems and the permutation composition task we use to model
them (Figure 1A), and §2.3 reviews the set of interpretability tools we use to analyze LM computations. Next, §3
lays out a family of algorithms that past work has suggested
LMs might, in principle, use to solve the state tracking
task (Figure 1D), and describes the signatures—expected
readouts from different interpretability methods—that we
would expect to find if a given algorithm is implemented
(Figure 1B-C).
Finally, §4 and §5 present experimental findings. Across a
range of sizes, architectures, and pretraining schemes, we
find that LMs consistently learn one of two state tracking
mechanisms. The first mechanism, which we call the “associative algorithm” (AA), resembles the associative scan
construction used by Liu et al. (2023) and Merrill & Sabharwal (2024) to establish theoretical lower bounds on the expressive capacity of Transformers. The second mechanism,
which we call the “parity-associative algorithm” (PAA), first
rules out a subset of final states using an easy-to-compute
permutation parity heuristic, then uses an associative scan

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) are trained to model the surface
form of text. A growing body of work suggests that model
internals contain a latent, decodable state of the world—e.g.,
situations described by language and results of program
1
MIT EECS and CSAIL. Correspondence to: Belinda Z. Li
<bzl@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

