Accelerating Linear Recurrent Neural Networks for the Edge
with Unstructured Sparsity

Alessandro Pierro * 1 2 Steven Abreu * 1 3 Jonathan Timcheck 1 Philipp Stratmann 1 Andreas Wild 1
Sumit Bam Shrestha 1

Abstract
Linear recurrent neural networks enable powerful long-range sequence modeling with constant memory usage
and time-per-token during inference. These architectures hold promise for streaming applications at the edge, but
deployment in resource-constrained environments requires hardware-aware optimizations to minimize latency
and energy consumption. Unstructured sparsity offers a compelling solution–when accelerated by compatible
hardware platforms. In this paper, we investigate the Pareto front of performance and efficiency across inference
compute budgets. We find that highly sparse linear RNNs consistently achieve better efficiency-performance
trade-offs than dense baselines, with 2× less compute and 36% less memory iso-accuracy. Our models achieve
state-of-the-art results on a streaming audio denoising task. By quantizing our sparse models to fixed-point
arithmetic and deploying them on the Intel Loihi 2 neuromorphic chip, we translate model compression into
tangible gains of 42× lower latency and 149× lower energy consumption compared to a dense model on an edge
GPU. Our findings showcase the transformative potential of unstructured sparsity, paving the way for highly
efficient recurrent neural networks in real-world, resource-constrained environments.
§ https://github.com/IntelLabs/SparseRNNs

1. Introduction
Linear Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have recently
emerged as powerful primitives for sequence modeling, both
in isolation or hybridized with self-attention, achieving impressive results in language modeling (Poli et al., 2024),
audio generation (Goel et al., 2022), and genomics (Nguyen
et al., 2023), and many other areas. This success has been
ignited by advances in initialization, parametrization, and
parallelization of these models, which, combined, enabled
large-scale training on GPUs (Voelker et al., 2019; Chilkuri
et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2020; 2022b; Smith et al., 2023).

Figure 1. Model compression and acceleration pipeline for linear
RNNs, tailored to the Intel Loihi 2 chip.

At inference time, linear RNNs iteratively compress the input sequence into a finite-dimensional representation whose
dimensionality does not depend on the sequence length.
Their memory requirements remain constant regardless of
sequence length, and runtime scales linearly with sequence
length. In contrast, transformer architectures (Vaswani et al.,

2017) exhibit linear memory growth and quadratic runtime
scaling as sequence length increases. This advantageous
scaling makes linear RNNs especially well-suited for realtime long-range sequence modeling on edge devices that
require low latency, a small form factor, and are subject to
weight and power constraints, as common for applications
like audio denoising (Timcheck et al., 2023), keyword spotting (Warden, 2018), or perception-and-control (Lu et al.,
2023). Although model optimization and compression are
essential for enabling efficient edge machine learning by
reducing resource demands, their application to accelerate
the inference of linear RNNs remains under-explored.

*

Equal contribution 1 Neuromorphic Computing Lab, Intel
Corporation, USA 2 Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich, Germany 3 Bernoulli Institute & CogniGron, University of Groningen,
Netherlands. Correspondence to: Alessandro Pierro <alessandro.pierro@intel.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

