QT-DoG: Quantization-aware Training for Domain Generalization

Saqib Javed 1 Hieu Le 1 Mathieu Salzmann 1 2

Test Domain Accuracy [%]

Abstract
A key challenge in Domain Generalization (DG)
is preventing overfitting to source domains, which
can be mitigated by finding flatter minima in
the loss landscape. In this work, we propose
Quantization-aware Training for Domain Generalization (QT-DoG) and demonstrate that weight
quantization effectively leads to flatter minima
in the loss landscape, thereby enhancing domain
generalization. Unlike traditional quantization
methods focused on model compression, QT-DoG
exploits quantization as an implicit regularizer
by inducing noise in model weights, guiding
the optimization process toward flatter minima
that are less sensitive to perturbations and overfitting. We provide both an analytical perspective and empirical evidence demonstrating that
quantization inherently encourages flatter minima, leading to better generalization across domains. Moreover, with the benefit of reducing the
model size through quantization, we demonstrate
that an ensemble of multiple quantized models
further yields superior accuracy than the state-ofthe-art DG approaches with no computational or
memory overheads. Code is released at: https:
//saqibjaved1.github.io/QT_DoG/.

70
69
68
67
66
65
64
63
62

M=60

M=6

M=5
Ours

Ours

ERM

MIRO

SWAD

DART QT-DoG DiWA

Algorithms

One Model
Multiple Models
EOA EOQ

Figure 1. Performance Comparison on the Domainbed Benchmark. We show the average accuracy on 5 different datasets. One
Model refers to methods training a single ResNet-50 model. Multiple Models refers to training M models for averaging or ensembling, which affects the training cost. We compare QT-DoG and
EoQ to other state-of-the-art methods. The marker size is proportional to the memory footprint. EoQ shows superior performance
despite being 4 times smaller than its full-precision counterpart.
Additionally, QT-DoG demonstrates comparable performance to
One Model methods, despite its significantly smaller size.

also in new, unseen (target) data distributions (Blanchard
et al., 2011; Muandet et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2022).
In the broader context of generalization, with training and
test data drawn from the same distribution, the literature has
revealed a relationship between the flatness of the loss landscape and the generalization ability of deep learning models (Keskar et al., 2017; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Garipov
et al., 2018; Izmailov et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2020; Foret
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023). This relationship has then
been leveraged by many recent works, demonstrating that a
flatter minimum also improves Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
performance (Cha et al., 2021; Ramé et al., 2023; Arpit et al.,
2022). At the heart of all these DG methods lies the idea
of weight averaging (Izmailov et al., 2018), which involves
averaging weights from several trained models or at various
stages of the training process.

1. Introduction
Many works have shown that deep neural networks trained
under the assumption that the training and test samples
are drawn from the same distribution fail to generalize in
the presence of large training-testing discrepancies, such
as texture (Geirhos et al., 2019; Bahng et al., 2020), background (Xiao et al., 2020), or day-to-night (Dai & Van Gool,
2018; Michaelis et al., 2019) shifts. Domain Generalization
(DG) addresses this problem and aims to learn models that
perform well not only in the training (source) domains but

In this work, we demonstrate that flatter minima in the loss
landscape can be effectively achieved through weight quantization using Quantization-aware Training (QAT), making
it an effective approach for DG. By restricting the possible
weight values to a lower bit precision, quantization imposes
constraints on the weight space, introducing quantization
noise into the network parameters. This noise, as discussed

1

CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland. 2 Swiss Data Science Center,
Switzerland.. Correspondence to: Mathieu Salzmann <mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

