Adapting to Linear Separable Subsets with Large-Margin
in Differentially Private Learning

Erchi Wang 1 Yuqing Zhu 2 Yu-Xiang Wang 1

Abstract

McSherry & Talwar, 2007a; Dwork et al., 2014). A single
point change can cause the margin to shift drastically, from
a positive value to zero or the reverse, as demonstrated in
Figure 1. Despite the theoretical challenge, empirically, a
larger margin is believed to be the reason why pre-trained
features help private learners to work better (De et al., 2022).

This paper studies the problem of differentially
private empirical risk minimization (DP-ERM)
for binary linear classification. We obtain an efficient (ε, δ)-DP algorithm
zero with an empirical


out |
one risk bound of Õ γ 21εn + |Sγn
where n is
the number of data points, Sout is an arbitrary
subset of data one can remove and γ is the margin
of linear separation of the remaining data points
(after Sout is removed). Here, Õ(·) hides only logarithmic terms. In the agnostic case, we improve
the existing results when the number of outliers is
small. Our algorithm is highly adaptive because
it does not require knowing the margin parameter
γ or outlier subset Sout . We also derive a utility
bound for the advanced private hyperparameter
tuning algorithm.

2

positive margin

zero margin

Figure 1. Margin is unstable after changing one point (marked
by the green square), thus hard to design a data-dependent DPmechanism using standard techniques (e.g., smoothed sensitivity
(Nissim et al., 2007) or propose-test-release (Dwork & Lei, 2009)).

To validate this hypothesis, we evaluated the margin of SVM
classifiers trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset using pre-trained
features from Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) and ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016). Interestingly, as
reported in Figure 2, while the margin remains at zero for the
whole dataset, if we allow removing a few “trouble makers”
(misclassified or other points near the decision boundary),
it becomes clear that ViT-based features achieve a larger
margin and increase more quickly than ResNet-50-based
features as removing more outliers.

1. Introduction
We investigate differentially private empirical risk minimization (DP-ERM) (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Bassily et al.,
2014) under the setting of learning large-margin halfspaces.
In classification problems, algorithms that create decision
boundaries with larger separations between classes, a.k.a.
large margins, tend to have stronger generalization performance (Vapnik, 1998; Panagiotakopoulos & Tsampouka,
2011). This principle has been leveraged in many classical
machine learning algorithms, such as the Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958; Novikoff, 1962), AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire,
1997), and Support Vector Machine (Vapnik, 1998; Cortes &
Vapnik, 1995). It is natural to ask whether we can design a
data-adaptive DP algorithm to benefit from a large-margin
condition. This is challenging because differential privacy
requires the algorithm’s output to be “close enough” when
two datasets differ by one data point (Dwork et al., 2006;

After approximately 0.1% of points are removed, the remaining data become linearly separable for both ViT and
ResNet-50-based features. This phenomenon also relates
to neural collapse theory (Papyan et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2024), which states that the last layer of a deep neural network trained on K-class classification task converges to
K distinct points. The geometric margin (Eq. 1) does not
capture this phenomenon. Since the CIFAR-10 dataset is
not linearly separable, the geometric margin is zero. This
inspires us to ask:

1

Halıcıoglu Data Science Institute, UC San Diego 2 LinkedIn.
Correspondence to: Yu-Xiang Wang <yuxiangw@ucsd.edu>, Erchi Wang <erw011@ucsd.edu>.

Can we design an efficient differentially private algorithm
for agnostic learning halfspaces while adapting to linear
separable subsets with large margins?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

