Flexible and Efficient Grammar-Constrained Decoding

Kanghee Park 1 Timothy Zhou 1 Loris D’Antoni 1

Abstract

ognized by a lexer in a preprocessing phase, while the grammatical structure of how terminals can be arranged—e.g.,
that the body of a loop should be a sequence of statements—
is enforced by an automaton operating over lexed terminals.
A key challenge with implementing GCD algorithms is that
the tokens used by subword tokenizers in LLMs do not align
with the terminals used by parsers.

Large Language Models (LLMs) are often asked
to generate structured outputs that obey precise
syntactic rules, such as code snippets or formatted
data. Grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) can
guarantee that LLM outputs matches such rules
by masking out tokens that will provably lead to
outputs that do not belong to a specified contextfree grammar (CFG). To guarantee soundness,
GCD algorithms have to compute how a given
LLM subword tokenizer can “align” with the tokens used by a given context-free grammar and
compute token masks based on this information.
Doing so efficiently is challenging and existing
GCD algorithms require tens of minutes to preprocess common grammars. We present a new
GCD algorithm together with an implementation
that offers 17.71x faster offline preprocessing than
existing approaches while preserving state-of-theart efficiency in online mask computation.

Because of this misalignment, GCD approaches either incur
high online token-masking overhead (>1 second per token),
or high offline preprocessing costs (>30 minutes) to precompute a lookup table that relates LLM tokens to terminals
(Beurer-Kellner et al., 2024; Ugare et al., 2024). Thus, existing GCD algorithms are impractical for domains where
the constraining grammar frequently changes. Examples of
such domains include program synthesis (Alur et al., 2019),
where a grammar is provided for every program one may try
to synthesize, and grammar prompting (Wang et al., 2024),
where grammars are predicted from a given prompt to then
guide the LLM towards a particular output structure.
In this paper, we introduce a new approach for grammarconstrained decoding that is both flexible—i.e., handles diverse grammars without incurring prohibitive offline preprocessing costs—and efficient—i.e., maintains state-of-the-art
efficiency in online token masking. The key innovation is
a combined analysis of the LLM token vocabulary and set
of CFG terminals. The analysis efficiently precomputes a
lexer-state-dependent mapping between sequences of CFG
tokens and individual LLM tokens. This precomputation allows the decoder to efficiently identify valid LLM tokens at
decoding time while avoiding wasteful processing of token
combinations that are not realizable within the given LLM
vocabulary.

1. Introduction
Constrained decoding guides the output of Large Language
Models (LLMs) by greedily enforcing user-given constraints
in highly structured settings. Grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) (Geng et al., 2023) refers to the specific case
where the constraint is given as a formal grammar that the
LLM’s output must conform to. This is done by applying
parsing algorithms to build an automaton that interfaces
with the LLM’s decoding algorithm to mask away all tokens
that will provably lead to outputs not in the grammar. For
example, GCD can be used to ensure that an LLM generates
programs that only use a specific set of function names.

We implement our approach in a tool, G REAT G RAMMA,
which compares favorably to existing GCD approaches.
G REAT G RAMMA achieves an average 17.71x speedup in offline preprocessing compared to related approaches (Ugare
et al., 2024) while maintaining state-of-the-art online masking efficiency (5-32ms per token). Furthermore, our evaluation reveals that GCD implementations from existing published papers contain soundness bugs (e.g., they mask tokens
that should not be masked or do not terminate when preprocessing simple grammars), whereas our approach lends
itself to an elegant implementation consisting of simple

Parsing algorithms for Context-Free Grammars (CFG)
achieve efficiency by processing input strings in two phases.
Terminals—e.g., variable names or string literals—are rec1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
UCSD, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Kanghee park
<kap022@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

