A Peer-review Look on Multi-modal Clustering: An Information Bottleneck
Realization Method
Zhengzheng Lou 1 Hang Xue 1 Chaoyang Zhang 1 Shizhe Hu 1

Abstract

the perspective of strategies, current MMCs can be classified
into weighted MMC (Wang et al., 2020a), shared feature
subspace learning based MMC (Li et al., 2022), multi-modal
consensus clustering (Liu et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2024),
multi-modal co-clustering (Kumar et al., 2011; Zhang et al.,
2024), multi-modal subspace clustering (Li et al., 2022),
and tensor representation learning based MMC (He & Atia,
2022; Gu et al., 2024). With the rapid development of various kinds of methods, MMC has been successfully applied
into many practical applications, such as object recognition (Lou et al., 2013), human action recognition (Hu et al.,
2020) and coherent groups detection in crowd scenes (Wang
et al., 2020b).

Despite the superior capability in complementary
information exploration and consistent clustering structure learning, most current weight-based
multi-modal clustering methods still contain three
limitations: 1) lack of trustworthiness in learned
weights; 2) isolated view weight learning; 3) extra
weight parameters. Motivated by the peer-review
mechanism in the academia, we in this paper give
a new peer-review look on the multi-modal clustering problem and propose to iteratively treat one
modality as “author” and the remaining modalities as “reviewers” so as to reach a peer-review
score for each modality. It essentially explores
the underlying relationships among modalities.
To improve the trustworthiness, we further design
a new trustworthy score with a self-supervision
working mechanism. Following that, we propose
a novel Peer-review Trustworthy Information Bottleneck (PTIB) method for weighted multi-modal
clustering, where both the above scores are simultaneously taken into account for accurate and
parameter-free modality weight learning. Extensive experiments on eight multi-modal datasets
suggest that PTIB can outperform the state-of-theart multi-modal clustering methods.

Related Works. Investigated from the above methods, the
weighted MMCs have exhibited remarkable clustering performance in the past decade, which is mainly due to its
superior capability in complementary relationship discovery and consistent clustering structure learning. For the
example of some typical ones, Xu et al. (2016) incorporated feature selection into weighted MMC for solving the
high-dimensional data clustering, so that the discriminative
representations and accurate clustering results can be jointly
learned. Further, to address the challenging large-scale data
clustering, Zhang et al. (2019) proposed an efficient binary
MMC method, worked by collaboratively conducting the
discrete representation learning and binary clustering assignment discovery. Different from most weighted MMCs,
Zhao et al. (2020) designed a cluster weights learning based
method to find the more fine-grained cluster relationships
compared to the modality-weighted methods. For the difficult parameter learning issue, Wang et al. (2020a) focused
on automatically tuning the weight parameters to obtain a
refined unified graph fusion matrix. In more recent year,
Zhou & Shen (2020) leveraged adversarial learning and attention mechanism to align the latent feature distributions
and quantify the importance of modalities respectively. Xia
et al. (2023b) introduced an adaptive fusion layer to adaptively sense the importance of modalities. Hu et al. (2025)
introduced a simple fusion mechanism that dynamically
updates modality-specifc weights via backpropagation, similar to parameter optimization. Chen et al. (2023) explored
the higher-order relations across modalities by designing a
low-rank Tensor based proximity learning method for MMC

1. Introduction
Learning a consistent clustering result from different modalities by fully mining the underlying modality correlations is
the essence of multi-modal clustering (MMC) (Raya et al.,
2024). From the view of basic method, existing MMC
methods are generally based on k-means, canonical correlation analysis, spectral clustering, matrix factorization,
information bottleneck and deep learning methods. From
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Shizhe Hu <ieshizhehu@gmail.com, https://shizhehu.github.io/>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

