L OCATE 3D: Real-World Object Localization via Self-Supervised Learning in 3D

Paul McVay * 1 Sergio Arnaud * 1 Ada Martin 1 Arjun Majumdar 1 Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula 1
Phillip Thomas 1 Ruslan Partsey 1 Daniel Dugas 1 Abha Gejji 1 Alexander Sax 1 Vincent-Pierre Berges 1
Mikael Henaff 1 Ayush Jain 1 2 Ang Cao 1 3 Ishita Prasad 1 Mrinal Kalakrishnan 1 Michael Rabbat 1
Nicolas Ballas 1 Mido Assran 1 Oleksandr Maksymets 1 Aravind Rajeswaran 1 Franziska Meier 1

Abstract

the 3D world grounded in human natural language is essential. Towards this goal, we study the task of 3D localization
via referring expressions (Chen et al., 2020; Achlioptas
et al., 2020), or simply 3D-R EF E XP. It requires localizing
an object (in 3D) from a textual expression that may include
a combination of attributes (e.g., “red chair”) and/or spatial relationships (e.g., “the small coffee table between the
sofa and the lamp”). In this work, we develop L OCATE 3D
(see Figure 1), a state-of-the-art model for 3D-R EF E XP. It
builds on two key components: (1) 3D-JEPA, a novel SSL
algorithm to learn contextualized scene representations, and
(2) a novel language-conditioned 3D localization decoder.

We present L OCATE 3D, a model for localizing
objects in 3D scenes from referring expressions
like “the small coffee table between the sofa and
the lamp.” L OCATE 3D sets a new state-of-theart on standard referential grounding benchmarks
and showcases robust generalization capabilities.
Notably, L OCATE 3D operates directly on sensor observation streams (posed RGB-D frames),
enabling real-world deployment on robots and
AR devices. Key to our approach is 3D-JEPA, a
novel self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithm
applicable to sensor point clouds. It takes as input a 3D pointcloud featurized using 2D foundation models (CLIP, DINO). Subsequently, masked
prediction in latent space is employed as a pretext task to aid the self-supervised learning of
contextualized pointcloud features. Once trained,
the 3D-JEPA encoder is finetuned alongside a
language-conditioned decoder to jointly predict
3D masks and bounding boxes. Additionally, we
introduce L OCATE 3D DATASET, a new dataset
for 3D referential grounding, spanning multiple
capture setups with over 130K annotations. This
enables a systematic study of generalization capabilities as well as a stronger model. Code, models
and dataset can be found at the project website:
locate3d.atmeta.com

The task of 3D-R EF E XP is challenging to date. At one end
of the spectrum are methods that train specialized models
for this task (Jain et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022) on small
benchmark datasets. They often require human annotation
at inference time in the form of detailed 3D meshes or object
instance segmentation, making them difficult to deploy on
real-world devices. At the other end are methods that try
to leverage 2D VLMs for 3D tasks (Xu et al., 2024; Zhu
et al., 2023). While these methods can encode rich linguistic
structures by leveraging LLMs, they employ a simplistic
and hand-crafted representation of the 3D world.
L OCATE 3D operates in three phases. In the first preprocessing phase, we leverage the underlying sensor observation stream to lift features from 2D foundation models (Radford et al., 2021; Oquab et al., 2023) into 3D point
clouds (Jatavallabhula et al., 2023). Subsequently, we use
a transformer encoder, pre-trained with our 3D-JEPA SSL
algorithm, to transform the “lifted” foundation features into
contextualized features that can provide better scene-level
understanding. Finally, we use a language conditioned 3D
decoder (Cheng et al., 2021; Kamath et al., 2021) to localize
the object of interest. Notably, L OCATE 3D operates directly
on sensor observation streams without requiring manual
post-processing (e.g., 3D mesh refinement or ground-truth
instance segmentations), making it readily deployable on
robots and AR devices.

1. Introduction
For AI systems to effectively assist us in the physical world,
such as through robots or smart glasses, an understanding of
*
Equal contribution 1 FAIR at Meta 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Correspondence to:
Sergio Arnaud <sergioarnaud@meta.com>, Paul McVay <pmcvay@meta.com>.

We outline our contributions in this work below.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. 3D-JEPA – A novel SSL method applicable to 3D point
1

