Deep Neural Cellular Potts Models

Laboratory
observations

Koen Minartz 1 Tim d’Hondt 1 Leon Hillmann 2 1 3 Jörn Starruß 4 Lutz Brusch 4 Vlado Menkovski 1

Abstract

NeuralCPM

CPM

The cellular Potts model (CPM) is a powerful computational method for simulating collective spatiotemporal dynamics of biological cells.
To drive the dynamics, CPMs rely on physicsinspired Hamiltonians. However, as first principles remain elusive in biology, these Hamiltonians only approximate the full complexity of
real multicellular systems. To address this limitation, we propose NeuralCPM, a more expressive cellular Potts model that can be trained directly on observational data. At the core of NeuralCPM lies the Neural Hamiltonian, a neural
network architecture that respects universal symmetries in collective cellular dynamics. Moreover, this approach enables seamless integration
of domain knowledge by combining known biological mechanisms and the expressive Neural
Hamiltonian into a hybrid model. Our evaluation with synthetic and real-world multicellular
systems demonstrates that NeuralCPM is able to
model cellular dynamics that cannot be accounted
for by traditional analytical Hamiltonians.

Figure 1. NeuralCPM is more expressive than traditional cellular
Potts models, allowing for more accurate simulation of real-world
collective cell dynamics, e.g. bi-polar self-organization of biological cells over 12 hours in the top row (Toda et al., 2018).

biology, but also needed for the development of medical
treatments. As experimental data alone do not reveal the
regulatory logic and self-organization principles of complex cell-cell interactions, computational models have to be
combined with biological experiments (Marée & Hogeweg,
2001; Hester et al., 2011; Boutillon et al., 2022). One of the
most powerful and widely-used numerical methods is the
cellular Potts model (CPM), which captures the stochastic
movement and shape of cells, interactions in multicellular
systems, and multiscale dynamics (Graner & Glazier, 1992;
Balter et al., 2007).

1. Introduction
Cell migration and multicellular self-organization are crucial biological processes that drive many phenomena of life,
such as embryo growth and the spread of cancer (Friedl
& Gilmour, 2009; Gottheil et al., 2023). Understanding
these cellular dynamics is not only a fundamental goal of

CPMs are based on a Hamiltonian or energy function which
maps each possible state in the discrete state space of a
multicellular system to a scalar (the energy). To model the
evolution of the system over time, a CPM-based simulator
stochastically perturbs the current state towards states with a
lower energy, following the principles of statistical mechanics. Consequently, the Hamiltonian directly drives the simulated dynamics of cells, and designing the Hamiltonian is the
core challenge to arrive at realistic CPM simulations. So far,
domain experts need to engineer a tailor-made Hamiltonian
for each new problem setting. This Hamiltonian generally
consists of a weighted sum of symbolic, physics-inspired
features of the system, but (1) it is labor-intensive to develop
and (2) arguably only partially captures the full complexity
of cellular systems due to simplifying assumptions in the
structure of the Hamiltonian.

1
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
2
Department of Applied Physics and Science Education, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of
Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands 4 Center for Information
Services and High Performance Computing, TUD Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. Correspondence to: Koen
Minartz <k.minartz@tue.nl>, Lutz Brusch <lutz.brusch@tudresden.de>, Vlado Menkovski <v.menkovski@tue.nl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

