ProxSparse: Regularized Learning of Semi-Structured Sparsity
Masks for Pretrained LLMs
Hongyi Liu 1 * Rajarshi Saha 2 Zhen Jia 2 Youngsuk Park 2 Jiaji Huang 2 Shoham Sabach 2 3
Yu-Xiang Wang 2 4 George Karypis 2

Abstract

cient, such as model compression (Han et al., 2015; Frantar
et al., 2022). By reducing memory footprint and accelerating computation, model compression significantly improves
the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of deploying LLMs at
scale (Yuan et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Tseng et al., 2025;
Ozkara et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025).

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance in natural language processing tasks, yet their massive size
makes serving them inefficient and costly. Semistructured pruning has emerged as an effective
method for model acceleration, but existing approaches are suboptimal because they focus on
local, layer-wise optimizations using heuristic
rules, failing to leverage global feedback. We
present ProxSparse, a learning-based framework
for mask selection enabled by regularized optimization. ProxSparse transforms the rigid,
non-differentiable mask selection process into a
smoother optimization procedure, allowing gradual mask exploration with flexibility. ProxSparse
does not involve additional weight updates once
the mask is determined. Our extensive evaluations on 7 widely used models show that ProxSparse consistently outperforms previously proposed semi-structured mask selection methods
with significant improvement, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our learned approach towards
semi-structured pruning. Code available here.

Network pruning is commonly used to reduce model size
and lower computation cost by removing unimportant parameters (Bai et al., 2024). Among various pruning patterns,
semi-structured pruning (Mishra et al., 2021), or block-wise
N:M sparsification, has emerged as a practical and effective approach for LLM compression (Sun et al., 2023; Fang
et al., 2024). In this approach, only N non-zero elements
are retained out of M consecutive elements within each
parameter block. This semi-structured sparsity strikes a balance between model accuracy and hardware efficiency, and
is well-supported by many hardware accelerators (Mishra
et al., 2021), enabling efficient LLM serving.
Despite its advantages, finding an effective semi-structured
mask for LLMs remains challenging. Pruning must follow per-block structural restriction, making efforts on other
patterns hard to adopt. Additionally, extensive retraining
after pruning is impractical due to LLMs’ massive size (Ma
et al., 2023; Chuang et al., 2024). Recent advances like
Wanda (Sun et al., 2023) and SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) improved semi-structured pruning using minimal
resources with only hundreds of calibration samples, but
still struggle to maintain optimal performance after pruning.
We identify two main challenges in finding effective semistructured masks: 1. The heuristic rules used for mask selection cannot fully take advantage of the calibration dataset
during pruning. Methods like SparseGPT and Wanda rely
on the Hessian matrix and importance scores to select elements to prune, but these lightweight criteria fail to effectively leverage or learn from the calibration data. 2. Both
methods focus on solving a “local” optimization problem
associated with individual layer, without considering the
broader, end-to-end optimization across the entire model.
In those methods, pruning is based on localized information within each layer, without considering the connections
across layers. Thus they cannot benefit from the global
feedback, limiting the effectiveness of the pruning method.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong
performance across a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Achiam et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022).
However, deploying and serving LLMs is not cost-efficient
due to their massive size with billions of parameters (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023; Sui et al., 2025). To address the high
computational demands and improve accessibility, various
techniques have been proposed to make LLMs more effi*
Work done during internship at Amazon Web Service. 1 Rice
University 2 Amazon Web Service 3 Technion 4 UCSD. Correspondence to: Hongyi L. <hongyi.liu@rice.edu>, Rajarshi S. <sahrajar@amazon.com>, Yu-Xiang W. <yuxiangw@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

