Learning Progress Driven Multi-Agent Curriculum

Wenshuai Zhao 1 Zhiyuan Li 1 Joni Pajarinen 1

Abstract

the number of agents as a potential curriculum in addition
to the environmental parameters in single-agent CRL, as
the number of agents is critical for the difficulty of MARL
tasks. However, prior work is limited to controlling the
number of agents manually or heuristically, for example,
FewToMore (Wang et al., 2020) and EPC (Long et al., 2020)
simply train the agents starting from tasks with fewer agents
and gradually move to the target task in a predefined way.
Variational automatic curriculum learning (VACL) (Chen
et al., 2021) proposes a general automatic CRL method that
can control both the initial states and the number of agents.
However, the number of agents is still manually set in a
linear scheme.

The number of agents can be an effective curriculum variable for controlling the difficulty of multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) tasks. Existing work typically uses manually defined curricula such as linear schemes. We identify two potential flaws while applying existing reward-based
automatic curriculum learning methods in MARL:
(1) The expected episode return used to measure
task difficulty has high variance; (2) Credit assignment difficulty can be exacerbated in tasks where
increasing the number of agents yields higher returns which is common in many MARL tasks. To
address these issues, we propose to control the
curriculum by using a TD-error based learning
progress measure and by letting the curriculum
proceed from an initial context distribution to the
final task specific one. Since our approach maintains a distribution over the number of agents and
measures learning progress rather than absolute
performance, which often increases with the number of agents, we alleviate problem (2). Moreover,
the learning progress measure naturally alleviates
problem (1) by aggregating returns. In three challenging sparse-reward MARL benchmarks, our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

Existing works that assume a curriculum proceeding from
fewer to more agents (Wang et al., 2020; Long et al., 2020)
are typically based on the intuition that coordinating a larger
number of agents is inherently more challenging than coordinating fewer agents to complete a task (Lowe et al., 2017;
Rashid et al., 2018; Chao et al., 2021). However, this assumption does not always hold. For example, in the MPE
Simple-Spread (Lowe et al., 2017) task shown in Figure 1,
several agents (blue circles) try to cover as many landmarks
(red circles) as possible. Intuitively, if the number of agents
increases sufficiently, the most naive policy such as random
moving can work well and achieve high episode returns. On
the contrary, with fewer agents, the agents have to learn
a complicated cooperation strategy to accomplish the task.
Moreover, while an increased number of agents can lead to
higher returns, this may also exacerbate credit assignment
challenges in policy learning. We argue in this paper that
more sophisticated control of the number of agents is needed
in multi-agent curriculum reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Curriculum reinforcement learning (CRL) (Portelas et al.,
2020b) consists of a teacher generating a sequence of tasks
of varying difficulty to train agents in order to bypass the
difficulty of exploration in target tasks with sparse rewards.
In single-agent CRL, the teacher usually controls the initial
states or environmental parameters to change the task difficulty. When considering curriculum learning in multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) settings (Li et al., 2025;
Zhao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), it is natural to employ

Therefore, we first directly apply the state-of-the-art singleagent automatic curriculum reinforcement learning (ACRL)
method, self-paced reinforcement learning (SPRL) (Klink
et al., 2021), to adaptively control the number of agents. We
name this method as SPRLM. SPRLM explores a range of
tasks with different contexts (Schaul et al., 2015a) and seeks
easier ones with higher performance while making progress
towards the target task, hence generating a reasonable task
sequence as a curriculum. In our experiments, SPRLM
outperforms heuristic baselines by successfully generating
effective task distributions without being restricted to predefined task sequences. However, current ACRL methods,

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto
University, Espoo, Finland. Correspondence to: Wenshuai Zhao
<wenshuai.zhao@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

