Compositional Condition Question Answering in Tabular Understanding

Jun-Peng Jiang 1 2 Tao Zhou 1 2 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2

Abstract

ous types of tables, such as images or screenshots. It is
a critical task in numerous fields, including financial analysis (Zavitsanos et al., 2024), experimental data interpretation (Konopka et al., 2023), and public service record
management (Engin & Treleaven, 2019).

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
for tabular understanding have made significant
progress in tasks such as financial report analysis and public data tests. However, our comprehensive analysis shows that these models are
still limited in certain simple scenarios, particularly when handling compositional conditions in
QA. Further investigation reveals that the poor
performance can be attributed to two main challenges: the visual encoder’s inability to accurately
recognize the content of a row, and the model’s
tendency to overlook conditions in the question.
To address these, we introduce a new Compositional Condition Tabular Understanding method,
called C O C OTAB. Specifically, to capture the
structural relationships within tables, we enhance
the visual encoder with additional row and column patches. Moreover, we introduce the conditional tokens between the visual patches and
query embeddings, ensuring the model focuses
on relevant parts of the table according to the
conditions specified in the query. Additionally,
we also introduce the Massive Multimodal Tabular Understanding (MMTU) benchmark, which
comprehensively assesses the full capabilities of
MLLMs in tabular understanding. Our proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
both existing tabular understanding benchmarks
and MMTU. Our code can be available at https:
//github.com/LAMDA-Tabular/MMTU.

Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) (Zhu et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2024b;a; Yin et al., 2023) have significantly progressed the field of tabular understanding. These models,
which integrate pre-trained large language models (LLMs)
with vision encoders through projections, provide an end-toend framework. While conventional tabular understanding
tasks, including table detection and structure recognition,
have been successfully addressed by previous studies (Xu
et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021a; Huang et al., 2022; Tang et al.,
2023; Wei et al., 2024), our work focuses on the more challenging task of table question answering (TQA), particularly
in scenarios where tabular data is presented in image format.
For simple TQA tasks, MLLMs may only need to recognize and interpret the table’s structure to provide accurate
answers. For instance, in a grade report, MLLMs can easily
extract a specific student’s score for a course. However,
such tasks do not engage with the table’s inherent structure, where rows represent samples and columns represent
attributes. The complexity of rows and columns often leads
to compositional queries (Oh et al., 2011; Lei et al., 2018;
Talmor et al., 2021; Dang et al., 2024), like identifying the
mathematics score of the student with the highest overall
total. Such tasks demand a more profound understanding of
the table’s content and structure, significantly increasing the
complexity and requiring enhanced interpretative capabilities from MLLMs. This raises the question: When provided
with a table image, can MLLMs understand the structural
information and handle such complex TQA tasks?

1. Introduction
Tabular understanding (Deng et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2022;
Shigarov, 2023; Wan et al., 2024) aims to automatically
extract, analyze, and comprehend information from vari-

To answer the question, we conducted a preliminary investigation. Based on the characteristics of tabular data, we categorize the existing benchmark into four aspects: understanding individual elements (IE), interpreting rows and columns
(RC), comprehending compositional conditions (CC), and
performing basic calculations or reasoning (CR). Our analysis, shown in Figure 1, reveals that current MLLMs perform
well on IE and RC tasks, which mainly require structural
recognition. However, they face significant limitations on

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China. 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Han-Jia
Ye <yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

