LightningDrag: Lightning Fast and Accurate Drag-based Image Editing
Emerging from Videos

Yujun Shi * 1 Jun Hao Liew * 2 Hanshu Yan 2 Vincent Y. F. Tan 1 Jiashi Feng 2

Abstract

editing is D RAG GAN (Pan et al., 2023), which enables
interactive point-based image manipulation on generative
adversarial networks (GANs). Using their method, users
initiate the editing process by selecting pairs of handle and
target points on an image. Subsequently, the model executes semantically coherent edits by relocating the contents
of the handle points to their corresponding targets. Moreover, users have the option to delineate editable regions
using masks, preserving the integrity of the rest of the image. Building upon the foundation laid by Pan et al. (2023),
subsequent works (Shi et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2023; Nie
et al., 2023; Ling et al., 2023) have endeavored to extend
this editing framework to large-scale pre-trained diffusion
models (Rombach et al., 2022), aiming to further enhance
its generality.

Accuracy and speed are critical in image editing tasks. Pan et al. introduced a drag-based
framework using Generative Adversarial Networks, and subsequent studies have leveraged
large-scale diffusion models. However, these
methods often require over a minute per edit and
exhibit low success rates. We present L IGHTNING D RAG , which achieves high-quality dragbased editing in about one second on general
images. By redefining drag-based editing as
a conditional generation task, we eliminate the
need for time-consuming latent optimization or
gradient-based guidance, achieving high-quality
editing in <1s. Our model is trained on largescale paired video frames, capturing diverse motion (object translations, pose shifts, zooming,
etc.) to significantly improve accuracy and consistency. Despite being trained only on videos, our
model generalizes to local deformations beyond
the training data (e.g., lengthening hair, twisting rainbows). Extensive evaluations confirm
the superiority of our approach. The code and
model are available at https://github.com/magicresearch/LightningDrag.

However, a common drawback among many methods within
this framework is their lack of efficiency. Prior to editing a
real image input by the user, D RAG GAN (Pan et al., 2023)
requires applying a lengthy pivotal-tuning-inversion (Roich
et al., 2022), a process that can consume up to 1 to 2 minutes.
As for diffusion-based approaches such as D RAG D IFFU SION (Shi et al., 2023) and D RAGON D IFFUSION (Mou et al.,
2023), they typically entail time-consuming operations such
as latent-optimization or gradient-based guidance during
editing. This inefficiency poses a significant barrier to practical deployment in real-world scenarios. What undermines
the users’ experiences even more is the low success rate of
these methods. Since they are mostly zero-shot methods
that lack explicit supervision to perform drag-based editing,
they frequently struggle with either accurately moving semantic content from handle to target points or preserving
the appearance and identity of the source image.

1. Introduction
Image editing using generative models (Roich et al., 2022;
Endo, 2022; Hertz et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2023; Kawar
et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2023) has received considerable attention in recent years. However, many existing approaches
lack the ability to conduct fine-grained spatial control. One
landmark work attempting to achieve precise spatial image

In this study, we introduce L IGHTNING D RAG, a novel
approach that achieves state-of-the-art drag-based editing
while drastically reducing latency to less than 1 second,
thereby making drag-based editing highly practical for deployment. To attain such rapid drag-based editing, we redefine the task as a specific form of conditional generation,
where the source image and the user’s drag instruction serve
as conditions. Drawing inspiration from previous literature
(Zhang, 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2024; Alzayer et al., 2024), we leverage the reference-only

*

1
Equal contribution
National University of Sin2
gapore ByteDance Inc..
Correspondence to:
Yujun Shi <shi.yujun@u.nus.edu>,
Jun Hao Liew
<junhao.liew@bytedance.com>,
Jiashi
Feng
<jshfeng@bytedance.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

