Open Materials Generation with Stochastic Interpolants

Philipp Höllmer * 1 Thomas Egg * 1 Maya M. Martirossyan * 1 Eric Fuemmeler * 2 Zeren Shui 2 Amit Gupta 2
Pawan Prakash 3 Adrian Roitberg 3 Mingjie Liu 3 George Karypis 2 Mark Transtrum 4 Richard G. Hennig 3
Ellad B. Tadmor 2 Stefano Martiniani 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The discovery of new materials is essential for
enabling technological advancements. Computational approaches for predicting novel materials
must effectively learn the manifold of stable crystal structures within an infinite design space. We
introduce Open Materials Generation (OMatG),
a unifying framework for the generative design
and discovery of inorganic crystalline materials.
OMatG employs stochastic interpolants (SI) to
bridge an arbitrary base distribution to the target distribution of inorganic crystals via a broad
class of tunable stochastic processes, encompassing both diffusion models and flow matching as
special cases. In this work, we adapt the SI framework by integrating an equivariant graph representation of crystal structures and extending it
to account for periodic boundary conditions in
unit cell representations. Additionally, we couple
the SI flow over spatial coordinates and lattice
vectors with discrete flow matching for atomic
species. We benchmark OMatG’s performance on
two tasks: Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP) for
specified compositions, and de novo generation
(DNG) aimed at discovering stable, novel, and
unique structures. In our ground-up implementation of OMatG, we refine and extend both CSP
and DNG metrics compared to previous works.
OMatG establishes a new state of the art in generative modeling for materials discovery, outperforming purely flow-based and diffusion-based
implementations. These results underscore the
importance of designing flexible deep learning
frameworks to accelerate progress in materials
science. The OMatG code is available at https:
//github.com/FERMat-ML/OMatG.

A core objective of materials science is the discovery of
new synthesizable structures and compounds with the potential to meet critical societal demands. The development
of new materials such as room-temperature superconductors
(Boeri et al., 2022), high-performance alloys with exceptional mechanical properties (Gludovatz et al., 2014; 2016;
George et al., 2019), advanced catalysts (Strmcnik et al.,
2016; Nakaya & Furukawa, 2023), and materials for energy
storage and generation (Liu et al., 2010; Snyder & Toberer,
2008) holds the potential to drive technological revolutions.
Exploring the vast compositional and structural landscape
of multicomponent materials with novel properties is
essential, yet exhaustive experimental screening is infeasible (Cantor, 2021). Quantum and classical molecular
simulation offer a powerful alternative, enabling a more
targeted and efficient exploration. In recent decades, both
experimental (Potyrailo et al., 2011; Maier, 2019) and
computational (Jain et al., 2011; Curtarolo et al., 2013)
high-throughput pipelines have led to a proliferation of
materials databases for crystal structures (Bergerhoff et al.,
1983; Mehl et al., 2017) and simulations (Blaiszik et al.,
2016; Vita et al., 2023; Fuemmeler et al., 2024). These
advances have already facilitated the development of more
accurate machine-learned interatomic potentials (Batzner
et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2022; Chen & Ong, 2022).
Still, efficiently sampling the manifold of stable materials structures under diverse constraints—such as composition and target properties—remains a major challenge.
Traditional approaches to materials discovery have relied on
first-principles electronic structure methods such as density
functional theory (DFT)1 —or more sophisticated theory,
depending on the property (Booth et al., 2013; Zaki et al.,
2014; Isaacs & Marianetti, 2020)—which, while powerful and fairly accurate, are very computationally expensive.
These methods include ab initio random structure searching
(AIRSS) (Pickard & Needs, 2011) or genetic algorithms
for structure and phase prediction (Tipton & Hennig, 2013),
both of which have successfully predicted new crystal struc-

*

Equal contribution 1 New York University 2 University of Minnesota 3 University of Florida 4 Brigham Young University. Correspondence to: Stefano Martiniani <sm7683@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
See Appendix A for a list of acronyms used throughout this
paper.

1

