PANDAS: Improving Many-shot Jailbreaking via
Positive Affirmation, Negative Demonstration, and Adaptive Sampling

Avery Ma 1 Yangchen Pan 2 Amir-massoud Farahmand 3

Abstract

0.4

Many-shot jailbreaking circumvents the safety
alignment of LLMs by exploiting their ability
to process long input sequences. To achieve
this, the malicious target prompt is prefixed with
hundreds of fabricated conversational exchanges
between the user and the model. These exchanges
are randomly sampled from a pool of unsafe
question-answer pairs, making it appear as
though the model has already complied with
harmful instructions. In this paper, we present
PANDAS: a hybrid technique that improves
many-shot jailbreaking by modifying these
fabricated dialogues with Positive Affirmations,
Negative Demonstrations, and an optimized
Adaptive Sampling method tailored to the target
prompt’s topic. We also introduce ManyHarm,
a dataset of harmful question–answer pairs, and
demonstrate through extensive experiments that
PANDAS significantly outperforms baseline
methods in long-context scenarios. Through
attention analysis, we provide insights into how
long-context vulnerabilities are exploited and
show how PANDAS further improves upon manyshot jailbreaking. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/averyma/pandas.

MSJ: Uniform Sampling Across Malicious Topics

Probability

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Maliclious Topics

0.4PANDAS: Adaptive Sampling based on Target's Topic

Probability

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Maliclious Topics

Figure 1. PANDAS improves many-shot jailbreaking by introducing: 1. Positive Affirmation phrases inserted before the next
malicious question, 2. refusal and correction phrases to create
a Negative Demonstration where the model initially refuses, followed by a user correction prompt, after which the model provides
the original malicious response, and 3. Adaptive Sampling of
demonstrations based on the topics of the malicious target prompt,
using a distribution optimized via Bayesian optimization.

However, this same long-context capability can be exploited
by adversaries. Anil et al. (2024) demonstrate that a malicious prompt, which safety-aligned LLMs would typically
refuse to respond to (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022),
can bypass safeguard when prefixed with hundreds of fabricated conversational turns within a single prompt. The
modified prompt mimics a dialogue between a user and the
LLM, in which the user asks malicious questions, and the
model complies by providing the corresponding answers.
This sequence makes it appear that the model has already
complied with multiple unsafe instructions, reinforcing an
instruction-following pattern that ultimately compels the
model to respond to the original malicious prompt. This
method, referred to as many-shot jailbreaking (MSJ), extends prior work on few-shot jailbreaking (Wei et al., 2023b;
Rao et al., 2024)—typically involving 8 shots in the shortcontext regime—by scaling up to 256 shots. Here, a “shot”
refers to a single malicious question-answer pair, also called
a “demonstration”, as it shows how the model should respond to malicious questions by providing harmful answers.

Warning: This paper contains model behavior
that can be offensive or harmful in nature.

1. Introduction
The growing length of context windows in large language models (LLMs) unlocks applications, such as agentic
LLMs (Park et al., 2023), that were previously impractical
or severely limited (Team et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024; Jin
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024).
1

University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2 University of Oxford
Polytechnique Montréal, Mila - Quebec AI Institute, University of
Toronto. Correspondence to: Avery Ma <ama@cs.toronto.edu>.
3

To further explore this new form of LLM vulnerability, we
propose PANDAS, a hybrid approach designed to increase
the attack success rate (ASR) in long-context scenarios. Our
results show that PANDAS consistently improves ASR over

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

