Let LLM Tell What to Prune and How Much to Prune
Mingzhe Yang * 1 Sihao Lin * 2 Changlin Li 3 Xiaojun Chang 1

Abstract

veloping effective methods to compress LLMs has become
a valuable research direction.

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized various AI applications. However, their billions of parameters pose significant challenges
for practical deployment. Structured pruning is
a hardware-friendly compression technique and
receives widespread attention. Nonetheless, existing literature typically targets a single structure
of LLMs. We observe that the structure units of
LLMs differ in terms of inference cost and functionality. Therefore, pruning a single structure
unit in isolation often results in an imbalance between performance and efficiency. In addition,
previous works mainly employ a prescribed pruning ratio. Since the significance of LLM modules
may vary, it is ideal to distribute the pruning load
to a specific structure unit according to its role
within LLMs. To address the two issues, we propose a pruning method that targets multiple LLM
modules with dynamic pruning ratios. Specifically, we find the intrinsic properties of LLMs
can guide us to determine the importance of each
module and thus distribute the pruning load on demand, i.e., what to prune and how much to prune.
This is achieved by quantifying the complex interactions within LLMs. Extensive experiments on
multiple benchmarks and LLM variants demonstrate that our method effectively balances the
trade-off between efficiency and performance.

Network Pruning (Han et al., 2015) is a promising method to
reduce model complexity by pruning the non-essential network connections. Traditional pruning strategy (i.e., weight
magnitude) may not be suitable to LLMs (Yin et al., 2024;
Muralidharan et al., 2024), which typically requires finetuning (Gordon et al., 2020; Jaiswal et al., 2023; Xia et al.,
2023) to restore the performance. Since retraining LLMs
could be prohibitively expensive, (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023)
propose SparseGPT, the first accurate one-shot unstructured
pruning method without any post-training. Compared to
unstructured pruning, structured pruning (An et al., 2024;
Song et al., 2024; Ashkboos et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024;
Ma et al., 2023; Men et al., 2024) is more friendly for deployment, which establishes a criterion to determine the
importance of specific structures, e.g., blocks and layers,
and remove the uninformative components accordingly.
Nonetheless, existing
literature on structured
pruning only focuses
on a single structure
unit in LLMs, such as
transformer block (Song
et al., 2024; Men et al.,
2024), attention & MLP
layers (Zhong et al.,
Figure 1. Dilemma between per2024) and the rows &
formance and efficiency. A faster
pruning strategy (speed ↑) comes
columns of weight mawith inferior performance (PPL ↓).
trices (An et al., 2024;
Ashkboos et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2023; Ling et al., 2024).
Different structure units vary from parameter counts and
functionality, contributing differently to inference speed
versus performance. An example is illustrated in Figure 1
where three structure units, accounting for 10% parameters,
of LLaMa2-7B are randomly pruned. The result shows that
there is no free lunch for structured pruning when targeting
a certain LLM module. Specifically, a faster strategy (e.g.,
block-wise pruning) comes with worse performance and
vice versa. Consequently, previous methods could lead to
an imbalance between throughput versus performance, as
shown in Figure 2.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance in the field of natural language processing (Mann et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Zhu et al.,
2024). Nonetheless, the billions of parameters (Zhao et al.,
2023) characteristic of LLMs substantially increase storage
requirements and computational overhead. Therefore, de*

Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology of
China 2 RMIT University 3 Stanford University. Correspondence
to: Xiaojun Chang <xjchang@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In addition, a majority of arts (Ashkboos et al., 2024; Song
et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Men et al.,
1

