Learning Attribute-Aware Hash Codes for Fine-Grained Image Retrieval via
Query Optimization

Peng Wang 1 Yong Li 2 Lin Zhao 1 Xiu-Shen Wei 2 †

1. Introduction

Abstract
Fine-grained hashing has become a powerful solution for rapid and efficient image retrieval, particularly in scenarios requiring high discrimination between visually similar categories. To enable each hash bit to correspond to specific visual
attributes, we propoe a novel method that harnesses learnable queries for attribute-aware hash
codes learning. This method deploys a tailored
set of queries to capture and represent nuanced
attribute-level information within the hashing process, thereby enhancing both the interpretability
and relevance of each hash bit. Building on this
query-based optimization framework, we incorporate an auxiliary branch to help alleviate the
challenges of complex landscape optimization often encountered with low-bit hash codes. This
auxiliary branch models high-order attribute interactions, reinforcing the robustness and specificity of the generated hash codes. Experimental
results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our method generates attribute-aware hash codes
and consistently outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in retrieval accuracy and robustness, especially for low-bit hash codes, underscoring its
potential in fine-grained image hashing tasks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
SEU-VIPGroup/QueryOpt

Large-scale fine-grained image retrieval aims to retrieve
images from various subcategories within a meta-category,
such as different species of animals, plant varieties, car
models, or types of retail products (Wah et al., 2011; Horn
et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2019). With the explosive growth of
fine-grained data in real applications, fine-grained hashing
has emerged as a promising solution for large-scale retrieval
tasks (Wang et al., 2018; Cakir et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2015;
Hu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025), as hashing method significantly reduces storage costs and increases retrieval speed
by using compact binary hash code representations. Unlike
fine-grained classification, retrieval task face an open-world
problem with unlimited categories. This task is complicated
by subtle inter-class variations among similar subcategories
and intra-class variations caused by different object postures (Wei et al., 2021b; Zhao et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2017).
To address these challenges, it is essential to explore the
nuances in object characteristics and leverage high-level
fine-grained features.
Recently, a variety of learning-to-hash methods have been
developed to enhance retrieval performance. In the literature, DSaH (Jin et al., 2020), ExchNet (Cui et al., 2020),
SEMICON (Shen et al., 2022) and AGMH (Lu et al., 2023)
concentrated on the design of feature extraction modules. As
for the process of generating hash codes, the final hash codes
are derived by projecting intricately coupled image features
through a simple linear layer. Although the generated hash
codes can perform retrieval tasks, a single bit will do not
imply significant semantics and it is difficult to preserve all
the intricately coupled global features of an image. Additionally, A2 -NET (Wei et al., 2021a) and A2 -NET++ (Wei
et al., 2023a) employs a reconstruction task to constrain the
process of generating hash codes, allowing each bit of hash
codes to indicate attribute-level information. This nuanced
attribute-level information enables us to effectively identify
different categories. Consequently, hash codes can perform
retrieval tasks effectively while ensuring that each bit is
interpretable. Following the idea of utilizing attribute-level
information as hash codes, we propose a novel method to
generate attribute-aware hash codes for fine-grained image
retrieval.

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. 2 School
of Computer Science and Engineering, and Key Laboratory
of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications, Southeast University, Nanjing,
China. This work was upported by National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFA1001100), National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant (62272231, 62172222), CIETencent Robotics X Rhino-Bird Focused Research Program,
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(4009002401,4009002509), and the Big Data Computing Center of Southeast University. Correspondence to: Xiu-Shen Wei
<weixs.gm@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

