e-GAI: e-value-based Generalized α-Investing for
Online False Discovery Rate Control

Yifan Zhang 1 Zijian Wei 1 Haojie Ren 1 Changliang Zou 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Online multiple hypothesis testing has attracted
a lot of attention in many applications, e.g.,
anomaly status detection and stock market price
monitoring. The state-of-the-art generalized αinvesting (GAI) algorithms can control online
false discovery rate (FDR) on p-values only under specific dependence structures, a situation
that rarely occurs in practice. The e-LOND algorithm (Xu & Ramdas, 2024) utilizes e-values
to achieve online FDR control under arbitrary
dependence but suffers from a significant loss
in power as testing levels are derived from prespecified descent sequences. To address these
limitations, we propose a novel framework on
valid e-values named e-GAI. The proposed e-GAI
can ensure provable online FDR control under
more general dependency conditions while improving the power by dynamically allocating the
testing levels. These testing levels are updated not
only by relying on both the number of previous
rejections and the prior costs, but also, differing
from the GAI framework, by assigning less αwealth for each rejection from a risk aversion perspective. Within the e-GAI framework, we introduce two new online FDR procedures, e-LORD
and e-SAFFRON, and provide strategies for the
long-term performance to address the issue of αdeath, a common phenomenon within the GAI
framework. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
e-GAI can be generalized to conditionally superuniform p-values. Both simulated and real data
experiments demonstrate the advantages of both
e-LORD and e-SAFFRON in FDR control and
power.

The online multiple hypothesis testing problem arises from
a range of applications. For example, regulators record the
number of NYC taxi passengers every 30 minutes, aiming to detect the anomalous intervals corresponding to special events (Lavin & Ahmad, 2015); economists build online monitoring procedures based on monthly stock market
prices to identify bubbles in financial series (Genoni et al.,
2023); industrial factories monitor machine operation status in real time for fault detection, thereby enabling early
warnings for potential system issues (Ahmad et al., 2017).
These different scenarios can all be formulated as the online multiple testing problem, which is concerned with the
investigation of an online sequence of null hypotheses. At
each time t, we must immediately make a real-time decision
on whether to reject the current hypothesis based on all the
observed data so far, without having knowledge of future
data or the total number of hypotheses.

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 School of Statistics and Data Sciences,
LPMC, KLMDASR and LEBPS, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China. Correspondence to: Haojie Ren <haojieren@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Related works. Methods for online FDR control were pioneered by Foster & Stine (2008), who proposed the so-called
α-investing (AI) strategy. It was further extended by the
generalized α-investing (GAI) procedure, which has served
as the fundamental framework for online testing problem
(Aharoni & Rosset, 2014; Javanmard & Montanari, 2018).
GAI deals with a sequence of p-values p1 , . . . , pt , . . . and

Consider an online sequence of null hypotheses
H1 , . . . , Ht , . . .. Define θt = 0/1 if Ht is true/false
for each time t and a class of online decision rules
δt = {δj : j = 1, . . . , t}, where δt = 1 indicates that Ht
is rejected and δt = 0 otherwise. It is necessary to control
the error rates of those decisions δt . A natural quantity to
control is the false discovery rate (FDR) at target level α
as introduced by Benjamini & Hochberg (1995), that is,
the ratio of falsely rejected nulls to the total number of
rejections. The online FDR is defined as:
 P

j∈H0 (t) δj
 ≤ α,

FDR(t) = E[FDP(t)] = E  P
t
δ
∨
1
j=1 j
where H0 (t) = {j ≤ t : θj = 0} is the true null set up to
time t.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

