Unveiling Markov Heads in Pretrained Language Models for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Wenhao Zhao 1 * † Qiushui Xu 2 * † Linjie Xu 3 † Lei Song 4 Jinyu Wang 4 Chunlai Zhou 1 Jiang Bian 4

Abstract

2018), computer vision (Yuan et al., 2021) and AI4Science
(Wang et al., 2024) tasks, for it encodes the input data into
powerful features via the attention mechanism. Applying
transformers to the field of reinforcement learning (RL), Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) which models
the offline RL problem (Levine et al., 2020) to a returnconditional sequence-to-sequence problem, has demonstrated superior performance in solving different types of
RL problems (Correia & Alexandre, 2023; Mezghani et al.,
2023; Badrinath et al., 2024; Janner et al., 2021).

Recently, incorporating knowledge from pretrained language models (PLMs) into decision
transformers (DTs) has generated significant attention in offline reinforcement learning (RL).
These PLMs perform well in RL tasks, raising
an intriguing question: what kind of knowledge
from PLMs has been transferred to RL to achieve
such good results? This work first dives into this
problem by analyzing each head quantitatively
and points out Markov head, a crucial component
that exists in the attention heads of PLMs. It leads
to extreme attention on the last-input token and
performs well only in short-term environments.
Furthermore, we prove that this extreme attention cannot be changed by re-training embedding
layer or fine-tuning. Inspired by our analysis, we
propose a general method GPT2-DTMA, which
equips a pretrained DT with Mixture of Attention
(MoA), to accommodate diverse attention requirements during fine-tuning. Extensive experiments
corroborate our theorems and demonstrate the effectiveness of GPT2-DTMA: it achieves comparable performance in short-term environments while
significantly narrowing the performance gap in
long-term environments.

Recently, using pretrained language models (PLMs) and
fine-tuning them for specific tasks (Kenton & Toutanova,
2019; Raffel et al., 2020) has gradually replaced training
Transformers from scratch. Pretraining phase enables PLMs
to gain rich universal language representations transferable
to various downstream tasks (Xiong et al., 2024). Remarkably, Noorbakhsh et al. (2021); Goel et al. (2022) showed
that PLMs can effectively tackle tasks beyond NLP. Inspired
by the powerful knowledge transfer capabilities of PLMs,
Reid et al. (2022); Shi et al. (2024) attempt to transfer NLP
knowledge to RL domain, indicating that PLMs can enhance the performance of downstream offline RL tasks as
well. We collectively refer to the DT variant models, which
are initialized with PLMs, as GPT2-DT.
To understand this surprising efficacy when transferring
knowledge from PLMs to offline RL, Shi et al. (2024) concluded that sequential modeling ability is the key to unleashing the potential of PLMs for RL tasks. Furthermore,
Takagi (2022) proposes a hypothesis that pretraining with
text is likely to make PLMs get context-like information
and utilize it to solve the downstream task. However, it is
still unclear that why these key features are essential for
RL tasks and how to acquire these knowledge through pretraining. To bring clarity to PLMs in offline RL and provide
more insightful guidance on how to better train and adapt
transformer-based models for RL tasks, we dive into the
mechanism of PLMs and do more quantitative analysis on
the direct transferred parameters to RL. Based on our quantitative analysis, we first propose the definition of Markov
heads, which inherit from PLMs and are fundamental for
RL tasks and then adapt PLMs to all kinds of RL tasks by
flexibly utilizing the properties of Markov heads.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) achieve significant improvements in natural language processing (Devlin et al.,
Equal contribution; the order is decided by a dice roll.† This
work was conducted when the author was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia. 1 Computer Science Department, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 2 Department of Industrial and
Manufacturing Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA,USA 3 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Scientce, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
4
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lei
Song <lei.song@microsoft.com>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

