Collapse or Thrive?
Perils and Promises of Synthetic Data in a Self-Generating World

Joshua Kazdan * 1 Rylan Schaeffer * 2 Apratim Dey 1 Matthias Gerstgrasser 2 Rafael Rafailov 2
David Donoho 1 Sanmi Koyejo 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
What happens when generative machine learning
models are pretrained on web-scale datasets containing data generated by earlier models? Some
prior work warns of “model collapse” as the web
is overwhelmed by synthetic data; other work
suggests the problem can be contained by managing how available data are used in pretraining. We report experiments on three ways of
using data (training-workflows), across three generative model task-settings (multivariate Gaussian estimation, kernel density estimation, and
language-model fine-tuning) to further confirm
the possibility of containment: (a) we confirm
that the training-workflow of replacing all real
data by successive generations of purely synthetic
data suffers model collapse; (b) we consider the
training-workflow of accumulating synthetic data
alongside real data and training on all data combined and confirm that, although the proportion
of real data eventually becomes zero, models remain stable and their test losses do not diverge
under this training-workflow; (c) we consider a
training-workflow where real and synthetic data
accumulate together but successive generations
of pretraining are constrained to use fixed-size
data subsets each generation. In this workflow,
we observe slow and gradual rather than explosive degradation of test loss performance across
generations. Our insights are important when
forecasting whether future generative models will
collapse or thrive, and our results open avenues
for empirically and mathematically studying the
context-dependent value of synthetic data.

With each passing day, the internet contains more AIgenerated content (Altman, 2024). What impact will this
have on future deep generative models and their successors?
Previous work forewarned that sequences of models trained
exclusively on successive iterations of their own outputs
can exhibit model collapse: model performance degrades
with each iteration and later models become progressively
more unusable (Shumailov et al., 2023). Due to increasingly
heavy usage of LMs to produce written content for the internet (Bommasani et al., 2022; Reuel et al., 2024; Perrault &
Clark, 2024; Kapoor et al., 2024), model collapse alarmists
believe current trends, if unmitigated, will irredeemably
pollute the pretraining data supply and degrade language
models across time.
However, the model collapse literature contains a variety
of methodologies, assumptions, and models. Research supports conflicting positions about such future scenarios (Taori
& Hashimoto, 2023; Hataya et al., 2023; Martı́nez et al.,
2023; Shumailov et al., 2023; Alemohammad et al., 2024;
Martı́nez et al., 2023; Bohacek & Farid, 2023; Guo et al.,
2024; Bertrand et al., 2024; Briesch et al., 2023; Gillman
et al., 2024; Wyllie et al., 2024; Dohmatob et al., 2024a;b;
Gerstgrasser et al., 2024; Seddik et al., 2024; Marchi et al.,
2024; Padmakumar & He, 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Ferbach et al., 2024a; Veprikov et al., 2024; Dey & Donoho,
2024). Concordance in the field is especially challenging
because “model collapse” has been defined in various ways
and studied under different assumptions concerning trainingworkflows and task-settings. Shumailov et al. (2023) defined
model collapse as a “degenerative process affecting generations of learned generative models, in which the data they
generate end up polluting the training set of the next generation.” Dohmatob et al. (2024b) called model collapse the
worsening of scaling law curves when training on synthetic
as opposed to real data. In their theory sections, Shumailov
et al. (2024) and Gerstgrasser et al. (2024) defined model
collapse as divergent test loss after multiple iterations of
training in certain task settings. Due to space constraints,
we discuss Related Work more extensively in Appendix A.

*

1
Equal contribution
Stanford Statistics 2 Stanford
Computer Science.
Correspondence to:
Joshua
Kazdan
<jkazdan@stanford.edu>,
Rylan
Schaeffer
<rschaef@cs.stanford.edu>,
Sanmi
Koyejo
<sanmi@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 dn International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we take model collapse by its literal mean1

