Learning Curves of Stochastic Gradient Descent in Kernel Regression

Haihan Zhang * 1 Weicheng Lin * 1 Yuanshi Liu 1 Cong Fang 1 2

Abstract

est in kernel methods driven by the neural tangent kernel
(NTK) theory (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019), which
states that sufficiently wide neural networks, under specific
initialization, can be well approximated by a deterministic
kernel model derived from the network architecture. Though
deep learning often operates in regimes beyond the traditional statistical mindset, recent advances demonstrate that
these generalization mysteries are not peculiar to neural networks and the phenomena are also present in kernel regression, particularly in the high-dimensional regime (Ghorbani
et al., 2021; Liang & Rakhlin, 2020; Zhang et al., 2024b).

This paper considers a canonical problem in kernel regression: how good are the model performances when it is trained by the popular online
first-order algorithms, compared to the offline
ones, such as ridge and ridgeless regression? In
this paper, we analyze the foundational singlepass Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) in kernel
regression under source condition where the optimal predictor can even not belong to the RKHS,
i.e. the model is misspecified. Specifically, we
focus on the inner product kernel over the sphere
and characterize the exact orders of the excess
risk curves under different scales of sample sizes
n concerning the input dimension d. Surprisingly,
we show that SGD achieves min-max optimal
rates up to constants among all the scales, without
suffering the saturation, a prevalent phenomenon
observed in (ridge) regression, except when the
model is highly misspecified and the learning is
in a final stage where n ≫ dγ with any constant
γ > 0. The main reason for SGD to overcome the
curse of saturation is the exponentially decaying
step size schedule, a common practice in deep
neural network training. As a byproduct, we provide the first provable advantage of the scheme
over the iterative averaging method in the common setting.

Substantial studies have been made in the related regimes
for kernel ridge or ridgeless methods. For instance, Liang
& Rakhlin (2020) demonstrates the existence of benign
overfitting for ridgeless regression, a phenomenon where
the model interpolates data yet still generalizes well. In
a large-dimension regime where n ≍ d, Ghorbani et al.
(2021) provably shows the double descent phenomenon. In
more general regimes, Zhang et al. (2024b) characterizes the
exact orders of the excess risk curves, i.e., learning curves
where the sample size scales polynomially with the input
dimension n = dγ with γ > 0 and elaborates the interplay
of the regularization parameter, γ, and the source condition.
On the other hand, in practice, dominant algorithms are
implemented in an online fashion to reduce computation
costs, with iterative updates relying on stochastic gradients
(single-pass or minibatch) as estimates of the population
counterpart. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), one of the
foundational online algorithms, admits the simplest updates
and receives abundant theoretical analysis in general optimization. However, its learning dynamics over specific kernels remains underexplored. Existing theoretical results are
either inapplicable or leave room for improvement. Specifically, the pioneering work of (Dieuleveut & Bach, 2016)
considers the optimality of single-pass SGD with iterate
averaging, yet their optimality results do not demonstrate
a clear improvement over ridge regression. Another thread
of work analyses single-pass SGD in the linear regression
framework (Jain et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2021b; Wu et al.,
2022). Although insightful, their decisive assumption on the
concentration effect deviates from that in kernel regression,
resulting in entirely different learning dynamics.

1. Introduction
Non-parametric least-squares regression within the RKHS
framework represents a cornerstone of statistical learning
theory. One mainstream method to solve the problem is kernel ridge regression (KRR) with optimality analysis (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007; Smale & Zhou, 2007; Zhang et al.,
2024a). Recent years have witnessed a renaissance of inter*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking
University 2 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University.
Correspondence to: Cong Fang <fangcong@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this study, we investigate a fundamental question to fill

1

