DocVXQA: Context-Aware Visual Explanations for Document Question
Answering

Mohamed Ali Souibgui * 1 Changkyu Choi * 2 Andrey Barsky 1 Kangsoo Jung 3 Ernest Valveny 1
Dimosthenis Karatzas 1

Abstract
We propose DocVXQA, a novel framework for
visually self-explainable document question answering. The framework is designed not only to
produce accurate answers to questions but also
to learn visual heatmaps that highlight contextually critical regions, thereby offering interpretable
justifications for the model’s decisions. To integrate explanations into the learning process, we
quantitatively formulate explainability principles
as explicit learning objectives. Unlike conventional methods that emphasize only the regions
pertinent to the answer, our framework delivers explanations that are contextually sufficient while remaining representation-efficient. This fosters user
trust while achieving a balance between predictive performance and interpretability in DocVQA
applications. Extensive experiments, including
human evaluation, provide strong evidence supporting the effectiveness of our method. The
code is available at https://github.com/
dali92002/DocVXQA.

Figure 1. An illustration of the relevant regions in a DocVQA
model (highlighted zones), produced by extracting the raw attention maps from the last layer (top) and by using our method
(bottom) for the question “ ‘Pleasure to burn since 1913’, Which
cigarette’s tagline is this?”. Here, the answer given correctly by
the model is “Camel”.

1. Introduction

tual and visual modalities at scale (Wang et al., 2024; Zhao
et al., 2024; Rasheed et al., 2024; Parashar et al., 2024).

Document visual question answering (DocVQA) is essential for automatically extracting information from visually
complex, multi-modal documents including invoices, reports, and contracts (Appalaraju et al., 2024; Blau et al.,
2024; Tito et al., 2023; Mathew et al., 2021). This task
requires interpreting the question and generating an answer
through natural language, given a specific document. Recently, DocVQA models have increasingly leveraged large
vision-language models for their ability to process both tex-

Despite these promising advances in terms of utility,
DocVQA relies on large, opaque neural network architectures that function as “black boxes,” offering limited
transparency into how they generate answers. This lack
of transparency is particularly concerning in high-stakes
domains such as finance (Wu et al., 2023), healthcare (Li
et al., 2024), and law (Abdallah et al., 2023), where trust
in AI-driven decision-making is crucial. In addition, existing explainable methods for DocVQA primarily rely on
visualizing attention maps to highlight relevant regions influencing the model’s predictions. However, as illustrated
in Figure 1 (above), these attention-based explanations are
often noisy or imprecise, failing to justify the reasoning behind the answer. Instead of offering clear insights, they tend
to broadly highlight all occurrences of the answer without

*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Vision Center, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain 2 UiT The Arctic University of
Norway, Norway 3 Inria, France. Correspondence to: Mohamed
Ali Souibgui <msouibgui@cvc.uab.cat>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

