VIP: Vision Instructed Pre-training for Robotic Manipulation

Zhuoling Li 1 Liangliang Ren 2 Jinrong Yang‡, 2 3 Yong Zhao 2 Xiaoyang Wu 1 Zhenhua Xu 4
Xiang Bai 5 Hengshuang Zhao 1
https://lizhuoling.github.io/VIRT_webpage/

Abstract

Pick up the
green block

The effectiveness of scaling up training data in
robotic manipulation is still limited. A primary
challenge in manipulation is the tasks are diverse,
and the trained policy would be confused if the
task targets are not specified clearly. Existing
works primarily rely on text instruction to describe targets. However, we reveal that current
robotic data cannot train policies to understand
text instruction effectively, and vision is much
more comprehensible. Therefore, we introduce
utilizing vision instruction to specify targets. A
straightforward implementation is training a policy to predict the intermediate actions linking the
current observation and a future image. Nevertheless, a single future image does not describe the
task target in insufficient detail. To handle this
problem, we propose to use sparse point flows
to provide more detailed information. Extensive
tasks are designed based on real and simulated
environments to evaluate the effectiveness of our
vision instructed pre-training (VIP) method. The
results indicate VIP improves the performance on
diverse tasks significantly, and the derived policy
can complete competitive tasks like “opening the
lid of a tightly sealed bottle”.

Text Instruction

Fail to
focus on
the green
block.

Text
Instructed
Policy
Policy Attention Map

Vision Observation

Vision Instruction

Focus on
the green
block
correctly.

Vision
Instructed
Policy
Policy Attention Map

Figure 1. Visualization comparison between the action attention
maps of the text instructed policy and vision instructed policy. We
can observe that the text instructed policy is confused about which
region to concentrate on, while the vision instructed policy focuses
on the target correctly. This phenomenon suggests that vision
instruction is more comprehensible by policy networks.

& Kragic, 2019). This is partly because manipulation data is
ambiguous due to its multi-modal nature (Chi et al., 2023).
Given the same observation, there could exist multiple objects to manipulate and the potential actions are diverse,
such as picking, sorting, and rotating.

1
HKU 2 CVTE 3 SYSU 4 THU 5 HUST. ‡ Project leader. Correspondence to: Hengshuang Zhao <hszhao@cs.hku.h>.

To handle this ambiguity, it is important to describe task
targets clearly to the policy. A common practice in existing
manipulation pre-training paradigms is describing task targets using text instructions like “pick up the green block”.
These paradigms expect that the trained policy understands
what the green block is in the input image and predicts the
action sequence of picking it up. Therefore, the policy needs
to align the information between text and vision, such as the
words “green block” and the appearance of this green block.
However, we find that existing manipulation data is not diverse sufficiently to train a policy to own this capability,
which demands millions of image-text pairs as suggested
in previous literature (Liu et al., 2024). As shown in Fig. 1,
the text instructed policy fails to concentrate on the green
block specified in the text instruction, and the robot hand
often grasps a block in a false color.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we reveal that vision instruction, such as a
future image predicting the grasp moment, is much more
comprehensible by policies in the current robotic data di-

1. Introduction
Following the data scaling law, the natural language processing and computer vision communities have achieved
remarkable breakthroughs (Achiam et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2024). In the robotics community, there are also many attempts of incorporating more robotic data (O’Neill et al.,
2024; Kim et al., 2024). However, the effectiveness of largescale training in robotic manipulation is still limited (Billard

1

