Reward Translation via Reward Machine in Semi-Alignable MDPs

Yun Hua * 1 Haosheng Chen * 2 Wenhao Li 3 Bo Jin 3 Baoxiang Wang 4 Hongyuan Zha 4 Xiangfeng Wang 2 5

Abstract

autonomous driving (Zhu et al., 2018), and precision agriculture management (Li et al., 2021). However, it is recognized
that the effectiveness of current DRL methods hinges on
the quality of the provided reward signals. Dense rewards
require significant engineering effort in practical applications (Fickinger et al., 2021), and non-Markovian reward
signals are often produced by humans (MacGlashan et al.,
2017), potentially hindering the training process. In light
of these challenges, it is important to consider how humans excel at drawing on their own experiences to learn
and apply skills across various domains. Specifically, humans demonstrate a unique ability to recognize latent structural similarities between tasks in related but distinct areas,
which enables them to abstract skills from differences. They
adeptly learn from third-party observations that lack explicit
correspondence to internal self-representations (Stadie et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2018; Sermanet et al., 2018) —performing tasks like finding a path on a map and navigating to a
destination in real life—or imitating experts with different
embodiments (Gupta et al., 2017; Rizzolatti and Craighero,
2004; Liu et al., 2019) in unfamiliar environments (Liu et al.,
2019). Endowing RL agents with this ability and transfer rewards across different domains could greatly enhance their
learning efficiency and reduce the efforts in reward design.

Addressing reward design complexities in deep
reinforcement learning is facilitated by knowledge transfer across different domains. To this
end, we define reward translation to describe
the cross-domain reward transfer problem. However, current methods struggle with non-pairable
and non-time-alignable incompatible MDPs. This
paper presents an adaptable reward translation
framework neural reward translation featuring
semi-alignable MDPs, which allows efficient reward translation under relaxed constraints while
handling the intricacies of incompatible MDPs.
Given the inherent difficulty of directly mapping
semi-alignable MDPs and transferring rewards,
we introduce an indirect mapping method through
reward machines, created using limited human
input or LLM-based automated learning. Graphmatching techniques establish links between reward machines from distinct environments, thus
enabling cross-domain reward translation within
semi-alignable MDP settings. This broadens the
applicability of DRL across multiple domains.
Experiments substantiate our approach’s effectiveness in tasks under environments with semialignable MDPs.

Existing efforts for transferring rewards across various domains primarily focus on cross-domain imitation learning,
including three main types of domain discrepancies: dynamics (Liu et al., 2019), embodiment (Gupta et al., 2017;
Hudson et al., 2022), and viewpoint mismatch (Jiang et al.,
2020; Stadie et al., 2017). These approaches require paired
and time-aligned demonstrations, often hard to handle more
than one descriptor at once. Subsequent advances, such
as DAIL (Kim et al., 2020) and other works using CycleGAN (Raychaudhuri et al., 2021) and Gromov-Wasserstein
distance (Fickinger et al., 2021), relax some constraints,
allowing algorithms to automatically learn observation and
action mappings from unpaired and unaligned demonstrations. However, they still struggle with incompatible MDPs
which are non-pairable and non-time-alignable tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has made notable
strides in areas such as gaming (Mnih et al., 2015; Lample and Chaplot, 2017), robotic control (Kober et al., 2013),
*

Equal contribution 1 Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 School
of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 3 School of Software Engineering, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China 4 School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China 5 Key
Laboratory of Mathematics and Engineering Applications, East
China Normal University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to:
Xiangfeng Wang <xfwang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we introduce the concept of reward translation,
describing cross-domain reward transfer in reinforcement
learning as a process akin to translation between different languages. We further introduce semi-alignable MDPs,
which describe incompatible MDPs sharing an abstract

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

