ReinboT: Amplifying Robot Visual-Language Manipulation with
Reinforcement Learning

Hongyin Zhang 1 2 Zifeng Zhuang 2 Han Zhao 2 Pengxiang Ding 2 Hongchao Lu 2 Donglin Wang 2

Abstract

An important reason that limits the performance of VLA
models is that the quality of training data sources is usually uneven, even if they come from successful demonstrations (Hejna et al.). Although recent imitation learning methods can effectively replicate the distribution of demonstrations (Vuong et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2025), they have difficulty distinguishing between uneven
data quality and making full use of mixed-quality data (Bai
et al., 2025). On the other side, offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms aim to leverage previously collected
data without the need for online data collection (Levine
et al., 2020). Despite initial attempts to integrate VLA with
RL (Mark et al., 2024; Zhai et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025a;
Guo et al., 2025), the design of widely applicable dense
rewards for visual-language manipulation tasks and the incorporation of the RL concept of maximizing benefits into
the VLA model remain underexplored.

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have
shown great potential in general robotic decisionmaking tasks via imitation learning. However,
the variable quality of training data often constrains the performance of these models. On
the other hand, offline Reinforcement Learning
(RL) excels at learning robust policy models from
mixed-quality data. In this paper, we introduce
Reinforced robot GPT (ReinboT), a novel endto-end VLA model that integrates the RL principle of maximizing cumulative reward. ReinboT achieves a deeper understanding of the data
quality distribution by predicting dense returns
that capture the nuances of manipulation tasks.
The dense return prediction capability enables the
robot to generate more robust decision-making
actions, oriented towards maximizing future benefits. Extensive experiments show that ReinboT achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
CALVIN mixed-quality dataset and exhibits superior few-shot learning and out-of-distribution
generalization capabilities in real-world tasks.

To this end, we propose Reinforced robot GPT (ReinboT),
a novel end-to-end VLA model to implement the RL concept of maximizing dense returns. Specifically, we efficiently and automatically decompose the long-horizon manipulation task trajectory into multiple trajectory segments
containing only a single sub-goal, and design a dense reward that captures the characteristics of the manipulation
task. In fact, complex robot manipulation tasks need to
consider many factors, such as tracking targets, reducing
energy consumption, and maintaining flexible and stable behavior. Therefore, the design principle of proposed reward
densification method is based on these considerations and
remains widely applicable to various manipulation tasks.

1. Introduction
Research on vision-language-action (VLA) models for general embodied intelligence in robotics has recently flourished (Brohan et al., 2022; 2023). VLA models are usually based on the imitation learning paradigm, where a
pre-trained vision-language model is post-trained on downstream robotic data (Ding et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025b).
While semantic generalization has improved in VLA models
through extensive robotic training data, a critical gap persists
in their manipulation accuracy for downstream tasks (Brohan et al., 2023; Black et al.; Li et al., a).

In terms of ReinboT algorithm design, we consider that
accurate estimation of the value function in RL algorithms
has always been a thorny problem, especially in the Transformer architecture (Parisotto et al., 2020; Davis et al.,
2021). Therefore, we utilize cumulative rewards (i.e., ReturnToGo (Chen et al., 2021)) as a new modality data to
characterize data quality characteristics based on the constructed dense reward. Inspired by previous work (Zhuang
et al., 2024), we model the maximum return sequence over
the joint distribution of language commands, image states
(and proprioception), actions, and ReturnToGo. This is a
supervised paradigm that integrates the RL goal of predict-

1

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Westlake University,
Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Donglin Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

