Understanding Model Reprogramming for CLIP via Decoupling Visual Prompts

Chengyi Cai * 1 Zesheng Ye * 1 Lei Feng 2 3 Jianzhong Qi 1 Feng Liu 1

Abstract

(a) Single VP

Model reprogramming adapts pretrained models
to downstream tasks by modifying only the input and output spaces. Visual reprogramming
(VR) is one instance for vision tasks that adds
a trainable noise pattern (i.e., a visual prompt)
to input images to facilitate downstream classification. The existing VR approaches for CLIP
train a single visual prompt using all descriptions
of different downstream classes. However, the
limited learning capacity may result in (1) a failure to capture diverse aspects of the descriptions
(e.g., shape, color, and texture), and (2) a possible bias toward less informative attributes that do
not help distinguish between classes. In this paper, we introduce a decoupling-and-reweighting
framework. Our decoupled visual prompts (DVP)
are optimized using descriptions grouped by explicit causes (DVP-cse) or unsupervised clusters
(DVP-cls). Then, we integrate the outputs of
these visual prompts with a probabilistic reweighting matrix (PRM) that measures their contributions to each downstream class. Theoretically,
DVP lowers the empirical risk bound. Experimentally, DVP outperforms baselines on average across 11 downstream datasets. Notably,
the DVP-PRM integration enables insights into
how individual visual prompts influence classification decisions, providing a probabilistic framework for understanding reprogramming. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
tmlr-group/DecoupledVP

(b) Decoupled VPs
Cause 1 Cause 2

Descriptions

Cluster 3

Cause 3
Reweight

Previous
Method

Reweight
OR

Align
Align

Align

By Explicit
Causes

By Unsupervised
Clusters

Figure 1. Difference between (a) existing VR methods that train
a single VP for all descriptions, and (b) our DVP that trains
decoupled-and-reweighted VPs that are optimized using descriptions grouped by explicit causes or unsupervised clusters. Learnable parameters are marked with ‘fire’s.

adapting models pretrained on abundant data to a specific
task by modifying inputs and outputs without altering the
model’s core architecture or retraining. Among these methods, visual reprogramming (VR) (Cai et al., 2024b;a; Tsao
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023), also known as adversarial reprogramming (Elsayed et al., 2018; Tsai et al., 2020),
aims to repurpose pretrained models for downstream image
classification tasks by adding trainable noise patterns to the
input images. VR for vision-language models (VLMs) (Cai
et al., 2025) trains a single noise pattern, also known as a
visual prompt (VP), to align input images with (i.e., bring
the visual features closer to texture features) all descriptions
of different downstream classes, as shown in Figure 1(a).
However, attribute descriptions (Cai et al., 2025) are complex and diverse, while the learning capacity of a single
VP may be limited, potentially insufficient to handle all
image-description pairs. This may result in the VP successfully capturing descriptions in certain aspects while failing
in others. Additionally, the VP may unreasonably tend to
optimize less informative descriptions that, while easier to
match with images (i.e., having a higher cosine similarity), exhibit low discriminability between classes. Figure
2 shows an example of a single VP pattern trained on the
OxfordFlowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008) dataset for all
attributes (Cai et al., 2025), with sample descriptions shown

1. Introduction
Model reprogramming (Vinod et al., 2020; Chen, 2024;
Hung et al., 2023) is shown to be an effective approach for
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne 2 School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Southeast University 3 Idealism Technology (Beijing). Correspondence to: Feng Liu <fengliu.ml@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

