Distribution-aware Fairness Learning in Medical Image Segmentation
From A Control-Theoretic Perspective

Yujin Oh * 1 Pengfei Jin * 1 Sangjoon Park * 2 3 Sekeun Kim 1 Siyeop Yoon 1 Kyungsang Kim 1
Jin Sung Kim 2 4 Xiang Li 1 Quanzheng Li 1

Abstract
Imbalanced Clinical Data Distribution

Ensuring fairness in medical image segmentation
is critical due to biases in imbalanced clinical
data acquisition caused by demographic attributes
(e.g., age, sex, race) and clinical factors (e.g., disease severity). To address these challenges, we
introduce Distribution-aware Mixture of Experts
(dMoE), inspired by optimal control theory. We
provide a comprehensive analysis of its underlying mechanisms and clarify dMoE’s role in adapting to heterogeneous distributions in medical image segmentation. Furthermore, we integrate
dMoE into multiple network architectures, demonstrating its broad applicability across diverse medical image analysis tasks. By incorporating demographic and clinical factors, dMoE achieves stateof-the-art performance on two 2D benchmark
datasets and a 3D in-house dataset. Our results
highlight the effectiveness of dMoE in mitigating biases from imbalanced distributions, offering
a promising approach to bridging control theory
and medical image segmentation within fairness
learning paradigms. The source code is available
at https://github.com/tvseg/dMoE.

T1

T2
T3
T-stage

HAM10000
Skin Lesion
Training Dataset

Minor
Group

Minor
Group

Harvard-FairSeg
Ophthalmoscopy
Training Dataset

Training Dataset

Prostate Cancer
Radiotherapy Target

T4

Asian Black White
Race

20

Improved Equity

Performance (Dice)

𝒉𝟎

𝑨𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒃𝒖𝒕𝒆

𝒉𝒍"𝟏

dMoE

Feedback
𝒉𝒍
T1

T2

T3

T-stage

80

T4

Performance (Dice)

Poor Equity

40 60
Age

dMoE

Mode-switching

Distribution-aware
Mixture of Experts

T1

T2

T3

T4

T-stage

Improved Equity for Medical Image Segmentation Performance

Figure 1. The influence of clinical data distribution on medical
image segmentation and the role of dMoE as a distribution-aware
control mechanism to address inequity challenges. Transparent
blue lines within the violin plots connect the most densely populated regions of each attribute, visually representing overall equity.

tributes such as gender and race, as well as clinical factors,
e.g., disease severity, emphasize the need for fairness-aware
learning approaches in medical data analysis (Ktena et al.,
2024; Jin et al., 2024). Deep neural networks, due to their
data-driven optimization processes, often overfit to prevalent patterns while failing to adequately learn from underrepresented ones, leading to potentially biased predictions
and weakening fairness across demographic subgroups, as
shown in Figure 1. Although advanced fairness training
strategies have been actively developed (Tian et al., 2025;
2024; Li et al., 2024), distributional approaches remain underexplored—despite the fact that clinical and demographic
factors play a significant role in many clinical decisionmaking (Chester et al., 2020; Theodore et al., 2023). Clinicians consider demographic factors such as age, gender, and
race alongside a patient’s unique condition to assess both
individual and subgroup characteristics. This process not
only informs clinical factors like disease stage and decisionmaking but also implicitly shapes region/population-specific

1. Introduction
The inherent imbalance and ill-posed nature of data collected in clinical practice, impacted by demographic at*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Advanced Medical Computing and Analysis (CAMCA), Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) and Harvard Medical School,
MA 02114, USA 2 Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul
03772, Republic of Korea 3 Institute for Innovation in Digital
Healthcare, Yonsei University, Seoul 03772, Republic of Korea 4 Oncosoft Inc, Seoul 03776, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Xiang Li <xli60@mgh.harvard.edu>, Quanzheng Li
<li.quanzheng2@mgh.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

