Improving Consistency Models with Generator-Augmented Flows

Thibaut Issenhuth 1 Sangchul Lee 2 Ludovic Dos Santos 1 Jean-Yves Franceschi 1 Chansoo Kim 2 3
Alain Rakotomamonjy 1 4

Abstract

proach is consistency models (Song et al., 2023; Song and
Dhariwal, 2024). Consistency models lead to high-quality
one-step generators, that can be trained either by distillation of a pre-trained velocity field (consistency distillation),
or as standalone generative models (consistency training)
by approximating the velocity field through a one-sample
Monte Carlo estimate.

Consistency models imitate the multi-step sampling of score-based diffusion in a single forward
pass of a neural network. They can be learned in
two ways: consistency distillation and consistency
training. The former relies on the true velocity
field of the corresponding differential equation,
approximated by a pre-trained neural network. In
contrast, the latter uses a single-sample Monte
Carlo estimate of this velocity field. The related
estimation error induces a discrepancy between
consistency distillation and training that, we show,
still holds in the continuous-time limit. To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel flow that transports noisy data towards their corresponding outputs derived from a consistency model. We prove
that this flow reduces the previously identified discrepancy and the noise-data transport cost. Consequently, our method not only accelerates consistency training convergence but also enhances
its overall performance. The code is available at:
github.com/thibautissenhuth/consistency GC.

The corresponding estimation error naturally induces a
discrepancy between consistency distillation and training.
While Song et al. (2023) hinted that it would resolve in the
continuous-time limit, we show that this discrepancy persists in both the gradients and values of the loss functions.
Interestingly, this discrepancy vanishes when the difference
between the target velocity field and its Monte-Carlo approximation approaches zero. However, this is not the case
with the independent coupling (IC) between data and noise
used to construct the standard estimate. It is unclear how to
improve this one-sample estimate without access to the true
underlying diffusion model.
The approach we adopt in this paper to alleviate this issue
involves altering the velocity field – thereby changing the
target flow – to reduce the variance of its one-sample estimator. One possible solution to this problem is to resort
to optimal transport (OT) to learn on a deterministic coupling. OT has been succesfully adopted in diffusion (Li
et al., 2024), consistency (Dou et al., 2024), and flow matching (Pooladian et al., 2023) models. However, due to the
prohibitive cubic complexity of OT solvers (e.g. Hungarian
matching algorithm), such methods need to be applied at the
minibatch level. This incurs an OT approximation error (Fatras et al., 2021; Sommerfeld et al., 2019) and stochasticity
of the data-noise coupling, thus not solving the consistency
training issue.

1. Introduction
A large family of diffusion (Ho et al., 2020), score-based
(Song et al., 2021; Karras et al., 2022), and flow models
(Liu et al., 2023; Lipman et al., 2023) have emerged as stateof-the-art generative models for image generation. Since
they are costly to use at inference time – requiring several
neural function evaluations –, many distillation techniques
have been explored (Salimans and Ho, 2022; Meng et al.,
2023; Sauer et al., 2023). One of the most remarkable ap1

In our approach, we propose to use the consistency model,
assumed to be an approximation of the target diffusion flow,
to construct additional trajectories. The consistency model
serves as a proxy to reduce the expected deviation between
the velocity field and its estimator. More precisely, from an
intermediate point computed from an IC, we let the consistency model predict the corresponding endpoint, supposedly
close to the data distribution. This predicted endpoint is coupled to the same original noise vector, defining a generator-

2

Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France AI, Information and Reasoning
(AI/R) Laboratory, Korea Institute of Science and Technology
3
AI and Robot Department, University of Science and Technology, Korea 4 LITIS, Univ Rouen-Normandie. Correspondence
to: Thibaut Issenhuth, Chansoo Kim <t.issenhuth@criteo.com;
eau@ust.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

