Voronoi-grid-based Pareto Front Learning and Its Application to Collaborative
Federated Learning

Mengmeng Chen * 1 Xiaohu Wu * 1 Qiqi Liu 2 Tiantian He 3 Yew-Soon Ong 3 4 Yaochu Jin 2 Qicheng Lao 1
Han Yu 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multi-objective optimization (MOO) is a critical area of
research in machine learning, addressing problems that involve optimizing multiple conflicting objectives simultaneously. In real-world applications such as engineering
design (Nedjah & Mourelle, 2015; Yi et al., 2021), financial
planning (Nobre & Neves, 2019; Doumpos & Zopounidis,
2020), and resource allocation (Gong et al., 2019; Wu et al.,
2019a; 2025; Ma et al., 2023), MOO problems are ubiquitous, where solutions need to balance trade-offs between
competing goals. Pareto-Front Learning (PFL) has emerged
as an effective technique to address these problems, utilizing
Pareto HyperNetworks (PHNs) to generate solutions along
the Pareto front. PFL allows the learning of a mapping
function that takes a given preference vector as an input and
outputs the corresponding solution on the Pareto front, providing a principled way to obtain optimal trade-offs between
different objectives (Navon et al., 2020).

Multi-objective optimization (MOO) exists extensively in machine learning, and aims to find a
set of Pareto-optimal solutions, called the Pareto
front, e.g., it is fundamental for multiple avenues
of research in federated learning (FL). ParetoFront Learning (PFL) is a powerful method implemented using Hypernetworks (PHNs) to approximate the Pareto front. This method enables the
acquisition of a mapping function from a given
preference vector to the solutions on the Pareto
front. However, most existing PFL approaches
still face two challenges: (a) sampling rays in
high-dimensional spaces; (b) failing to cover the
entire Pareto Front which has a convex shape.
Here, we introduce a novel PFL framework, called
as PHN-HVVS, which decomposes the design
space into Voronoi grids and deploys a genetic algorithm (GA) for Voronoi grid partitioning within
high-dimensional space. We put forward a new
loss function, which effectively contributes to
more extensive coverage of the resultant Pareto
front and maximizes the HV Indicator. Experimental results on multiple MOO machine learning
tasks demonstrate that PHN-HVVS outperforms
the baselines significantly in generating Pareto
front. Also, we illustrate that PHN-HVVS advances the methodologies of several recent problems in the FL field. The code is available at
https://github.com/buptcmm/phnhvvs.

Despite the promising potential of PFL approaches, two
significant limitations persist in existing methods: (a) difficulties in efficiently sampling rays in high-dimensional
spaces, and (b) challenges in covering the entire Pareto
front, which is essential for obtaining a comprehensive set
of solutions. These limitations have been widely acknowledged in prior work. For instance, the difficulty of sampling in high-dimensional spaces has been highlighted in
(Hoang et al., 2023). Similarly, the issue of inadequate
Pareto front coverage has been extensively studied in (Hua
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Hoang et al., 2023). To address these issues, we propose a novel framework for PFL,
termed PHN-HVVS. This framework novelly decomposes
the design space into Voronoi grids (Aurenhammer & Klein,
2000), with the help of a genetic algorithm (GA) (Holland,
1992) for high-dimensional Voronoi grid partitioning. This
partitioning technique allows for more effective exploration
of the Pareto front.

*

Equal contribution 1 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China 2 School of Engineering, Westlake University,
China 3 Centre for Frontier AI Research, Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore 4 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Han Yu
<han.yu@ntu.edu.sg>, Xiaohu Wu <xiaohu.wu@bupt.edu.cn>.

Furthermore, we propose a new loss function within this
framework, which significantly enhances the coverage of
the Pareto front and maximizes the Hypervolume Indicator
(HV) (Zitzler et al., 2007). HV metric can simultaneously
evaluate the convergence and diversity of a set of solutions,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

