From Jack of All Trades to Master of One:
Specializing LLM-based Autoraters to a Test Set

Mara Finkelstein 1 Daniel Deutsch 1 Parker Riley 1 Juraj Juraska 1 Geza Kovacs 1 Markus Freitag 1

Abstract

has come to the fore in the era of large language models
(LLMs). Moreover, while human evaluation has historically
been considered the gold standard for measuring model
quality, it has become a key bottleneck during model development. In addition to being costly, slow, and difficult to
scale, human evaluation is also limited by subjectivity (Krishna et al., 2023) and high variability in judgments across
human raters (Karpinska et al., 2021; Riley et al., 2024;
Zhang et al., 2024b). Increasingly, automatic metrics are
replacing human evaluation for measuring the quality of
generative models, and LLMs themselves have been shown
to be state-of-the-art evaluators (also known as Autoraters)
across a range of capabilities (Kim et al., 2023; 2024; Vu
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023).

As LLMs continue to become more powerful
and versatile, human evaluation has become intractable at scale and reliance on automatic metrics has become the norm. Recently, it has been
shown that LLMs are themselves state-of-the-art
evaluators for many tasks. These Autoraters are
typically designed so that they generalize to new
systems and test sets. In practice, however, evaluation is performed on a small set of fixed, canonical
test sets, which are carefully curated to measure
the capabilities of interest and are not changed frequently. In this work, we design a method which
specializes a prompted Autorater to a given test
set, by leveraging historical ratings on the test set
to construct in-context learning (ICL) examples.
We evaluate our Specialist method on the task of
fine-grained machine translation evaluation, and
show that it dramatically outperforms the stateof-the-art XCOMET metric by 54% and 119%
on the WMT’23 and WMT’24 test sets, respectively. We also evaluate our method on the task
of open-ended story generation evaluation, where
we show that it outperforms the non-specialized
baseline by 31% on the HANNA benchmark. We
perform extensive analyses to understand the representations learned by our Specialist metrics, and
how variability in rater behavior affects their performance. We also verify the generalizability and
robustness of our Specialist method across different numbers of ICL examples, LLM backbones,
systems to evaluate, and evaluation tasks.

The race to build ever-more-performant LLMs has accelerated not only this shift from human to automatic evaluation,
but has also brought demand for standard test sets on which
LLM quality is measured and compared (Hendrycks et al.,
2020; Liang et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023a;b). Evaluating new systems on a fixed set of benchmarks, which are
carefully curated to measure certain capabilities of interest
and are not changed frequently, allows for fair comparison
against previous work and is the standard in the literature.
Thus, while automatic metrics are typically designed so that
they generalize to new systems and test sets, in practice, it
is very important that the evaluation metric being used work
well across systems on the given test set, and less important
that the metric generalize to other, unseen and unused test
sets. In this work, we propose a simple and highly effective
method to build LLM-based Autoraters which are specialized to a given test set, by leveraging historical ratings on
the test set to construct ICL examples.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

1. Introduction

• We propose a novel method for constructing LLMbased Autoraters for NLG evaluation, which are specialized to a given test set (see Figure 1a). This method
only requires multi-shot prompting (no finetuning).

While evaluation of natural language generation (NLG) systems has been a long-standing challenge, its importance
1
Google.
Correspondence to:
<marafin@google.com>.

Mara Finkelstein

• We show that this method can be used to create an
automatic metric for fine-grained machine translation
(MT) evaluation (called Specialist AutoMQM) which
dramatically outperforms the existing state-of-the-art,

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

