Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Stochastic Adversary

Ziyuan Zhou 1 Guanjun Liu 1 MengChu Zhou 2 3 Weiran Guo 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

The performance of models trained by MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is sensitive to perturbations in observations, lowering
their trustworthiness in complex environments.
Adversarial training is a valuable approach to
enhance their performance robustness. However, existing methods often overfit to adversarial perturbations of observations and fail to
incorporate prior information about the policy
adopted by their protagonist agent, i.e., the primary one being trained. To address this important issue, this paper introduces Adversarial Training with Stochastic Adversary (ATSA),
where the proposed adversary is trained online
alongside the protagonist agent. The former consists of Stochastic Director (SDor) and SDorguided generaTor (STor). SDor performs policy
perturbations by minimizing the expected team
reward of protagonists and maximizing the entropy of its policy, while STor generates adversarial perturbations of observations by following SDor’s guidance. We prove that SDor’s soft
policy converges to a global optimum according to factorized maximum-entropy MARL and
leads to the optimal adversary. This paper also
introduces an SDor-STor loss function to quantify the difference between a) perturbations in the
agent’s policy and b) those advised by SDor. We
evaluate our ATSA on StarCraft II tasks and autonomous driving scenarios, demonstrating that
a) it is robust against diverse perturbations of observations while maintaining outstanding performance in perturbation-free environments, and b)
it outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Deep reinforcement learning leverages the representational
power of deep learning alongside the decision-making capabilities of reinforcement learning, allowing agents to
learn and adapt through interactions with dynamic environments (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), agents are not isolated because
they actively interact with and adapt to environments in
both cooperative and/or competitive frameworks. This interaction enables them to develop their sophisticated strategies and allows them to optimize their behaviors not only
on an individual level but also on the system level, thereby
enhancing their ability to handle complex tasks. MARL
proves particularly valuable for data-driven applications
(Cai et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023a) like autonomous driving (Wang et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2023) and recommendation systems (Deng et al., 2023; Gui et al., 2019),
where adaptive and decentralized decision-making is crucial. However, models trained by deep learning often lack
robustness to dynamic and noisy environments because
they are typically trained under the assumption of independent and identically distributed training data (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). This assumption is rarely met in real-world
scenarios, leading to performance degradation when models encounter a data distribution that differs from the training set’s (Wang et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2024a).
In MARL, a deep neural network module exacerbates this
robustness issue, causing them to make incorrect or suboptimal decisions in critical situations. It is essential to
enhance the robustness of MARL-trained models. Much
progress has been made on doing so in deep learning for
classification tasks such as adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2018; Wong et al., 2020)
where the goal of the adversary is to identify and use the
strongest adversary. Yet directly applying these approaches
to Single-Agent Reinforcement Learning (SARL) scenarios introduces some great challenges: 1) Mismatch between short-term and long-term goals. Aversarial training like the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and projected gradient descent (Madry
et al., 2018), borrowed from classification tasks, perturb
the agent’s observation at each time step (Huang et al.,
2017). However, one-step misclassification does not equate
to minimized long-term rewards. 2) Difficulty in high-

1
The School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji
University 2 The School of Information and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang University 3 The Helen and John C.
Hartmann Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
New Jersey Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Guanjun
Liu <liuguanjun@tongji.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

