Steering Protein Language Models

Long-Kai Huang 1 Rongyi Zhu 1 Bing He 1 Jianhua Yao 1

Abstract

mance in predicting diverse protein properties (Mardikoraem & Woldring, 2023; Notin et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2024; Chu et al., 2024; Gordon et al., 2024). However, their
ability to generate proteins with precisely specified properties remains limited, typically requiring massive sequence
generation followed by resource-intensive screening.

Protein Language Models (PLMs), pre-trained on
extensive evolutionary data from natural proteins,
have emerged as indispensable tools for protein
design. While powerful, PLMs often struggle to
produce proteins with precisely specified functionalities or properties due to inherent challenges
in controlling their outputs. In this work, we investigate the potential of Activation Steering, a
technique originally developed for controlling text
generation in Large Language Models (LLMs), to
direct PLMs toward generating protein sequences
with targeted properties. We propose a simple yet
effective method that employs activation editing
to steer PLM outputs, and extend this approach to
protein optimization through a novel editing site
identification module. Through comprehensive
experiments on lysozyme-like sequence generation and optimization, we demonstrate that our
methods can be seamlessly integrated into both
auto-encoding and autoregressive PLMs without
requiring additional training. These results highlight a promising direction for precise protein
engineering using foundation models. Code is
available at Github1 .

To address this limitation, several strategies have been
explored to control the generation. One straightforward
method involves fine-tuning PLMs using a dataset consisting of proteins that exhibit desired characteristics, thereby
converting a general-purpose model into a specialized generator (Nijkamp et al., 2023). This approach, however, demands hundreds or even thousands of high-quality data and
substantial computational resources. Besides, it risks diluting the general knowledge encapsulated during the initial
pre-training phase. Another strategy incorporates special
keyword tags indicating functionalities or properties during
the pre-training, aiming to guide the generation process akin
to prompting in large language models (LLMs) for natural
language processing (Madani et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2024).
Yet, this approach lacks flexibility, as any control requires
alignment with the tags used during the pre-training phase,
limiting its adaptability to new controls. These challenges
motivate the exploration of inference-time control methods that preserve model knowledge while enabling precise
steering.
Inference-time intervention methods, known as activation
steering or activation editing, have been introduced to guide
the generated texts of LLMs toward desired behaviors (Subramani et al., 2022; Turner et al., 2023; Panickssery et al.,
2023; Wang & Shu, 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024;
Zou et al., 2023; Cao et al., 2024; Qiu et al., 2024; Lee
et al., 2024a). These methods presuppose that the models
inherently possess the knowledge required to generate the
desired output in the internal representations but may not
always actualize this potential in its outputs. By modifying
the internal activations, we can steer the model’s behavior
to produce the desired texts. Despite their success in LLMs,
these techniques remain largely unexplored in the context of
PLMs, where the unique characteristics of protein languages
present additional challenges.

1. Introduction
Protein Language Models (PLMs) (Madani et al., 2020; Nijkamp et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022; Hayes et al., 2024; Lv
et al., 2024) have emerged as transformative tools for understanding and designing proteins (Notin et al., 2022; Strokach
& Kim, 2022; Ferruz & Höcker, 2022; Meier et al., 2021).
By distilling evolutionary information from billions of protein sequences, these models encode rich biological knowledge about protein structure and function. Coupled with
additional predictors, PLMs achieve state-of-the-art perfor1

Tencent AI Lab. Correspondence to: Long-Kai Huang
<hlongkai@gmail.com>, Jianhua Yao <>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/Long-Kai/Steering-PLMs

In this paper, we explore the potential of activation steering in PLMs, aiming to guide protein generation toward

1

