On the Power of Context-Enhanced Learning in LLMs

Xingyu Zhu 1 * Abhishek Panigrahi 1 * Sanjeev Arora 1

Abstract

placement of additional helpful material in the context,
but without actual auto-regressive gradient updates on
this material. We will call this form of learning contextenhanced learning. Because the material used for contextenhancement can evolve over the course of training, this
approach naturally aligns with the idea of a curriculum.

We formalize a new concept for LLMs, contextenhanced learning. It involves standard gradientbased learning on text except that the context is
enhanced with additional data on which no autoregressive gradients are computed. This setting is
a gradient-based analog of usual in-context learning (ICL) and appears in some recent works.

Context-enhanced learning intuitively mirrors how humans
learn: when solving problems, they refer to textbooks or
demonstrations for guidance, yet they do not seek to memorize these resources per se. An analogous concept Learning using Privileged Information (or LUPI), has been wellstudied in the context of kernel SVMs (Vapnik & Vashist,
2009) and classification models. Our work adapts this concept for LLMs, and surfaces the following questions:

Using a multi-step reasoning task, we prove in
a simplified setting that context-enhanced learning can be exponentially more sample-efficient
than standard learning when the model is capable of ICL. At a mechanistic level, we find that
the benefit of context-enhancement arises from a
more accurate gradient learning signal. We also
experimentally demonstrate that it appears hard to
detect or recover learning materials that were used
in the context during training. This may have implications for data security as well as copyright.

Q1: Even though autoregressive loss is computed on
the same set of tokens, can context-enhanced learning be
significantly more powerful than usual auto-regressive
learning that has no additional in-context materials? If
so, can we theoretically characterize and understand the
mechanism behind such improvement?
Q2: Do models need a certain capability level to benefit
from context-enhanced learning? This is a natural question,
since leveraging in-context information (e.g., ICL) likely
requires a minimum capability level or model size (Brown
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Pre-trained LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023;
Team et al., 2023) show strong capability to learn new material at inference time, for instance via in-context-learning
(ICL). There is also emerging evidence that gradient-based
learning on a piece of text (say, math Q&A) can be enhanced if additional helpful text is placed in the context,
even though no auto-regressive loss is computed on this
helpful text (Liao et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2024; Choi et al.,
2025). Such strategies have also been shown to benefit
pre-training as prepending source URLs to documents can
enhance the model’s training efficiency and memorization
capacity (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024; Gao et al., 2025).

Q3: Is context-enhanced learning a viable way to use
privileged/private information during learning? Providing
such privileged information in the context could conceivably
enhance the model’s learning, but since no auto-regressive
gradient updates happen on the privileged/private information, there might be a lower risk of leakage of such
information via API calls.
Paper Overview: Section 2.1 formally defines contextenhanced learning. To allow rigorous understanding of the
power of context-enhanced learning, Section 2.2 introduces
a multi-step reasoning task called Multi-layer translation.
This is a synthetic setting involving d + 1 languages
L1 , L2 , . . . , Ld+1 over finite alphabets. For each i, there is
a simple phrasebook that describes how to translate from Li
to Li+1 , and the mapping from L1 to Ld+1 is a sequential
application of the set of phrasebooks.

In this paper we seek to formally study this phenomenon,
whereby LLMs’ gradient-based learning is enhanced via
*
Equal contribution with theoretical framework and setting up
the problem, XZ undertook most of the experiments. 1 Princeton
Language and Intelligence, Princeton University. Correspondence
to: <{xingyu.zhu, ap34}@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The goal is to learn how to translate text from L1 into Ld+1
1

