Action-Constrained Imitation Learning

Chia-Han Yeh * 1 Tse-Sheng Nan * 2 Risto Vuorio† 3 Wei Hung 1 Hung-Yen Wu 1 Shao-Hua Sun 4
Ping-Chun Hsieh 1

Abstract

cumulative rewards through interactions with environments.
However, in many real-world applications, interacting with
environments can be costly or dangerous, and designing an
effective reward function that consistently encourages the
desired behavior in all situations could pose a significant
challenge. In such cases, imitation learning (IL) (Pomerleau & A, 1991; Ho & Ermon, 2016) offers a compelling
alternative. Rather than learning from a reward function
through trial and error, IL learns a policy directly from a set
of pre-collected expert demonstrations, which are transition
data logged from a near-optimal policy.

Policy learning under action constraints plays a
central role in ensuring safe behaviors in various
robot control and resource allocation applications.
In this paper, we study a new problem setting
termed Action-Constrained Imitation Learning
(ACIL), where an action-constrained imitator
aims to learn from a demonstrative expert with
larger action space. The fundamental challenge
of ACIL lies in the unavoidable mismatch of
occupancy measure between the expert and the
imitator caused by the action constraints. We
tackle this mismatch through trajectory alignment
and propose DTWIL, which replaces the original
expert demonstrations with a surrogate dataset
that follows similar state trajectories while adhering to the action constraints. Specifically, we
recast trajectory alignment as a planning problem
and solve it via Model Predictive Control, which
aligns the surrogate trajectories with the expert
trajectories based on the Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) distance. Through extensive experiments,
we demonstrate that learning from the dataset
generated by DTWIL significantly enhances
performance across multiple robot control tasks
and outperforms various benchmark imitation
learning algorithms in terms of sample efficiency.
Our code is publicly available at https://
github.com/NYCU-RL-Bandits-Lab/
ACRL-Baselines.

In many real-world tasks, imposing constraints that define
feasible sets of actions to ensure the safe and proper functioning of agents is necessary. Classic examples include
optimal allocation of network resources under capacity constraints (Xu et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020)
and robot control under kinematic limitations that prevent
damage to the physical structure of robots (Pham et al.,
2018; Gu et al., 2017; Jaillet & Porta, 2012; Tsounis et al.,
2020). While there has been substantial research on actionconstrained reinforcement learning (ACRL) (Kasaura et al.,
2023; Lin et al., 2021; Brahmanage et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2024; Hung et al., 2025), surprisingly, little attention has
been given to its imitation learning counterpart. Hence, in
this work, we propose a novel problem, Action-Constrained
Imitation Learning (ACIL), which concerns learning an
agent under action constraints from a constraint-free expert
demonstration set, e.g., learning to control a robot arm with
a limited power supply from trajectories collected from a
more powerful robot arm (i.e., higher torque limit).
Can we adopt existing ACRL methods to address the ACIL
problem? To ensure that the actions generated by the policy
adhere to specific constraints during both training and evaluation, most existing ACRL methods incorporate a projection
layer on top of the policy network (Chow et al., 2018; Liu
et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2017). However, such an approach can
cause problems in IL. Most IL approaches aim to minimize
the discrepancy between the occupancy measure of the expert demonstrations and that of the imitator (Pomerleau & A,
1991; Ho & Ermon, 2016). When expert actions are outside
the feasible action set, the projection layer can prevent the
imitator from accurately matching the occupancy measure
of the expert, especially in cases with more restrictive action

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) finds policies that maximize
†

Work conducted while at the University of Oxford.
Equal contribution 1 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Illinois, United States 3 Reflection AI 4 National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Ping-Chun Hsieh <pinghsieh@nycu.edu.tw>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

