Learn to Vaccinate: Combining Structure Learning and Effective Vaccination
for Epidemic and Outbreak Control

Sepehr Elahi * 1 Paula Mürmann * 1 Patrick Thiran 1
through networks (Nowzari et al., 2016). These models
capture the complex interactions between agents, helping to
predict dissemination patterns and devise strategies to control unwanted spread (Lokhov & Saad, 2017). Among these
models, the Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (SIS) framework is particularly well-suited for representing scenarios
where agents can undergo multiple cycles of infection and
recovery. While simple in structure, the interactions between neighboring agents in an SIS model can give rise to
complex behavior, which makes predicting and controlling
its dynamics challenging.

Abstract
The Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (SIS) model
is a widely used model for the spread of information and infectious diseases, particularly nonimmunizing ones, on a graph. Given a highly contagious disease, a natural question is how to best
vaccinate individuals to minimize the disease’s
extinction time. While previous works showed
that the problem of optimal vaccination is closely
linked to the NP-hard Spectral Radius Minimization (SRM) problem, they assumed that the graph
is known, which is often not the case in practice.
In this work, we consider the problem of minimizing the extinction time of an outbreak modeled
by an SIS model where the graph on which the
disease spreads is unknown and only the infection
states of the vertices are observed. To this end, we
split the problem into two: learning the graph and
determining effective vaccination strategies. We
propose a novel inclusion-exclusion-based learning algorithm and, unlike previous approaches,
establish its sample complexity for graph recovery. We then detail an optimal algorithm for the
SRM problem and prove that its running time is
polynomial in the number of vertices for graphs
with bounded treewidth. This is complemented by
an efficient and effective polynomial-time greedy
heuristic for any graph. Finally, we present experiments on synthetic and real-world data that
numerically validate our learning and vaccination
algorithms.

The SIS model is represented using a contact graph where
each vertex corresponds to an agent that can be in one of
two states: susceptible or infected. The state of each vertex evolves probabilistically, influenced by the infection
statuses of its neighboring vertices, allowing for multiple
cycles of infection and recovery. In recent years, SIS models have seen applications in fields such as the modeling
of credit and financial markets (Chen & Fan, 2023; Barja
et al., 2019), rumor spreading in social networks (Dong
& Huang, 2018), malware attacks on computer networks
(Märtens et al., 2016), and epidemiology (Nowzari et al.,
2016; Grandits et al., 2019).
To mitigate the adverse effects of contagions modeled by
the SIS framework, it is often necessary to perform strategic
interventions. These interventions, in the form of regulatory
interventions (Chen & Fan, 2023), installation of updates
and patches (Muthukumar et al., 2024), vaccinations or
quarantines of vertices (i.e., person or community), are designed to reduce transmission rates, limit the reach of the
contagion, and accelerate its extinction. However, devising
effective intervention strategies is particularly challenging
when the underlying graph is unknown, a common scenario
in practice (Rosenblatt et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Spreading models are essential frameworks for understanding how information, diseases, or behaviors propagate

We provide a motivating example in the field of epidemiology. While we adopt the epidemiological terminology in
this work, our approaches are general and can be readily
applied to any other domain that utilizes the SIS framework.

*

Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Sepehr Elahi <sepehr.elahi@epfl.ch>, Paula Mürmann
<paula.murmann@epfl.ch>.

Motivating Example. Consider the spread of cholera (Vibrio cholerae), a highly contagious waterborne disease that individuals can contract multiple times, making it well-suited

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

