Policy Optimization for CMDPs with Bandit Feedback:
Learning Stochastic and Adversarial Constraints

Francesco Emanuele Stradi 1 Anna Lunghi 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1 Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

requirements. For instance, in autonomous driving one has
to avoid crashing with other cars (Isele et al., 2018), in ad
auctions one must not deplete the allocated budget (He et al.,
2021), while in recommendation systems offending items
should not be presented to the users (Singh et al., 2020).
In order to capture such requirements, constrained MDPs
(CMDPs) (Altman, 1999) have been introduced. These
augment classical MDPs by adding costs that the agent is
constrained to keep below some given thresholds.

We study online learning in constrained Markov
decision processes (CMDPs) in which rewards
and constraints may be either stochastic or adversarial. In such settings, Stradi et al. (2024b)
proposed the first best-of-both-worlds algorithm
able to seamlessly handle stochastic and adversarial constraints, achieving optimal regret and
constraint violation bounds in both cases. This
algorithm suffers from two major drawbacks.
First, it only works under full feedback, which
severely limits its applicability in practice. Moreover, it relies on optimizing over the space of
occupancy measures, which requires solving convex optimization problems, an highly inefficient
task. In this paper, we provide the first best-ofboth-worlds algorithm for CMDPs with bandit
feedback. Specifically, when the
constraints are
√
e T ) regret
stochastic, the algorithm achieves O(
and constraint violation,√while, when they are ade T ) constraint violation
versarial, it attains O(
and a tight fraction of the optimal reward. Moreover, our algorithm is based on a policy optimization approach, which is much more efficient than
occupancy-measure-based methods.

Over the last years, online learning problems in episodic
CMDPs have received a growing attention (see, e.g., (Efroni
et al., 2020) for a seminal work in the field). These are
problems in which the learner repeatedly interacts with the
CMDP environment over multiple episodes. In such settings, the learner’s goal is to minimize the regret of not
always selecting a best-in-hindsight policy that satisfies cost
constraints, while at the same time ensuring that the cumulative violation of cost constraints does not grow too fast over
the episodes. Ideally, one would like that both the regret and
the constraint violation grow sublinearly in the number of
episodes T .
In online learning in episodic Markov decision processes,
two different assumptions on how rewards and costs are
determined at each episode are possible. They can be selected either stochastically according to fixed (unknown)
probability distributions or adversarially, meaning that no
statistical assumption is made.

1. Introduction

Very recently, Stradi et al. (2024b) proposed the first bestof-both-worlds learning algorithm for online learning in
episodic constrained MDPs. Such an algorithm is able to
seamlessly handle stochastic and adversarial constraints,
achieving optimal regret and violation bounds in both cases.
However, it suffers from two major drawbacks. First, it
only works under full feedback, meaning that the learning
agent needs to observe rewards and costs defined over the
whole environment after each episode. This is extremely
unreasonable in practice, where only some feedback along
the realized trajectory is usually available. Moreover, the
algorithm works by optimizing over the space of occupancy
measures, which requires solving a convex problem at every
episode, an highly inefficient task.

Most of the learning tasks arising in real-world scenarios
involve an agent sequentially interacting with an unknown
environment. Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) have emerged as the most natural models for
such interactions, as they allow to capture the fundamental
goal of learning an optimal (i.e., reward-maximizing) actionselection policy for the agent. However, in most of the realworld applications, the learner has to satisfy some additional
1

DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Francesco Emanuele Stradi <francescoemanuele.stradi@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

