Projection Pursuit Density Ratio Estimation

Meilin Wang 1 Wei Huang 2 Mingming Gong 2 Zheng Zhang 1

Abstract

DRE and its applications in machine learning.

Density ratio estimation (DRE) is a paramount
task in machine learning, for its broad applications across multiple domains, such as covariate
shift adaptation, causal inference, independence
tests and beyond. Parametric methods for estimating the density ratio possibly lead to biased results
if models are misspecified, while conventional
non-parametric methods suffer from the curse
of dimensionality when the dimension of data
is large. To address these challenges, in this paper,
we propose a novel approach for DRE based on
the projection pursuit (PP) approximation. The
proposed method leverages PP to mitigate the impact of high dimensionality while retaining the
model flexibility needed for the accuracy of DRE.
We establish the consistency and the convergence
rate for the proposed estimator. Experimental
results demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms existing alternatives in various applications.

There are a variety of methods concerning the DRE problem in the existing literature, which can be divided into
three paradigms: the parametric methods (Liu et al., 2013;
2017; Nagumo & Fujisawa, 2024), the nonparametric linear sieve methods (Kanamori et al., 2009; Sugiyama et al.,
2008; 2010) and the nonparametric neural network methods
(Nam & Sugiyama, 2015; Fang et al., 2020; Rhodes et al.,
2020). The validity of the parametric modeling builds on
the correct model specification for the density ratio. If the
model is misspecified, the results may be severely biased.
Nonparametric neural network methods (Nam & Sugiyama,
2015; Fang et al., 2020; Rhodes et al., 2020) can achieve
superior performance without imposing parametric model
assumptions; however, they require a substantial number of
training samples to learn the extensive parameters involved.
Furthermore, theoretical guarantees for neural network estimations remain insufficient.
Nonparametric linear sieve estimation is a statistical technique that combines the flexibility of nonparametric methods with the simplicity of linear models (Chen, 2007b).
The term “linear sieve" refers to a sequence of increasingly
complex linear models that are used to approximate the unknown function of interest. With different choices of criteria,
e.g. squared-loss (Kanamori et al., 2009; Sugiyama et al.,
2011; Yamada et al., 2013), Kullback–Leibler divergence
(Sugiyama et al., 2008; Tsuboi et al., 2009), the method of
sieves is highly flexible in estimating complicated models.
Unlike nonparametric neural network methods that can become excessively complex and computationally intensive,
the sieve approach seeks to balance model complexity with
interpretability and computational feasibility.

1. Introduction
Density ratio estimation (DRE) is a fundamental concept in
machine learning that focuses on directly estimating the ratio between two probability density functions (PDFs), avoiding the need to estimate each density function individually.
DRE has widespread applications, such as covariate shift
adaptation (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2007), outlier detection (Hido et al., 2011), independence test (Ai
et al., 2024), mutual information estimation (Suzuki et al.,
2009; Ai et al., 2024), importance sampling (Meng & Wong,
1996; Sinha et al., 2020), and treatment effect estimation in
causal inference (Ai et al., 2021; Matsushita et al., 2023).
See Sugiyama et al. (2012) for a comprehensive review of

Although the linear sieve methods enjoy computational convenience and theoretical support (Kanamori et al., 2010),
they suffer from a significant challenge known as the curse
of dimensionality. Specifically, as the dimension of the data
increases, there is a notable and substantial deterioration in
the performance of these linear sieve methods. This phenomenon is clearly evidenced by both ratio pattern visualization and estimation error in our experimental results. Conventional linear sieve methods, such as KLIEP (Sugiyama
et al., 2007) and uLSIF (Kanamori et al., 2009) can correctly capture the pattern of density ratio functions when

1 Center for Applied Statistics, Institute of Statistics and

Big Data, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Zheng Zhang
<zhengzhang@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42𝑛𝑑 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

