Training Diffusion-based Generative Models with Limited Data

Zhaoyu Zhang 1 Yang Hua 1 Guanxiong Sun 2 Hui Wang 1 Seán McLoone 1

Abstract

ing superior image quality, greater diversity, and more stable training on image generation tasks (Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2022). In theory, diffusion models aim to train a score-based model (Song et al.,
2021) that matches the score function of the data distribution via denoising score matching (Song et al., 2021; Karras
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a). The current success of
diffusion models in unconditional image synthesis (Vahdat
et al., 2021; Song et al., 2023; 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021), text-to-image generation (Podell et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022a; Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023b) and audio generation (Kong et al., 2020;
Popov et al., 2021) tasks is fueled by the almost unlimited
supply of samples. Nevertheless, collecting and cleaning
such data can be expensive, time-consuming, and sometimes
infeasible, which significantly constrains the applications of
diffusion models in real-world scenarios.

Diffusion-based generative models (diffusion
models) often require a large amount of data to
train a score-based model that learns the score
function of the data distribution through denoising
score matching. However, collecting and cleaning such data can be expensive, time-consuming,
and even infeasible. In this paper, we present
a novel theoretical insight for diffusion models
that two factors, i.e., the denoiser function hypothesis space and the number of training samples,
can affect the denoising score matching error of
all training samples. Based on this theoretical
insight, it is evident that minimizing the total denoising score matching error is challenging within
the denoiser function hypothesis space in existing methods, when training diffusion models with
limited data. To address this, we propose a new
diffusion model called Limited Data Diffusion
(LD-Diffusion), which consists of two main components: a compressing model and a novel mixed
augmentation with fixed probability (MAFP) strategy. Specifically, the compressing model can
constrain the complexity of the denoiser function hypothesis space and MAFP can effectively
increase the training samples by providing more
informative guidance than existing data augmentation methods in the compressed hypothesis
space. Extensive experiments on several datasets
demonstrate that LD-Diffusion can achieve better
performance compared to other diffusion models. Codes are available at https://github.
com/zzhang05/LD-Diffusion.

Focusing on training diffusion models with limited data,
we present a novel theoretical insight for diffusion models that the denoising score matching error of all training
samples, i.e., the total denoising score matching error, is
determined by two key factors: the denoiser function hypothesis space and the number of training samples (§3.2).
To further validate this theoretical insight, we conduct several experiments to illustrate that both factors significantly
influence the training of diffusion models (§3.3). According
to the unveiled insight, challenges arise when directly adapting existing methods (Karras et al., 2022; Song & Ermon,
2019; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Karras
et al., 2024) to limited data settings because they struggle
to minimize the total denoising score matching error within
their denoiser function hypothesis space.
To improve the training of diffusion models with limited
data, we propose a new diffusion model called Limited Data
Diffusion (LD-Diffusion). Motivated by the theoretical insight, LD-Diffusion consists of two main components. The
first main component is a compressing model with the encoder and decoder obtained from different pre-trained VAE
models, which aims to reduce the complexity of denoiser
function hypothesis space. Although image compression
models have previously been applied to several diffusion
models (Esser et al., 2021; Vahdat et al., 2021; Rombach
et al., 2022a), they all seek to accelerate the training speed
and reduce the computational cost. In contrast, the com-

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based generative models (diffusion models) have
decisively surpassed GANs in generative modeling, achiev1
Queen’s University Belfast 2 Huawei UKRD. Correspondence
to: Yang Hua <y.hua@qub.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

