Explanatory Instructions:
Towards Unified Vision Tasks Understanding and Zero-shot Generalization

Yang Shen 1 Xiu-Shen Wei 2 † Yifan Sun 3 † Yuxin Song 3 Tao Yuan 3 Jian Jin 1 Heyang Xu 4 Yazhou Yao 1 5
Errui Ding 3

Abstract

learning to follow these instructions, the ARbased VLM achieves instruction-level zero-shot
capabilities for previously-seen tasks and demonstrates strong zero-shot generalization for unseen
CV tasks. Code and dataset have been openly
available on our GitHub repository.

Computer Vision (CV) has yet to fully achieve
the zero-shot task generalization observed in Natural Language Processing (NLP), despite following many of the milestones established in
NLP, such as large transformer models, extensive
pre-training, and the auto-regression paradigm,
among others. In this paper, we rethink the reality that CV adopts discrete and terminological
task definitions (e.g., “image segmentation”), and
conjecture it is a key barrier that hampers zeroshot task generalization. Our hypothesis is that
without truly understanding previously-seen tasks–
due to these terminological definitions–deep models struggle to generalize to novel tasks. To verify this, we introduce Explanatory Instructions,
which provide an intuitive way to define CV task
objectives through detailed linguistic transformations from input images to outputs. We create
a large-scale dataset comprising 12 million “image input → explanatory instruction → output”
triplets, and train an auto-regressive-based visionlanguage model (AR-based VLM) that takes both
images and explanatory instructions as input. By

1. Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has achieved significant advancements in task-level zero-shot generalization, driven by key milestones such as transformer
models, large-scale pretraining, and the auto-regression
paradigm (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron
et al., 2023a). This impressive adaptability stems from the
language models’ capacity to interpret flexible, open-ended
but semantically rich instructions, enabling them to generalize across language tasks without additional task-specific
fine-tuning.

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. 2 School of Computer
Science and Engineering, and Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications, Southeast University, China. 3 Baidu VIS. 4 School
of Instrument Science and Engineering, and State Key Laboratory of Digital Medical Engineering, Southeast University, China.
5
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing of Advanced
Construction Machinery, China. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFA1001100), National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (62272231,
62472222), CIE-Tencent Robotics X Rhino-Bird Focused Research Program, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (4009002401), Natural Science Foundation of
Jiangsu Province (BK20240080), and the Big Data Computing
Center of Southeast University. Correspondence to: Xiu-Shen Wei
<weixs.gm@gmail.com>, Yifan Sun <sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn>.

In contrast, Computer Vision (CV) has not yet unlocked the
task-level zero-shot generalization capabilities. Early CV
models largely depend on discrete vision task boundaries (cf.
Fig. 1 (a)), which restricts their flexibility and generalization
capabilities. While recent efforts, e.g., Lumina-mGPT (Liu
et al., 2024), OmniGen (Xiao et al., 2024), and PixWizard (Lin et al., 2024), have attempted to incorporate a wide
range of vision tasks via fixed or open-style terminological
instructions (cf. Fig. 1 (b)), their zero-shot capabilities remain confined within seen vision tasks or rely on few-shot
prompting for guidance. Our intuition strongly implies that
this limitation may stem from the constrained scope of instructions and existing vision-language models (VLMs) do
not truly understand the previously-seen vision tasks. To
be specific, these terminological instructions are consisted
of discrete and symbolic task definitions that do not convey
the objective behind each task, which can be replaced with
any other symbols (e.g., changing “Semantic segmentation”
within these instructions into “Task X” or “Task djjjvau”)
without affecting the vision task results.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To enable deep models to understand vision tasks genuinely,
we introduce Explanatory Instructions that characterize vision tasks by providing linguistic descriptions of the task

1

1

