MetaAgent: Automatically Constructing Multi-Agent Systems Based on Finite
State Machines
Yaolun Zhang 1 Xiaogeng Liu 1 Chaowei Xiao 1

Abstract

2024). To further improve the performance, the multi-agent
system has been proposed, which improves and enlarges the
abilities of the agent by assigning different roles and skills
to LLMs and designing effective cooperation mechanisms
to organize them (Hong et al., 2024b; Qian et al., 2023; Yan
et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023). Despite the success, most
of the existing multi-agent systems are still manually designed, introducing human efforts to implement the complex
codebase, and need several iterations of human polishing.
Moreover, these frameworks are built only to solve tasks in
some specific scenarios, further enhancing the design cost.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated the ability to solve a wide range of practical tasks within multi-agent systems. However,
existing human-designed multi-agent frameworks
are typically limited to a small set of pre-defined
scenarios, while current automated design methods suffer from several limitations, such as the
lack of tool integration, dependence on external
training data, and rigid communication structures.
In this paper, we propose MetaAgent, a finite
state machine based framework that can automatically generate a multi-agent system. Given a
task description, MetaAgent will design a multiagent system and polish it through an optimization algorithm. When the multi-agent system is
deployed, the finite state machine will control the
agent’s actions and the state transitions. To evaluate our framework, we conduct experiments on
both text-based tasks and practical tasks. The
results indicate that the generated multi-agent
system surpasses other auto-designed methods
and can achieve a comparable performance with
the human-designed multi-agent system, which
is optimized for those specific tasks. The code
can be found at: https://github.com/SaFoLabWISC/MetaAgent/.

To address it, a few works try to build multi-agent systems
automatically (Chen et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024d; Yuan
et al., 2024). However, current works have failed to construct a complete and practical multi-agent system due to
several reasons. SPP, AutoAgents, and EvoAgent (Chen
et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024d; Yuan et al., 2024) design multi-agent systems for each specific case. In other
words, the produced multi-agent system can only handle
the specific case and lacks generalization to other cases in
the same task domain. SPP and AutoAgents do not support tool-using as well. ADAS and Symbolic-Learning (Hu
et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024) build multi-agent systems
automatically based on self-iteration algorithms. However,
tons of iterations and external data are needed for optimization. Moreover, following the communication structure
of human-designed multi-agent systems (Hong et al., 2024b;
Qian et al., 2023; Du et al., 2024), current works use linear, decentralized debate or coordinate with an orchestrator
cooperation structure to organize agents (Su et al., 2024),
which have limited traceback abilities to fix bugs in previous steps when encountering errors or misunderstanding.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023) show a spring-up of intelligence, containing
strong ability of reasoning, coding, and numerous compressed knowledge. Utilizing LLM as the brain to build
agents can complete various complex tasks, which require
the agent to plan, utilize tools, and make reflections (Yao
et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a; Qin et al.,

To address the limitations of human-designed multi-agent
systems and drawbacks of existing auto-design methods, we
introduce MetaAgent: A framework that can automatically
design Finite State Machine (FSM) based multi-agent systems for a large spectrum of tasks.
Specifically, given a general description of a type of task,
MetaAgent will first design agents needed to solve the task.
Then, to organize these agents, several states are summarized based on the possible situations involved in solving
the task. Each state includes the corresponding task-solving

1
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, US. Correspondence to: Chaowei Xiao <cxiao34@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

