Provably Improving Generalization of Few-Shot Models with Synthetic Data

Lan-Cuong Nguyen 1 2 Quan Nguyen-Tri 1 Bang Tran Khanh 3 Dung D. Le 3 Long Tran-Thanh 4 Khoat Than 2

Abstract

tasks (Van Breugel et al., 2023). The main reason comes
from the distribution gap, which is the discrepancy between
the real and synthetic data distributions, due to the imperfect
nature of the generator for a downstream task. Overcoming this gap is crucial for ensuring effective utilization of
synthetic data in this training scenario.

Few-shot image classification remains challenging due to the scarcity of labeled training examples. Augmenting them with synthetic data has
emerged as a promising way to alleviate this issue, but models trained on synthetic samples often
face performance degradation due to the inherent gap between real and synthetic distributions.
To address this limitation, we develop a theoretical framework that quantifies the impact of such
distribution discrepancies on supervised learning,
specifically in the context of image classification.
More importantly, our framework suggests practical ways to generate good synthetic samples and
to train a predictor with high generalization ability. Building upon this framework, we propose a
novel theoretical-based algorithm that integrates
prototype learning to optimize both data partitioning and model training, effectively bridging the
gap between real few-shot data and synthetic data.
Extensive experiments results show that our approach demonstrates superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods, outperforming
them across multiple datasets.

Some recent methods minimize this gap by fine-tuning generative models. Notable examples include RealFake (Yuan
et al., 2024) and DataDream (Kim et al., 2024) which focus
on full dataset and few-shot image classification, respectively. These approaches emphasize pixel-space distribution
matching. The importance of feature-space alignment has
been demonstrated in dataset distillation (Wang et al., 2018),
where condensed datasets are created to approximate the
performance of models trained on full datasets (Wang et al.,
2022; Zhao & Bilen, 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). An issue of
distribution matching is the potential for incorrect associations between samples from different classes. DataDream
(Kim et al., 2024) partially mitigates this by fine-tuning generators for each class independently, yet its results remain
suboptimal. A promising direction to address this issue is
prototype learning, which emphasizes local class-specific
behavior. Prototype-based approaches have been shown to
enhance performance in various applications, such as robust
classification (Yang et al., 2018), data distillation (Su et al.,
2024), and dataset representation (Tu et al., 2023; van Noord, 2023). While such recent methods have shown promise
in narrowing the distribution gap, they predominantly rely
on heuristics, lacking theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models often require extensive annotated
datasets to achieve excellent performance. However, creating such datasets is both labor-intensive and costly. To
address this challenge, many recent studies has explored
synthetic data as an alternative approach to training deep
learning models.

In more detail, for a downstream task, we are interested in
these questions:
1. What properties can indicate the goodness of a synthetic
dataset?
2. How to generate a good synthetic dataset?
3. How to efficiently train a predictor from a training set of
both real and synthetic samples?
4. How can the quality of a generator affect the generalization ability of the trained predictor?

In this paper, we focus on a specific scenario: How to efficiently use a synthetic dataset along with few real samples to
train a predictor in a downstream task? A naive way of using synthetic data can degrade performance on downstream
1

FPT Software AI Center 2 Hanoi University of Science and
Technology 3 VinUniversity 4 University of Warwick. Correspondence to: Khoat Than <khoattq@soict.hust.edu.vn>.

From the theoretical perspective, existing studies typically
have preliminary answers to simple models only. Indeed,
Yuan et al. (2024) proposed a framework that generates
synthetic samples by training/finetuning a generator to minimize the distribution gap, addressing the second question.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

