Generalizing from SIMPLE to HARD Visual Reasoning:
Can We Mitigate Modality Imbalance in VLMs?

Simon Park * 1 Abhishek Panigrahi * 1 Yun Cheng * 1 Dingli Yu 1 Anirudh Goyal 2 Sanjeev Arora 1

Abstract

reasoning abilities of pre-trained LLMs towards solving
visual reasoning tasks (Monajatipoor et al., 2023; Carbune
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). However, VLMs are
usually felt to exhibit more brittle reasoning than the
underlying LLM, and recent works have tried to understand
this as a modality imbalance problem (Peng et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024). For
example, presenting the task in an image form can lead to
a lower performance than when the same task is presented
in a text form (Zhang et al., 2023; 2024c; Wang et al.,
2024b; Zhang et al., 2024d; Fu et al., 2024). Mitigating this
modality imbalance is still an open problem.

Vision Language Models (VLMs) are impressive
at visual question answering and image captioning. But they underperform on multi-step visual
reasoning—even compared to LLMs on the same
tasks presented in text form—giving rise to perceptions of modality imbalance or brittleness. Towards a systematic study of such issues, we introduce a synthetic framework for assessing the ability of VLMs to perform algorithmic visual reasoning, comprising three tasks: Table Readout, Grid
Navigation, and Visual Analogy. Each has two levels of difficulty, SIMPLE and HARD, and even the
SIMPLE versions are difficult for frontier VLMs.
We propose strategies for training on the SIM PLE version of tasks that improve performance
on the corresponding HARD task, i.e., simple-tohard (S2H) generalization. This controlled setup,
where each task also has an equivalent text-only
version, allows a quantification of the modality
imbalance and how it is impacted by training strategy. We show that 1) explicit image-to-text conversion is important in promoting S2H generalization on images, by transferring reasoning from
text; 2) conversion can be internalized at test time.
We also report results of mechanistic study of
this phenomenon. We identify measures of gradient alignment that can identify training strategies
that promote better S2H generalization. Ablations
highlight the importance of chain-of-thought 1 .

Here, we introduce a concrete methodology to precisely
study such issues. First, we design visual tasks where
the image information relevant to the task can also be
represented as text (e.g., LaTeX code). This allows a
direct comparison of the effect of training strategies in
individual modalities and combinations. Second, to allow
a clear comparison of different training strategies, we
measure the brittleness of learning with simple-to-hard
(S2H) generalization, where models are trained on SIMPLE
examples of a task and evaluated on HARD examples.
We create a set of synthetic tasks2 that involve algorithmic
visual reasoning (Ghosal et al., 2024; Cherian et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2024b): Table Readout (reading out table entries in an order specified visually), Grid Navigation (finding
valid paths through grid-like structures while avoiding obstacles), and Visual Analogy (identifying logical patterns across
sets of abstract visual examples and applying analogical reasoning). Each task requires many reasoning steps while
dynamically shifting attention over a sequence of small regions in the image. SIMPLE and HARD examples differ in
the length and complexity of the necessary reasoning steps.

1. Introduction
Many Vision Language Models (VLMs) (e.g., LLaVAseries (Liu et al., 2023c;b; 2024a)) fuse an LLM with visual
encoders which allows them to harness the impressive

The SIMPLE tasks are difficult for current frontier VLMs
such as GPT-4o and Claude-3.5 Sonnet (Achiam et al.,
2023; Anthropic, 2024) (Appendix I.1). Since we work with
smaller open-parameter models, our methodology consists
of using supervised training to precisely inject capability at
a task in one modality and then study how variations in training affect the gap in S2H generalization between modalities.

*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton Language and Intelligence,
Princeton University 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to: <{juhyunp,
ap34, yc6206}@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code is available at VLM-S2H PLI codebase

2
Creating such tasks was more nontrivial than expected, for
reasons described in Appendix C.6.

1

