PISA Experiments: Exploring Physics Post-Training
for Video Diffusion Models by Watching Stuff Drop

Chenyu Li * 1 Oscar Michel * 1 Xichen Pan 1 Sainan Liu 2 Mike Roberts 2 Saining Xie 1

Abstract

line of research that seeks to evolve these models from content creators to world simulators for embodied agents (Yang
et al., 2023; 2024b; Agarwal et al., 2025). However, accurate world modeling is considerably more challenging than
creative content creation because looking “good enough” is
not sufficient: generated pixels must faithfully represent a
world state evolving in accordance with the laws of physics
and visual perspective.

Large-scale pre-trained video generation models excel in content creation but are not reliable
as physically accurate world simulators out of
the box. This work studies the process of posttraining these models for accurate world modeling
through the lens of the simple, yet fundamental,
physics task of modeling object freefall. We show
state-of-the-art video generation models struggle
with this basic task, despite their visually impressive outputs. To remedy this problem, we find
that fine-tuning on a relatively small amount of
simulated videos is effective in inducing the dropping behavior in the model, and we can further
improve results through a novel reward modeling procedure we introduce. Our study also reveals key limitations of post-training in generalization and distribution modeling. Additionally, we release a benchmark for this task that
may serve as a useful diagnostic tool for tracking physical accuracy in large-scale video generative model development. Code is available
at this repository: https://github.com/
vision-x-nyu/pisa-experiments.

We find that although the generations of state-of-the-art
models are impressive visually, these models still struggle
to generate results that are accurate physically, even though
these models are pretrained on internet-scale video data
demonstrating a wide variety of complex physical interactions. The failure to ground and align visual generations to
the laws of physics suggests that pretraining is not enough
and a post-training stage is needed. Much like how pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs) need to be adapted
through post-training before they can be useful conversational assistants, pretrained video generative models ought
to be adapted through post-training before they can be deployed as physically accurate world simulators.
In this work, we rigorously examine the post-training process of video generation models by focusing on the simple
yet fundamental physics task of modeling object freefall,
which we find is highly challenging for state-of-the-art models. Specifically, we study an image-to-video1 (I2V) scenario where the goal is to generate a video of an object
falling and potentially colliding with other objects on the
ground, starting from an initial image of the object suspended in midair. We chose to study this single task, rather
than general physics ability as a whole, because its simplicity allows us to conduct controlled experiments that yield
insights into the strengths and limitations of the post-training
process, which we believe will become an increasingly important component of research in generative world modeling.
Additionally, the simplicity of the dropping task allows it to
be implemented in simulation which is desirable because it
allows us to easily test the properties of dataset scaling, gives
us access to ground truth annotations for evaluation, and
gives us the ability to precisely manipulate the simulation

1. Introduction
Over the past year, video generation models have advanced
significantly, inspiring visions of a future where these models could serve as realistic world models (Craik, 1967; LeCun, 2022; Hafner et al., 2019; 2023; Ha & Schmidhuber,
2018). State-of-the-art video generation models models exhibit impressive results in content creation (OpenAI, 2024;
Kuaishou, 2024; Luma, 2024; Runway, 2024) and are already being used in advertising and filmmaking (Runway,
2025; NBC, 2025). These advancements have sparked a
*

Equal contribution, alphabetical order. 1 New York University 2 Intel Labs. Correspondence to: Saining Xie <saining.xie@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
We discuss our decision to formulate this task in the image-tovideo setting instead of the video-to-video setting in Appendix A.

1

