Rényi Neural Processes

Xuesong Wang 1 He Zhao 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 1

Abstract

its parameters with an approximate posterior model. In this
paper we show that this parameter sharing amounts to prior
misspecification and can yield a biased estimate of the posterior variance and deteriorate predictive performance (Cannon et al., 2022; Knoblauch et al., 2019). Such misspecification can be worsened under noisy context sets (Jung
et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024). Other cases of prior misspecification encompass domain shifts (Xiao et al., 2021),
out-of-distribution predictions (Malinin & Gales, 2018) and
adversarial samples (Stutz et al., 2019).

Neural Processes (NPs) are deep probabilistic
models that represent stochastic processes by conditioning their prior distributions on a set of context points. Despite their advantages in uncertainty estimation for complex distributions, NPs
enforce parameterization coupling between the
conditional prior model and the posterior model.
We show that this coupling amounts to prior
misspecification and revisit the NP objective to
address this issue. More specifically, we propose Rényi Neural Processes (RNP), a method
that replaces the standard KL divergence with
the Rényi divergence, dampening the effects of
the misspecified prior during posterior updates.
We validate our approach across multiple benchmarks including regression and image inpainting
tasks, and show significant performance improvements of RNPs in real-world problems. Our extensive experiments show consistently better loglikelihoods over state-of-the-art NP models.

To address the prior misspecification caused by parameterization coupling in vanilla NPs, several studies have been
proposed to relax the constraint (Wang et al., 2023; Wang
& Van Hoof, 2022; Wu et al., 2018; Wicker et al., 2021).
For instance, the prior and the posterior models can share
partial parameters instead of the entire network (Rybkin
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022); hierarchical latent variable
models are also used where both models share the same
global latent variable and induce prior or posterior-specific
distribution parameterization (Shen et al., 2023; Requeima
et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021).
Instead of modifying the specifics of the NP model or its
underlying architectures, in this paper we offer a new insight into prior misspecification in NPs through the lens of
robust divergences (Futami et al., 2018), which seek to learn
an alternative posterior without changing the parameters
of interests. Instead of minimizing the standard KL divergence between the prior and posterior distributions, robust
divergences are theoretically guaranteed to produce better posterior estimates under prior misspecification (Verine
et al., 2024; Regli & Silva, 2018). The Rényi divergence (Li
& Turner, 2016; Van Erven & Harremos, 2014b), for instance, introduces an additional parameter α to control how
the prior distribution can regularize the posterior updates.
This parameter allows us to reduce the regularization effects
of the misspecified prior (Knoblauch et al., 2019), thereby
mitigating the biased estimates of the posterior variance,
avoiding oversmoothed predictions (Alemi et al., 2018; Higgins et al., 2017), and achieving performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Neural processes (NPs) (Garnelo et al., 2018b) strive to
represent stochastic processes via deep neural networks
with desirable properties in uncertainty estimation and flexible feature representation. The vanilla NP (Garnelo et al.,
2018b) predicts the distribution for unlabelled data given
any set of observational data as context. The main advantage of NPs is to learn a set-dependent prior distribution,
where the KL divergence is minimized between a posterior
distribution conditioned on a target set with new data and
the prior distribution conditioned on the context set (Kim
et al., 2019; Jha et al., 2022; Bruinsma et al., 2023).
However, as the parameters of the conditional prior are unknown, NP proposes a coupling scheme where the model
that parameterizes the prior distribution is forced to share
1
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia. Correspondence to: Xuesong
Wang <xuesong.wang@data61.csiro.au>.

In light of this, we propose Rényi Neural Processes (RNPs)
that focus on improving neural processes with a more robust
objective. RNP minimizes the Rényi divergence between the
posterior distribution defined on the target set and the true

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

