Test-Time Selective Adaptation for Uni-Modal Distribution Shift
in Multi-Modal Data
MingCai Chen * 1 Baoming Zhang * 2 Zongbo Han 3 Wenyu Jiang 2 Yanmeng Wang 1 Shuai Feng 2
Yuntao Du 4 Bingkun Bao 1

Abstract

Modern machine learning applications are characterized by the increasing size of deep models
and the growing diversity of data modalities. This
trend underscores the importance of efficiently
adapting pre-trained multi-modal models to the
test distribution in real time, i.e., multi-modal
test-time adaptation. In practice, the magnitudes
of multi-modal shifts vary because multiple data
sources interact with the impact factor in diverse
manners. In this research, we investigate the the
under-explored practical scenario uni-modal distribution shift, where the distribution shift influences only one modality, leaving the others unchanged. Through theoretical and empirical analyses, we demonstrate that the presence of such
shift impedes multi-modal fusion and leads to
the negative transfer phenomenon in existing testtime adaptation techniques. To flexibly combat
this unique shift, we propose a selective adaptation schema that incorporates multiple modalityspecific adapters to accommodate potential shifts
and a “router” module that determines which
modality requires adaptation. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of our proposed method
through extensive experimental evaluations. Code
available at https://github.com/chenmc1996/UniModal-Distribution-Shift.

(a) No shift

(b) Uni-modal distribution shift

Figure 1. A self-driving car equipped with complementary camera
and LiDAR sensors navigating under different conditions. In the
right figure, the icy road surface primarily impacts the LiDAR signals, while poor light conditions mainly affect the camera signals.

1. Introduction
In recent years, multi-modal learning has emerged as a
crucial area in both academic research and practical applications due to its remarkable ability to process a wide range
of data types (Huang et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023). In the
open-world environment across diverse applications, distribution shifts constantly occur and significantly degrade
the performance of static models (Liang et al., 2024; Shi
et al., 2024; Han et al., 2023). Existing research on distribution shifts, especially in multi-modal data, often implicitly
assumes a “global” distribution shift where all modalities
experience distribution changes. However, many real-world
corrupting factors impact only specific modalities, e.g., light
changes can solely shift the distribution of camera signals,
while the LiDAR data remains immune as shown in Fig.
1. For the first time, we term this type of shift uni-modal
distribution shift, which is distinct from the previously considered global distribution shifts. Nevertheless, this setting
is of great practical significance. In many cases, complementary data modalities are often preferred, yet they are
likely to be subject to different disturbances. We theoretically show how the uni-modal distribution shift undermines
the attention-based multi-modal model in Sec. 3.3.

*

Equal contribution 1 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University, Nanjing University 3 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University 4 Joint SDU-NTU Centre
for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR) & School of software, Shandong university. Correspondence to: Yuntao Du <yuntaodu@sdu.edu.cn>, Bingkun Bao <bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn>.

Methodologically, to address distribution shifts, Test-Time
Adaptation (TTA), which involves continuously updating
models to adapt to the shifted data distribution in test environments, has become a cutting-edge approach (Wang et al.,
2020; Cao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2024). Therefore, our
work also focuses on utilize TTA to solve the uni-modal
distribution shift problem. Subsequently, we investigate
the adequacy of existing TTA methods for addressing the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

