Learning to Incentivize in Repeated Principal-Agent Problems
with Adversarial Agent Arrivals

Junyan Liu * 1 Arnab Maiti * 1 Artin Tajdini * 1 Kevin Jamieson 1 Lillian J. Ratliff 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The repeated principal-agent model captures sequential
decision-making scenarios where a principal strategically
incentivizes agents over multiple rounds to act toward a
long-term objective. This framework is central to many
real-world applications, such as online platforms offering
discounts to influence purchasing behavior, insurance companies designing contracts without full knowledge of customers’ risk levels, and crowdsourcing platforms structuring
payments to ensure high-quality contributions. In these settings, the principal cannot directly control agents’ actions
but influence them by proposing incentives, often under
asymmetric information. Typically, asymmetric information introduces two key challenges, including moral hazard
(Bolton & Dewatripont, 2004; Ho et al., 2014; Kaynar &
Siddiq, 2023) and adverse selection (Scheid et al., 2024b;
Dogan et al., 2023b;a). In moral hazard settings, the agents’
actions cannot be directly observed by the principal, requiring incentive design to encourage agents to take actions
in favor of the principal’s interest. A common example is
crowdsourcing where a task requester (principal) cannot directly observe the effort level of workers (agents). Adverse
selection, on the other hand, arises when the agents’ types
or preferences are unknown. For example, in insurance,
the insurer (principal) may not know whether a customer
(agent) is high-risk, complicating the contract design.

We initiate the study of a repeated principal-agent
problem over a finite horizon T , where a principal sequentially interacts with K ≥ 2 types
of agents arriving in an adversarial order. At
each round, the principal strategically chooses
one of the N arms to incentivize for an arriving
agent of unknown type. The agent then chooses
an arm based on its own utility and the provided
incentive, and the principal receives a corresponding reward. The objective is to minimize regret
against the best incentive in hindsight. Without
prior knowledge of agent behavior, we show that
the problem becomes intractable, leading to linear
regret. We analyze two key settings where sublinear regret is achievable. In the first setting, the
principal knows the arm each agent type would
select greedily for any given incentive. Under this
setting, we propose an algorithm
that achieves
√
√
a regret bound of O(min{ KT log N , K T })
and provide a matching lower bound up to a log K
factor. In the second setting, an agent’s response
varies smoothly with the incentive and is governed by a Lipschitz constant L ≥ 1. Under this
setting, we show that there is an algorithm with a
e
regret bound of O((LN
)1/3 T 2/3 ) and establish a
matching lower bound up to logarithmic factors.
Finally, we extend our algorithmic results for both
settings by allowing the principal to incentivize
multiple arms simultaneously in each round.

While repeated principal-agent problems have been extensively studied, prior works heavily focus on the scenarios
where the principal repeatedly contracts with a fixed and
unknown type (Scheid et al., 2024b; Dogan et al., 2023a;b)
or a random type of agent drawn stochastically from a fixed
underlying distribution (Ho et al., 2014; Gayle & Miller,
2015). However, these two assumptions may not hold in
many real-world applications. For example, in online shopping, discount ads displayed on a website are visible to all
users, and the sequence of users who respond may not follow a stochastic pattern. Another example is crowdsourcing,
where the sequence of crowdworkers who respond to a task
could be arbitrary and subject to herding behavior through
online forums (Horton et al., 2011). To capture the uncertainty of agent arrivals, we initiate the study of the repeated
principal-agent problem with adversarial agent arrivals. To

*

1
Equal contribution
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Junyan Liu <junyanl1@cs.washington.edu>,
Arnab Maiti <arnabm2@cs.washington.edu>, Artin Tajdini
<artin@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

