Offline Model-based Optimization for Real-World Molecular Discovery

Dong-Hee Shin 1 * Young-Han Son 1 * Hyun Jung Lee 1 Deok-Joong Lee 1 Tae-Eui Kam 1

Abstract
Molecular discovery has attracted significant attention in scientific fields for its ability to generate
novel molecules with desirable properties. Although numerous methods have been developed
to tackle this problem, most rely on an online setting that requires repeated online evaluation of
candidate molecules using the oracle. However,
in real-world molecular discovery, the oracle is
often represented by wet lab experiments, making
this online setting impractical due to the significant time and resource demands. To fill this gap,
we propose the Molecular Stitching (MolStitch)
framework, which utilizes a fixed offline dataset to
explore and optimize molecules without the need
for repeated oracle evaluations. Specifically, MolStitch leverages existing molecules from the offline dataset to generate novel ‘stitched molecules’
that combine their desirable properties. These
stitched molecules are then used as training samples to fine-tune the generative model using preference optimization techniques. Experimental results on various offline multi-objective molecular
optimization problems validate the effectiveness
of MolStitch. The source code is available online.

Figure 1. Proposed offline MBO process for molecular discovery.

in real-world molecular discovery, the oracle function is
typically represented by wet lab experiments, which are
resource-intensive and can take weeks or even months for
evaluation (Payton et al., 2023). This creates a significant
bottleneck, as in silico models cannot receive real-time evaluation feedback from wet lab. Instead, these models must
wait for the wet lab experiments to complete before further
optimization can occur, leading to substantial delays.
To address these challenges, a promising research direction
is to enable the optimization and refinement of the in silico
generative model without relying on online evaluation feedback. To this end, we propose to explore an offline optimization setting for real-world molecular discovery. Specifically,
offline optimization seeks to fully leverage the information
contained within an offline dataset, using it to refine the generative model in the absence of online evaluation feedback.
Detailed explanations of an offline setting is in Appendix A.
One of the most promising approaches for solving the offline
optimization problem is offline model-based optimization
(MBO) (Trabucco et al., 2022). In this approach, a proxy,
typically parameterized as a deep neural network fˆθ (·), is
trained to approximate the oracle function by fitting it to an
offline dataset. Once trained, the proxy acts as a surrogate
to guide the optimization of the generative model. For instance, gradient ascent (Zinkevich, 2003) can be applied to
the generative model’s parameters based on the proxy’s predictions, refining the generative model to produce candidate
molecules with increasingly desirable properties.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a diverse array of in silico generative models
has been developed to tackle molecular discovery (Bilodeau
et al., 2022). These computational approaches have demonstrated impressive success across various benchmarks, leading to a growing interest in integrating them into real-world
applications such as drug discovery. Despite this success,
most existing in silico generative models often operate under
an online optimization setting, where numerous candidate
molecules are generated iteratively and those molecules are
evaluated immediately using the oracle function. However,

The offline MBO approach exhibits strong performance by
generating synthetic data guided by the proxy. However, several challenges remain: the vanilla proxy is trained using a
supervised regression loss, which may struggle to accurately
approximate the true values from the oracle function as the
problem becomes more complex (Fu & Levine, 2021). This
challenge is compounded when the proxy encounters out-ofdistribution (OOD) data, leading to significant discrepancies

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Tae-Eui Kam <kamte@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

