E NS L OSS: Stochastic Calibrated Loss Ensembles
for Preventing Overfitting in Classification

Ben Dai 1

Abstract

produces a predicted class sign(f (x)) to predict the true
class Y ∈ {−1, +1}. The performance of the classification
function f is typically evaluated using the risk function
based on the zero-one loss:

R(f ) = E 1(Y f (X) ≤ 0) ,
(1)

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) with a computationally feasible surrogate loss is a widely
accepted approach for classification. Notably, the
convexity and calibration (CC) properties of a
loss function ensure consistency of ERM in maximizing accuracy, thereby offering a wide range of
options for surrogate losses. In this article, we propose a novel ensemble method, namely E NS L OSS,
which extends the ensemble learning concept to
combine loss functions within the ERM framework. A key feature of our method is the consideration on preserving the “legitimacy” of the
combined losses, i.e., ensuring the CC properties.
Specifically, we first transform the CC conditions
of losses into loss-derivatives, thereby bypassing
the need for explicit loss functions and directly
generating calibrated loss-derivatives. Therefore,
inspired by Dropout, E NS L OSS enables loss ensembles through one training process with doubly
stochastic gradient descent (i.e., random batch
samples and random calibrated loss-derivatives).
We theoretically establish the statistical consistency of our approach and provide insights into
its benefits. The numerical effectiveness of E N S L OSS compared to fixed loss methods is demonstrated through experiments on a broad range of
45 pairs of CIFAR10 datasets, the PCam image
dataset, and 14 OpenML tabular datasets and with
various deep learning architectures. Python repository and source code are available on G IT H UB.

where 1(·) is an indicator function, and the classification
accuracy is defined as Acc(f ) = 1 − R(f ). Clearly, the
Bayes decision rule f ∗ (x) = sgn(P(Y = 1|X = x) − 1/2)
is a minimizer of the risk function R(f ). Due to the discontinuity of the indicator function, the zero-one loss is usually
replaced by a convex and classification-calibrated loss ϕ
to facilitate the empirical computation (Lin, 2004; Zhang,
2004b; Bartlett et al., 2006). For example, typical losses
including the hinge loss ϕ(z) = (1 − z)+ for SVMs (Cortes
& Vapnik, 1995), the exponential loss ϕ(z) = exp(−z) for
AdaBoost (Freund & Schapire, 1995; Hastie et al., 2009),
and the logistic loss ϕ(z) = log(1 + exp(−z)) for logistic
regression (Cox, 1958), and others (Lin et al., 2017; Leng
et al., 2022). Then, the risk based on ϕ(·) is defined as:

Rϕ (f ) = E ϕ(Y f (X)) .
Note that convexity and classification-calibration (hereafter
referred to as calibration for simplicity) are widely accepted
requirements for a loss function ϕ(z). The primary motivations behind these requirements are that convexity facilitates
computations, while calibration ensures the statistical consistency of the empirical estimator derived from Rϕ , as
formally defined below.
Definition 1.1 (Bartlett et al. (2006)). A loss function ϕ(·) is
classification-calibrated, if for every sequence of measurable
function fn and every probability distribution on X × {±1},

1. Introduction

Rϕ (fn ) → inf Rϕ (f ) implies that R(fn ) → inf R(f ),
f

The objective of binary classification is to categorize each
instance into one of two classes. Given a feature vector
X ∈ X ⊂ Rd , a classification function f : Rd → R

f

as n approaches infinity.
According to Definition 1.1, a calibrated loss function ϕ
guarantees that any sequence fn that optimizes Rϕ will
eventually also optimize R, thereby ensuring consistency
in maximizing classification accuracy. To achieve this, the
most commonly used and direct approach is ERM, which
directly minimizes the empirical version of Rϕ to obtain

1

Department of Statistics, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong. Correspondence to: Ben Dai <bendai@cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

