Verification Learning:
Make Unsupervised Neuro-Symbolic System Feasible

Lin-Han Jia 1 Wen-Chao Hu 1 2 Jie-Jing Shao 1 2 Lan-Zhe Guo 1 3 Yu-Feng Li 1 2

Abstract

experience-based responses to simple tasks, while System 2
(deliberative processing) engages slow, knowledge-intensive
reasoning for complex ones. This cognitive architecture mirrors the dichotomy in artificial intelligence (AI) between
data-driven and rule-driven learning paradigms. In the past,
rule-driven symbolic learning systems were less favored
compared to data-driven neural learning systems due to
their high maintenance and search costs. However, with the
continuous iteration of neural network models, they still perform poorly on reasoning tasks. Consequently, an increasing
number of research efforts are now focused on Nesy systems
capable of integrating data-driven and rule-driven methods.

The current Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) Learning
paradigm suffers from an over-reliance on labeled data, so if we completely disregard labels,
it leads to less symbol information, a larger solution space, and more shortcuts-issues that current Nesy systems cannot resolve. This paper introduces a novel learning paradigm, Verification
Learning (VL), which addresses this challenge by
transforming the label-based reasoning process
in Nesy into a label-free verification process. VL
achieves excellent learning results solely by relying on unlabeled data and a function that verifies
whether the current predictions conform to the
rules. We formalize this problem as a Constraint
Optimization Problem (COP) and propose a Dynamic Combinatorial Sorting (DCS) algorithm
that accelerates the solution by reducing verification attempts, effectively lowering computational
costs and introduce a prior alignment method to
address potential shortcuts. Our theoretical analysis points out which tasks in Nesy systems can be
completed without labels and explains why rules
can replace infinite labels for some tasks, while
for others the rules have no effect. We validate
the proposed framework through several fully unsupervised tasks including addition, sort, match,
and chess, each showing significant performance
and efficiency improvements.

In the Nesy paradigm, a machine learning model f establishes a mapping between inputs X and symbolic representations S, i.e., S = f (X). Then, using a knowledge base
KB and S, to infer the label Y , i.e., KB, S |= Y . S is
unknown and needs to be predicted based on both X and
Y , ensuring consistency between the learning and reasoning processes. While the goal is to leverage knowledge to
reduce reliance on labeled data, the real-world application
of Nesy remains limited. For simple tasks, good results can
be achieved without a symbolic system. For complex tasks,
the required data grows exponentially but most current Nesy
algorithms still require labels Y of the same scale as the input data X which are expensive to acquire. Therefore, there
is an urgent need to develop unsupervised Nesy systems.
The difficulty in bridging the gap between supervised Nesy
and unsupervised Nesy remains significant which can be
seen in Figure 1. Firstly, the unsupervised paradigm lacks
critical information compared to the supervised paradigm.
Much of the performance improvement seen in current Nesy
algorithms comes from label leakage (Chang et al., 2020).
For example, in the common task of handwritten digit addition (Manhaeve et al., 2018), providing labels Y for the
equations ( +
= 0) and ( +
= 18) effectively
leaks the symbolic labels 0 and 9, further propagated to
other labels, essentially supervising the learning of X directly. Secondly, the lack of labels drastically increases the
search space for problem-solving. For example, transforming the problem ( +
= 18) to ( +
= , )
changes the search space from 102 to 104 and when labels
are available, one can further restrict the search to solutions

1. Introduction
Human cognition operates through a dual-system framework: System 1 (intuitive processing) enables rapid,
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 3 School of Intelligence
Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Yu-Feng Li <liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Lan-Zhe
Guo <guolz@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

