Deep Ridgelet Transform and Unified Universality Theorem
for Deep and Shallow Joint-Group-Equivariant Machines

Sho Sonoda 1 2 Yuka Hashimoto 3 1 Isao Ishikawa 4 1 Masahiro Ikeda 5 1

Abstract

The proof of a universality theorem contains hints for understanding the internal data processing mechanisms inside
neural networks. For example, the first universality theorems for depth-2 neural networks were shown in 1989
with four different proofs by Cybenko (1989), Hornik et al.
(1989), Funahashi (1989), and Carroll & Dickinson (1989).
Among them, Cybenko and Hornik et al. presented existential proofs by using Hahn-Banach and Stone-Weierstrass
respectively, meaning that it is not clear how to assign the
parameters. On the other hand, Funahashi and Carroll-andDickinson presented constructive proofs by reducing networks to the Fourier transform and Radon transform respectively, meaning that it is clear how to assign the parameters.
The latter constructive methods were refined as the so-called
integral representation by Barron (1993) and further culminated as the ridgelet transform, the main objective of this
study, discovered by Murata (1996) and Candès (1998).

We present a constructive universal approximation theorem for learning machines equipped with
joint-group-equivariant feature maps, called the
joint-equivariant machines, based on the group
representation theory. “Constructive” here indicates that the distribution of parameters is given
in a closed-form expression known as the ridgelet
transform. Joint-group-equivariance encompasses
a broad class of feature maps that generalize
classical group-equivariance. Particularly, fullyconnected networks are not group-equivariant but
are joint-group-equivariant. Our main theorem
also unifies the universal approximation theorems
for both shallow and deep networks. Until this
study, the universality of deep networks has been
shown in a different manner from the universality
of shallow networks, but our results discuss them
on common ground. Now we can understand
the approximation schemes of various learning
machines in a unified manner. As applications,
we show the constructive universal approximation properties of four examples: depth-n jointequivariant machine, depth-n fully-connected network, depth-n group-convolutional network, and
a new depth-2 network with quadratic forms
whose universality has not been known.

To show the universality in a constructive manner, we formulate the problem as a functional equation: Let M[γ] denote
a certain learning machine (such as a deep network) with
parameter γ, and let F denote a class of functions to be
expressed by the learning machine. Given a function f ∈ F,
find an unknown parameter γ so that the machine M[γ] represents function f , i.e.
M[γ] = f,

RIKEN AIP 2 CyberAgent, Inc. 3 NTT Corporation 4 Kyoto
University 5 The University of Osaka. Correspondence to: Sho
Sonoda <sho.sonoda@riken.jp>.

which we call a learning equation. This equation is a
stronger formulation of learning than anPordinary formun
lation such as minimizing empirical risk i=1 |M[γ](xi ) −
2
f (xi )| with respect to γ, as the latter is a weak form (or a
variational form) of this equation. Therefore, characterizing
the solution space of this equation leads to understanding
the parameters obtained by risk minimization. Following
previous studies (Murata, 1996; Candès, 1998; Sonoda et al.,
2021a;b; 2022a;b), we call a solution operator R satisfying
M[R[f ]] = f a ridgelet transform. Once such an R is found
in a closed-form manner, we can present a constructive
proof of universality because the reconstruction formula
M[R[f ]] = f implies for any f ∈ F there exists a machine
that implements f .

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

For depth-2 neural networks, the equation has been solved
with several closed-form ridgelet transforms by using either
Fourier expression method (Sonoda et al., 2024b), or group

1. Introduction
One of the technical barriers in deep learning theory is
that the relationship between parameters and functions is
a black box. For this reason, the majority of authors build
their theories on extremely simplified mathematical models.
Such theories can explain the complex phenomena in deep
learning only at a highly abstract level.
1

1

