FSL-SAGE: Accelerating Federated Split Learning via Smashed Activation
Gradient Estimation
Srijith Nair 1 Michael Lin 1 Peizhong Ju 2 Amirreza Talebi 3 Elizabeth Serena Bentley 4 Jia Liu 1

Abstract

vron et al., 2023) pretrained on large corpora of data have
demonstrated near human-level performance on a variety
of tasks. These models demand heavy computational resources and very large datasets for training (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). The datasets are often owned
by different organizations, making it impossible for a single
entity to train a model on all the data (Sani et al., 2024b).
Distributed learning paradigms like federated learning (FL)
(McMahan et al., 2016) and split learning (SL) (Vepakomma
et al., 2018), which preserve data privacy while leveraging
the compute power of various clients, have become increasingly popular in LLM pretraining (Sani et al., 2024a) and
fine-tuning (Sun et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024).

Collaborative training methods like Federated
Learning (FL) and Split Learning (SL) enable
distributed machine learning without sharing raw
data. However, FL assumes clients can train entire
models, which is infeasible for large-scale models.
In contrast, while SL alleviates the client memory
constraint in FL by offloading most training to
the server, it increases network latency due to its
sequential nature. Other methods address the conundrum by using local loss functions for parallel
client-side training to improve efficiency, but they
lack server feedback and potentially suffer poor
accuracy. We propose FSL-SAGE (Federated
Split Learning via Smashed Activation Gradient
Estimation), a new federated split learning algorithm that estimates server-side gradient feedback
via auxiliary models. These auxiliary models periodically adapt to emulate server behavior on local
datasets. We show that √
FSL-SAGE achieves a convergence rate of O(1/ T ), where T is the number of communication rounds. This result matches
FedAvg, while significantly reducing communication costs and client memory requirements. Our
empirical results also verify that it outperforms
existing state-of-the-art FSL methods, offering
both communication efficiency and accuracy.

Despite their benefits, FL and SL both have some limitations.
Although FL can preserve data privacy by training the model
on the client and aggregating the client-side models at a
server, an inherent assumption of FL is that client devices
have enough computational power to process the model,
which is impractical for large models. SL, on the other hand,
reduces compute requirements for clients by splitting the
model into two parts, processing a smaller piece at the client,
and offloading the other piece to the server. This, however,
implies that processing the complete model in each iteration
involves transmitting the cut-layer features and gradients
back and forth between the client and the server. Moreover,
SL loses the benefits of data parallelism in FL, since the
server needs to assist gradient computation for each client
in a sequential fashion. Consequently, SL suffers significant
increases in communication load, power, and latencies.

1. Introduction

To reduce the communication overheads incurred by SL,
some recent works (Han et al., 2021; Mu & Shen, 2023) propose to use auxiliary models at the clients. These auxiliary
models continue the forward propagation of the client-side
model to compute a local loss function, which is then used
to update both models via gradient descent. This eliminates the need for awaiting the server’s response, which
significantly speeds up the training process. Meanwhile, the
server-side model is updated at a lower frequency by using
the cut-layer features from the clients. While enjoying the
benefit that the clients can conduct training in parallel, this
can significantly reduce communication costs and latencies.
However, the client-side models do not get any feedback
from the server-side model, i.e., the clients are only updated

1) Background and Motivation: In the recent years, large
foundation models (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2021;
Ramesh et al., 2022) and LLMs (OpenAI et al., 2024; Tou1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky,
USA 3 Department of Industrial Engineering, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 4 Air Force Research Laboratory, Rome, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Srijith Nair
<nair.203@osu.edu>, Jia Liu <liu@ece.osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

