Structure Is All You Need: Structural Representation Learning on
Hyper-Relational Knowledge Graphs

Jaejun Lee 1 Joyce Jiyoung Whang 1

Abstract

et al., 2020), where a qualifier consists of a relation and
an entity, e.g., (country, Australia). In HKGs, each
piece of information is represented as a hyper-relational
`
fact defined as a triplet and its qualifiers, e.g., (Finding
Australia),
Nemo, set in, Sydney),{(country,
˘
(state, New South Wales)} .

Hyper-relational knowledge graphs (HKGs) enrich knowledge graphs by extending a triplet to
a hyper-relational fact, where a set of qualifiers
adds auxiliary information to a triplet. While
many HKG representation learning methods have
been proposed, they often fail to effectively utilize
the HKG’s structure. This paper demonstrates that
thoroughly leveraging the structure of an HKG
is crucial for reasoning on HKGs, and a purely
structure-based representation learning method
can achieve state-of-the-art performance on various link prediction tasks. We propose MAYPL,
which learns to initialize representation vectors
based on the structure of an HKG and employs
an attentive neural message passing consisting of
fact-level message computation and entity-centric
and relation-centric aggregations, thereby computing the representations based solely on the structure. Due to its structure-driven learning, MAYPL
can conduct inductive inferences on new entities
and relations. MAYPL outperforms 40 knowledge
graph completion methods in 10 datasets, compared with different baseline methods on different
datasets to be tested from diverse perspectives.

Reasoning and inferring new knowledge on HKGs necessitates understanding and exploiting intricate relationships
among entities and relations. However, most existing studies on HKGs do not sufficiently utilize the graph structure
of HKGs. For example, transformer-based methods (Wang
et al., 2021; Yu & Yang, 2021; Chung et al., 2023) process
each hyper-relational fact (referred to as a ‘fact’ for brevity)
individually, failing to capture the interconnectedness between different facts. Some other recent methods (Hu et al.,
2023) use simple one-hop neighbourhood information to
learn representations on HKGs. While StarE (Galkin et al.,
2020) proposes a graph neural network (GNN) layer for
encoding a fact, it turns out that the proposed GNN encoding is redundant and does not critically affect the overall
performance (Yu & Yang, 2021). Recently, HAHE (Luo
et al., 2023) introduces another GNN-based encoding, but
it does not consider relations and the positions of entities
within each fact. Like this, existing HKG methods incorporate only limited structural information and fail to utilize
the structures of HKGs effectively.
In this paper, we demonstrate that thoroughly leveraging
an HKG’s structure is crucial for successful reasoning on
HKGs, and a purely structure-based representation learning can achieve state-of-the-art performance on a range of
transductive and inductive link prediction tasks. We propose
a structure-driven representation learning method, named
MAYPL (Message pAssing framework for hYper-relational
knowledge graph rePresentation Learning), that learns to initialize the representations of entities and relations based on
their interconnections, co-occurrence, and positions within a
fact. By compressing the information of which entities and
relations are included and how they are connected within
each fact, MAYPL computes fact-level messages, which are
attentively aggregated to entities and relations. Along with
the fact-level structure, the component-level connectivity
is also considered in MAYPL’s attentive neural message

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) provide a structured representation of human knowledge, which eases organizing the relationships between concepts or objects (Ji et al., 2022).
In KGs, information is represented in the form of a
triplet (Toutanova & Chen, 2015; Bordes et al., 2013), e.g.,
(Finding Nemo, set in, Sydney). Since the simple triplet form oversimplifies information, hyper-relational
knowledge graphs (HKGs) have been recently proposed to
add auxiliary details by adding qualifiers to a triplet (Rosso
1
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Joyce Jiyoung Whang <jjwhang@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

