Contrastive Learning with Simplicial Convolutional Networks for Short-Text
Classification
Liang Huang 1 2 Benedict Lee 2 Daniel Hui Loong Ng 2 Kelin Xia 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Text classification is a fundamental task in Natural Language Processing (NLP). It involves analysing the content
of texts and determining which predefined category they
belong to based on their representation. Unlike longer texts,
short texts have recently captured much attention, with an
increase in the number appearing in various sources, such
as social media, search snippets, and news feeds. However,
these short texts with a few words pose challenges to the
current models in generating effective representations and
are not usually labelled in real-world cases (Linmei et al.,
2019). Supervised learning on short-text classification has
gained significant attention and has been applied to different
tasks for web reviews (Pang & Lee, 2004), news feeds (Yao
et al., 2019), and medical information (Liu et al., 2020). On
the other hand, data labelling has been expensive, labourintensive and time-consuming. Few-shot learning has been
popular with low resources required by training on a few
labelled samples, either with or without pre-training. Furthermore, graph models have been widely used to capture
complex relationships between text data’s structural, semantic, and syntactic meanings. To address the label scarcity
issue, contrastive learning has been adopted to enhance performance. Many researchers (Sun et al., 2022; Wen & Fang,
2023; Liu et al., 2024) have explored the effectiveness of
combining graph models and contrastive learning within the
scope of few-shot learning.

Text classification is a fundamental task in Natural
Language Processing (NLP). Short text classification has recently captured much attention due
to its increased amount from various sources with
limited labels and its inherent challenges for its
sparsity in words and semantics. Recent studies
have adopted self-supervised contrastive learning
across different representations to improve performance. However, most of the current models
face several challenges. Firstly, the augmentation
step might not be able to generate positive and
negative samples that are semantically similar and
dissimilar to the anchor respectively. Secondly,
the text data could be enhanced with external auxiliary information that might introduce noise to
the sparse text data. In addition, they are limited in capturing higher-order information such
as group-wise interactions. In this work, we propose a novel document simplicial complex construction based on text data for a higher-order
message-passing mechanism. We enhance the
short text classification performance by contrasting the structural representation with the sequential representation generated by the transformer
mechanism for improved outcomes and mitigated
issues. The proposed framework, Contrastive
Learning with Simplicial Convolutional Networks
(C-SCN), leverages the expressive power of graph
neural networks, models higher-order information
beyond pair-wise relations and enriches features
through contrastive learning. Experimental results
on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the capability of C-SCN to outperform existing models in
analysing sequential and complex short-text data.

Although they have achieved successful outcomes, some
limitations and challenges still exist. Firstly, the data augmenting step and the negative sampling step of contrastive
learning might distort the semantic meaning and introduce
unnecessary noise. For example, removing graph components is adopted as a data augmentation strategy, but
it might disrupt the text’s original meaning. An instance
from the Movie Review (MR) dataset (Pang & Lee, 2005):
“there’s not enough to sustain the comedy” while removing the word “not” reversely changes the meaning of this
short sentence. Furthermore, negative sampling of texts
with different syntaxes while similar semantics might be
designed to be pushed away from each other. Secondly,
some auxiliary information such as entities, latent topics,
and part-of-speech (POS) tags (such as nouns and verbs)

1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 HP
Inc, Singapore.
Correspondence to:
Liang Huang
<liang013@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Kelin Xia <xiakelin@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

