STP: Self-play LLM Theorem Provers with Iterative Conjecturing and Proving

Kefan Dong 1 Tengyu Ma 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; Nijkamp et al., 2022). It is also a key criterion
for achieving artificial general intelligence (AGI). Automated theorem proving with formal languages by LLMs
stands at the forefront of reasoning research (Yang et al.,
2024a), partly because it allows objective and reliable evaluation through classical verifiers such as Lean (Moura &
Ullrich, 2021) and Isabelle (Nipkow et al., 2002). Moreover,
it arguably encapsulates the essence of advanced reasoning
tasks while abstracting away the ambiguity of natural language, enabling meaningful studies on a relatively smaller
scale.

A fundamental challenge in formal theorem proving by LLMs is the lack of high-quality training
data. Although reinforcement learning or expert iteration partially mitigates this issue by alternating
between LLM generating proofs and finetuning
them on correctly generated ones, performance
quickly plateaus due to the scarcity of correct
proofs (sparse rewards). To keep improving the
models with limited data, we draw inspiration
from mathematicians, who continuously develop
new results, partly by proposing novel conjectures
or exercises (which are often variants of known
results) and attempting to solve them. We design the Self-play Theorem Prover (STP) that simultaneously takes on two roles, conjecturer and
prover, each providing training signals to the other.
The conjecturer is trained iteratively on previously
generated conjectures that are barely provable by
the current prover, which incentivizes it to generate increasingly challenging conjectures over time.
The prover attempts to prove the conjectures with
standard expert iteration. We evaluate STP with
both Lean and Isabelle formal versifiers. With
51.3 billion tokens generated during the training
in Lean, STP proves 28.5% of the statements in
the LeanWorkbook dataset, doubling the previous
best result of 13.1% achieved through expert iteration. The final model achieves state-of-the-art performance among whole-proof generation methods
on miniF2F-test (65.0%), ProofNet-test (23.9%)
and PutnamBench (8/644) with pass@3200.

However, a fundamental challenge in improving reasoning
performance—whether in natural or formal languages—lies
in the lack of high-quality training data. Collecting reasoning data requires domain experts, making it expensive to
scale. There are only a limited number of advanced math papers and theorems in existence, orders of magnitude smaller
than other data sources.
Reinforcement learning (RL) on datasets without solutions
(e.g., datasets with theorem statements or reasoning questions and answers) is a prominent approach for improving
the reasoning capability, as seen in the recent development
of OpenAI o1 (Jaech et al., 2024), DeepSeek-Prover (Xin
et al., 2024a) and DeepSeek R1 (Guo et al., 2025). Often
referred to as expert iteration (Anthony et al., 2017), it partially mitigates the data scarcity issue by alternating between
LLMs generating proofs and finetuning them on correctly
generated ones (Kaliszyk et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2021; AlphaProof, 2024; Xin et al., 2024b; Ying et al., 2024).
However, as Wu et al. (2024) pointed out, RL or expert iteration often saturates at a low pass rate because the number of
samples required to generate a correct proof for an unproven
theorem grows exponentially. As a result, a massive amount
of computation is wasted on generating incorrect proofs that
provide no training signal to the model. For instance, in the
proof sampling process of Wu et al. (2024), 98.5% of the
compute yields no successful proofs, despite the pass rate
being only 13.1% on the training dataset, LeanWorkbook
(Ying et al., 2024). In other words, after a few rounds of
expert iteration, re-training the model becomes less effective
due to the limited number of new successful proofs.

1. Introduction
The reasoning capability of large language models (LLMs)
is critical for various applications, including coding assistants, question-answering, and agents (Plaat et al., 2024;
Shinn et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2024; Li
1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Kefan Dong <kefandong@cs.stanford.edu>, Tengyu Ma <tengyuma@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In addition, RL’s capability is fundamentally bounded by
the difficulty level of the theorems in the training dataset—it
1

