Beyond Entropy: Region Confidence Proxy for Wild Test-Time Adaptation

Zixuan Hu 1 2 Yichun Hu 1 Xiaotong Li 1 Shixiang Tang 3 Ling-Yu Duan † 1 2

Abstract

(a)

Wild Test-Time Adaptation (WTTA) is proposed
to adapt a source model to unseen domains under
extreme data scarcity and multiple shifts. Previous approaches mainly focused on sample selection strategies, while overlooking the fundamental problem on underlying optimization. Initially, we critically analyze the widely-adopted
entropy minimization framework in WTTA and
uncover its significant limitations in noisy optimization dynamics that substantially hinder adaptation efficiency. Through our analysis, we identify region confidence as a superior alternative to
traditional entropy, however, its direct optimization remains computationally prohibitive for realtime applications. In this paper, we introduce
a novel region-integrated method ReCAP that
bypasses the lengthy process. Specifically, we
propose a probabilistic region modeling scheme
that flexibly captures semantic changes in embedding space. Subsequently, we develop a finiteto-infinite asymptotic approximation that transforms the intractable region confidence into a
tractable and upper-bounded proxy. These innovations significantly unlock the overlooked potential dynamics in local region in a concise solution. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
the consistent superiority of ReCAP over existing methods across various datasets and wild
scenarios. The source code will be available at
https://github.com/hzcar/ReCAP.

Mild

Batch 1

Batch 2

Batch 3

Glass Blur

Glass Blur

Glass Blur

Batch 1
Glass Blur

Pixelate

Batch 2
Brightness

Fog

Batch 1

Batch 2

Batch 3

Batch size=1

Batch size=1

Batch size=1

Wild
Multiple Concurrent Shifts

(b)

Test Sample

Neighboring Samples

Extreme Data Scarcity
Predicted Class

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of Mild (Wang et al., 2020) and Wild
(Niu et al., 2023) TTA settings. (b) Comparison of the adaptation
process between mild and wild scenes on the Zoom domain of
ImageNet-C dataset (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). Different
colors of points represent different predicted classes of samples in
the local region. The results highlight that entropy minimization
in the wild scenario causes significant local prediction instability.

distribution shifts between training and testing data (BenDavid et al., 2010; Koh et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2024). To
tackle this issue, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) (Iwasawa &
Matsuo, 2021; Alfarra et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024) has
emerged as a critical paradigm, enabling source models to
adapt to target distributions through online updates. Its dominant approach involves optimizing the model to minimize
prediction entropy, thereby enhancing the model’s global
confidence in the target domain.

†
Corresponding author 1 School of Computer Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen,
China 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China.
Correspondence to: Ling-Yu Duan <lingyu@pku.edu.cn>.

While TTA methods (Zhou & Levine, 2021; Wang et al.,
2022) have achieved promising results under mild conditions, they show significant performance drops in wild scenarios involving extreme data scarcity and multiple concurrent shifts (Niu et al., 2023), as shown in Fig. 1(a). To
enable effective adaptation under these wild settings, recent
works focus on developing selection criteria to leverage reliable samples only for entropy minimization. For example,
SAR (Niu et al., 2023) excluded samples with high entropy
and, DeYO (Lee et al., 2024) filtered out samples with sensitive prediction changes under image transformation.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Orthogonal to sample selection, this paper delves into a
fundamental yet overlooked challenge: the noisy optimization dynamics introduced by typical entropy minimization.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have exhibited remarkable success
across various visual tasks (Girshick, 2015; He et al., 2016).
However, their performance is often compromised by the

1

