Q-Supervised Contrastive Representation: A State Decoupling Framework for
Safe Offline Reinforcement Learning

Zhihe Yang 1 Yunjian Xu 1 Yang Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Safe offline reinforcement learning (RL), which
aims to learn the safety-guaranteed policy without risky online interaction with environments,
has attracted growing recent attention for safetycritical scenarios. However, existing approaches
encounter out-of-distribution problems during the
testing phase, which can result in potentially unsafe outcomes. This issue arises due to the infinite
possible combinations of reward-related and costrelated states. In this work, we propose State
Decoupling with Q-supervised Contrastive representation (SDQC), a novel framework that decouples the global observations into reward- and
cost-related representations for decision-making,
thereby improving the generalization capability
for unfamiliar global observations. Compared
with the classical representation learning methods,
which typically require model-based estimation
(e.g., bisimulation), we theoretically prove that
our Q-supervised method generates a coarser representation while preserving the optimal policy,
resulting in improved generalization performance.
Experiments on DSRL benchmark provide compelling evidence that SDQC surpasses other baseline algorithms, especially for its exceptional ability to achieve almost zero violations in more than
half of the tasks. Further, we demonstrate that
SDQC possesses superior generalization ability
when confronted with unseen environments.

Figure 1. OOD issue for offline trained UGV in the testing phase.

problems under uncertainty (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al.,
2017; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). Nevertheless, safety concerns remain a significant obstacle to the extensive adoption
of RL in safety-critical domains (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015;
Gu et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022b; Li, 2023), such as industrial management, and robot control. In these contexts, the
potential for catastrophic outcomes necessitates a significant emphasis on preventing unsafe actions (Andersen et al.,
2020; Brunke et al., 2022). As a promising method that
received growing attention, safe RL provides safety guarantees by formulating the problem as a constrained Markov
decision process (CMDP) (Altman, 1998; 2021).
Over the past few years, a multitude of safe RL algorithms
have been introduced (Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler et al.,
2018; Zhao et al., 2021; Sootla et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022).
Regrettably, most existing methods address safety concerns
within online settings, relying on the high-fidelity simulators
or agent-environment interactions during the training process, which introduces additional risks of safety violations
(Liu et al., 2023a). Safe offline RL, on the other hand, provides a promising solution that learns the safety-guaranteed
policy in a fully offline manner. Its training requires no risky
interaction with the environment and relies only on the precollected offline dataset. However, empirical observations
indicate that most existing safe offline RL algorithms fail to
thoroughly ensure pre-defined safety constraints during testing (Liu et al., 2023a; Zheng et al., 2024). Such occurrences
tend to be more pronounced in environments characterized
by higher observation dimensions.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been proven to be a powerful tool for solving high-dimensional decision-making
1

Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence
to: Yunjian Xu <yjxu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

