A Variational Information Theoretic Approach to Out-of-Distribution Detection

Sudeepta Mondal 1 Zhuolin Jiang 1 Ganesh Sundaramoorthi 1

Abstract

2024; Xu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024) has focused on
identifying descriptors of the data that can distinguish between OOD and ID data. In particular, feature-shaping
functions have been shown to be promising. In feature
shaping, features, usually from the penultimate layer of a
pre-trained network, are input to a shaping function and
then used to score incoming data. Examples of these approaches include ReAct (Sun et al., 2021), FS-OPT (Zhao
et al., 2024), VRA (Xu et al., 2023), ASH (Djurisic et al.,
2022). While these approaches have provided advancements
to SoA on several benchmarks, most of these are empirically
driven rule-based methods, and may not generalize well over
new unseen datasets (Zhao et al., 2024). It is thus beneficial to understand under what conditions that these methods
will work so that we may understand when to employ one
method over another. One way to do this is to develop
a theory where one can derive features for OOD detection
(henceforth called OOD features for brevity) as a function of
underlying assumptions (e.g., statistical distributions). This
could potentially offer a way to critically examine existing
methods. It could also potentially enable the systematic
development of new features that may generalize better.

We present a theory for the construction of outof-distribution (OOD) detection features for neural networks. We introduce random features
for OOD through a novel information-theoretic
loss functional consisting of two terms, the first
based on the KL divergence separates resulting
in-distribution (ID) and OOD feature distributions
and the second term is the Information Bottleneck,
which favors compressed features that retain the
OOD information. We formulate a variational
procedure to optimize the loss and obtain OOD
features. Based on assumptions on OOD distributions, one can recover properties of existing OOD
features, i.e., shaping functions. Furthermore, we
show that our theory can predict a new shaping
function that out-performs existing ones on OOD
benchmarks. Our theory provides a general framework for constructing a variety of new features
with clear explainability.

Towards this goal, we develop a theory to formulate OOD
features based on underlying statistical distributions of ID
and OOD distributions. We develop a novel loss functional,
based on information theory, defined on the set of OOD features whose optimization yields OOD features as a function
of the underlying statistical distributions. Unlike current
approaches, our OOD features are random and thus follow a statistical distribution. The mean value models the
deterministic shaping features in the literature.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) systems are typically designed under the assumption that the training and test sets are sampled
from the same statistical distribution. However, this often
does not hold in practice. For example, during deployment,
test data may include previously unseen classes. In such
cases, the ML system may produce incorrect results with
high confidence (DeVries & Taylor, 2018). Therefore, it is
crucial to develop methods that enable ML systems to detect
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Detecting OOD data allows
users to be alerted of potentially unreliable predictions and
enables the system to adapt accordingly. OOD detection has
gained considerable attention recently (Yang et al., 2022).

Our loss aims to determine the OOD feature that maximally separates resulting ID and OOD feature distributions
through the Kullback-Leiber (KL) divergence. As separating distributions by itself is ill-posed, we propose a novel use
of the Information Bottleneck (IB) (Tishby et al., 2000) as
regularization. In our use, IB seeks compressed features that
preserve the information the data has about OOD, aiming for
a feature representation that contains only the information
necessary for OOD detection. As this loss functional is defined on probability measures (representing the distribution
of the OOD feature), it is an infinite dimensional optimization problem, and thus we use the calculus of variations
(Troutman, 2012) to derive the optimization procedure. Our

Recent state-of-the-art (SoA) (Sun et al., 2021; Djurisic
et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2023; Sun & Li, 2022; Zhao et al.,
1

RTX Technology Research Center (RTRC), East Hartford, CT 06118. Correspondence to: Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
<ganesh.sundaramoorthi@rtx.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

