Making Hard Problems Easier with Custom Data Distributions
and Loss Regularization: A Case Study in Modular Arithmetic

Eshika Saxena * 1 Alberto Alfarano * 1 Emily Wenger † 1 2 Kristin Lauter † 1

Abstract

Recent work has shown that machine learning (ML) models
can, under certain conditions, be used to break LWE by
recovering the secret (Wenger et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a;b;
Stevens et al., 2024). The attack trains ML models to predict
b given A, which requires learning to compute the (noisy)
modular arithmetic operation A · s (mod q). If models
predict b with even low accuracy, s can be recovered.

Recent work showed that ML-based attacks on
Learning with Errors (LWE), a hard problem used
in post-quantum cryptography, outperform classical algebraic attacks in certain settings. Although
promising, ML attacks struggle to scale to more
complex LWE settings. Prior work connected this
issue to the difficulty of training ML models to
do modular arithmetic, a core feature of the LWE
problem. To address this, we develop techniques
that significantly boost the performance of ML
models on modular arithmetic tasks—enabling
the models to sum up to N = 128 elements modulo q ≤ 974269. Our core innovation is the use
of custom training data distributions and a carefully designed loss function that better represents
the problem structure. We apply an initial proof
of concept of our techniques to LWE specifically
and find that they allow recovery of 2x harder secrets than prior work. Our techniques also help
ML models learn other well-studied problems better, including copy, associative recall, and parity,
motivating further study.

However, ML attacks struggle to recover LWE secrets with
many nonzero entries, limiting their efficacy. Prior work
links this struggle to ML models’ inability to learn modular arithmetic at scale, since recovering LWE secrets with
more nonzero entries requires summing more elements mod
q (Wenger et al., 2024). Given the widespread adoption of
LWE-based cryptosystems, exploring the potential of these
nascent ML attacks—which can exploit statistical dependencies algebraic attacks may miss—is critical to improve
understanding of LWE’s practical security.
ML models’ struggle to perform modular arithmetic extends
beyond cryptanalysis. Numerous works have documented
the poor performance of ML models on modular arithmetic
problems with many terms and/or large prime moduli (Palamas, 2017; Gromov, 2023; Abbe et al., 2023; Mohamadi
et al., 2024; Doshi et al., 2024). This is surprising because
ML models can learn other complex math tasks such as
symbolic regression, linear algebra, discovering Lyapunov
functions, computing Gröbner bases, polynomial simplification, and computing the greatest common divisor (Charton
et al., 2021; Charton, 2022; Alfarano et al., 2024; Kera et al.,
2024; Agarwal et al., 2021; Charton, 2024). Modular arithmetic, on its face, seems easier, but scalable ML solutions
remain elusive.

1. Introduction
Modular arithmetic is a key component of many cryptographic hard problems, including Learning with Errors
(LWE), which is the basis for several newly standardized
post-quantum cryptosystems (Chen et al., 2022). The LWE
problem involves determining a secret vector given two
pieces of information: A ∈ Zm×n
, a matrix sampled uniq
formly at random mod q, and b = A · s + e ∈ Zm
q , the noisy
dot product of A with the secret vector s mod q. When s
is binary, which often happens in practical applications of
LWE, computing b from A requires computing a subset
sum mod q, which is a modular addition problem.

Thus, our goal is simple: train ML models that can sum
many elements mod q. In considering this challenge, we
make two key observations. First, modular arithmetic
problems lie along a gradient of difficulty based on how
many times the sum “wraps” around the modulus. Prior
work observed that models learn better from examples
that
Pn
wrap fewer times around the modulus q, e.g.
a
i=1 i ≤
2q (Wenger et al., 2024). Second, the geometry of the modular field disrupts traditional notions of gradient descent, as
0 and q are close (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017). Prior work
proposed an angular embedding for model input/outputs that

*
Equal contribution † Equal contribution 1 Meta AI 2 Duke University. Correspondence to: Eshika Saxena <eshika@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

