Enhancing Visual Localization with Cross-Domain Image Generation

Yuanze Wang 1 Yichao Yan 1 Shiming Song 2 Songchang Jin 2 Yilan Huang 2 Xingdong Sheng 3 Dianxi Shi 1 4

Abstract

Query Images

Visual localization aims to predict the absolute
camera pose for a single query image. However,
predominant methods focus on single-camera images and scenes with limited appearance variations, limiting their applicability to cross-domain
scenes commonly encountered in real-world applications. Furthermore, the long-tail distribution of cross-domain datasets poses additional
challenges for visual localization. In this work,
we propose a novel cross-domain data generation method to enhance visual localization methods. To achieve this, we first construct a crossdomain 3DGS to accurately model photometric
variations and mitigate the interference of dynamic objects in large-scale scenes. We introduce a text-guided image editing model to enhance data diversity for addressing the long-tail
distribution problem and design an effective finetuning strategy for it. Then, we develop an anchorbased method to generate high-quality datasets
for visual localization. Finally, we introduce
positional attention to address data ambiguities
in cross-camera images. Extensive experiments
show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy, outperforming existing cross-domain
visual localization methods by an average of
59% across all domains. Project page: https:
//yzwang-sjtu.github.io/CDG-Loc.

Nighttime

Daytime

Photometry in the same region varies dramatically

360 Images

Fisheye Images

Pinhole Images

Domain Consistent

Render

Train

Test

Visual

Predict

localization
Cross-Domain
3D Gaussians

Cross-Domain Images
with Positional Attention

Enhancing with
Cross-Domain Images

Query Pose

Figure 1. Demonstration of the proposed method. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art cross-domain localization performance by
rendering domain-consistent images with positional attention for
data augmentation.

augmented reality. Successful visual localization methods
have been developed, such as feature matching-based techniques (Zhou et al., 2022; Sarlin et al., 2021; Zhou et al.,
2025), scene coordinate regression methods (Wang et al.,
2023; Brachmann et al., 2023; 2025; Wang et al., 2024a),
and absolute pose regression methods (Chen et al., 2024b;
Shavit & Keller, 2022; Chen et al., 2022a; Shavit et al.,
2021). Current methods focus on single-domain visual localization, typically applied to images from a single camera
(e.g., pinhole cameras) and scenes with limited appearance
variations. However, single-domain methods encounter two
major challenges in real-world applications: 1) Query images captured by pinhole cameras, 360 cameras, fisheye
cameras, and other cameras exhibit significant differences
due to variations in distortion and field of view. 2) The
appearance of scenes undergoes substantial variations over
time, influenced by factors such as lighting conditions and
dynamic objects. Due to the limited training data of singledomain methods, significant domain differences arise between these methods and the real-world domain, leading to a
drop in localization performance. Recently, 360Loc(Huang

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the process of estimating the position
and orientation of a query image in 3D space. It is crucial
in applications such as robotics, autonomous driving, and
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab (IGDL), Beijing, China 3 Lenovo Research, Shanghai,
China 4 Department of Big Data Intelligence, Advanced Institute
of Big Data, Beijing, 100195, China. Correspondence to: Dianxi
Shi <dxshi@nudt.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

