Towards Learning to Complete Anything in Lidar

Ayça Takmaz† 1 2 Cristiano Saltori 1 Neehar Peri 1 3 Tim Meinhardt 1
Riccardo de Lutio 1 Laura Leal-Taixé 1 Aljosa Osep 1

Figure 1. Learning to Complete Anything in Lidar. Given a sparse Lidar point cloud, CAL (Complete Anything in Lidar) localizes,
reconstructs, and, optionally, recognizes objects in a zero-shot fashion. By providing a semantic class vocabulary of specific object classes
at test time, CAL can be prompted to perform Semantic Scene Completion (SSC), Panoptic Scene Completion (PSC), or (amodal) 3D
Object Detection. Note that CAL only takes a single Lidar scan as input; RGB images are shown for visualization purposes only.

Abstract

object shapes from multiple such partial observations across the dataset. We show that our model
can be prompted on standard benchmarks for Semantic and Panoptic Scene Completion, localize
objects as (amodal) 3D bounding boxes, and recognize objects beyond fixed class vocabularies.

We propose CAL (Complete Anything in Lidar)
for Lidar-based shape-completion in-the-wild.
This is closely related to Lidar-based semantic/panoptic scene completion. However, contemporary methods can only complete and recognize objects from a closed vocabulary labeled
in existing Lidar datasets. Different to that, our
zero-shot approach leverages the temporal context from multi-modal sensor sequences to mine
object shapes and semantic features of observed
objects. These are then distilled into a Lidar-only
instance-level completion and recognition model.
Although we only mine partial shape completions,
we find that our distilled model learns to infer full

1. Introduction
Understanding the complete spatial layout and semantics of
objects and scene geometry from raw sensor data is crucial
for embodied 3D perception and safe navigation.
Contemporary methods for Lidar semantic (Behley et al.,
2019) and instance (Behley et al., 2021) segmentation only
group and classify points directly observable from the Lidar
sensor. In contrast, methods for (amodal) 3D object detection (Zhou & Tuzel, 2018), Semantic Scene Completion
(SSC) (Behley et al., 2019; Li et al., 2024) and Panoptic
Scene Completion (PSC) (Cao et al., 2024) learn to complete objects and scenes directly from labeled sensor data
to predict occluded regions not directly observable in Lidar.
However, prior work can only localize and complete around

†

Work done during a research internship at NVIDIA. 1 NVIDIA
ETH Zurich 3 Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). Correspondence to: Ayça Takmaz <ayca.takmaz@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

