SGD Jittering: A Training Strategy for
Robust and Accurate Model-Based Architectures
Peimeng Guan 1 Mark A. Davenport 1

Abstract

Machine learning algorithms show significantly better reconstructions than classical optimization methods. Most of
the work in the field aims to promote reconstruction quality
using different deep-learning models, such as transformers
(Fabian et al., 2022) and diffusion models (Whang et al.,
2022). In particular, model-based architectures (MBAs)
such as loop unrolling (LU) networks inspired by classical
optimization methods, unroll the objective function into a
sequence of trainable iterative steps with the forward model
A involved in every iteration. MBAs are considered to be
more interpretable than neural networks that learn a direct
inverse without using A (Monga et al., 2021), and achieve
state-of-the-art reconstructions in different fields, such as
natural image restoration (Gilton et al., 2021) and medical
image reconstruction (Bian, 2024).

Inverse problems aim to reconstruct unseen
data from corrupted or perturbed measurements.
While most work focuses on improving reconstruction quality, generalization accuracy and robustness are equally important, especially for
safety-critical applications. Model-based architectures (MBAs), such as loop unrolling methods, are
considered more interpretable and achieve better
reconstructions. Empirical evidence suggests that
MBAs are more robust to perturbations than blackbox solvers, but the accuracy-robustness tradeoff
in MBAs remains underexplored. In this work, we
propose a simple yet effective training scheme for
MBAs, called SGD jittering, which injects noise
iteration-wise during reconstruction. We theoretically demonstrate that SGD jittering not only
generalizes better than the standard mean squared
error training but is also more robust to averagecase attacks. We validate SGD jittering using
denoising toy examples, seismic deconvolution,
and single-coil MRI reconstruction. Both SGD
jittering and its SPGD extension yield cleaner
reconstructions for out-of-distribution data and
demonstrates enhanced robustness against adversarial attacks.

While reconstruction quality is crucial, robustness and generalization accuracy are equally important for IPs. Robustness refers to the model’s ability to handle unwanted noise,
while generalization accuracy measures how well the model
performs on unseen data. For example, in medical image
reconstruction, a model must generalize well to detect subtle
details like small bone fractures and be robust enough to
eliminate artifacts caused by measurement noise. Despite
their importance, robustness and generalization have not
been thoroughly explored in the context of IPs, particularly
in MBAs. While some studies provide empirical assessments of robustness (Gilton et al., 2021; Genzel et al., 2022),
there is a noticeable lack of theoretical analysis (Gottschling
et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
Inverse problems (IPs) aim to recover the underlying signal
x ∈ Rn from corrupted observation y ∈ Rm , where m is
often less than n, leading to non-unique solutions. IPs are
typically modeled as:
y = Ax + z,

In this work, we model MBA training as a bilevel optimization problem without making specific assumptions about
neural network architectures. We theoretically analyze its
generalization and robustness risks in solving denoising
problems and demonstrate that standard mean squared error
(MSE) training may perform poorly in both metrics.

(1)

where A ∈ Rm×n is a known forward model for linear IPs,
and z represents unknown noise in the observation.

Technologies like adversarial training (AT) (Fawzi et al.,
2016; Gilmer et al., 2019; Kannan et al., 2018) and input
noise injection (Fawzi et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2019;
Kannan et al., 2018) are commonly used to enhance robustness, while approaches such as weight perturbation (Wu
et al., 2020), stochastic training (Hardt et al., 2016) and
sharpness-aware minimization (Foret et al., 2021) are de-

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: M. D.
<mdav@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

