Towards Understanding Catastrophic Forgetting in Two-layer Convolutional
Neural Networks
Boqi Li 1 Youjun Wang 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2015), transformers (Kotha et al., 2024), and others, across
different CL scenarios, such as task-incremental CL (Sun
et al., 2023), class-incremental CL (Babakniya et al., 2023),
domain-incremental CL (Jeeveswaran et al., 2024) and so
on.

Continual learning (CL) focuses on the ability
of models to learn sequentially from a stream of
tasks. A major challenge in CL is catastrophic
forgetting (CF). CF is a phenomenon where the
model experiences significant performance degradation on previously learned tasks after training
on new tasks. Although CF is commonly observed in convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
the theoretical understanding about CF within
CNNs remains limited. To fill the gap, we present
a theoretical analysis of CF in a two-layer CNN.
By employing a multi-view data model, we analyze the learning dynamics of different features
throughout CL and derive theoretical insights.
The findings are supported by empirical results
from both simulated and real-world datasets.

Alleviating CF is a core challenge in CL, and many methods
(Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Serrà et al., 2018; Gao & Liu, 2023;
Wu et al., 2024; Gao & Liu, 2025b) have been proposed to
address CF in recent years. Despite tangible improvements
in the field of CL, the theoretical understanding of CF remains underexplored. Recent theoretical works investigate
CF from the perspectives of optimization (Doan et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2023; Evron et al., 2022) and statistics (Goldfarb
& Hand, 2023; Zhao et al., 2024). However, few of these
studies analyze the learning dynamics in non-linear models,
particularly CNNs.
To bridge the gap, we investigate CF in a two-layer CNN
model. Following Allen-Zhu & Li (2023); Shen et al. (2022),
we employ a multi-view data model and focus on taskincremental binary-classification CL. In a multi-view data
model, the data consists of features and noises. By analyzing the learning dynamics of the features and noise,
we identify which components the model ultimately learns
after several time steps. Our data model includes four components: task-specific features, general features, random
features, and background noise. Using gradient descent
(GD) to update the model, we analyze the learning process
of the model. Under mild assumptions, our theoretical results offer insights into the underlying causes of CF. Our
findings suggest that when task-specific features are learned
more rapidly than others, the learning of general features
with low signals is hindered. Additionally, when training on
new tasks, we observe that if the random feature has a large
signal, CF occurs, causing the model to forget knowledge
from previous tasks. We also offer a theoretical insight into
the effectiveness of replay-based methods (Rolnick et al.,
2019; Jeeveswaran et al., 2023), which are commonly used
to mitigate CF.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large volumes of data are generated. Designing a general machine learning model to adapt quickly
to changing environments becomes a significant concern
(Ebrahimi et al., 2021; Goldfarb et al., 2024). One of the
popular approaches is to train the model on a sequence
of multiple tasks, which is called continual learning (CL)
(Parisi et al., 2019; Chen & Liu, 2018; Wang et al., 2024;
Gao & Liu, 2025a). A major challenge in CL is that after
training on a few new tasks, the model “forgets” knowledge
learned from previous tasks with a significant performance
degradation, which is also known as catastrophic forgetting
(CF) (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Goodfellow et al., 2015;
Shi et al., 2021; Korbak et al., 2022). CF is widely observed
in various models, such as linear models (Evron et al., 2022),
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University National
Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan
University Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University. Correspondence to: Weiwei
Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

We perform numerical analysis and conduct experiments on
real-world datasets to further validate our theoretical findings. In numerical analysis, we validate the key components

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

