Multiobjective Distribution Matching

Xiaoyuan Zhang 1 Peijie Li 2 Yingying Yu 1 Yichi Zhang 3 Han Zhao 4 Qingfu Zhang 1

Abstract

can also be expressed in its inverse form: minθ D(p∥pθ ),
since the divergence D(·∥·) is not necessarily symmetric.
This classical distribution matching problem has been extensively studied, with various approaches proposed for
calculating the divergence such as the Wasserstein distance
W(pθ ∥p) (Villani et al., 2009) and f -divergence Minimization (Nowozin et al., 2016). A widely used but underexplored problem addressed in this paper is aligning a single
distribution with multiple distributions simultaneously, formulated as:

Distribution matching is a core concept in machine learning, with applications in generative
models, domain adaptation, and algorithmic fairness. A closely related but less explored challenge
is generating a distribution that aligns with multiple underlying distributions, often with conflicting objectives, known as a Pareto optimal distribution. In this paper, we develop a general theory based on information geometry to construct
the Pareto set and front for the entire exponential family under KL and inverse KL divergences.
This formulation allows explicit derivation of the
Pareto set and front for multivariate normal distributions, enabling applications like multiobjective
variational autoencoders (MOVAEs) to generate
interpolated image distributions. Experimental results on real-world images demonstrate that both
algorithms can generate high-quality interpolated
images across multiple distributions.

min f (θ) = (f1 (θ), . . . , fm (θ))
θ

(1)
= (D(pθ ∥p1 ), . . . , D(pθ ∥pm )),

where each objective can also be presented in its inverted
form, D(pi ∥pθ ). MODM has broad applications in machine
learning, including the controllable generation of intermediate distributions (e.g., images, drugs, speeches) between
multiple underlying distributions, the development of models that balance multiple domain adaptations (Han and Pimentel, 2024; Jin et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021), multi-source
domain adaptation (Wen et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2018), and
group fairness with multiple sub-populations (Chen et al.,
2023; Xian and Zhao, 2024; Xian et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Distribution Matching (DM) is a fundamental concept in
machine learning and has rich applications across multiple
applications, including generative modeling (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Ho and Ermon, 2016; Li et al., 2015), domain
adaptation (Baktashmotlagh et al., 2016; Ganin et al., 2016;
Gong et al., 2024; Tachet des Combes et al., 2020; Zhao
et al., 2018), causal representation learning (Johansson et al.,
2016; Shalit et al., 2017), and algorithmic fairness (Zhang
et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019b; 2022), just to name a few.
A typical DM problem is formulated as:

This paper presents two approaches to study the MODM
problem. The first approach assumes that the distributions
pθ , p1 , . . . , pm belong to a specific distribution family, such
as the Exponential family. Under this condition, we first
investigate a more general case: how to generate Pareto
solutions when the decision space is a dually flat manifold
endowed with a Riemannian metric. Building on these general results, we characterize the Pareto set for multivariate
normal (MVN) distributions under both Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence and inverse KL divergence as illustrative
examples. Furthermore, we highlight a direct application
of generating Pareto-optimal MVN distributions in the context of multiobjective Variational Autoencoder (MOVAE)
algorithm. This algorithm learns multiple latent MVN distributions and employs non-linear decoders to map them
into complex real-world applications. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in
this context. The contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows:

min D(pθ ∥p),
θ

where p denotes the target distribution, and pθ is the distribution which needs to be optimized. Alternatively, the problem
1
Department of Computer Science, CityUHK. 2 Department of
Mathematics, HKU. 3 Department of Statistics, IU. 4 Department
of Computer Science, UIUC. Correspondence to: Qingfu Zhang
<qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

