ProofAug: Efficient Neural Theorem Proving via
Fine-grained Proof Structure Analysis

Haoxiong Liu 1 Jiacheng Sun 2 Zhenguo Li 2 Andrew C Yao 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract
The synergy between deep learning models and
traditional automation tools, such as built-in tactics of the proof assistant and off-the-shelf automated theorem provers, plays a crucial role in
developing robust and efficient neural theorem
provers (NTPs). However, for proof synthesis
with LLMs, previous work applies automation
tools either only when explicitly invoked by the
model or at a single granularity level, failing to
fully exploit their power. To solve this issue, we
propose ProofAug, a procedure that equips LLMs
with automation methods at various granularities
through fine-grained structure analysis of modelgenerated proof proposals. ProofAug also serves
as a versatile plug-and-play module that seamlessly integrates with any tree-search algorithm,
enabling our construction of an efficient recursive
proving (ERP) module to further enhance performance. The superiority of our method is validated
on the miniF2F benchmark using the open-source
deepseek-math-7b-base model and the Isabelle
proof assistant. Notably, by additionally employing a mixed prompting strategy, we achieve a
cumulative pass rate of 66.0% after curation of
the dataset (61.9% for the original version) with
at most 2100 queries to the model per problem (In
contrast, the previous SOTA in Isabelle, SubgoalXL (Zhao et al., 2024), only achieves 56.1% using 16384 queries per problem). We also implement a Lean 4 version of ProofAug that can improve the pass@1 performance of Kimina-ProverPreview-Distill-1.5B from 44.3% to 50.4% on
miniF2F-test. Our code is available at https://
github.com/haoxiongliu/ProofAug.

Automated theorem proving is a field that not only appeals
to mathematicians looking for efficient formalization and
proof automation for mathematical theorems, but also finds
significant applications in real-world industries such as integrated circuit design and software engineering (Bibel, 2013;
Schumann, 2013). Early applications of machine learning methods on automated theorem proving focus on tasks
such as premise selection (Irving et al., 2016) and proof
search (Loos et al., 2017) in SMT solvers or resolution/superposition provers, often interleaved with handcrafted
heuristics. Recently, rapid progress in mathematical reasoning with large language models (LLMs) has awoken a
flourishing interest for directly synthesizing formal proofs
using generative language models.
In literature, there are primarily two paradigms for direct
proof synthesis: the proof-step generation paradigm and
the whole-proof generation paradigm, each corresponding
to a distinct proof style. For proof assistants where proofs
are mainly in the procedural style (or tactic-style), such as
MetaMath (Megill & Wheeler, 2019) and HOL Light (Harrison, 2009), previous work adopts the proof-step generation
paradigm (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Lample et al., 2022; Han
et al., 2022; Polu et al., 2022), where in each iteration the
model is requested to generate one tactic to be applied in the
interactive theorem prover (ITP)1 . Then the ITP provides
information on the updated proof state, which sometimes
could be indispensable for people to finish the remaining
proof. Proof-step generation methods typically use treesearch algorithms to guide the proof process, inspired by
the success of AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016). In contrast, for
proof systems where declarative style proofs are common,
such as Isabelle and Lean 4, computation-efficient wholeproof generation methods become possible. However, the
efficiency in this paradigm is not free. Any incorrect application of a proof method that bridges the gap between two
proof terms (or goals/conjectures) will cause the proof to
fail to pass the ITP verification check.

1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.
Correspondence to: Haoxiong Liu <liuhx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Zhenguo Li
<li.zhenguo@huawei.com>.

1
We use the terms ‘interactive theorem prover’ and ‘proof
assistant’ interchangeably with a nuance: the former emphasizes
the formal system aspects, while the latter highlights its role in
assisting users.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

