Balancing Interference and Correlation in Spatial Experimental Designs: A
Causal Graph Cut Approach

Jin Zhu * 1 Jingyi Li * 2 Hongyi Zhou 3 Yinan Lin 4 Zhenhua Lin 2 Chengchun Shi 1

Abstract

interventions applied to one experimental unit may influence others, leading to the violation of the fundamental
stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA) for causal
inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2015); (ii) the strong outcome
correlations among units, which increase the variance of
the causal effect estimator. We present the following examples to illustrate.

This paper focuses on the design of spatial experiments to optimize the amount of information derived from the experimental data and enhance the accuracy of the resulting causal effect estimator. We propose a surrogate function for the mean squared error (MSE) of the
estimator, which facilitates the use of classical
graph cut algorithms to learn the optimal design. Our proposal offers three key advances:
(1) it accommodates moderate to large spatial interference effects; (2) it adapts to different spatial covariance functions; (3) it is computationally efficient. Theoretical results and numerical experiments based on synthetic environments
and a dispatch simulator that models a city-scale
ridesharing market, further validate the effectiveness of our design. A python implementation of
our method is available at https://github.
com/Mamba413/CausalGraphCut.

Example 1: A/B testing in marketplaces. A/B testing is
frequently used in two-sided markets such as Uber, Lyft,
Airbnb and eBay to assess the impact of a newly developed product relative to a standard control. It has become
the gold standard for companies in conducting data-driven
decision making (Johari et al., 2022). Spatial interference
is ubiquitous in marketplaces. For instance, ridesharing
companies constantly offer subsidizing policies to drivers
or passengers across different regions in a city. Applying a
subsidizing policy in one location can attract drivers from
neighboring regions to this area, potentially decreasing the
driver supply in other regions. Thus, a subsidizing policy in
one location can affect outcomes at other locations, inducing interference over space (Shi et al., 2023a). Meanwhile,
market features like online driver numbers and call order
numbers form interconnected spatial networks, leading to
considerable spatial correlation (Luo et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Background. Before deploying any policy in practice, it
is essential to evaluate its impact. This renders randomized
control trials or online experiments extensively used for accurate policy evaluation. In numerous applications, the experiments involve multiple units that are either distributed
across different spatial regions or connected through a network. The spatial or network dependencies inherent in
these experiments pose two unique challenges for policy
evaluation: (i) the existence of interference effects where

Example 2: Environmental and epidemiological applications. Environmental and epidemiological studies frequently utilize spatial data to examine causal effects of
certain interventions on health outcomes in different geographical regions (Reich et al., 2021). Spatial correlation
and interference are likely to arise in these applications.
For instance, in evaluating the impact of vaccination campaigns on disease incidence, infection rates exhibit strong
correlations within regions. Furthermore, the vaccination
coverage in a given region not only influences its own infection rate but also those in the neighboring regions (VanderWeele et al., 2012; Perez-Heydrich et al., 2014).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, London School
of Economics and Political Science, London, United Kingdom
2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, National University
of Singapore, Singapore 3 Department of Mathematics, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 4 National Center for Applied Mathematics in Chongqing, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing,
China. Correspondence to: Zhenhua Lin <linz@nus.edu.sg>,
Chengchun Shi <c.shi7@lse.ac.uk>.

Example 3: Experimentation in social networks. Social network sites such as Facebook and LinkedIn extensively conduct online experiments to evaluate user engagement or satisfaction from a new service or feature. In these
experiments, the treatment applied to a given user may
spill over to other users via underlying social connections

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

