AnalogGenie-Lite: Enhancing Scalability and Precision
in Circuit Topology Discovery through Lightweight Graph Modeling

Jian Gao 1 Weidong Cao 2 Xuan Zhang 1

Abstract

ered fundamentally by the semiconductor integrated circuits
(ICs) technology. The relentless performance improvements
of ICs have been the driving force behind the continuous
advancement of these innovations and will continue to play
a key role in enabling future technological breakthroughs.
Historically, remarkable progress in IC performance has
been primarily driven by semiconductor process scaling,
evolving from 10 µm in the early 1960s to the cutting-edge
2 nm nodes of today – a 5000× in dimension reduction
and nearly 100000× in performance improvement. This
progression laid the foundation for the well-known Moore’s
law, which predicts that computing power (i.e., CPU performance) doubles approximately every 18 months – a principle that has shaped the trajectory of modern technology. Yet,
the end of Moore’s law is looming (Theis & Wong, 2017)
and the continuous performance enhancements of ICs can
no longer be expected from technology scaling, a crucial
question thus arises: How can we sustain and advance IC
performance in the post-Moore era?

The sustainable performance improvements of
integrated circuits (ICs) drive the continuous advancement of nearly all transformative technologies. Since its invention, IC performance enhancements have been dominated by scaling the
semiconductor technology. Yet, as Moore’s law
tapers off, a crucial question arises: How can
we sustain IC performance in the post-Moore
era? Creating new circuit topologies has emerged
as a promising pathway to address this fundamental need. This work proposes AnalogGenieLite, a decoder-only transformer that discovers
novel analog IC topologies with significantly enhanced scalability and precision via lightweight
graph modeling. AnalogGenie-Lite makes several
unique contributions, including concise devicepin representations
 (i.e., advancing the best prior
art from O n2 to O (n)), frequent sub-graph
mining, and optimal sequence modeling. Compared to state-of-the-art circuit topology discovery methods, it achieves 5.15× to 71.11× gains
in scalability and 23.5% to 33.6% improvements
in validity. Case studies on other domains’ graphs
are also provided to show the broader applicability
of the proposed graph modeling approach. Source
code: https://github.com/xz-group/
AnalogGenie-Lite.

Developing novel circuit topologies, especially for analog
ICs, has emerged as a promising pathway to meet this critical challenge (Schuman et al., 2022; Mohseni et al., 2022;
De Leon et al., 2021). Analog ICs essentially bridge the
physical world and cyberspace by dealing with continuous
signals and enabling seamless interaction with digital ICs in
the cyber domain that handle binary data. Their topologies
(i.e., interconnections between different devices) primarily
determine the performance, functionality, and efficiency
of a circuit once a semiconductor process is finalized to
implement the circuit, akin to a protein structure that dictates the generation of amino acids. Yet, unlike their digital
counterparts that can be easily synthesized with high-level
hardware description languages (e.g., Verilog and VHDL)
or programming languages (e.g., C) or even multiple generative AI-based tools (Blocklove et al., 2023; Thakur et al.,
2024; Fu et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023),
analog ICs have relied on a longstanding handcraft design
process. This is mainly due to their inherent complexity,
which makes them resistant to the universal and hierarchical
abstraction that digital ICs benefit from. Thus, the discovery of novel analog circuit topologies has been significantly
limited since the invention of ICs and remains a critical
challenge to be addressed.

1. Introduction
Nearly every transformative technology over the past several
decades, ranging from medical devices and 5G communication to generative AI and quantum computing, has been pow1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, The George Washington University,
NW Washington, DC, USA. Correspondence to: Xuan Zhang
<xuan.zhang@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

