MODA: MOdular Duplex Attention for
Multimodal Perception, Cognition, and Emotion Understanding

Zhicheng Zhang 1 2 † Wuyou Xia 1 Chenxi Zhao 1 † Yan Zhou 3 Xiaoqiang Liu 3 Yongjie Zhu 3 ‡ Wenyu Qin 3
Pengfei Wan 3 Di Zhang 3 Jufeng Yang 1 2
(a)

Abstract

(b)

Corleone: A man who doesn't spend time
with his family can never be a real man

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) recently showed strong capacity in integrating data
among multiple modalities, empowered by a generalizable attention architecture. Advanced methods predominantly focus on language-centric tuning while less exploring multimodal tokens mixed
through attention, posing challenges in high-level
tasks that require fine-grained cognition and emotion understanding. In this work, we identify the
attention deficit disorder problem in multimodal
learning, caused by inconsistent cross-modal attention and layer-by-layer decayed attention activation. To address this, we propose a novel
attention mechanism, termed MOdular Duplex
Attention (MODA), simultaneously conducting
the inner-modal refinement and inter-modal interaction. MODA employs a correct-after-align
strategy to effectively decouple modality alignment from cross-layer token mixing. In the
alignment phase, tokens are mapped to duplex
modality spaces based on the basis vectors, enabling the interaction between visual and language modality. Further, the correctness of attention scores is ensured through adaptive masked
attention, which enhances the model’s flexibility
by allowing customizable masking patterns for
different modalities. Extensive experiments on
21 benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness
of MODA in perception, cognition, and emotion
tasks. Source code and demo are available in
https://zzcheng.top/MODA.

(c)
32

SOTA (LLaVA-NeXT): In the dialogue, we see
a scene from a film where two characters
(
:three), are engaged in a conversation.
The character on the left, who appears to be a
man in a suit and tie, is speaking to the
character on the right, who is wearing a tuxedo
with a red flower on the lapel. The character
on the right is looking down (
:looking at
Johnny), possibly at a piece of paper or a
small object in his hand, and his expression is
one of peace or contemplation (
:gravity).

Layer-wise Attention Score

Text
Visual

Figure 1. Illustration of deficit disorder attention problem. (a)
Given the detailed image and lines from The Godfather, (b) we
highlight incorrect responses, corresponding hallucinated explanations, and attached answers. (c) We visualize attention score across
layers, highlighting inconsistent attention across modalities.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the blossom of large language models (Chiang et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024; Teknium et al.,
2024), multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have
shown strong capacity in integrating multimodal data as
human (Tong et al., 2024a; Brown et al., 2020; Bai et al.,
2023), which illuminate a promising pathway toward Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Advanced effort has been
devoted to constructing MLLM (Achiam et al., 2023), focusing on exploring more insightful data curation, model
tuning, and evaluation benchmarks. As the controller of
agent, MLLMs provide a natural solution by conducting
content perception (Liu et al., 2023), understanding role
cognition (Dai et al., 2025), and analyzing human emotion (Yang et al., 2024). One more step forward into AGI
lies in high-level multimodal understanding like humans, including cognition and emotion. Cognition, as a higher-level
capability, requires the ability to model relationships and
reasoning across modalities (Dai et al., 2025; Pessoa, 2022).
Beyond cognition, emotion understanding is another critical
aspect of fine-grained multimodal comprehension (Yang
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023). These high-level multimodal tasks pose new challenges for MLLMs.

†
Work done during the internship at Kuaishou ‡ Project Leader
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai
University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Kuaishou Technology. Correspondence to: Jufeng Yang <yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

