Fast Tensor Completion via Approximate Richardson Iteration

Mehrdad Ghadiri 1 Matthew Fahrbach 2 Yunbum Kook 3 Ali Jadbabaie 1
b without explicit
regularization term. For brevity, we write X
dependence on θ. Rank constraints can be incorporated into
(1) by including appropriate penalty terms in R(θ), e.g., by
using ℓ1 or ℓ2 regularization terms to reduce the effective
dimension (Fahrbach et al., 2022).

Abstract
We study tensor completion (TC) through the lens
of low-rank tensor decomposition (TD). Many TD
algorithms use fast alternating minimization methods to solve highly structured linear regression
problems at each step (e.g., for CP, Tucker, and
tensor-train decompositions). However, such algebraic structure is often lost in TC regression problems, making direct extensions unclear. This work
proposes a novel lifting method for approximately
solving TC regression problems using structured
TD regression algorithms as blackbox subroutines,
enabling sublinear-time methods. We analyze the
convergence rate of our approximate Richardson
iteration-based algorithm, and our empirical study
shows that it can be 100x faster than direct methods for CP completion on real-world tensors.

This work focuses on the sum of squared errors
LΩ ( b
X, X) =

(2)

To introduce our approach, we use a running example where
b = G ×1 A(1) ×2 A(2) · · · ×N A(N ) is a low-rank Tucker
X
decomposition with core tensor G ∈ RR1 ×···×RN and factor
matrices A(n) ∈ RIn ×Rn . We do not focus on regularization in this paper, but our approach extends to regularized
problems, provided there exists an algorithm that accelerates
the corresponding structured and regularized objectives. For
example, Fahrbach et al. (2022) present subquadratic-time
algorithms for Kronecker ridge regression (i.e., ℓ2 regularization).

Tensor completion (TC) is the higher-order generalization
of matrix completion. It has many applications across data
mining, machine learning, signal processing, and statistics
(see Song et al. (2019) for a detailed survey of applications).
In the TC problem, we are given a partially observed tensor
as input (i.e., only a subset of its entries is known), and the
goal is to impute the missing values. Under low-rank and
other statistical assumptions, we can recover the missing
values by minimizing a loss function over only the observed
entries.

In general, TC is a nonconvex and NP-hard problem (Hillar
& Lim, 2013). The special case where Ω = [I1 ] × · · · × [IN ]
is the widely studied tensor decomposition (TD) problem,
for which alternating least squares (ALS) methods are often
used to compute G, A(1) , . . . , A(N ) .
Each ALS step fixes all but one of G, A(1) , . . . , A(N ) , and
optimizes the unfixed component. In the case of TD, each
ALS step is a highly structured linear regression problem.
For example, in the core tensor update for G, ALS solves

Consider a tensor X ∈ RI1 ×···×IN with a subset of observed
indices Ω ⊆ [I1 ] × · · · × [IN ]. The general TC problem is
θ

(b
xi1 ...iN − xi1 ...iN )2 .

(i1 ,...,iN )∈Ω

1. Introduction

b
min LΩ (X(θ),
X) + R(θ) ,

X

min

G′ ∈RR1 ×···×RN

(1)

N
O
n=1

!
A

(n)

vec(G′ ) − vec(X)

, (3)
2

where ⊗ is the Kronecker product and vec(G′ ) ∈ RR is the
QN
flattened version of tensor G′ , with R := n=1 Rn .

b
where θ are the learnable parameters, X(θ)
∈ RI1 ×···×IN is
the reconstructed tensor, LΩ is the loss function defining the
b
error between X(θ)
and X on entries in Ω, and R(θ) is the

Diao et al. (2019) and Fahrbach et al. (2022) recently exploited the Kronecker product structure in (3) to give algorithms with running
QNtimes that are sublinear in the size of the
full tensor I := n=1 In . These approaches use leverage
score sampling to approximately solve (3).

*
Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 Google Research 3 Georgia Tech.
Correspondence to: Mehrdad Ghadiri <mehrdadg@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In TC, however, only a subsetNof observations appear in the
N
loss function. Letting A = n=1 A(n) and b = vec(X),
1

