Geometric Median (GM) Matching for
Robust k-Subset Selection from Noisy Data

Anish Acharya 1 2 Sujay Sanghavi 1 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 3 4 Inderjit S. Dhillon 1 5

Abstract

ing data (Radford et al., 2018; 2021b; Brown et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023; Kaplan et al., 2020; Hestness et al.,
2017). However, such large-scale training is usually associated with enormous computational costs, hindering the path
to democratizing AI (Paul et al., 2021).

Data pruning – the combinatorial task of selecting a small and representative subset from a large
dataset, is crucial for mitigating the enormous
computational costs associated with training datahungry modern deep learning models at scale.
Since large-scale data collections are invariably
noisy, developing data pruning strategies that remain robust even in the presence of corruption is
critical in practice. Existing data pruning methods
often fail under high corruption rates due to their
reliance on empirical mean estimation, which is
highly sensitive to outliers. In response, this work
proposes Geometric Median (G M) Matching, a
novel k-subset selection strategy that leverages
the G M, a robust estimator with an optimal breakdown point of 1/2; to enhance resilience against
noisy data. Our method iteratively selects a ksubset such that the mean of the subset approximates the G M of the (potentially) noisy dataset,
ensuring robustness even under arbitrary corruption. We provide theoretical guarantees, showing
that G M M ATCHING enjoys an improved
√O(1/k)
convergence rate, outperforming O(1/ k) scaling of uniform sampling, even under arbitrary
corruption. Extensive experiments across image
classification and image generation tasks demonstrate that G M M ATCHING consistently outperforms existing pruning approaches, particularly
in high-corruption settings; making it a strong
baseline for robust data pruning.

Data pruning – the combinatorial task of reducing a large
training set into a small informative subset (Feldman, 2020;
Agarwal et al., 2005; Muthukrishnan et al., 2005; Har-Peled,
2011; Feldman & Langberg, 2011), is a promising approach
to reduce the enormous computational and storage costs of
modern deep learning.
1.1. Robustness vs Diversity
Consequently, a large body of recent work has been proposed to solve the combinatorial subset selection problem.
At a high level, these approaches rely on some carefully designed importance scoring criterion to rank the training samples, retaining a fraction of them as representative samples
(super samples) used for training the downstream model.
For example, spatial sampling approaches (Xia et al., 2022;
Joshi & Mirzasoleiman, 2023; Sorscher et al., 2022; Needell
et al., 2014) calculate the importance score of a sample in
terms of the distance from the centroid of its corresponding
class marginal. Samples closer to the centroid are considered the most prototypical (easy) and those far from the
centroid are treated as least prototypical (hard). Canonical
scoring criteria have also been developed in terms of gradients (Paul et al., 2021), uncertainty (Pleiss et al., 2020),
and forgetfulness (Toneva et al., 2018). Notably, the spatial distance-based score is closely related to the gradient
/ uncertainty / forgetting-based score. Samples close (far
away) to the class centroid are often associated with smaller
(larger) gradient norm / lower (higher) uncertainty / harder
(easier) to forget (Paul et al., 2021; Sorscher et al., 2022;
Xia et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep learning has been largely fueled
by the training of gigantic models on vast amounts of train-

In the ideal scenario i.e. in the absence of any corruption,
hard examples are known to contribute the most towards
downstream generalization performance (Katharopoulos &
Fleuret, 2018; Joshi et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2010; Balcan
et al., 2007) as they often encode the most discriminative
and task-relevant information in the dataset (Xu et al., 2020).

1

University of Texas at Austin 2 Amazon 3 University of California, Berkeley 4 Bespoke Labs 5 Google. Correspondence to: Anish
Acharya <anishacharya@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

