Emergence in Non-Neural Models:
Grokking Modular Arithmetic via Average Gradient Outer Product

Neil Mallinar 1 2 Daniel Beaglehole 1 Libin Zhu 1 Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan 2 Parthe Pandit 3
Mikhail Belkin 4

Accuracy

Abstract

Square Loss

Neural networks trained to solve modular arithmetic tasks exhibit grokking, the phenomenon
where the test accuracy improves only long after
the model achieves 100% training accuracy in the
training process. It is often taken as an example of “emergence”, where model ability manifests sharply through a phase transition. In this
work, we show that the phenomenon of grokking
is not specific to neural networks nor to gradient descent-based optimization. Specifically, we
show that grokking occurs when learning modular arithmetic with Recursive Feature Machines
(RFM), an iterative algorithm that uses the Average Gradient Outer Product (AGOP) to enable task-specific feature learning with kernel machines. We show that RFM and, furthermore, neural networks that solve modular arithmetic learn
block-circulant features transformations which
implement the previously proposed Fourier multiplication algorithm.

RFM Iterations

Learned Feature (AGOP) Matrices

Figure 1. Recursive Feature Machines grok the modular arithmetic
task f ∗ (x, y) = (x + y) mod 59.

the simplest, most striking examples supporting this idea is
“grokking” modular arithmetic (Power et al., 2022; Nanda
et al., 2023). A neural network trained to predict modular
arithmetic operations on a fixed data set rapidly transitions
from near-zero to perfect (100%) test accuracy at a certain
point in the optimization process. Surprisingly, this transition point occurs long after perfect training accuracy is
achieved. Not only is this contradictory to traditional wisdom regarding overfitting but, as we will show, some aspects
of grokking do not fit neatly with our modern understanding
of “benign overfitting” (Bartlett et al., 2021; Belkin, 2021).

1. Introduction
In recent years the idea of “emergence” has become an
important narrative in machine learning. While there is
no broad agreement on the definition (Rogers & Luccioni,
2023), it is often argued that “skills” emerge during the
training process once certain data size, compute, or model
size thresholds are achieved (Wei et al., 2022; Arora &
Goyal, 2023). Furthermore, these skills are believed to appear rapidly, exhibiting sharp and seemingly unpredictable
improvements in performance at these thresholds. One of

Despite a large amount of recent work on emergence and,
specifically, grokking, (see, e.g., (Power et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Thilak et al., 2022; Furuta
et al., 2024; Miller et al., 2024)), the nature and existence of
the emergent phenomena remains contested. The recent paper (Schaeffer et al., 2023) suggests that the rapid emergence
of skills may be a “mirage” due to the mismatch between the
discontinuous metrics used for evaluation, such as accuracy,
and the continuous loss used in training. The authors argue
that, in contrast to accuracy, the test (or validation) loss or
some other suitably chosen metric may decrease gradually

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA 2 The Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 IIT Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 4 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, UC San Diego,
La Jolla, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Neil Mallinar <nmallina@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

