Adaptive Self-improvement LLM Agentic System for ML Library Development

Genghan Zhang 1 Weixin Liang 1 Olivia Hsu 1 Kunle Olukotun 1
b. Adaptive self-improvement learning

Abstract
ML libraries, often written in architecture-specific
programming languages (ASPLs) that target
domain-specific architectures, are key to efficient ML systems. However, writing these highperformance ML libraries is challenging because
it requires expert knowledge of both ML algorithms and the ASPL. Large language models
(LLMs), on the other hand, have shown general
coding capabilities. However, challenges remain
when using LLMs for generating ML libraries
using ASPLs because 1) this task is complicated
even for human experts and 2) there are limited
code examples due to the esoteric and evolving
nature of ASPLs. We present an adaptive selfimprovement agentic system that enables LLMs
to perform such complex reasoning under limited data by iteratively improving their capability
through self-generated experience. In order to
evaluate the effectiveness of our system, we construct a benchmark of a typical ML library and
generate ASPL code with both open and closedsource LLMs on this benchmark. Our results
show improvements of up to 3.9× over a baseline
single LLM 1 .

Select

?
Task

Demonstrations
LLM
Agents

Multi-level
experiences

Filter

Stratify
Verifier

a. Agentic system organization

Answer
Parallel sampling

Figure 1. We propose an adaptive self-improvement LLM agentic
system. LLM agents start from their base knowledge and accumulate experiences through parallel sampling. Our adaptive
self-improvement learning algorithm filters high-quality answers,
stratifies the earned experiences by difficulty, and adaptively selects demonstrations to enhance LLM agents.

generations of DSAs evolve because new DSAs introduce
specialized functions to these existing ASPLs (Choquette,
2023). Efficiently utilizing these new functions requires
fundamentally different programming styles and thus new
ASPLs (Thakkar et al., 2023; Hagedorn et al., 2023).
Each DSA needs a corresponding ML library, a collection of
ML operators written in its ASPL, before programmers can
effectively use the DSA to accelerate ML applications. ML
library development is challenging as it requires expertise in
both ML algorithms and the target ASPL. Essentially, library
development is a generation process that composes lowlevel ASPL primitives into high-level ML operators (Dong
et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025).

1. Introduction
With the ending of Dennard Scaling and Moore’s Law,
computer architectures are specializing in domain applications to achieve greater performance and efficiency and
will continue to do so (Hennessy & Patterson, 2019). New
domain-specific architectures (DSA) typically come with
new architecture-specific programming languages (ASPL),
such as CUDA for NVIDIA GPUs (NVIDIA, 2025), HIP
for AMD GPUs (AMD, 2025), and Pallas for Google
TPUs (Google, 2025). Even existing ASPLs change as

Furthermore, ML library development using ASPLs requires
complex reasoning while minimizing data requirements.
ML libraries development often occurs in parallel with hardware manufacturing to meet production deadlines (Villa
et al., 2021). This time-constrained library–chip co-design
process leaves limited code examples. Moreover, this task is
complicated even for expert human programmers. For example, the publication of FlashAttention-3 (Shah et al., 2024)
lagged behind the release of the H100 by two years. The
challenge is further intensified by the need for ML libraries
to co-evolve with new hardware to sustain performance. For
instance, directly adapting FlashAttention-2 (Dao, 2023)
from the A100 to H100 GPU witnessed a 47% performance
drop (Spector et al., 2024).

1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA.
Correspondence to: Genghan Zhang <zgh23@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The example code is public at https://github.com/
zhang677/PCL-lite

1

