Origin Identification for Text-Guided Image-to-Image Diffusion Models

Wenhao Wang 1 Yifan Sun 2 Zongxin Yang 3 Zhentao Tan 4 Zhengdong Hu 1 Yi Yang 2
Change this image to
President Joe Biden
being assassinated.

Remove the watermark. An overhead
view of a couple walking hand in
hand along a narrow sandbar.

Translate the image of a modern
urban scene with a wrecked car
into a medieval setting.

(a) Misinformation

(b) Copyright infringement

(c) Evading content tracing

Figure 1: The illustration for misusing text-guided image-to-image diffusion models in several scenarios: misinformation,
copyright infringement, and evading content tracing. Specifically: (a) An altered image originally showing Donald Trump
post-assassination is edited to depict Joe Biden instead; (b) The removal of a watermark from a copyrighted beach image,
followed by modifications, could assist in escaping copyright checks; (c) An image of a Norwegian government building
after an explosion is altered to bypass restrictions, which limit the spread of disturbing images.

Abstract

guided Prompts, which can be used to train and
test potential IDentification models across various
diffusion models. In the method section, we first
prove the existence of a linear transformation that
minimizes the distance between the pre-trained
Variational Autoencoder embeddings of generated samples and their origins. Subsequently, it is
demonstrated that such a simple linear transformation can be generalized across different diffusion
models. Experimental results show that the proposed method achieves satisfying generalization
performance, significantly surpassing similaritybased methods (+31.6% mAP), even those with
generalization designs. The project is available at
https://id2icml.github.io.

Text-guided image-to-image diffusion models excel in translating images based on textual prompts,
allowing for precise and creative visual modifications. However, such a powerful technique can
be misused for spreading misinformation, infringing on copyrights, and evading content tracing.
This motivates us to introduce the task of origin IDentification for text-guided Image-to-image
Diffusion models (ID2 ), aiming to retrieve the
original image of a given translated query. A
straightforward solution to ID2 involves training
a specialized deep embedding model to extract
and compare features from both query and reference images. However, due to visual discrepancy
across generations produced by different diffusion
models, this similarity-based approach fails when
training on images from one model and testing on
those from another, limiting its effectiveness in
real-world applications. To solve this challenge
of the proposed ID2 task, we contribute the first
dataset and a theoretically guaranteed method,
both emphasizing generalizability. The curated
dataset, OriPID, contains abundant Origins and

1. Introduction
Text-guided image-to-image diffusion models are notable
for their ability to transform images based on textual descriptions, allowing for detailed and highly customizable
modification. While they are increasingly used in creative
industries for tasks such as digital art re-creation, customizing visual content, and personalized virtual try-ons, there
are growing security concerns associated with their misuse. As illustrated in Fig. 1, for instance, they could be
misused for misinformation, copyright infringement, and
evading content tracing. To help combat these misuses,
this paper introduces the task of origin IDentification for
text-guided Image-to-image Diffusion models (ID2 ), which
aims to identify the original image of a generated query from

1

University of Technology Sydney 2 Zhejiang University
Harvard University 4 Peking University. Correspondence to: Yi
Yang <yangyics@zju.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

