Identifying biological perturbation targets through
causal differential networks
Menghua Wu 1 Umesh Padia 1 Sean H. Murphy 1 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract

variables, identifying the root causes, or targets, that induce
these transitions has vast therapeutic implications, from cellular reprogramming (Cherry & Daley, 2012) to mechanism
of action elucidation (Schenone et al., 2013).

Identifying variables responsible for changes to a
biological system enables applications in drug target discovery and cell engineering. Given a pair
of observational and interventional datasets, the
goal is to isolate the subset of observed variables
that were the targets of the intervention. Directly
applying causal discovery algorithms is challenging: the data may contain thousands of variables
with as few as tens of samples per intervention,
and biological systems do not adhere to classical
causality assumptions. We propose a causalityinspired approach to address this practical setting.
First, we infer noisy causal graphs from the observational and interventional data. Then, we learn to
map the differences between these graphs, along
with additional statistical features, to sets of variables that were intervened upon. Both modules
are jointly trained in a supervised framework, on
simulated and real data that reflect the nature of biological interventions. This approach consistently
outperforms baselines for perturbation modeling
on seven single-cell transcriptomics datasets. We
also demonstrate significant improvements over
current causal discovery methods for predicting
soft and hard intervention targets across a variety
of synthetic data.1

Machine learning methods have primarily been designed to
infer the effects of perturbations on cells, with the goal of
generalizing to unseen perturbations (Roohani et al., 2023),
or unseen cell distributions (Lotfollahi et al., 2023; Bunne
et al., 2023). In principle, these models can be used within
an active learning framework to discover intervention targets (Huang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a). However,
the number of candidate sets scales exponentially with the
number of variables under consideration, and there are limited training data for combinatorial perturbations (< 150
pairs in Norman et al. (2019)). Thus, this option may be
impractical for larger search spaces.
Alternatively, some methods predict targets by comparing
pairs of “before” and “after” cell states, similar to this paper.
They do so by attributing observed differences to sparse,
mechanistic changes. Specifically, relationships between
variables are represented through a graph, e.g. a gene regulatory network (Babu et al., 2004). Existing methods often use data-mined relations as priors for this graph, and
search for modifications to the set of edges that best explain the interventional data (Cosgrove et al., 2008; Gonzalez et al., 2024). However, biological knowledge graphs
are incomplete and noisy priors. They contain heterogeneous, potentially conflicting information, since the reported
findings were observed under diverse contexts (Ashburner
et al., 2000). Moreover, different cell populations may exhibit distinct gene regulatory behavior (Huttlin et al., 2021),
leading to incomplete knowledge, especially of less wellcharacterized systems.

1. Introduction
Cells form the basis of biological systems, and they take on
a multitude of dynamical states throughout their lifetime.
In addition to natural factors like cell cycle, external perturbations (e.g. drugs, gene knockdown) can alter a cell’s
state. While perturbations can affect numerous downstream

In this paper, we propose causal differential networks (C DN):
a causality-inspired approach to identify variables that drive
desired shifts in cell state, while estimating their mechanistic structure directly from data. Given a pair of observational and interventional datasets, we train a causal structure
learner to predict causal graphs that could have generated
each dataset. The pair of graphs is input to an attentionbased classifier, which predicts whether each variable was
subject to intervention. To address the challenges of data

1
Department of Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Menghua
Wu <rmwu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/rmwu/cdn

1

