When to Forget? Complexity Trade-offs in Machine Unlearning

Martin Van Waerebeke 1 Marco Lorenzi 2 Giovanni Neglia 2 Kevin Scaman 1

,

Abstract

1
rf d

Inefficient
Unlearning (IR)

0 rf2

Un Effi
lea cie
rni nt
ng (
E

higher privacy

R)

Machine Unlearning (MU) aims at removing the
influence of specific data points from a trained
model, striving to achieve this at a fraction of the
cost of full model retraining. In this paper, we
analyze the efficiency of unlearning methods and
establish the first upper and lower bounds on minimax computation times for this problem, characterizing the performance of the most efficient
algorithm against the most difficult objective function. Specifically, for strongly convex objective
functions and under the assumption that the forget
data is inaccessible to the unlearning method, we
provide a phase diagram for the unlearning complexity ratio—a novel metric that compares the
computational cost of the best unlearning method
to full model retraining. The phase diagram reveals three distinct regimes: one where unlearning
at a reduced cost is infeasible, another where unlearning is trivial because adding noise suffices,
and a third where unlearning achieves significant
computational advantages over retraining. These
findings highlight the critical role of factors such
as data dimensionality, the number of samples to
forget, and privacy constraints in determining the
practical feasibility of unlearning.

Trivial
Unlearning(TR)

lower utility

1 e/e0

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the phase diagram
for unlearning, where e (resp. e0 ) is the target (resp. initial)
excess risk, and κϵ,δ the strength of the privacy constraint
(see Section 4). We describe the existence of three regimes
of unlearning (IR, ER, TR).

(Mantelero, 2013) and CCPA (Goldman, 2020) attempt to
limit these risks and give individuals the right to ask for
erasure of their data, but modern machine learning models
rely on vast corpora, making it impractical and costly to
honor such a request by retraining the model completely
(Cottier et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
With the widespread collection of personal data, privacy
concerns have become more important than ever (Jha et al.,
2024; Kiryati and Landau, 2021). As vast amounts of data
are gathered, the risk of errors or damaging information
being recorded grows, potentially leading to severe consequences in the training of machine learning models. This, in
turn, can result in inaccurate predictions, such as incorrect
medical treatment plans and prognosis (Navarro et al., 2021;
Lawrence et al., 2024). Regulations such as the GDPR

Machine Unlearning (MU) aims to solve this issue by efficiently removing the influence of specific training data
(the ’forget set’) without the need for full model retraining.
MU focuses on developing algorithms that can replicate the
effects of retraining from scratch at a “fraction of its cost”
(Kong and Chaudhuri, 2023; Georgiev et al., 2024).

1
INRIA Paris 2 INRIA Sophia Antipolis. Correspondence to:
Martin Van Waerebeke <martin.van-waerebeke@inria.fr>.

While we want to retrain the model “at a fraction of the
cost”, the exact “fraction” is currently not quantified in
the literature. Specifically, in a general machine learning
setting and for any accepted excess risk e, let us define
rf as the fraction of data in the forget set. We denote by

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

