Neural Solver Selection for Combinatorial Optimization

Chengrui Gao * 1 2 Haopu Shang * 1 2 Ke Xue 1 2 Chao Qian 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs) involve finding an optimal solution over a set of combinatorial alternatives, which has broad and important applications such
as logistics (Konstantakopoulos et al., 2022) and manufacturing (Zhang et al., 2019). To solve COPs, traditional approaches usually depend on heuristics designed by experts,
requiring extensive domain knowledge and considerable
effort. Recently, machine learning techniques have been
introduced to automatically discover effective heuristics for
COPs (Bengio et al., 2021; Cappart et al., 2023), leading to
the burgeoning development of end-to-end neural solvers
that employ deep neural networks to generate solutions for
problem instances (Bello et al., 2017; Kool et al., 2019;
Joshi et al., 2019). Compared to traditional approaches,
these end-to-end neural solvers can not only get rid of the
heavy reliance on expertise, but also realize better inference
efficiency (Bello et al., 2017).

Machine learning has increasingly been employed
to solve NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems, resulting in the emergence of neural solvers
that demonstrate remarkable performance, even
with minimal domain-specific knowledge. To
date, the community has created numerous opensource neural solvers with distinct motivations
and inductive biases. While considerable efforts
are devoted to designing powerful single solvers,
our findings reveal that existing solvers typically demonstrate complementary performance
across different problem instances. This suggests
that significant improvements could be achieved
through effective coordination of neural solvers
at the instance level. In this work, we propose the
first general framework to coordinate the neural
solvers, which involves feature extraction, selection model, and selection strategy, aiming to allocate each instance to the most suitable solvers.
To instantiate, we collect several typical neural
solvers with state-of-the-art performance as alternatives, and explore various methods for each
component of the framework. We evaluated our
framework on two typical problems, Traveling
Salesman Problem (TSP) and Capacitated Vehicle
Routing Problem (CVRP). Experimental results
show that our framework can effectively distribute
instances and the resulting composite solver can
achieve significantly better performance (e.g., reduce the optimality gap by 0.88% on TSPLIB and
0.71% on CVRPLIB) than the best individual neural solver with little extra time cost. Our code is
available at https://github.com/lamda-bbo/neuralsolver-selection.

To enhance the capabilities of neural solvers, a variety of
methods have been proposed, with intensive effort on the
design of frameworks, network architectures, and training
procedures. For example, to improve the performance across
different distributions, (Jiang et al., 2022) proposed adaptively joint training over varied distributions, and (Bi et al.,
2022) leveraged knowledge distillation to integrate the models trained on different distributions. For generalization
on large-scale instances, (Fu et al., 2021) implemented a
divide-and-conquer strategy, (Luo et al., 2023) proposed a
heavy-decoder structure to better capture the relationship
among nodes, while (Gao et al., 2024) utilized the local
transferability and introduced an additional local policy
model. Diffusion models (Sun & Yang, 2023) have also
been adapted to generate the distribution of optimal solutions, demonstrating impressive results. More works include
bisimulation quotienting (Drakulic et al., 2023), latent space
search (Chalumeau et al., 2023), local reconstruction (Cheng
et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024) and so on.

*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Chao
Qian <qianc@nju.edu.cn>.

As various neural solvers are emerging in the community,
the state-of-the-art records for the overall performance on
benchmark problems are frequently refreshed. However,
the detailed comparison of these neural solvers on each
instance has been rarely discussed. Here, we empirically examined the performance of several prevailing neural solvers

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

