LoRA-One: One-Step Full Gradient Could Suffice for Fine-Tuning Large
Language Models, Provably and Efficiently

Yuanhe Zhang 1 2 Fanghui Liu 2 3 Yudong Chen 4

Abstract

while retain the knowledge from pre-trained models. For
scalability, we expect that fine-tuning can be conducted
with low computation/memory cost, i.e., parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) (Houlsby et al., 2019; Han et al., 2024).

This paper explores how theory can guide and
enhance practical algorithms, using Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) in large language models as a case study. We rigorously
prove that, under gradient descent, LoRA adapters
align with specific singular subspaces of the onestep full fine-tuning gradient. This result suggests that, by properly initializing the adapters
using the one-step full gradient, subspace alignment can be achieved immediately—applicable
to both linear and nonlinear models. Building
on our theory, we propose a theory-driven algorithm, LoRA-One, where the linear convergence
(as well as generalization) is built and incorporating preconditioners theoretically helps mitigate
the effects of ill-conditioning. Besides, our theory reveals connections between LoRA-One and
other gradient-alignment-based methods, helping
to clarify misconceptions in the design of such
algorithms. LoRA-One achieves significant empirical improvements over LoRA and its variants
across benchmarks in natural language understanding, mathematical reasoning, and code generation. Code is available at: https://github.
com/YuanheZ/LoRA-One.

One typical PEFT strategy is Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
(Hu et al., 2022), which learns an approximation of the
unknown feature shift ∆ by two low-rank matrices A and B
with rank r, i.e. ∆ ≈ AB under the following initialization
(denoted by index 0):
[A0 ]ij ∼ N (0, α2 )

[B0 ]ij = 0 ,

α > 0 . (LoRA-init)

To improve the performance in the downstream tasks, various LoRA-based algorithms have been proposed based on,
e.g., refined initialization (Li et al., 2025), learning rates
(Hayou et al., 2024), efficiency (Kopiczko et al., 2024), and
gradient information (Meng et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024).
Although LoRA is conceptually simple, its optimization
dynamics are inherently nonlinear and non-convex. There is
few theoretical understanding of its behavior, e.g., optimization from lazy-training regime (Jang et al., 2024; Malladi
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025) to non-lazy training regime
(Kim et al., 2025) and generalization guarantees in some
simplified settings (Dayi & Chen, 2024). It still remains unclear how (low-rank) gradient updates in LoRA evolve and
which subspaces LoRA will converge to. More importantly,
given the application-driven nature of LoRA, a rigorous theoretical understanding should not only explain its behavior
but also inform practical algorithm design. The goal of this
work is to enhance LoRA’s empirical performance through
theoretically grounded insights. To this end, we address
two key questions at the intersection of theory and practice:

1. Introduction
How to efficiently approximate or learn nonlinear models
is a central question in large-scale machine learning, especially in the era of large language models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022). Fine-tuning (Dodge
et al., 2020) aims to make LLMs perform well on new tasks

• Q1: How to characterize low-rank dynamics of LoRA
and the associated subspace alignment in theory?

1
Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, UK.
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, UK.
3
Centre for Discrete Mathematics and its Applications (DIMAP),
University of Warwick, UK. 4 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. Correspondence
to: Fanghui Liu <fanghui.liu@warwick.ac.uk>.

• Q2: How can our theoretical results contribute to algorithm design for LoRA in practice?

2

1.1. Contributions
In this work, we theoretically investigate the behavior of
gradient descent (GD) update of LoRA parameters (At , Bt )
and identify the subspaces they align with. Our theory identifies the optimal initialization strategies in the perspective

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

