AffectGPT: A New Dataset, Model, and Benchmark for Emotion Understanding
with Multimodal Large Language Models

Zheng Lian 1 Haoyu Chen 2 Lan Chen 1 Haiyang Sun 3 Licai Sun 2 Yong Ren 1 Zebang Cheng 4 Bin Liu 1
Rui Liu 5 Xiaojiang Peng 6 Jiangyan Yi 7 Jianhua Tao 7 8

1. Introduction

Abstract
The emergence of multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) advances multimodal emotion
recognition (MER) to the next level—from naive
discriminative tasks to complex emotion understanding with advanced video understanding abilities and natural language description. However,
the current community suffers from a lack of
large-scale datasets with intensive, descriptive
emotion annotations, as well as a multimodalcentric framework to maximize the potential of
MLLMs for emotion understanding. To address
this, we establish a new benchmark for MLLMbased emotion understanding with a novel dataset
(MER-Caption) and a new model (AffectGPT).
Utilizing our model-based crowd-sourcing data
collection strategy, we construct the largest descriptive emotion dataset to date (by far), featuring over 2K fine-grained emotion categories
across 115K samples. We also introduce the AffectGPT model, designed with pre-fusion operations to enhance multimodal integration. Finally,
we present MER-UniBench, a unified benchmark with evaluation metrics tailored for typical MER tasks and the free-form, natural language output style of MLLMs. Extensive experimental results show AffectGPT’s robust performance across various MER tasks. We have released both the code and the dataset to advance
research and development in emotion understanding: https://github.com/zeroQiaoba/AffectGPT.

Emotions encapsulate human intentions, and accurately recognizing emotional states is essential for enhancing humancomputer interaction (Minsky, 1988). Emotions can be conveyed through various human behaviors in different forms
(Chen et al., 2023; Pfister et al., 2011), giving rise to the task
of multimodal emotion recognition (MER), which integrates
multimodal information to evaluate human emotional states.
As a critical area in artificial intelligence, MER has broad
applications, ranging from education (Schutz, 2007) and
psychological counseling (Liu et al., 2021a) to empathic
embodied robots (Spezialetti et al., 2020).
Traditional methods primarily rely on discriminative models
that map human emotions to the most likely categories from
predefined emotion taxonomies. The most widely used taxonomy is Ekman’s theory (Ekman & Keltner, 1970), which
classifies all emotions into six basic categories: sadness,
happiness, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust. However, such
categorical frameworks exhibit some limitations in modeling human affective states. For example, our emotional
expressions are diverse and nuanced due to culture-specific
idioms (Matsumoto, 2001), context-dependent metaphors
(Kövecses, 2003), and highly personalized behavioral patterns (Izard et al., 1993). Current closed-set classification
paradigms fail to capture the rich diversity of emotional
expressions in real-world scenarios (Plutchik, 1980). Meanwhile, the rigid emotion taxonomies oversimplify the continuous spectrum of emotional experiences by forcing discrete
labels (e.g., anger or surprise) onto nuanced affective states
that often coexist (Cowen & Keltner, 2017). Illustrations
are provided in Figure 1, where the diverse and coexisting
issues are presented in Figs. (a) and (b).

1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
CMVS, University of Oulu 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Shenzhen University 5 Inner Mongolia University 6 Shenzhen Technology University 7 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 8 Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. Correspondence
to: Zheng Lian <lianzheng2016@ia.ac.cn>, Jianhua Tao <jhtao@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Recent advances in multi-modal large language models
(MLLMs) enable emotion understanding to move beyond
traditional discriminative approaches, embracing a more
generative framework (Liang et al., 2024). This shift allows
models to describe complex, coexisting emotional states
in natural language. With the vast vocabulary, MLLMs
can generate diverse, descriptive emotion categories beyond basic emotions, offering new opportunities for emotional understanding. However, recent research highlights

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

