MindCustomer: Multi-Context Image Generation Blended with Brain Signal

Muzhou Yu * † 1 Shuyun Lin * 2 Lei Ma 3 4 Bo Lei 3 Kaisheng Ma 2
Overview of MindCustomer

Dual Contexts Generation

Visual Stimuli

MindCustomer

Blend

Triplet Contexts Generation

New Human Subject Few-Shot Generation

Figure 1. MindCustomer seamlessly integrates visual brain signals into multi-context image generation. Given the scarcity of real-world
brain data, it efficiently performs real-time single-image generation without additional inputs (e.g. masks or muti-views of the same image
context). Text context is optional, which provides more semantics or control over the image and brain contexts.

Abstract

present MindCustomer to explore the blending of
visual brain signals in multi-context image generation. We first design shared neural data augmentation for stable cross-subject brain embedding
by introducing the Image-Brain Translator (IBT)
to generate brain responses from visual images.
Then, we propose an effective cross-modal information fusion pipeline that mask-freely adapts
distinct semantics from image and brain contexts
within a diffusion model. It resolves semantic
conflicts for context preservation and enables harmonious context integration. During the fusion
pipeline, we further utilize the IBT to transfer
image context to the brain representation to mitigate the cross-modal disparity. MindCustomer enables cross-subject generation, delivering unified,
high-quality, and natural image outputs. More-

Advancements in generative models have promoted text- and image-based multi-context image generation. Brain signals, offering a direct
representation of user intent, present new opportunities for image customization. However, it faces
challenges in brain interpretation, cross-modal
context fusion and retention. In this paper, we
*
Equal contribution † Work done during internship at Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence. 1 Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 4 Peking University. Correspondence to: Lei Ma
<lei.ma@pku.edu.cn>, Bo Lei <b.lei.2022@hotmail.com>,
Kaisheng Ma <kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

