RULEBREAKERS: Challenging LLMs at the Crossroads between Formal
Logic and Human-like Reasoning

Jason Chan 1 Robert Gaizauskas 1 Zhixue Zhao 1

Abstract
A or B.

Formal logic enables computers to reason in natural language by representing sentences in symbolic forms and applying rules to derive conclusions. However, in what our study characterizes
as “rulebreaker” scenarios, this method can lead
to conclusions that are typically not inferred or accepted by humans given their common sense and
factual knowledge. Inspired by works in cognitive science, we create RULEBREAKERS, the
first dataset for rigorously evaluating the ability of
large language models (LLMs) to recognize and
respond to rulebreakers (versus non-rulebreakers)
in a knowledge-informed and human-like manner.
Evaluating seven LLMs, we find that most models
achieve mediocre accuracy on RULEBREAKERS and exhibit some tendency to over-rigidly
apply logical rules, unlike what is expected from
typical human reasoners. Further analysis suggests that this apparent failure is potentially associated with the models’ poor utilization of their
world knowledge and their attention distribution
patterns. Whilst revealing a limitation of current
LLMs, our study also provides a timely counterbalance to a growing body of recent works that
propose methods relying on formal logic to improve LLMs’ general reasoning capabilities, highlighting their risk of further increasing divergence
between LLMs and human-like reasoning.

Not A.

Not B.

Anne is either in Stockholm or

Anne is in 


somewhere in Sweden.

Stockholm.

Anne is not in Sweden.

Figure 1. An example adapted from Johnson-Laird (1983): rigidly
applying logical rules (top) to premises (left) in natural language
can result in conclusions (right) that humans would not typically
draw or accept, given their common sense and factual knowledge.

symbolic forms (in a process known as semantic parsing)
and then applying a set of pre-defined rules to evaluate or
derive new conclusions (Kamath & Das, 2019; Saparov &
Mitchell, 2022; Olausson et al., 2023, etc.). For example, in
a system using propositional logic (Barker-Plummer et al.,
2011), sentences are converted into atomic propositions
(“A”, “B”) optionally connected by one or more of the five
connectives (“not” (¬), “and” (∧), “or” (∨), “if. . . then”(→),
“...if and only if...” (←
→)). Given two premises, “Anne is either in Stockholm or somewhere in Germany” and “Anne is
not in Germany”, we can convert them symbolically into A
∨ B and ¬B respectively. We can then apply the disjunctive
syllogism rule (for all propositions P and Q, P ∨ Q, ¬Q ∴
P) to correctly conclude that A i.e. “Anne is in Stockholm”.
However, as argued in some cognitive science literature
(Johnson-Laird, 2010, Ragni & Johnson-Laird, 2018, Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2019, etc.), this method of reasoning
purely based on logical form and rules is fundamentally
different from how humans typically reason with natural language statements. A key problem is that this approach can
lead to conclusions which factually contradict the premises
and which humans typically do not draw provided that they
recognize this factual contradiction. Drawing on examples adapted from Johnson-Laird (1983) such as Figure 1,
suppose we are told that “Anne is either in Stockholm or
somewhere in Sweden” (A ∨ B) but we find out in fact that

1. Introduction
Formal logic has numerous applications in mathematics and
computer science (Zach, 2024). In natural language processing (NLP), it enables computers to perform reasoning with
natural language sentences by first converting them into
1
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. Correspondence to:
Zhixue Zhao <zhixue.zhao@sheffield.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

