Safe-EF: Error Feedback for Non-smooth Constrained Optimization

Rustem Islamov 1 Yarden As 2 3 Ilyas Fatkhullin 2 3
parameters to be optimized. The function fi : Rd → R is the
local (possibly non-smooth) loss associated with data on
worker i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n}, and X is a subset of Rd .

Abstract
Federated learning faces severe communication
bottlenecks due to the high dimensionality of
model updates. Communication compression
with contractive compressors (e.g., Top-K) is often preferable in practice but can degrade performance without proper handling. Error feedback
(EF) mitigates such issues but has been largely
restricted for smooth, unconstrained problems,
limiting its real-world applicability where nonsmooth objectives and safety constraints are critical. We advance our understanding of EF in the
canonical non-smooth convex setting by establishing new lower complexity bounds for firstorder algorithms with contractive compression.
Next, we propose Safe-EF, a novel algorithm
that matches our lower bound (up to a constant)
while enforcing safety constraints essential for
practical applications. Extending our approach to
the stochastic setting, we bridge the gap between
theory and practical implementation. Extensive
experiments in a reinforcement learning setup,
simulating distributed humanoid robot training,
validate the effectiveness of Safe-EF in ensuring
safety and reducing communication complexity.

This paradigm is particularly valuable in privacy-sensitive
and resource-constrained settings, where data remains decentralized, and collaboration is achieved without requiring
direct data sharing. For instance, consider a fleet of robots
that operate in homes (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Brohan
et al., 2022). In such settings, traditional centralized learning approaches are impractical, as transmitting raw sensory
data from each robot to a central server would pose severe
privacy risks and require enormous bandwidth. Furthermore,
these robots must adapt to diverse household environments,
necessitating personalized learning while still benefiting
from collective experience across the fleet. Despite its advantages, distributed training faces significant communication bottlenecks due to the high dimensionality of model
updates. This challenge necessitates the development of
communication-efficient algorithms.
Communication compression with Top-K. One prominent strategy to reduce communication costs is the communication compression technique, which applies possibly
randomized compression to updates prior to transmission.
One of the most practical and versatile classes of compression operators are those that satisfy the contractive property:


E ∥C(x) − x∥2 ≤ (1 − δ)∥x∥2
for all x ∈ Rd ,
where δ ∈ (0, 1] represents the accuracy of the compression.
Prominent examples are Top-K sparsifier that preserves K
largest components of vector x in magnitude, and random
sampling methods such as Rand-K that preserves a subset of
K components of x chosen uniformly at random. Although
both Top-K and Rand-K are contractive with δ ≥ K/d,
methods utilizing Top-K operator are often empirically superior due to their greedy nature (You et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Federated learning is a crucial framework for training machine learning models across distributed environments (Konečný et al., 2016; Kairouz, 2019), where data
is naturally stored in a distributed fashion. Formally, such
problems can be expressed as
n
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x),
(1)
x∈X
n i=1

Non-smooth challenges. The majority of works focusing
on communication compression assume that the objective
function is smooth, i.e., differentiable with Lipschitz continuous gradient, simplifying theoretical analysis (Stich et al.,
2018; Richtárik et al., 2021). However, this assumption
limits the applicability of developed methods to many realworld problems, where non-smooth functions frequently
arise. For instance, consider problems involving ReLU activations (Glorot et al., 2011) or clipped objectives such

where n represents the number of workers or machines
participating in the training, and x ∈ Rd denotes the model
1

University of Basel, Switzerland 2 ETH Zürich, Switzerland
ETH AI Center, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Rustem Islamov <rustem.islamov@unibas.ch>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

