Sparsing Law: Towards Large Language Models
with Greater Activation Sparsity

Yuqi Luo * 1 Chenyang Song * 1 Xu Han 1 Yingfa Chen 1 Chaojun Xiao 1 Xiaojun Meng 2 Liqun Deng 2
Jiansheng Wei 2 Zhiyuan Liu 1 Maosong Sun 1
{luo-yq23,scy22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {han-xu,liuzy}@tsinghua.edu.cn

activation ratio
sparsity ratio

Abstract

40%
60%

activation
value

strongly-contributed
elements / neurons

s

weakly-contributed
elements / neurons

gate

Wgate

Activation sparsity denotes the existence of substantial weakly-contributed neurons within feedforward networks of large language models
(LLMs), providing wide potential benefits such
as computation acceleration. However, existing
works lack thorough quantitative studies on this
useful property, in terms of both its measurement
and influential factors. In this paper, we address
three underexplored research questions: (1) How
can activation sparsity be measured more accurately? (2) How is activation sparsity affected by
the model architecture and training process? (3)
How can we build a more sparsely activated and
efficient LLM? Specifically, we develop a generalizable and performance-friendly metric, named
CETT-PPL-1%, to measure activation sparsity.
Based on CETT-PPL-1%, we quantitatively study
the influence of various factors and observe several important phenomena, such as the convergent
power-law relationship between sparsity and training data amount, the higher competence of ReLU
activation than mainstream SiLU activation, the
potential sparsity merit of a small width-depth
ratio, and the scale insensitivity of activation sparsity. Finally, we provide implications for building
sparse and effective LLMs, and demonstrate the
reliability of our findings by training a 2.4B model
with a sparsity ratio of 93.52%, showing 4.1×
speedup compared with its dense version. The
codes and checkpoints are available at https:
//github.com/thunlp/SparsingLaw/.

σ

matrix multiplication

element-wise multiplication

activation
function

FFN(x)

x

input hidden state
(one token)

out

in

Wout

Win

Figure 1: A typical case of activation sparsity (with a sparsity ratio of 60%) in a gated feed-forward network of LLMs.

1. Introduction
Activation sparsity refers to the phenomenon that considerable elements within the output of activation layers (shown
in Figure 1) are zero or low values, and thus the corresponding neurons1 contribute weakly to the final model output
given a specific input. As a prevalent property of many
language and vision modeling architectures (Li et al., 2022),
activation sparsity has wide practical values, such as inference acceleration (Liu et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023),
training acceleration (Zhang et al., 2024b), and LLM interpretation (Sajjad et al., 2022). For instance, Xue et al. (2024)
achieves up to 27.8× inference acceleration on smartphones
by utilizing activation sparsity, while Zhang et al. (2023)
reveals and interprets the emergent modularity in LLMs by
analyzing the specialization of sparsely-activated neurons.
Despite the extensive benefits of activation sparsity, there
are few relevant comprehensive and quantitative studies. To
fill this gap, we focus on three research questions:

*
Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for
AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
China. Correspondence to: Xu Han <han-xu@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Zhiyuan Liu <liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

• (Q1) How can activation sparsity be measured more
accurately?
• (Q2) How is activation sparsity affected by the model
architecture and training process?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
A neuron denotes a certain row or column within the parameter
matrices of feed-forward networks (FFN).

1

