Discrete and Continuous Difference of Submodular Minimization
George Orfanides 1 Tim Hoheisel 1 Marwa El Halabi 2

Abstract

literature focuses on set functions, which can be equivalently
viewed as functions on X = {0, 1}n . Throughout, we make
this identification and refer to them as such. Submodular set
functions can be minimized in polynomial time exactly or up
to arbitrary accuracy (Axelrod et al., 2020), and maximized
approximately in polynomial time (Buchbinder et al., 2015).

Submodular functions, defined on continuous or
discrete domains, arise in numerous applications.
We study the minimization of the difference of
two submodular (DS) functions, over both domains, extending prior work restricted to set functions. We show that all functions on discrete domains and all smooth functions on continuous domains are DS. For discrete domains, we observe
that DS minimization is equivalent to minimizing
the difference of two convex (DC) functions, as in
the set function case. We propose a novel variant
of the DC Algorithm (DCA) and apply it to the
resulting DC Program, obtaining comparable theoretical guarantees as in the set function case. The
algorithm can be applied to continuous domains
via discretization. Experiments demonstrate that
our method outperforms baselines in integer compressive sensing and integer least squares.

Beyond set functions, submodularity extends to general
lattices like X (Topkis, 1978). Bach (2019) extended results from submodular set function minimization to general
domains X . In particular, he provided two polynomialtime algorithms for submodular minimization with arbitrary
accuracy on discrete domains, which are also applicable
to continuous domains via discretization. Axelrod et al.
(2020) later developed a faster algorithm for this problem.
Bian et al. (2017b); Niazadeh et al. (2020) extended results
from submodular set function maximization to continuous
domains, with Bian et al. (2017b) giving a deterministic
1/3-approximation, and Niazadeh et al. (2020) an optimal
randomized 1/2-approximation, both in polynomial-time.
In this paper, we extend this line of inquiry by generalizing
DS set function minimization results to general domains X .
However, unlike the special case where F is submodular,
Problem (1) in general cannot be solved efficiently, neither
exactly nor approximately. Indeed, even for set functions,
any constant-factor multiplicative approximation requires
exponential time, and any positive polynomial-time computable multiplicative approximation is NP-Hard (Iyer &
Bilmes, 2012, Theorems 5.1, 5.2). Even obtaining a local
minimum (Definition 4.3) is PLS complete (Iyer & Bilmes,
2012, Section 5.3). Prior work (Narasimhan & Bilmes,
2005; Iyer & Bilmes, 2012; El Halabi et al., 2023) developed descent algorithms for Problem (1) in the special case
of set functions, which converge to a local minimum of F .

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning require solving a nonconvex problem, with potentially mixed discrete and continuous variables. In this paper, we investigate a broad class
of such problems that possess a special structure, namely
the minimization of the difference of two submodular (DS)
functions, over
Qn both continuous and discrete domains of the
form X = i=1 Xi , where each Xi ⊆ R is compact:
min F (x) := G(x) − H(x),

x∈X

(1)

and where G and H are normalized submodular functions.

Minimizing DS set functions is equivalent to minimizing
the difference of two convex (DC) functions, obtained by
replacing each submodular function by its Lovász extension
(Lovász, 1983). DC programs capture most well-behaved
non-convex problems on continuous domains. The DC algorithm (DCA) is a classical method to solve them (Le Thi &
Pham Dinh, 2018). El Halabi et al. (2023) leverage this connection to minimize DS set functions by applying DCA variants to the equivalent DC program. They also show that the
submodular-supermodular (SubSup) method of Narasimhan
& Bilmes (2005) is a special case of one of their variants.

Submodularity is an important property which naturally
occurs in a variety of machine learning applications (Bilmes,
2022; Bach, 2013). Most of the submodular optimization
1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University,
Montreal 2 Samsung AI Lab, Montreal. Correspondence to: George
Orfanides <george.orfanides@mail.mcgill.ca>, Marwa El Halabi
<marwa.elhalabi@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

