Connecting Thompson Sampling and UCB: Towards More Efficient Trade-offs
Between Privacy and Regret

Bingshan Hu 1 Zhiming Huang 2 Tianyue H. Zhang 3 4 Mathias Lécuyer 1 Nidhi Hegde 5 6

Abstract

loss between the highest mean reward and the earned mean
reward, is used to measure the performance of the algorithm
used by the learning agent to make decisions.

We address differentially private stochastic bandit problems by leveraging Thompson Sampling with Gaussian priors and Gaussian differential privacy (GDP). We propose DP-TS-UCB,
a novel parametrized private algorithm that enables trading off privacy and
 regret. DP-TSUCB satisfies Õ T 0.25(1−α) -GDP and achieves

O K lnα+1 (T )/∆ regret bounds, where K is
the number of arms, ∆ is the sub-optimality gap,
T is the learning horizon, and α ∈ [0, 1] controls
the trade-off between privacy and regret. Theoretically, DP-TS-UCB relies on anti-concentration
bounds for the Gaussian distributions, linking the
exploration mechanisms of Thompson Sampling
and Upper Confidence Bound, which may be of
independent research interest.

1. Introduction

Low-regret bandit algorithms should leverage past information to inform future decisions, as previous observations
reveal which arms have the potential to yield higher rewards.
However, due to privacy concerns, the learning agent may
not be allowed to directly use past information to make decisions. For example, a hospital collects health data from
patients participating in clinical trials over time to learn the
side effects of some newly developed treatments. To comply
with privacy regulations, the hospital is required to publish
scientific findings in a differentially private manner, as the
sequentially collected data from patients carries sensitive
information from individuals. The framework of differential
privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2014) is widely accepted to preserve the privacy of individuals whose data have been used
for data analysis. Differentially private learning algorithms
bound the privacy loss, the amount of information that an
external observer can infer about individuals.

This paper studies differentially private stochastic bandit
problems previously studied in Mishra & Thakurta (2015);
Hu et al. (2021); Hu & Hegde (2022); Azize & Basu (2022);
Ou et al. (2024). In a classical stochastic bandit problem,
we have a fixed arm set [K]. Each arm i is associated with a
fixed but unknown reward distribution pi with mean reward
µi . In each round, a learning agent pulls an arm and obtains
a random reward that is distributed according to the reward
distribution associated with the pulled arm. The goal of the
learning agent is to pull arms sequentially to accumulate as
much reward as possible over a finite number of T rounds.
Since the pulled arm in each round may not always be the
optimal one, regret, defined as the expected cumulative

DP is commonly achieved by adding noise to summary
statistics computed based on the collected data. Therefore,
to solve a private bandit problem, the learning agent has to
navigate two trade-offs. The first one is the fundamental
trade-off between exploitation and exploration due to bandit
feedback: in each round, the learning agent can only focus
on either exploitation (pulling arms seemingly promising
to attain reward) or exploration (pulling arms helpful to
learn the unknown mean rewards and reduce uncertainty).
The second one is the trade-off between privacy and regret
due to the DP noise: adding more noise enhances privacy,
but it reduces data estimation accuracy and weakens regret
guarantees.

1

There are two main strategies to design (non-private)
stochastic bandit algorithms that efficiently balance exploitation and exploration: Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
(Auer et al., 2002) and Thompson Sampling (Agrawal &
Goyal, 2017; Kaufmann et al., 2012b). Both enjoy good
theoretical regret guarantees and competitive empirical performance. UCB is inspired by the principle of optimism in
the face of uncertainty, adding deterministic bonus terms to
the empirical estimates based on their uncertainty to achieve

Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, Canada. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Victoria, Canada. 3 Université de Montréal, Canada. 4 Mila
– Quebec AI Institute, Canada. 5 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada. 6 Alberta Machine Intelligence Instribute (Amii), Canada. Correspondence to: Bingshan
Hu <bingshanhu3@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

