NeuronTune: Towards Self-Guided Spurious Bias Mitigation

Guangtao Zheng 1 Wenqian Ye 1 Aidong Zhang 1

Abstract

of waterbird (Sagawa et al., 2019), as the background of
the water is a spurious attribute. In contrast, core attributes,
such as bird feathers, causally determine a class. A model
with spurious bias may achieve a high prediction accuracy
(Beery et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2019; 2020; Xiao et al.,
2021; Zheng et al., 2024a) even without core attributes, such
as identifying an object only by its frequently co-occurring
background (Geirhos et al., 2020). However, the model may
perform poorly on the data lacking the learned spurious
correlations, which poses a great challenge to robust model
generalization.

Deep neural networks often develop spurious bias,
reliance on correlations between non-essential features and classes for predictions. For example, a
model may identify objects based on frequently
co-occurring backgrounds rather than intrinsic
features, resulting in degraded performance on
data lacking these correlations. Existing mitigation approaches typically depend on external annotations of spurious correlations, which may be
difficult to obtain and are not relevant to the spurious bias in a model. In this paper, we take a
step towards self-guided mitigation of spurious
bias by proposing NeuronTune, a post hoc method
that directly intervenes in a model’s internal decision process. Our method probes in a model’s
latent embedding space to identify and regulate
neurons that lead to spurious prediction behaviors. We theoretically justify our approach and
show that it brings the model closer to an unbiased one. Unlike previous methods, NeuronTune
operates without requiring spurious correlation annotations, making it a practical and effective tool
for improving model robustness. Experiments
across different architectures and data modalities
demonstrate that our method significantly mitigates spurious bias in a self-guided way.

Existing methods (Sagawa et al., 2019; Kirichenko et al.,
2023; Deng et al., 2024) that mitigate spurious bias are
mostly at the sample level, using a curated set of samples
with annotations of spurious correlations called group labels
to retrain a biased model. A group label (class, spurious
attribute) annotates a sample with a spurious attribute and
its class label, representing a spurious correlation. However,
group labels are difficult to acquire and often require costly
human-guided annotations. To circumvent this, group label
estimation (Nam et al., 2022) and various sample reweighting mechanisms (Nam et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2022; Qiu et al., 2023; LaBonte et al., 2024) are
adopted using the idea that spurious bias can be identified
through the misclassification of bias-conflicting samples.
Despite significant progress in spurious bias mitigation, existing sample-level methods that rely on group labels or sample reweighting offer limited and indirect control over how
spurious bias is addressed. On the one hand, group labels
are data annotations that are external to a model and may
not accurately reflect the specific spurious bias developed
in the model. On the other hand, sample reweighting does
not directly target the internal mechanisms that give rise to
spurious bias. This highlights the need for a self-guided
approach that directly intervenes in a model’s decision
process, providing more targeted and model-relevant signals
for mitigating spurious bias than sample-level approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks trained using empirical risk minimization (ERM) often develop spurious bias: a tendency to rely
on spurious correlations for predictions. A spurious correlation refers to a non-causal relationship between a class and
an attribute that is not essential for defining the class, commonly referred to as a spurious attribute (Ye et al., 2024).
For example, the class of waterbird and the background of
the water can form spurious correlations in the predictions

To this end, we focus on developing self-guided methods
that directly analyze the internal prediction mechanism of
a model to identify components of the model that are affected by spurious bias and then mitigate their influence
to final predictions. We take a step towards this goal by
proposing a novel method termed NeuronTune, which sys-

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Guangtao Zheng
<gz5hp@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

