Causal Logistic Bandits with Counterfactual Fairness Constraints

Jiajun Chen 1 Jin Tian 2 Christopher John Quinn 1

Abstract

long-term constraints (Liu et al., 2022), and reinforcement
learning (Jabbari et al., 2017), just to name a few. Notably,
rather than addressing fairness through the lens of specified
attributes, these studies typically operationalize fairness in
a different manner by defining it with respect to one-step
rewards and introducing a notion of meritocratic fairness
(Joseph et al., 2018). An algorithm should never assign a
higher selection probability to a less qualified decision than
to a more qualified one, i.e., arms with higher empirical
rewards should be picked more frequently than those with
lower empirical rewards, which is distinguishable from the
fairness criteria based on specified attribute.

Artificial intelligence will play a significant role
in decision making in numerous aspects of society. Numerous fairness criteria have been proposed in the machine learning community, but
there remains limited investigation into fairness
as defined through specified attributes in a sequential decision-making framework. In this paper, we
focus on causal logistic bandit problems where
the learner seeks to make fair decisions, under
a notion of fairness that accounts for counterfactual reasoning. We propose and analyze an algorithm by leveraging primal-dual optimization
for constrained causal logistic bandits where the
non-linear constraints are a priori unknown and
must be learned in time. We obtain sub-linear
regret guarantees with leading term similar to
that for unconstrained logistic bandits (Lee et al.,
2024) while guaranteeing sub-linear constraint
violations. We show how to achieve zero cumulative constraint violations with a small increase in
the regret bound.

In this paper, we focus on a problem structure wherein
arms arrive in a sequential and stochastic manner from an
underlying fixed distribution and decisions are made in an
online fashion by the agent. The objective of the agent is
to optimize cumulative rewards while achieving fairness
counterfactually with respect to specified attributes, i.e. the
outcome would not have been substantially different if the
specified attributes had different values. In general, this type
of task belongs to the setting of dynamic treatment regimes
(Murphy, 2003; Lavori & Dawson, 2008; Zhang, 2020) for
finding a sequence of decisions over a finite set of treatments
which appears across a broad range of applications.

1. Introduction

1.1. Contributions

Artificial intelligence (AI) models, using techniques from
statistics and machine learning, are increasingly being used
to make decisions that affect people’s lives. In light of this, a
plethora of formal fairness criteria have been proposed (Darlington, 1971; Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt et al., 2016; Zhang
et al., 2016; Kusner et al., 2017; Zafar et al., 2017; Nabi
& Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa, 2019; Chouldechova & Roth,
2020; Imai & Jiang, 2023; Plecko & Bareinboim, 2024).
There has been growing interest in the sequential decisionmaking community for accounting for fairness, including in
settings such as classic and contextual bandits (Joseph et al.,
2018), combinatorial bandits (Xu et al., 2020), bandits with

In light of the above, the goal of this paper is to analyze the
foundations of online causal fair decision-making. More
specially, our contributions are as follows:
• We formulate a constrained causal logistic bandits problem where the online decision-making processes are
characterized within a causal structure. We formalize a
(non-linear) fairness constraint based on the counterfactual outcome effect that is a priori unknown and must
be learned in time. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to study constrained logistic bandits
without a known safe decision subset (see Footnote 1).

1
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University,
Ames, IA, USA 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial
Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Correspondence to: Christopher
John Quinn <cjquinn@iastate.edu>.

• We provide an unified analysis for the confidence set
construction, algorithm design, and performance guarantee, i.e., sublinear reward regret and sublinear cumulative constraint violations by leveraging the regret-toconfidence-set conversion and the primal-dual online

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

