Exogenous Isomorphism for Counterfactual Identifiability

Yikang Chen 1 Dehui Du 1
thus confirm the reliability of the constructed model — if
counterfactual identifiability is guaranteed.

Abstract
This paper investigates ∼L3 -identifiability, a form
of complete counterfactual identifiability within
the Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH) framework, ensuring that all Structural Causal Models (SCMs)
satisfying the given assumptions provide consistent answers to all causal questions. To simplify
this problem, we introduce exogenous isomorphism and propose ∼EI -identifiability, reflecting
the strength of model identifiability required for
∼L3 -identifiability. We explore sufficient assumptions for achieving ∼EI -identifiability in two special classes of SCMs: Bijective SCMs (BSCMs),
based on counterfactual transport, and Triangular Monotonic SCMs (TM-SCMs), which extend
∼L2 -identifiability. Our results unify and generalize existing theories, providing theoretical guarantees for practical applications. Finally, we leverage neural TM-SCMs to address the consistency
problem in counterfactual reasoning, with experiments validating both the effectiveness of our
method and the correctness of the theory.

(Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018) categorized causal questions into
three levels of human cognition, termed the Pearl Causal
Hierarchy (PCH) (Bareinboim et al., 2022). Counterfactual
reasoning corresponds to human imagination, situated at
the highest level L3 of the PCH, encoding the most intricate and nuanced information. Structural Causal Models
(SCMs) provide specific semantics for addressing counterfactual questions. Counterfactual identifiability on SCMs
guarantees that all SCMs adhering to the assumptions yield
consistent results for L3 quantities. Prior research has constrained causal structures to identify specific counterfactual
effects (Shpitser & Pearl, 2008; Correa et al., 2021; Xia
et al., 2023), or limited causal mechanisms to determine
counterfactual outcomes (Lu et al., 2020; Nasr-Esfahany
et al., 2023; Scetbon et al., 2024). Further studies investigate
model identifiability for counterfactuals, offering empirical
evidence that counterfactual outcomes are identifiable (Khemakhem et al., 2021; Javaloy et al., 2023).
This work introduces a novel identification target: identification across the entire counterfactual layer of the PCH. This
requires that all SCMs satisfying the assumptions yield consistent results for any counterfactual statement. Within the
PCH, since the counterfactual layer L3 encodes all causal
information, the identifiability of the SCMs in L3 implies
that these SCMs provide consistent answers to all causal
questions, rendering them indistinguishable for any causal
statements. Thus, identifiability over the counterfactual
layer represents the most stringent and comprehensive goal
for causal quantity identifiability within the PCH.

1. Introduction
The purpose of counterfactual reasoning is to answer questions about hypothetical, unobserved worlds. It has been
applied in tasks such as fairness evaluation (Kusner et al.,
2017), explanation generation (Karimi et al., 2020), harm
quantification (Richens et al., 2022), and policy optimization (Tsirtsis & Rodriguez, 2023). Counterfactual identification is a subtask of counterfactual reasoning, aiming to
determine whether all models satisfying certain reasonable
assumptions yield the same answer to a specific counterfactual question. It is critical to ensure the dependability
of counterfactual reasoning results, as the reasoning outcomes can only be consistent with the assumptions — and

To achieve this goal, we first examine the identifiability problem in causal inference from the perspective of model identifiability in Section 2. In this context, identifiability over the
counterfactual layer is denoted as ∼L3 -identifiability. To
simplify the ∼L3 -identifiability problem, we establish an alternative form of identifiability in Section 3, denoted as ∼EI identifiability, which is induced by an equivalence relation
termed exogenous isomorphism. This form of identifiability
demonstrates that fully recovering the exogenous variables
of SCMs is unnecessary to ensure consistent results for any
counterfactual quantities, clarifying the strength of assumptions required for counterfactual layer identification.

1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East
China Normal University. Correspondence to: Dehui Du
<dhdu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

