Generalization Analysis for Controllable Learning

Yi-Fan Zhang * 1 2 Xiao Zhang * 3 4 Min-Ling Zhang 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Controllability has emerged as a crucial aspect of AI (Yampolskiy, 2020; Artificial Intelligence Safety Summit, 2023;
A16z, 2025), enabling AI models to be more reliable and
adaptable to user needs in dynamic environments. In the
context of machine learning, controllability ensures that
learners can dynamically adapt to evolving task requirements at test time, a concept known as controllable learning. In many real-world applications, such as information
retrieval and recommender systems, the ability to control
model behavior at test time is essential for accommodating
diverse user preferences, balancing competing objectives,
and adapting to dynamic information-seeking needs (Chen
et al., 2023; Mysore et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024; Chang
et al., 2023; He et al., 2022). Existing methods for controllable learning including embedding-based methods that
adjust model inputs, and hypernetwork-based methods that
generate task-specific model parameters, have demonstrated
empirical success (Chen et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2023;
Shen et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2025).

Controllability has become a critical issue in trustworthy machine learning, as a controllable learner
allows for dynamic model adaptation to task requirements during testing. However, existing research lacks a comprehensive understanding of
how to effectively measure and analyze the generalization performance of controllable learning
methods. In an attempt to move towards this goal
from a generalization perspective, we first establish a unified framework for controllable learning.
Then, we develop a novel vector-contraction inequality and derive a tight generalization bound
for general controllable learning classes, which
is independent of the number of task targets except for logarithmic factors and represents the current best-in-class theoretical result. Furthermore,
we derive generalization bounds for two typical
controllable learning methods: embedding-based
and hypernetwork-based methods. We also upper
bound the Rademacher complexities of commonly
used control and prediction functions, which serve
as modular theoretical components for deriving
generalization bounds for specific controllable
learning methods in practical applications such
as recommender systems. Our theoretical results
without strong assumptions provide general theoretical guarantees for controllable learning methods and offer new insights into understanding controllability in machine learning.

However, theoretically understanding controllability in machine learning remains an important open question in machine learning theory. Theoretical analysis of controllable
learning methods from the perspective of generalization
is an important research avenue. A comprehensive generalization analysis of controllable learning faces two main
challenges: 1) How to establish the relationship between the
generalization bounds and controllability? 2) How to reduce
the dependency of the generalization bounds on the number
of task targets? First, controllable learning often needs to dynamically respond to the task requirement and often involves
multiple task targets. How to establish a unified theoretical
framework that can formally characterize these factors is the
primary issue of theoretical analysis. In addition, the ideal
theoretical framework should be general enough to cover
existing controllable learning methods and facilitate the development of general analysis methods and theoretical tools
for generalization analysis of controllable learning. With an
effective unified theoretical framework, we can explicitly
introduce controllability in generalization analysis. Second,
intuitively, the multiple task targets involved in controllable
learning suggest that learning will become more difficult
as the number of task targets increases, but the empirical
success of controllable learning methods suggests that the

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of
Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China 3 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent
Search and Recommendation, MOE 5 School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China.
Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang <zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

