Vision-Language Models Create Cross-Modal Task Representations

Grace Luo 1 Trevor Darrell 1 Amir Bar 1
vlm-cross-modal-reps.github.io
Task

Abstract
Autoregressive vision-language models (VLMs)
can handle many tasks within a single model, yet
the representations that enable this capability remain opaque. We find that VLMs align conceptually equivalent inputs into a shared task vector,
which is invariant to modality (text, image) and
format (examples, instruction), and may simplify
VLM processing. We measure this alignment
via cross-modal transfer–the ability of a task vector derived in one modality to trigger the correct
generation in another–on a range of tasks and
model architectures. Although the task vector is
highly compressed, we find that this single vector outperforms prompting the model with the
full task information, unique to this cross-modal
case. Furthermore, we show that task vectors can
be transferred from a base language model to its
fine-tuned vision-language counterpart, and that
they can be derived solely from instructions without the need for examples. Taken together, our
findings shed light on how VLMs internally process task information, and how they map different
modalities into common semantic representations.

Modality

Country-Capital

Food-Color

Text
Instruction

Map country to capital

Match food to color

Text
Examples

France : Paris, …

Cherry : Red, …

Image
Examples

: Paris, …

: Red, …

Latent Space of
Task Representations

Figure 1: VLMs map conceptually equivalent inputs into a
shared task representation. This representation is invariant
to the specification, regardless of modality (image, text) and
format (examples, instruction).
representation. Consider the tasks shown in Figure 1, which
can be equivalently expressed using instructions, text examples, or image examples. One might argue that the model
is biased towards learning the same simple function that
solves the task, for all specifications (Solomonoff, 1964;
Valle-Perez et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2023; Huh et al., 2024).
In this work, we provide evidence of such a shared task representation, which is invariant to specification modality or
format. This representation exists at a special token position
near the end of the sequence, which is contextualized by the
inputs to form a high-level summary, also known as the task
vector (Hendel et al., 2023; Todd et al., 2024). This observation is non-trivial; recall that VLM training is designed to
encourage the alignment of image and text embeddings, but
not the emergent task summaries derived from them. This
difference is apparent from the t-SNE (van der Maaten &
Hinton, 2008) visualization in Figure 2. While the image
and text embeddings exhibit no task-specific grouping (a),
the task vectors cluster by the color-coded tasks (b).

1. Introduction
Depending on the input instruction (Liu et al., 2023a) or incontext examples (Alayrac et al., 2022), VLMs can dynamically adjust the task executed on the image. This flexibility
poses a challenge: each task can be defined in a different
way, and memorizing every possible variation is impractical. There needs to exist some form of compression, or
representation sharing, to manage this complexity.
This brings into question whether the many ways of describing the same underlying task converge to a shared VLM
1
University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Grace Luo <graceluo@berkeley.edu>.

To quantify the alignment of these task representations, we
evaluate cross-modal transfer. For example, we evaluate the
VLM’s ability to apply a task expressed with text examples
onto an image query (see Figure 3). We find that “patch-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

