Heterogeneous Data Game: Characterizing the Model Competition Across
Multiple Data Sources

Renzhe Xu 1 2 Kang Wang 2 Bo Li 3
demographics and disease prevalences. Such heterogeneous
settings arise across diverse fields, including the digital
economy and scientific research.

Abstract
Data heterogeneity across multiple sources is common in real-world machine learning (ML) settings. Although many methods focus on enabling
a single model to handle diverse data, real-world
markets often comprise multiple competing ML
providers. In this paper, we propose a gametheoretic framework—the Heterogeneous Data
Game—to analyze how such providers compete
across heterogeneous data sources. We investigate the resulting pure Nash equilibria (PNE),
showing that they can be non-existent, homogeneous (all providers converge on the same model),
or heterogeneous (providers specialize in distinct
data sources). Our analysis spans monopolistic,
duopolistic, and more general markets, illustrating how factors such as the “temperature” of datasource choice models and the dominance of certain data sources shape equilibrium outcomes. We
offer theoretical insights into both homogeneous
and heterogeneous PNEs, guiding regulatory policies and practical strategies for competitive ML
marketplaces.

Much of the existing literature on heterogeneous data focuses on devising a single ML method that performs robustly across all data sources (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Kuang
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021b; Duchi & Namkoong, 2021).
However, real-world markets typically have multiple ML
providers (Black et al., 2022; Jagadeesan et al., 2023a), each
aiming to optimize its performance relative to others. For
instance, competing diagnostic tool providers offer models
to hospitals, which then choose a provider based on local
performance criteria. This competitive interplay differs significantly from single-provider frameworks (Nisan et al.,
2007) and can lead to market dynamics unaddressed by
previous approaches.
Several works (Ben-Porat & Tennenholtz, 2017; 2019; Feng
et al., 2022; Jagadeesan et al., 2023a; Iyer & Ke, 2024; Einav
& Rosenfeld, 2025) have analyzed competition among multiple ML model providers, examining Nash equilibria, social
welfare, and agents’ strategies under competition. However,
these studies mainly focus on a single data distribution and
do not account for heterogeneity across multiple sources.
In this paper, we develop a game-theoretic framework to
study multiple providers competing over heterogeneous data
sources. We then analyze the resulting pure Nash equilibria
to uncover how data heterogeneity and competitive forces
shape providers’ strategies.

1. Introduction
Data heterogeneity is commonplace in real-world machine
learning (ML) applications, where data often originate from
multiple sources with distinct distributions (Li et al., 2017;
Hendrycks et al., 2020; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021; Liu
et al., 2023). For example, in health care, patient data may
be gathered from different hospitals, each serving varied

1.1. Overview of the Heterogeneous Data Game
We introduce the Heterogeneous Data Game to model the
competition among multiple ML model providers across
diverse data sources. Consider K distinct data sources, each
associated with a weight wk representing its proportion, and
joint distributions Pk (x, y) over features x and labels y. In
this market, each of the N ML model providers selects a
model parameterized by θ̂n . Following previous works on
model and platform competition (Jagadeesan et al., 2023a;
Drezner & Eiselt, 2024), the utility of each model provider
is determined by its market share across the different data
sources. Specifically, each data source k selects an ML

1
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of
Computation and Economics, Shanghai University of Fi2
nance and Economics, China.
Institute for Theoretical
Computer Science, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China. 3 School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, China. Emails: xurenzhe@sufe.edu.cn,
wangkang0330@gmail.com, libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn. Correspondence to: Bo Li <libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

