Position: AI Competitions Provide the Gold Standard for
Empirical Rigor in GenAI Evaluation

D. Sculley 1 Will Cukierski 2 Phil Culliton 2 Sohier Dane 2 Maggie Demkin 2 Ryan Holbrook 2
Addison Howard 2 Paul Mooney 2 Walter Reade 2 Megan Risdal 2 Nate Keating 2

Abstract

been poured into creating myriad benchmarks and test cases
(Chiang et al., 2024b; Fourrier et al., 2024; Hendrycks et al.,
2021; Cobbe et al., 2021; Zellers et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2021b). However, even accounting for these many important
efforts and achievements, our position is that the current
state of evaluation is insufficient to meet the needs of this
moment in GenAI for the field and for the world.

In this position paper, we observe that empirical
evaluation in Generative AI is at a crisis point
since traditional ML evaluation and benchmarking strategies are insufficient to meet the needs
of evaluating modern GenAI models and systems.
There are many reasons for this, including the
fact that these models typically have nearly unbounded input and output spaces, typically do not
have a well defined ground truth target, and typically exhibit strong feedback loops and prediction
dependence based on context of previous model
outputs. On top of these critical issues, we argue
that the problems of leakage and contamination
are in fact the most important and difficult issues
to address for GenAI evaluations. Interestingly,
the field of AI Competitions has developed effective measures and practices to combat leakage for
the purpose of counteracting cheating by bad actors within a competition setting. This makes AI
Competitions an especially valuable (but underutilized) resource. It is now time for the field to
view AI Competitions as the gold standard for empirical rigor in GenAI evaluation, and to harness
and harvest their results with according value.

In our view, the root cause of this insufficiency is that the
evaluation needs of GenAI models fundamentally break the
paradigm of traditional benchmarking that served the field
of machine learning (ML) so well during decades of remarkable progress. This breakage goes beyond the familiar
difficulty of defining what, exactly, is in the training data
for an LLM. In our view, we need a broader conception
of generalization for GenAI that moves beyond the idea of
generalizing to new independently drawn examples from a
stationary distribution, and instead refers to performing well
on tasks that are entirely novel from a model’s perspective.
This higher bar is rooted in commonsense standards for
human intelligence (Chollet, 2019; Dennett, 1991), but has
far reaching consequences, most notably that it implies the
problems of data leakage and contamination in evaluation
are the most pressing concerns.
Together, these factors imply that rigorous and robust
evaluation of GenAI models requires a steady source of
novel tasks structured to avoid leakage, contamination,
and other forms of inadvertent “cheating”. Fortunately,
AI Competitions—such as those hosted on platforms like
Kaggle and others—act as a solution to GenAI evaluation
challenges by providing a continual source of new tasks for
evaluation and significant structures to avoid leakage and
related issues. We define an AI Competition as a problem
or task with an objective evaluation function for ranking
solutions or models in which multiple parallel attempts are
made during a time-bound period by independent teams.

1. Introduction
As Generative AI (GenAI) models such as Large Language
Models (LLMs) become ever more important to the field
and to the world, it has become clear that performing empirical evaluation of these models and methods is extremely
difficult to do in a rigorous and comprehensive way. This
difficulty is of course not due to lack of effort or expertise
by researchers. Indeed, enormous effort and resources have
1

Work done at Kaggle 2 Kaggle, Inc. Correspondence
to: Nate Keating <natekeating@kaggle.com>, Meg Risdal
<meg@kaggle.com>.

1.1. Summarizing Our Position
Our position can be summarized by the following points:

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• Traditional paradigms for ML evaluation are illequipped to meet the demands of GenAI Evaluation.
1

