Discrepancies are Virtue: Weak-to-Strong Generalization through Lens of
Intrinsic Dimension
Yijun Dong 1 Yicheng Li 1 Yunai Li 2 Jason D. Lee 3 Qi Lei 1

Abstract

of a weak teacher model. W2S is related to various learning
paradigms like co-training (Blum & Mitchell, 1998), selftraining (Scudder, 1965), knowledge distillation (Hinton,
2015), and self-distillation (Zhang et al., 2019; 2021), yet
being critically dissimilar.

Weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization is a type
of finetuning (FT) where a strong (large) student
model is trained on pseudo-labels generated by a
weak teacher. Surprisingly, W2S FT often outperforms the weak teacher. We seek to understand
this phenomenon through the observation that
FT often occurs in intrinsically low-dimensional
spaces. Leveraging the low intrinsic dimensionality of FT, we analyze W2S in the ridgeless regression setting from a variance reduction perspective. For a strong student-weak teacher pair with
sufficiently expressive low-dimensional feature
subspaces Vs , Vw , we provide an exact characterization of the variance that dominates the generalization error of W2S. This unveils a virtue of
discrepancy between the strong and weak models in W2S: the variance of the weak teacher is
inherited by the strong student in Vs ∩ Vw , while
reduced by a factor of dim(Vs )/N in the subspace
of discrepancy Vw \ Vs with N pseudo-labels for
W2S. Our analysis further casts light on the sample complexities and the scaling of performance
gap recovery in W2S. The analysis is supported
by experiments on synthetic regression problems,
as well as real vision and NLP tasks.

Formalizing the discrepancy between the student and the
teacher in their model capacities is essential for understanding W2S. Most existing theories for W2S treat model capacity as an absolute notion with respect to the downstream
task, e.g. the weak teacher lacks the robustness to perturbation (Lang et al., 2024; Shin et al., 2024) or the ability to fit
the target function (Ildiz et al., 2024; Wu & Sahai, 2024).
Nevertheless, empirical observations suggest W2S models
also surpass weak models’ performance on less challenging
tasks (Burns et al., 2024), where the weak teacher has sufficient capacity to achieve good performance. This gap of
understanding motivates some natural questions:
Why W2S happens when both the teacher and student have
sufficient capacities for the downstream task?
What affects W2S generalization beyond the absolute notion
of model capacity?
To answer the above questions, we analyze W2S generalization through the lens of intrinsic dimension beyond the
absolute notion of model capacity. We develop a theoretical
framework that incorporates student-teacher correlation, providing a more nuanced explanation of when and why W2S
model surpasses the weak teacher’s performance.

1. Introduction
As the capabilities of modern machine learning models
grow and exceed human performance in many domains,
an emerging problem is whether it would be possible to
align the strong superhuman models with weaker supervisors such as human feedback. The weak-to-strong (W2S)
framework introduced in (Burns et al., 2024) is a feasible
analogy for this problem, inquiring how much capacity of a
strong student model can be evoked under the supervision

Our framework is built on two inspiring observations on
finetuning (FT): (i) FT tends to fall in the kernel regime (Jacot et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2022; Malladi et al., 2023); and
(ii) for a downstream task, relevant features in a stronger
pretrained model tend to concentrate in a subspace of lower
dimension, known as the intrinsic dimension, even when
FT is highly overparametrized (Aghajanyan et al., 2021).
Leveraging these properties, we cast FT as a ridgeless regression problem over subgaussian features. In particular,
we consider two subspaces Vs , Vw ⊂ Rd of low dimensions ds , dw ≪ d that encapsulate relevant features in the
strong student and weak teacher, respectively. The “absolute”
model capacities are measured from two aspects: (i) the intrinsic dimensions ds , dw that quantify the representation

1

New York University 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University
Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Yijun Dong
<yd1319@nyu.edu>, Qi Lei <ql518@nyu.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

