SK-VQA: Synthetic Knowledge Generation at Scale for Training
Context-Augmented Multimodal LLMs

Xin Su * 1 Man Luo * 1 Kris W Pan 2 Tien Pei Chou 2 Vasudev Lal 1 Phillip Howard 3

Abstract
Multimodal retrieval augmented generation
(RAG) plays a crucial role in domains such as
knowledge-based visual question answering (KBVQA), where external knowledge is needed to
answer a question. However, existing multimodal
LLMs (MLLMs) are not designed for contextaugmented generation, limiting their effectiveness in such tasks. While synthetic data generation has recently gained attention for training
MLLMs, its application for context-augmented
generation remains underexplored. To address
this gap, we introduce SK-VQA, a large-scale synthetic multimodal dataset containing over 2 million visual question-answer pairs, each associated
with context documents containing information
necessary to determine the final answer. Compared to previous datasets, SK-VQA contains 11×
more unique questions, exhibits greater domain
diversity, and covers a broader spectrum of image
sources. Through human evaluations, we confirm
the high quality of the generated question-answer
pairs and their contextual relevance. Extensive
experiments show that SK-VQA serves both as
a challenging KB-VQA benchmark and as an effective training resource for adapting MLLMs to
context-augmented generation. Our results further
indicate that models trained on SK-VQA demonstrate enhanced generalization in both contextaware VQA and multimodal RAG settings. SKVQA is publicly available via Hugging Face Hub.

Context: The Beverly Hilton is a luxury hotel located in Beverly Hills, California.
Opened in 1955, the hotel was designed by architect Welton Becket and is owned
by the Oasis West Realty, LLC. This iconic hotel has hosted numerous prestigious
events over its history, most notably the annual Golden Globe Awards. The Beverly
Hilton features more than 500 guest rooms, including 101 suites, and a variety of …

Q: When was the building in the image opened?
A: 1955
Q: Who owns the building in the image?
A: Oasis West Realty, LLC
Q: What type of events is the location in the image known for hosting annually?
A: Golden Globe Awards
Q: How many suites are available in the building shown in the image?
A: 101

Figure 1. Example from SK-VQA. Each image is paired with a
synthetically-generated context document & QA pairs.

domain, enabling advanced reasoning and chat capabilities
over multimodal input queries consisting of both text and images (Achiam et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024b). While MLLMs
have demonstrated promising results, they suffer from the
same hallucination and reliability issues as LLMs (Li et al.,
2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024c). This motivates
the need to incorporate MLLMs into retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) systems, where retrieved documents can
ground answer generation in factually-correct information
via context augmentation (Lewis et al., 2020; Ram et al.,
2023). However, context augmentation for MLLMs presents
unique challenges. Generated answers must be conditioned
on both multimodal input queries as well as retrieved contexts which potentially span multiple modalities. Existing
MLLMs have not been trained with context-augmented generation, which makes them incompatible for use in a RAG
system. Adapting MLLMs for use in a RAG system requires
extensive datasets which can support the training of models
with multimodal queries and relevant context documents.
Unfortunately, naturally-occurring data of this kind is relatively scarce; unlike other common types of internet data
(e.g., text, image-text pairs), input queries consisting of both

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) have extended the impressive capabilities of LLMs to the vision
*

Equal contribution 1 Intel Labs 2 Amazon 3 Thoughtworks.
Correspondence to: Xin Su <xin.su@intel.com>, Man Luo
<man.luo@intel.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

