Principal-Agent Bandit Games with Self-Interested
and Exploratory Learning Agents

Junyan Liu 1 Lillian J. Ratliff 2

Abstract

more et al., 2015). In most bandit frameworks, a player
directly interacts with an unknown environment by repeatedly playing arms and observing the corresponding rewards.
However, those frameworks often fail to capture the unique
challenges faced in many online marketplaces, where the
player can only indirectly interact with the environment. For
instance, in online shopping, the website (player) learns
users’ preference (unknown environment) by observing purchase behaviors. To acquire a comprehensive knowledge of
users’ preferences, the website typically needs to provide
external incentives, such as discounts or coupons, for agents
to encourage exploration.

This paper studies the repeated principal-agent
bandit game, where the principal indirectly explores an unknown environment by incentivizing
an agent to play arms. Unlike prior work that
assumes a greedy agent with full knowledge of
reward means, we consider a self-interested learning agent who iteratively updates reward estimates
and may explore arbitrarily with some probability.
As a warm-up, we first consider a self-interested
learning agent without exploration. We propose
algorithms for both i.i.d. and linear reward settings with bandit feedback in √
a finite horizon T ,
e T ) and O(T
e 2/3 ),
achieving regret bounds of O(
respectively. Specifically, these algorithms rely
on a novel elimination framework coupled with
new search algorithms which accommodate the
uncertainty from the agent’s learning behavior.
We then extend the framework to handle an exploratory learning agent and develop an algorithm
e 2/3 ) regret bound in i.i.d. reward
to achieve a O(T
setup by enhancing the robustness of our elimination framework to the potential agent exploration.
Finally, when our agent model reduces to that in
Dogan et al. (2023a), we propose an algorithm
based√on our robust framework, which achieves
e T ) regret bound, significantly improving
a O(
e 11/12 ) bound.
upon their O(T

Motivated by such scenarios, recent work (e.g., Dogan
et al. (2023a;b); Scheid et al. (2024b)) frames this problem as a principal-agent bandit game, modifying the classic
principal-agent problem in economics (see, e.g., Bolton
& Dewatripont (2004); Laffont & Martimort (2009)) with
repeated engagements and stochastic rewards where the
aforementioned player refers to a principal, and the agent
refers to end-users. With arms representing a vector of
incentives, in each round of the game, the principal first
selects an arm, and after observing these incentives, the
agent greedily selects amongst their own arms to maximize
their expected reward plus the offered incentive (henceforth
we call this arm true-maximizer). The chosen arm yields
two stochastic rewards drawn from different distributions:
one for the principal and one for the agent. Notably, the
principal observes their own reward and the selected arm,
yet remains agnostic of the reward on the agent side.
Despite the merger of classic models of incentives with bandits, most work relies on an oracle-agent assumption, where
the agent has complete knowledge of the true reward means
(expected rewards) and always selects the true-maximizer.
This assumption, in general, will not hold in real-world scenarios. For instance, in the case of online shopping, users
rarely fully understand their own preferences over many
options without a prolonged learning process. Recently, a
notable step towards a more realistic model was taken by
Dogan et al. (2023a) who consider an an agent that employs
an exploratory learning behavior: the agent is allowed to
explore an arm, different from the true-maximizer, with a
small probability decreasing over time. However, even in

1. Introduction
Bandits learning is a powerful framework for solving a
broad spectrum of sequential decision-making problems,
such as recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010), clinical
trials (Villar et al., 2015), and resource allocation (Latti1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA 2 Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA.
Correspondence to: Junyan Liu <junyanl1@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

