Oracle-MoE: Locality-preserving Routing in the Oracle Space for
Memory-constrained Large Language Model Inference

Jixian Zhou * 1 Fang Dong * 1 Ruijun Huang * 1 2 Hengjie Cao 1 Mengyi Chen 1 Yifeng Yang 1 Anrui Chen 1
Mingzhi Dong 3 Yujiang Wang 4 Dongsheng Li 5 David A. Clifton 4 Qin Lv 6 Rui Zhu 7 Chun Zhang 8
Fan Yang 9 Tun Lu 1 Ning Gu 1 Li Shang 1
.

Abstract

fore, better expert activation consistencies. Experiments on the pretrained GPT-2 architectures of
different sizes (200M, 350M, 790M, and 2B) and
downstream tasks demonstrate that without compromising task performance, our Oracle-MoE has
achieved state-of-the-art inference speeds across
varying memory budgets, revealing its substantial
potential for LLM deployments in industry.

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) is widely adopted to
deploy Large Language Models (LLMs) on edge
devices with limited memory budgets. Although
MoE is, in theory, an inborn memory-friendly
architecture requiring only a few activated experts to reside in the memory for inference, current MoE architectures cannot effectively fulfill
this advantage and will yield intolerable inference
latencies of LLMs on memory-constrained devices. Our investigation pinpoints the essential
cause as the remarkable temporal inconsistencies
of inter-token expert activations, which generate
overly frequent expert swapping demands dominating the latencies. To this end, we propose a
novel MoE architecture, Oracle-MoE, to fulfill
the real on-device potential of MoE-based LLMs.
Oracle-MoE route tokens in a highly compact
space suggested by attention scores, termed the
oracle space, to effectively maintain the semantic locality across consecutive tokens to reduce
expert activation variations, eliminating massive
swapping demands. Theoretical analysis proves
that Oracle-MoE is bound to provide routing decisions with better semantic locality and, there-

1. Introduction
The unprecedented prevalence of Large Language Models
(LLMs) calls for their sink from remote servers to local
edge devices for better accessibility, privacy protections,
and personalizations. Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) (Fedus
et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2024) is the most widely adopted
technique for the on-device deployment of LLMs. A wellestablished advantage of MoE is that it could effectively
scale up LLMs’ capacities without increasing the inference
computational complexity, which is vital for their executions on edge devices of less powerful computing hardware.
However, we would like to underline a less-mentioned but
crucial property of MoE: it is, in theory, a memory-friendly
architecture that could naturally satisfy the memory constraint of edge devices. Only a few activated experts are
needed to reside in the device memory for a feedforward
MoE inference, and thus, the minimum memory occupations of MoE-based LLMs can be significantly less than
their dense counterparts, which indicates the edge-friendly
nature of MoE architectures.

*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 Greater
Bay Area National Center of Technology Innovation, Research
Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Bath, Bath, UK 4 Oxford Suzhou Centre for Advanced Research, Suzhou, China 5 Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China 6 Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado, USA 7 Bayes Business School, City St
George’s, University of London, London, UK 8 Research Institute
of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China 9 School
of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Li Shang <lishang@fudan.edu.cn>, Yujiang Wang
<yujiang.wang@oscar.ox.ac.uk>.

In practice, the fulfilling of MoE’s memory-saving advantage, however, is still far from satisfying. To date, deploying MoE-based LLMs on memory-constrained devices will
commonly introduce intolerable inference latencies that substantially impair the industrial values of LLMs. Those latencies are predominantly caused by the overheads from
frequently loading activated experts into the memory and
cleaning old ones during successive inferences of tokens.
As shown in Figure 1(a) (Top), the memory-constrained inference of MoE-based LLMs can result in latencies approxi-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

