Provable Length Generalization in Sequence Prediction via Spectral Filtering

Annie Marsden * 1 Evan Dogariu * 1 Naman Agarwal 1 Xinyi Chen 1 Daniel Suo 1 Elad Hazan 1 2

Abstract

dictor with a longer context. Unlike standard regret, which
assumes both the learner and benchmark operate under the
same conditions, Asymmetric-Regret explicitly accounts
for the context length discrepancy, offering a more realistic
evaluation of length generalization in resource-constrained
settings.

We consider the problem of length generalization
in sequence prediction. We define a new metric
of performance in this setting – the AsymmetricRegret– which measures regret against a benchmark predictor with longer context length than
available to the learner. We continue by studying
this concept through the lens of the spectral filtering algorithm. We present a gradient-based learning algorithm that provably achieves length generalization for linear dynamical systems. We conclude with proof-of-concept experiments which
are consistent with our theory.

We study length generalization through the lens of spectral
filtering algorithms, a class of methods known for their effectiveness in learning linear dynamical systems (LDS) with
long memory (Hazan et al., 2017a). Spectral filtering methods have recently been used to develop state space models
that achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in LLMs,
improving both efficiency and scalability (Gu et al., 2021b;
Poli et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2023). In this work, we prove
that spectral filtering algorithms can generalize across context lengths while maintaining strong theoretical guarantees
on regret. This is the first result, to the authors’ knowledge,
providing such provable guarantees in the setting of learning
linear dynamical systems.

1. Introduction
Sequence prediction is a fundamental problem in machine
learning, with applications that span natural language processing (NLP), forecasting, and control systems. A common challenge in these tasks is to determine how much past
information, known as context length, should be used to
make accurate predictions. Although longer contexts often
improve performance, they come with increased computational and memory costs, making it impractical to store and
process entire sequences, especially during training.

1.1. Our Contributions
Consider online sequence prediction in which the predictor
iteratively receives input ut ∈ Rdin and then makes a prediction ŷt ∈ Rdout of the output, after which the true output
yt is revealed. The goal of the predictor is to minimize error
according to a given convex and Lipschitz loss function
ℓt (yt , ŷt ). In this work we consider the class of spectral
filtering predictors, introduced by Hazan et al. (2017b). A
spectral filtering predictor is characterized by parameters
(T, Mi ki=1 , k) and outputs predictions ŷt of the form

This challenge raises a key question: Can we design learning algorithms that effectively operate with limited context
during training while still generalizing to longer sequences
at test time? This property, which we call length generalization, is particularly relevant in large-scale models, such as
large language models (LLMs), which struggle to extrapolate beyond the context lengths seen during training. Despite
extensive empirical research on this issue, formal theoretical
guarantees on length generalization remain elusive.

ŷt = yt−1 +

k
X

Mi u(t−1):0 ϕi ,

i=1

where u(t−1):0 ∈ Rdin ×T is a matrix whose columns are the
previous inputs ut−1 , ut−2 , . . . , u0 (possibly zero-padded
as necessary), {ϕj }kj=1 are the T -dimensional spectral filk
ters, {Mi }i=1 ⊂ Rdout ×din are matrices which are learned
online, and k is the number of filters used. Hazan et al.
k
(2017b) provide an algorithm to learn {Mi }i=1 and show
this achieves nearly optimal regret bounds when measured
against the best Linear Dynamical System (LDS) predictor.
We explore whether the full history u(t−1):0 is needed to
k
learn {Mi }i=1 . More broadly, we explore whether predic-

To address this, we introduce a novel performance metric,
Asymmetric-Regret, which quantifies the regret of a predictor with a limited context length compared to an ideal pre*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Annie Marsden <anniemarsden@google.com>, Evan Dogariu <dogariu@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

