Contextures: Representations from Contexts

Runtian Zhai 1 Kai Yang 2 Burak Varıcı 1 Che-Ping Tsai 1 Zico Kolter 1 Pradeep Ravikumar 1

Abstract

useful, or perhaps even what representations are these models learning? Unlike classical statistical learning theory,
where there is no mystery regarding the statistical estimand,
the very target itself is unclear in representation learning.
For example, what are the representations that BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)—trained to do cloze tests—is learning, and
why are they useful in understanding the sentiment of user
reviews on Netflix? What representations do deep neural
networks learn, and why are they useful if they cause neural
collapse (Papyan et al., 2020), where deep representations
could collapse to a few clusters? Do the many different
self-supervised learning methods (Balestriero et al., 2023)
all learn similar or disparate representations?

Despite the empirical success of foundation models, we do not have a systematic characterization
of the representations that these models learn. In
this paper, we establish the contexture theory. It
shows that a large class of representation learning
methods can be characterized as learning from
the association between the input and a context
variable. Specifically, we show that many popular
methods aim to approximate the top-d singular
functions of the expectation operator induced by
the context, in which case we say that the representation learns the contexture. We demonstrate
the generality of the contexture theory by proving
that representation learning within various learning paradigms—supervised, self-supervised, and
manifold learning—can all be studied from such
a perspective. We prove that representations that
learn the contexture are optimal on those tasks
that are compatible with the context. One important implication of our theory is that once the
model is large enough to approximate the top singular functions, scaling up the model size yields
diminishing returns, so further improvement requires better contexts. To this end, we study how
to evaluate a context without knowing the downstream tasks. We propose a metric and show by
experiments that it correlates well with the actual
performance of the encoder on many real datasets.

The responses to these questions are often muddled. Many
analyses are conflated with the mystery of deep learning
generalization—the ability of large neural networks to learn
function approximations that generalize to unseen points.
However, this is a different problem from the mechanism
of representation learning. Our focus is on what representation learning (or “pretraining” in the context of foundation
models) aims to capture, and why it can be applied to tasks
completely different from the objectives used to train the
representations. Another way this question is muddled is by
recourse to scaling. A popular viewpoint argues that even
if the encoder performs poorly on one task, increasing the
model size while keeping everything else the same could
allow better performance to “emerge” (Wei et al., 2022).
However, substantial evidence suggests that certain abilities
cannot emerge solely from scaling. Additional training signals, such as alignment (Ouyang et al., 2022), are necessary.
The above questions are naturally interesting to learning
theorists, but why should the broader machine learning
community care about understanding the mechanism of
representation learning, if empirical success seems to be
always achievable with existing approaches by scaling up
the model size, an empirical observation known as scaling
laws (Kaplan et al., 2020)? This is because sustainable success or progress is not always guaranteed. Ilya Sutskever
recently remarked that “pretraining as we know it will end”
(Sutskever, 2024), largely because the current pretraining
paradigm is producing diminishing returns. Understanding
what representations are learned by foundation models is
crucial for designing future generations of pretraining methods, and this is how this field can make scientific progress.

1. Introduction
Representation learning underpins the modern deep learning
revolution, leading up to the remarkable recent successes
of foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021). But a
critical question that has remained unanswered to a satisfactory extent is: why are these models learning anything
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Peking
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Runtian Zhai
<rzhai@alumni.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

