Fundamental Bias in Inverting Random Sampling Matrices
with Application to Sub-sampled Newton

Chengmei Niu 1 Zhenyu Liao 1 Zenan Ling 1 Michael W. Mahoney 2

Abstract

As a pivotal technique in RandNLA, random sketching –
which encompasses both random projection and random
sampling – is becoming increasingly critical in many modern large-scale machine learning (ML) applications.

A substantial body of work in machine learning
(ML) and randomized numerical linear algebra
(RandNLA) has exploited various sorts of random
sketching methodologies, including random sampling and random projection, with much of the
analysis using Johnson–Lindenstrauss and subspace embedding techniques. Recent studies have
identified the issue of inversion bias – the phenomenon that inverses of random sketches are not
unbiased, despite the unbiasedness of the sketches
themselves. This bias presents challenges for the
use of random sketches in various ML pipelines,
such as fast stochastic optimization, scalable statistical estimators, and distributed optimization.
In the context of random projection, the inversion
bias can be easily corrected for dense Gaussian
projections (which are, however, too expensive
for many applications). Recent work has shown
how the inversion bias can be corrected for sparse
sub-gaussian projections. In this paper, we show
how the inversion bias can be corrected for random sampling methods, both uniform and nonuniform leverage-based, as well as for structured
random projections, including those based on the
Hadamard transform. Using these results, we establish problem-independent local convergence
rates for sub-sampled Newton methods.

More precisely, for a tall matrix A ∈ Rn×d with n ≫ d,
random projection proposes to obtain a sketch Ã ∈ Rm×d ,
of size m ≪ n of A by randomly and linearly combining the rows of A; while random sampling, on the other
hand, carefully selects a small subset (of size m say) of
the rows A and rescales them to obtain Ã ∈ Rm×d . For
both approaches, it follows from Johnson–Lindenstrauss
(JL) type analysis (Johnson & Lindenstrauss, 1984) that the
random sketch Ã can be used as a “proxy” of A in many
downstream ML tasks, e.g., Ã⊤ Ã ≈ A⊤ A are close in
some sense with high probability, even with m ≪ n. This
leads to a significant boost in the running time, communication time, and/or memory cost, for many numerical methods (Drineas et al., 2006b; 2011; 2012; Avron et al., 2017;
Dereziński & Mahoney, 2021; Lacotte & Pilanci, 2022).
See also Mahoney (2011); Halko et al. (2011); Woodruff
(2014); Drineas & Mahoney (2018); Martinsson & Tropp
(2020); Dereziński & Mahoney (2021); Murray et al. (2023);
Dereziński & Mahoney (2024) and reference therein for an
overview of RandNLA and the applications in modern ML.
Despite this promising “complexity-accuracy” trade-off
achieved with random sketching, in many ML pipelines
ranging from linear/ridge regression to scalable statistical
estimation and fast stochastic optimization, the object of direct interest is the sketched matrix inverse (Ã⊤ Ã+C)−1 for
some (perhaps all-zeros or diagonal) positive semi-definite
(p.s.d.) C (instead of Ã⊤ Ã itself). Since the matrix inverse
is a nonlinear operator, the fact that Ã⊤ Ã is an unbiased or
nearly unbiased estimator of A⊤ A (i.e., E[Ã⊤ Ã] = A⊤ A,
which is a major guide in forming the sketch Ã) does
not, in general, imply the unbiasedness of its inverse, i.e.,
E[(Ã⊤ Ã)−1 ] ̸≈ (A⊤ A)−1 . This phenomenon of inversion
bias has been long known in the literature: in the case of
Gaussian random projection with Ã = SA for S ∈ Rm×n
having i.i.d. N (0, 1/m) entries, (Ã⊤ Ã)−1 is known to
follow the inverse Wishart distribution (Haff, 1979) with
m
E[(Ã⊤ Ã)−1 ] = m−d−1
(A⊤ A)−1 for m > d + 1. However, much less is known beyond the Gaussian setting. Build-

1. Introduction
Randomized numerical linear algebra (RandNLA) significantly reduces computation, communication, and/or storage
overheads by using randomness as an algorithmic resource.
1

School of Electronic Information & Communications,
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, Hubei,
China. 2 ICSI, LBNL, and Department of Statistics, University
of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Zhenyu Liao
<zhenyu_liao@hust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

