GaussMarker: Robust Dual-Domain Watermark for Diffusion Models
∗

Kecen Li 1 2 Zhicong Huang 3 Xinwen Hou 1 Cheng Hong 3

Abstract

promising solution, and governments are starting to exert
pressure on companies to adopt watermarks (Biden, 2023;
California State Legislature, 2024; European Union, 2024).
A watermarking method usually consists of two modules: a
watermark injector and a watermark detector. The injector
embeds a watermark into our target (e.g., a synthetic image),
while the detector is capable of extracting the corresponding
watermark from the watermarked target. To watermark a
diffusion model, a naive approach is to apply classical image
watermarking techniques (Cox et al., 2007) to the contents
generated by the diffusion model. These traditional watermarks are easy to remove without compromising content
quality and lack adequate robustness for detection in real
applications (Ren et al., 2024). Therefore, some researchers
propose to inject the watermark into the parameters of diffusion model (Fernandez et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2023; Xiong
et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Rezaei et al., 2024; Feng et al.,
2024). With the parameters watermarked, the images generated by the diffusion model also contain some information
for the detector to extract the watermark. However, these
approaches need to fine-tune the diffusion model, inevitably
introducing additional computational overhead.

As Diffusion Models (DM) generate increasingly
realistic images, related issues such as copyright
and misuse have become a growing concern. Watermarking is one of the promising solutions.
Existing methods inject the watermark into the
single-domain of initial Gaussian noise for generation, which suffers from unsatisfactory robustness. This paper presents the first dual-domain
DM watermarking approach using a pipelined injector to consistently embed watermarks in both
the spatial and frequency domains. To further
boost robustness against certain image manipulations and advanced attacks, we introduce a modelindependent learnable Gaussian Noise Restorer
(GNR) to refine Gaussian noise extracted from
manipulated images and enhance detection robustness by integrating the detection scores of both
watermarks. GaussMarker efficiently achieves
state-of-the-art performance under eight image
distortions and four advanced attacks across three
versions of Stable Diffusion with better recall and
lower false positive rates, as preferred in real applications.

Recent research delves into designing tuning-free watermarking approaches (Gunn et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Ci
et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). Since the
diffusion model generates images through denoising a Gaussian noise iteratively, they use a carefully designed injector
to embed the watermark into the initial Gaussian noise. For
detection, they leverage the Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Model (DDIM) inversion (Song et al., 2021) to estimate the
initial noise from the input image and detect whether the
watermark exists in the estimated Gaussian noise. Although
these tuning-free approaches can resist some attack algorithms by leveraging the inherent generalization of diffusion
models, they still suffer from detection performance degrading under some easy image editing. For example, when
the watermarked image is rotated by just 3◦ , the watermark
detection accuracy of Gaussian Shading (Yang et al., 2024)
(the SOTA tuning-free method) decreases from 100% to
64%, making this method extremely vulnerable in practical
application scenarios.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) have marked a significant advancement
in image generation, empowering individuals from various backgrounds to effortlessly create high-quality images.
However, these highly realistic images can be misused in
several ways, such as faking synthetic images as humancreated ones, generating fake news, and copyright infringement (Humphreys et al., 2024).
To mitigate these concerns, watermarking has become a
∗

Work done during an internship at Ant Group. 1 Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Ant Group.
Correspondence to: Zhicong Huang
<zhicong.hzc@antgroup.com>.

This paper proposes GaussMarker, a more robust tuningfree method to watermark diffusion models. Compared
to existing methods which can only watermark the Gaus-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

