Breaking the n1.5 Additive Error Barrier for Private and Efficient Graph
Sparsification via Private Expander Decomposition

Anders Aamand * 1 Justin Chen * 2 Mina Dalirrooyfard * 3 Slobodan Mitrović * 4 Yuriy Nevmyvaka 5
Sandeep Silwal * 6 Yinzhan Xu * 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Many modern applications rely on personal data, with notable examples including social networks and medical data
analysis. However, traditional algorithms, developed over
decades, are inherently non-private and often sensitive to
even small changes in input. This sensitivity can lead
to significant privacy breaches (Backstrom et al., 2007;
Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; Culnane et al., 2019). These
privacy concerns have driven extensive research on algorithms that protect users’ privacy. Graphs, which are ubiquitous in machine learning and data processing, have received
significant attention in privacy-preserving settings. Our
work contributes to this growing body of research by designing private algorithms in the context of graph cuts. In social
networks, cut queries are crucial in analyzing how tightly a
community is connected internally and how it interacts with
the outside world. However, accurately releasing connectivity information can compromise user privacy (Hay et al.,
2009). Moreover, there are exponentially many cuts, making a direct private release of all the cuts infeasible. Hence,
one way to solve this problem is to construct a synthetic
graph on the same node set as the original while preserving
approximate cut values.

We study differentially private algorithms for
graph cut sparsification, a fundamental problem
in algorithms, privacy, and machine learning.
While significant progress has been made, the
best-known private and efficient cut sparsifiers
on n-node graphs approximate each cut within
e
O(n1.5 ) additive error and 1 + γ multiplicative error for any γ > 0 [Gupta, Roth, Ullman TCC’12].
In contrast, inefficient algorithms, i.e., those requiring exponential time, can achieve an e
O(n) additive error and 1 + γ multiplicative error [Eliáš,
Kapralov, Kulkarni, Lee SODA’20]. In this work,
we break the n1.5 additive error barrier for private
and efficient cut sparsification. We present an
(ε, δ)-DP polynomial time algorithm that, given
a non-negative weighted graph, outputs a private
synthetic graph approximating all cuts with multiplicative error 1 + γ and additive error n1.25+o(1)
(ignoring dependencies on ε, δ, γ).
At the heart of our approach lies a private algorithm for expander decomposition, a popular and
powerful technique in (non-private) graph algorithms.

The standard notion of privacy is differential privacy (DP)
introduced by Dwork, McSherry, Nissim, and Smith in
their seminal work (Dwork et al., 2006), which indicates
that the output of a private algorithm of two neighboring inputs must be statistically indistinguishable. Formally, an algorithm A is (ε, δ)-DP if given two neighboring inputs G and G′ and a subset of outputs O, we have
Pr(A(G) ∈ O) ≤ eε Pr(A(G′ ) ∈ O) + δ. When δ = 0,
we say that the algorithm preserves pure-DP, and otherwise
approximate-DP. In the context of graphs, the most widely
studied notion of neighboring graphs is edges-neighboring:
two neighboring graphs differ in only one edge, and the
graphs’ node sets are publicly available. For weighted
graphs, two neighboring graphs are those whose total edge
weights differ by at most one, and in a single edge1 .

*

1
Equal contribution
University of Copenhagen,
2
BARC, Denmark.
aa@di.ku.dk.
Massachusetts
Institute of Technology,
Cambridge,
MA, USA.
3
justc@mit.edu.
Machine Learning Research, Morgan Stanley, Canada. minad@mit.edu. 4 University of
California, Davis, USA. smitrovic@ucdavis.edu.
5
Machine Learning Research, Morgan Stanley, USA.
6
yuriy.nevmyvaka@morganstanley.com.
UWMadison, USA. silwal@cs.wisc.edu. 7 University of
California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Mina
Dalirrooyfard <minad@mit.edu>.

1

Algorithms satisfying this notion are often also private for
graphs whose vector of n2 edge weights differ by at most 1 in ℓ1
distance.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

