M ATH C ONSTRUCT: Challenging LLM Reasoning with Constructive Proofs

Mislav Balunović* 1 2 Jasper Dekoninck* 1 Nikola Jovanović 1 Ivo Petrov 2 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

100%

While Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive performance in mathematics, existing math benchmarks come with significant
limitations. Many focus on problems with fixed
ground-truth answers, and are often saturated
due to problem simplicity or the viability of
guessing or memorization. Crucially, they capture only a narrow subset of relevant math problems. To address this research gap, we introduce M ATH C ONSTRUCT, a new benchmark of
126 challenging problems sourced from various
math competitions, which targets constructive
proofs, a widely encountered problem type requiring the construction of mathematical objects
with specific properties. These proofs are particularly suitable for LLM evaluation, as solution correctness can be easily verified. Our automated verifiers also enable M ATH C ONSTRUCT
to generate problem variations, used to evaluate
robustness. State-of-the-art LLMs solve only 54%
of M ATH C ONSTRUCT problems, highlighting its
complexity and importance for LLM evaluation.

80%

MATH

(97.30%)

AIME-2024

(86.70%)

Average Accuracy
Robust Accuracy

60%
40%
20%
0%

o3-mini

o1

Flash-Thinking

R1-70B

3.5-Sonnet

Figure 1: Accuracy of LLMs on M ATH C ONSTRUCT, highlighting the difficulty of constructive proofs. We compute
Robust Accuracy by requiring the model to consistently
solve a problem across a set of problem variations.
formalized proof generation, requires LLMs to generate
proofs that can be verified by automated theorem provers
such as Lean (de Moura & Ullrich, 2021). Unfortunately,
even models explicitly fine-tuned for this task struggle to
perform well (Xin et al., 2024). Furthermore, this approach
does not fully leverage the strong natural language reasoning capabilities of LLMs. This raises an important question:
Is there a class of proof-based problems that are both challenging for LLMs and easy to verify for correctness?

1. Introduction
Evaluating the mathematical reasoning abilities of Large
Language Models (LLMs) requires high-quality public
benchmarks that accurately measure progress. As shown
in Fig. 1, existing benchmarks, such as MATH (Hendrycks
et al., 2021), are becoming increasingly saturated as stateof-the-art models improve, highlighting the need for more
challenging evaluation tasks. Many complex mathematical
problems involve proofs, which are a fundamental component of advanced reasoning. However, current benchmarks
primarily focus on problems where LLM outputs can be
directly compared to ground truth answers, making them
unsuitable for evaluating proofs. A promising alternative,

Constructive proofs One important class of proofs, commonly appearing in real-world applications and advanced
mathematical competitions, involves constructive proofs.
These proofs establish a mathematical result by explicitly
constructing an object—such as a set, matrix, or graph—that
satisfies specific constraints.
For instance, one of the most challenging problems from the
2022 International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO), shown
in Fig. 2 (left), requires constructing an n × n matrix that
maximizes a particular quantity. More generally, disproving
a conjecture often involves constructing a counterexample,
as seen in Cantor’s diagonal argument (Cantor, 1890). Similarly, proving a bound frequently requires constructing an
object that achieves that bound, as in the proof of the Four
Color Theorem (Appel & Haken, 1989).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich 2 INSAIT, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski". Correspondence to: Mislav Balunović <mislav.balunovic@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

