Learning to Trust Bellman Updates: Selective State-Adaptive Regularization for
Offline RL
Qin-Wen Luo * 1 Ming-Kun Xie * 1 Ye-Wen Wang 1 Sheng-Jun Huang 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; Haarnoja et al., 2024). However, RL typically
improves performance through trial and error, which limits its practical application to critical scenarios, such as
healthcare decision-making (Tang & Wiens, 2021; Fatemi
et al., 2022) and autonomous driving (Fang et al., 2022;
Diehl et al., 2023). These tasks often have such strict requirements regarding potential risks and time costs that the
interaction with the environment is limited or inaccessible.

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn
an effective policy from a static dataset. To alleviate extrapolation errors, existing studies often
uniformly regularize the value function or policy
updates across all states. However, due to substantial variations in data quality, the fixed regularization strength often leads to a dilemma: Weak regularization strength fails to address extrapolation
errors and value overestimation, while strong regularization strength shifts policy learning toward
behavior cloning, impeding potential performance
enabled by Bellman updates. To address this issue,
we propose the selective state-adaptive regularization method for offline RL. Specifically, we introduce state-adaptive regularization coefficients to
trust state-level Bellman-driven results, while selectively applying regularization on high-quality
actions, aiming to avoid performance degradation caused by tight constraints on low-quality
actions. By establishing a connection between
the representative value regularization method,
CQL, and explicit policy constraint methods, we
effectively extend selective state-adaptive regularization to these two mainstream offline RL approaches. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches in both offline and offline-to-online settings on the D4RL
benchmark. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/QinwenLuo/SSAR.

Offline RL has mitigated this problem by deriving policies
from static datasets without actual environment interactions.
Direct application of the off-policy algorithms could result
in value overestimation and extrapolation errors (Fujimoto
et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019). To address these challenges, based on how they resolved around the policy iteration process, existing RL-based offline methods can be
roughly divided into two groups, value regularization (Kumar et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2022; Nakamoto et al., 2024)
and policy constraint (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Kostrikov
et al., 2021b; Nair et al., 2020). The former suppresses the
Q-values of out-of-distribution (OOD) actions in the policy
evaluation function to alleviate value overestimation; while
the latter restricts updates near the dataset in the policy improvement function to avoid OOD actions. Both approaches
incorporate regularization terms into their online counterparts, shifting the update from an optimistic to a pessimistic
manner. Despite their demonstrated advances, existing methods still face the critical challenge of identifying optimal
regularization strengths that balance trust in the outcomes
derived from Bellman updates and the imitation of dataset
actions to fully unlock the potential of RL-based learning.
Given that in model-free RL methods, performance gains
beyond the behavior policy are fundamentally enabled by
Bellman updates, it is crucial to balance confidence in these
updates and conservative regularization. Since the balance is
typically achieved by the fixed global coefficient in the regularization term, identifying its optimal value is paramount
for effective performance. This presents challenges from
three key aspects. Firstly, from a task-level perspective, the
optimal global coefficient can vary significantly across different tasks. Certain tasks may benefit from a larger coefficient to enforce stricter regularization and avoid overestimation, while others may require a lower coefficient to enable
more flexible policy updates, resulting in better performance

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made remarkable strides
across diverse domains (Degrave et al., 2022; Kaufmann
*

Equal contribution 1 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun
Huang <huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

