Bellman Unbiasedness: Toward Provably Efficient Distributional Reinforcement
Learning with General Value Function Approximation

Taehyun Cho 1 Seungyub Han 1 Seokhun Ju 1 Dohyeong Kim 1 Kyungjae Lee 2 Jungwoo Lee 1

Abstract

2019), neural response (Muller et al., 2024), stratospheric
balloon navigation (Bellemare et al., 2020), algorithm discovery (Fawzi et al., 2022), and several game benchmarks
(Bellemare et al., 2013; Machado et al., 2018). While the
distributional approach offers richer information, two key
theoretical challenges are introduced that distinguish it from
expectation-based RL.

Distributional reinforcement learning improves
performance by capturing environmental stochasticity, but a comprehensive theoretical understanding of its effectiveness remains elusive. In addition, the intractable element of the infinite dimensionality of distributions has been overlooked.
In this paper, we present a regret analysis of distributional reinforcement learning with general
value function approximation in a finite episodic
Markov decision process setting. We first introduce a key notion of Bellman unbiasedness which
is essential for exactly learnable and provably efficient distributional updates in an online manner.
Among all types of statistical functionals for representing infinite-dimensional return distributions,
our theoretical results demonstrate that only moment functionals can exactly capture the statistical
information. Secondly, we propose a provably efficient algorithm, SF-LSVI,
that achieves a tight
3√
regret bound of Õ(dE H 2 K) where H is the
horizon, K is the number of episodes, and dE is
the eluder dimension of a function class.

Infinite-dimensionality of distribution. In practice, distributions contain an infinite amount of information, and
we must resort to approximations using a finite number
of parameters or statistical functionals, such as categorical (Bellemare et al., 2017) and quantile representations
(Dabney et al., 2018b). However, previous works often conducted analyses while overlooking these intractable nature
of distributions. Additionally, not all statistical functionals
can be exactly learned through the Bellman operator, as
the meaning of statistical functionals is not preserved after
updates. For example, the median is not preserved under
the Bellman updates, as the median of a mixture of two
distributions does not equal the mixture of their medians.
Thus, a fundamental question arises:
"For a given statistical functional, does there exist a
corresponding Bellman operator that ensures exactness?"
To formalize this issue, Rowland et al. (2019) introduced
Bellman closedness, which characterizes statistical functionals that can be exactly learned in the presence of a corresponding Bellman operator.

Distributional reinforcement learning (DistRL) (Bellemare
et al., 2017; Rowland et al., 2019; Choi et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2024) is an advanced approach to reinforcement learning (RL) that focuses on the entire probability distribution
of returns rather than solely on the expected return. By
considering the full distribution of returns, distRL provides
deeper insight into the uncertainty of each action, such as
the mode or median. This framework enables us to make
safer and more effective decisions that account for various risks (Chow et al., 2015; Son et al., 2021; Greenberg
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023), particularly in complex realworld situations, such as robotic manipulation (Bodnar et al.,

Online distributional update. In this paper, we focus
on developing an algorithm that efficiently explores from a
regret minimization perspective while simultaneously performing distributional Bellman updates in an online manner. One possible approach to addressing this problem is
to first update the policy using an existing provably efficient non-distributional RL algorithm and then estimate
the distribution via additional rollouts. However, decoupling these two processes introduces several drawbacks.
First, adding extra rollouts solely for distribution estimation
is sample-inefficient, and the limited number of rollouts
inevitably introduce accumulated approximation errors in
the estimated distribution throughout the learning process.

1

Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Korea University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Kyungjae Lee
<kyungjae_lee@korea.ac.kr>, Jungwoo Lee <junglee@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

