Optimizing Language Models for Inference Time Objectives using
Reinforcement Learning

Yunhao Tang 1 * Kunhao Zheng 2 * Gabriel Synnaeve 2 Rémi Munos 2 *

Abstract

Usually, model training does not explicitly account for the
downstream inference time algorithm. It is clear that there
is a trade-off: this helps avoid premature specialization,
but might also risk not benefiting from the inference time
algorithm fully had we known the algorithm in advance.

In this work, we investigate the merits of explicitly optimizing for inference time algorithmic performance during model training. We show how
optimizing for inference time performance can improve overall model efficacy. We consider generic
inference time objectives with k samples, with a
focus on pass@k and majority voting as two main
applications. With language model training on
reasoning datasets, we showcase the performance
trade-off enabled by training with such objectives.
When training on code generation tasks, we show
that the approach significantly improves pass@k
objectives compared to the baseline method.

In this work, we investigate the impact of training explicitly
for the inference time algorithm. We focus on pass@k and
majority voting, two influential yet relatively simple inference time objectives. The pass@k objective arises when the
task has verifiers and the system can retry it k times. Majority voting is even more broadly applicable: devoting more
inference time compute to have different solutions and selecting the most voted one. We demonstrate how such objectives can be optimized via stochastic gradient descent, and
built as part of an online reinforcement learning algorithm
(Section 3). We carry out extensive ablations that showcase
the trade-off of different objectives, such as an improved
inference time performance when the training algorithm is
aware of the inference time algorithm (Section 5): we show
that when training on mathematical reasoning datasets such
as MATH, as well as challenging code generation datasets
such as CodeContests, new algorithmic variants achieve
significant gains on inference time objectives of interest.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, the performance of machine learning system
can be improved via either training time or inference time
algorithm. At training time, knowledge is distilled into
model weights via gradient descent (Bottou, 2010). At
inference time, a fixed model is queried multiple times to
deliver a better prediction than a single model call.
Though model training and inference time compute improves model performance, their scaling properties differ
significantly. For example, Lerer et al. (2020) has demonstrated that for the game of Hex, scaling inference time
compute can match performance at increased training budget, while at a fraction of the cost. More generally, inference
compute has proved effective at various machine learning
applications, even if the underlying model has been trained
extensively. Notable examples include board game (Silver
et al., 2014; 2018), competitive pokers (Brown & Sandholm,
2018; 2019), general game (Lerer et al., 2020; Bakhtin et al.,
2022), competitive programming (Li et al., 2022) and language modeling (Jaech et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025).
*

1

2. Reinforcement learning for language model
A language model can be understood as a policy πθ in the
context of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto,
1998). Given a prompt x, the policy generates a response
y, which then gets assessed by a human user. Usually, the
objective is to optimize πθ such that certain reward function
r(x, y) that captures human preference (HF) is maximized
(Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022). Formally, consider the average
reward optimization problem
max Ex∼ρ,y∼πθ (·|x) [r(x, y)] ,
θ

2

Equal contribution Meta GenAI Meta FAIR. Correspondence to: Yunhao Tang <yt2541@columbia.edu>, Kunhao Zheng
<kunhao@meta.com>.

where ρ is a distribution over prompt set. Below, when
the context is clear we will omit the dependency on the
prompt x. Given samples y drawn from πθ , we can construct
stochastic gradient estimates to the policy gradient (Sutton
et al., 2000) to iteratively improve the policy. Note that for

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

