A Theoretical Justification for Asymmetric Actor-Critic Algorithms

Gaspard Lambrechts 1 * Damien Ernst 1 Aditya Mahajan 2

Abstract

tional RL approaches have thus been adapted by considering
history-dependent policies, usually with a recurrent neural
network to process histories (Bakker, 2001; Wierstra et al.,
2007; Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Heess et al., 2015; Zhang
et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2017). Given the difficulty of learning effective history-dependent policies, various auxiliary
representation learning objectives have been proposed to
compress the history into useful representations (Igl et al.,
2018; Buesing et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2018; Gregor et al.,
2019; Han et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020;
Subramanian et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2024). Such methods
usually seek to learn history representations that encode the
belief, defined as the posterior distributions over the states
given the history, which is a sufficient statistic of the history
for optimal control.

In reinforcement learning for partially observable
environments, many successful algorithms have
been developed within the asymmetric learning
paradigm. This paradigm leverages additional
state information available at training time for
faster learning. Although the proposed learning
objectives are usually theoretically sound, these
methods still lack a precise theoretical justification for their potential benefits. We propose
such a justification for asymmetric actor-critic algorithms with linear function approximators by
adapting a finite-time convergence analysis to this
setting. The resulting finite-time bound reveals
that the asymmetric critic eliminates error terms
arising from aliasing in the agent state.

While these methods are theoretically able to learn optimal
history-dependent policies, they usually learn solely from
the partial state observations, which can be restrictive. Indeed, assuming the same partial observability at training
time and execution time can be too pessimistic for many
environments, notably for those that are simulated. This motivated the asymmetric learning paradigm, where additional
state information available at training time is leveraged during the process of learning a history-dependent policy. Although the optimal policies obtained by asymmetric learning
are theoretically equivalent to those learned by symmetric
learning, the promise of asymmetric learning is to improve
the convergence speed. Early approaches proposed to imitate a privileged policy conditioned on the state (Choudhury
et al., 2018), or to use an asymmetric critic conditioned
on the state (Pinto et al., 2018). These heuristic methods
initially lacked a theoretical framework, and a recent line
of work has focused on proposing theoretically grounded
asymmetric learning objectives. First, imitation learning
of a privileged policy was known to be suboptimal, and it
was addressed by constraining the privileged policy so that
its imitation results in an optimal policy for the partially
observable environment (Warrington et al., 2021). Similarly, asymmetric actor-critic approaches were proven to
provide biased gradients, and an unbiased actor-critic approach was proposed by introducing the history-state value
function (Baisero & Amato, 2022). In model-based RL, several works proposed world model objectives that are proved
to provide sufficient statistics of the history, by leveraging

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an appealing framework
for solving decision making problems, notably because it
makes very few assumptions about the problem at hand.
In its purest form, the promise of an RL algorithm is to
learn an optimal behavior from interaction with an environment whose dynamics are unknown. More formally, an RL
algorithm aims to learn a policy – which is defined as a
mapping from observations to actions – from interaction
samples, in order to maximize a reward signal. While RL
has obtained empirical successes for a plethora of challenging problems ranging from games to robotics (Mnih et al.,
2015; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Levine et al., 2015; Akkaya
et al., 2019), most of these achievements have assumed full
state observability. A more realistic assumption is partial
state observability, where only a partial observation of the
state of the environment is available for taking actions. In
this setting, the optimal action generally depends on the
complete history of past observations and actions. Tradi*
Work done at McGill University and Mila Québec. 1 Montefiore
Institute, University of Liège 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University. Correspondence to: Gaspard Lambrechts <gaspard.lambrechts@uliege.be>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

