LoRA Training Provably Converges to a Low-Rank Global Minimum
or It Fails Loudly (But it Probably Won’t Fail)

Junsu Kim 1 Jaeyeon Kim 2 Ernest K. Ryu 3

Abstract

rank = r

Xspurious
r⋆ < rank < r

Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) has become a standard approach for fine-tuning large foundation
models. However, our theoretical understanding of LoRA remains limited as prior analyses
of LoRA’s training dynamics either rely on linearization arguments or consider highly simplified setups. In this work, we analyze the LoRA
loss landscape without such restrictive assumptions. We define two regimes: a “special regime”,
which includes idealized setups where linearization arguments hold, and a “generic regime” representing more realistic setups where linearization
arguments do not hold. In the generic regime, we
show that LoRA training converges to a global
minimizer with low rank and small magnitude, or
a qualitatively distinct solution with high rank and
large magnitude. Finally, we argue that the zeroinitialization and weight decay in LoRA training
induce an implicit bias toward the low-rank, smallmagnitude region of the parameter space—where
global minima lie—thus shedding light on why
LoRA training usually succeeds in finding global
minima.

Xspurious
rank ≤ r⋆
X⋆
0

Xspurious

Figure 1: In LoRA fine-tuning, under the assumption that
the global minimum X⋆ has low rank and small magnitude,
we show that spurious local minima Xspurious may exist, but
they have high rank and large magnitude.
where r ≪ min(m, n), A ∈ Rm×r and B ∈ Rn×r . The
low-rank factor matrices A and B are respectively initialized
as a random Gaussian matrix and a zero matrix, leading to
X = 0 at initialization. By training fewer parameters, LoRA
fine-tuning significantly reduces memory usage, making
fine-tuning feasible on GPUs with limited GPU memory.
The broad use of LoRA has spurred theoretical works aimed
at understanding its effectiveness. One line of work focuses on analyzing LoRA’s training dynamics, exploring
why optimizers like SGD or Adam successfully find effective low-rank updates despite the significant non-convexity
introduced by the factorization X = AB ⊺ , as well as the inherent non-convexity of neural networks, by utilizing some
degree of linearization. Specifically, Malladi et al. (2023)
studies LoRA under a complete linearization, effectively
holding A fixed during fine-tuning and viewing the training as a convex optimization problem. A subsequent work
(Jang et al., 2024) presents a more refined analysis linearizing with respect to the product X = AB ⊺ , retaining the
non-convexity arising from the interaction between A and B.
Beyond linearization, Dayi & Chen (2024) analyzes a twolayer teacher-student setup for rank-1 LoRA. In this work,
we carry out a theoretical analysis without any linearizations
and any restriction on layers or LoRA rank.

1. Introduction
With the recent explosive trend of scale, fine-tuning a pretrained foundational model to target downstream tasks has
become a dominant approach to deep learning. Low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022) is a parameter-efficient
fine-tuning method freezing the pre-trained weight matrix
W0 ∈ Rm×n , and training a low-rank update X = AB ⊺ to
it using
W = W0 + X = W0 + AB ⊺ ,
1
Department of Mathematics, Seoul National University 2 Department of Computer Science, Harvard University
3
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Ernest K. Ryu <eryu@math.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

