Gradient Flow Provably Learns Robust Classifiers for Orthonormal GMMs

Hancheng Min 1 2 René Vidal 1 2 3

Abstract

Large Language Models are also susceptible to adversarial
attacks (Chao et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2023), leading to
undesired or harmful outputs, and the competition between
adversaries and defenders continues (Robey et al., 2023; Ji
et al., 2024). While such a competition allows us to design
more robust networks, it will not end unless many fundamental questions about adversarial robustness are answered.

Deep learning-based classifiers are known to be
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Existing methods for defending against such attacks require
adding a defense mechanism or modifying the
learning procedure (e.g., by adding adversarial
examples). This paper shows that for certain data
distributions one can learn a provably robust classifier using standard learning methods and without
adding a defense mechanism. More specifically,
this paper addresses the problem of finding a robust classifier for a binary classification problem
in which the data comes from an isotropic mixture of Gaussians with orthonormal cluster centers. First, we characterize the largest ℓ2 -attack
any classifier can defend against while maintaining high accuracy, and show the existence of optimal robust classifiers achieving this maximum
ℓ2 -robustness. Next, we show that given data from
the orthonormal Gaussian mixture model, gradient flow on a two-layer network with a polynomial
ReLU activation and without adversarial examples provably finds an optimal robust classifier.

One question is, what is the maximum adversarial perturbation a neural network can tolerate? Many works on certified
robustness (Cohen et al., 2019; Fazlyab et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2018) aim to find a certified radius such that a neural
network can provably maintain a high prediction accuracy
for adversarial attacks within that radius. However, their
reported certified radii are often too small compared to what
can be achieved by practical defenses (Tramèr et al., 2018;
Guo et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). Yet,
practical defenses come at the cost of computing adversarial
examples, or sophisticated model designs, mostly without
theoretical guarantees, except for the case of linear classifiers (Zou et al., 2021). This also gives rise to an intriguing
question: Is it possible to find a robust network by standard
training methods without adversarial examples?
Note that this question might not always be well-defined.
For example, Dobriban et al. (2023); Javanmard et al. (2020)
prove that, for certain tasks, trade-offs between clean accuracy and adversarial robustness are unavoidable, hence the
notion of robust networks requires additional specifications
on how much accuracy one would sacrifice for robustness.
However, for tasks without such trade-offs, a robust classifier can be accurate on clean data while maintaining a
substantial level of robustness against adversarial attacks.
The existence of such a robust classifier is closely related to
data geometry. For instance, Pal et al. (2023; 2024) show
that if the data is localized, i.e., if the distribution of the data
given the class concentrates in a set of small volume, then a
robust classifier is guaranteed to exist. Moreover, they show
that a 2r separation (w.r.t. to some distance metric) between
the sets that contain each class-conditioned probability mass
is sufficient for the existence of a robust classifier against
attacks of radius r in the same distance metric. These results
motivate us to explore the following question: Can standard
training methods, without adversarial examples, provably
find a classifier for localized data that achieves maximum
robustness while maintaining good clean accuracy?

1. Introduction
The vulnerability of neural networks to adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2014), i.e., perturbations to their
input that are typically human-imperceptible, has led to
numerous efforts in building defenses against these attacks
(Shafahi et al., 2019; Papernot et al., 2016; Wong et al.,
2019; Guo et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Levine & Feizi,
2020; Yang et al., 2020; Sulam et al., 2020; Kinfu & Vidal, 2022). These defenses have been counteracted by new
adaptive attacks (Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini et al., 2019;
Croce & Hein, 2020), leading to new defenses and so on.
1

Center for Innovation in Data Engineering and Science
(IDEAS) 2 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
3
Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Hancheng Min <hanchmin@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

