Freeze-Omni: A Smart and Low Latency
Speech-to-speech Dialogue Model with Frozen LLM

Xiong Wang * 1 Yangze Li * 1 2 Chaoyou Fu 3 Yike Zhang 1 Yunhang Shen 1 Lei Xie 2 Ke Li 1 Xing Sun 1
Long Ma 1

Abstract

users. The traditional method adopts a cascaded approach
of ASR + LLM + TTS to achieve interaction with LLM in
the speech modality. However, this engineering-centered
pipeline approach often leads to considerable interaction
latency. Nevertheless, GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) has changed
this situation – it provides an end-to-end speech interaction
mode which has significantly improved user experience,
triggering a research boom regarding multimodal LLMs for
speech-to-speech interaction.

The GPT-4o’s excellent duplex speech interaction
ability has given users an impressive experience.
Researchers have recently proposed several multimodal LLMs to achieve user-agent speech-tospeech conversations. In this paper, we propose
a novel speech-text multimodal LLM architecture called Freeze-Omni, and our main contribution is that the speech input and output modalities
can be easily connected to a textual LLM while
keeping the LLM’s parameters frozen throughout
the training process. We effectively ensure that
the intelligence of the Freeze-Omni in the speech
modality is at the same level as that in the text
modality of its backbone LLM while achieving
low latency in the end-to-end spoken response. In
addition, we also designed a method to achieve
duplex dialogue ability through multitask training, giving Freeze-Omni a more natural style of
dialogue ability between users and agents. In
summary, Freeze-Omni holds great potential to
conduct speech-to-speech dialogue based on a
multimodal LLM under the condition of a frozen
LLM, avoiding the catastrophic forgetting problem caused by limited data and training resources.

In the field of general LLMs, many public models such as
Llama 3.2 (Dubey et al., 2024), Qwen2.5 (Team, 2024),
Mixtral (Jiang et al., 2024), etc., have provided good opportunities for researchers to develop downstream tasks. Therefore, in the field of multimodal LLMs targeting speech-tospeech conversation, works such as Mini-Omni2 (Xie & Wu,
2024b), LLaMA-Omni (Fang et al., 2024), Moshi (Défossez
et al., 2024) and GLM-4-Voice (Zeng et al., 2024) have
provided excellent references for researchers. These works
adopt different strategies to align the speech modality with
an LLM and design some tricks to achieve a duplex dialogue
mode.
In this research context, we found that in the process of aligning the LLM with the speech modality in existing public
speech-text multimodal LLMs (Chu et al., 2024; Défossez
et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2023; Xie & Wu, 2024a; Zeng et al., 2024), the parameters of the LLM are more or less fine-tuned. However,
in most cases, it is challenging for researchers to easily
collect spoken Q&A data at the million-hour level (the corresponding text content can be comparable to the amount
of data for training text-modal LLM). Fine-tuning the LLM
inevitably brings the catastrophic forgetting problem to the
LLM, negatively impacting its original “intelligence” ability.
In addition, only a few works have evaluated the performance of spoken question-answering tasks for speech-tospeech multimodal LLMs, showing an obvious gap in the
performance between spoken Q&A and text-modality Q&A.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a speech-to-speech
dialogue LLM called Freeze-Omni, which achieves effective speech-text modality alignment while keeping the LLM
parameters frozen, obtaining low-latency speech dialogue

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a rapid development of large
language models (LLMs). The LLM family represented by
the GPT series (Floridi & Chiriatti, 2020; Achiam et al.,
2023) of OpenAI has demonstrated extraordinary capabilities. As speech interaction is one of the most natural forms
of human-computer interaction, combining speech input
and output with an LLM can bring a natural experience to
*

Equal contribution 1 Tencent, China 2 ASLP@NPU, China
Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Long Ma <malonema@tencent.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

