Sampling from Binary Quadratic Distributions via Stochastic Localization

Chenguang Wang * 1 2 Kaiyuan Cui * 3 Weichen Zhao 4 Tianshu Yu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider sampling from the Gibbs measure
with the form of binary quadratic distributions (BQDs):

Sampling from binary quadratic distributions
(BQDs) is a fundamental but challenging problem
in discrete optimization and probabilistic inference. Previous work established theoretical guarantees for stochastic localization (SL) in continuous domains, where MCMC methods efficiently
estimate the required posterior expectations during SL iterations. However, achieving similar convergence guarantees for discrete MCMC samplers
in posterior estimation presents unique theoretical challenges. In this work, we present the first
application of SL to general BQDs, proving that
after a certain number of iterations, the external
field of posterior distributions constructed by SL
tends to infinity almost everywhere, hence satisfy
Poincaré inequalities with probability near to 1,
leading to polynomial-time mixing. This theoretical breakthrough enables efficient sampling
from general BQDs, even those that may not originally possess fast mixing properties. Furthermore, our analysis, covering enormous discrete
MCMC samplers based on Glauber dynamics and
Metropolis-Hastings algorithms, demonstrates the
broad applicability of our theoretical framework.
Experiments on instances with quadratic unconstrained binary objectives, including maximum
independent set, maximum cut, and maximum
clique problems, demonstrate consistent improvements in sampling efficiency across different discrete MCMC samplers.

β

ν(x) ∝ e− 2 ⟨x,W x⟩+⟨x,b⟩ , x ∈ {−1, 1}N .

(1)

where β is the inverse temperature. This distribution class
naturally arises in statistical physics such as Ising models (Nishimori, 2001; Bauerschmidt & Dagallier, 2024),
spin systems (Bauerschmidt & Bodineau, 2019) and in combinatorial optimization as quadratic unconstrained binary
optimization (QUBO) problems (Lucas, 2014; Glover et al.,
2022a;b), making it a fundamental object of study in both
theoretical and applied research. Sampling from such distributions poses significant challenges due to their discrete nature and complex dependencies (Sly & Sun, 2012). To sample from such distributions, various sampling approaches
have been proposed, including Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods (Metropolis et al., 1953; Titsias & Yau,
2017; Grathwohl et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; 2023b), simulated annealing (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983; Sun et al., 2022;
Sanokowski et al., 2023), diffusion models (Sanokowski
et al., 2024) and variational inference (Koehler et al., 2022).
Recently, stochastic localization (SL) has emerged as a
promising sampling framework. In the continuous domain, SLIPS (Grenioux et al., 2024) established theoretical guarantees by proving the “duality of log-concavity”
on sampling from the posterior and marginal distributions during SL iterations under certain assumptions, leading to significant improvements in sampling efficiency
using Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA)
(Roberts & Tweedie, 1996). Intuitively, rather than directly sampling from the continuous target distribution, SL
achieves sampling by iteratively adding Gaussian noise to
posterior estimates of the target distribution. This results in
posterior distributions that are Gaussian convolutions of the
target distribution which effectively reduces sampling complexity by smoothing out the target distribution’s irregular
features (Huang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024). This idea of
decomposing a difficult direct sampling task into a sequence
of sampling from simpler distributions is also prevalent in
diffusion models for generative tasks and is considered one
of the key factors behind their remarkable performance (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020a;b; Rombach et al., 2022).

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 3 The Academy of Mathematics and Systems
Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 The School of Statistics
and Data Science, LPMC & KLMDASR, Nankai University. Correspondence to: Weichen Zhao <zhaoweichen@nankai.edu.cn>,
Tianshu Yu <yutianshu@cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

