Sable: a Performant, Efficient and Scalable Sequence Model for MARL

Omayma Mahjoub * 1 Sasha Abramowitz * 1 Ruan de Kock * 1 Wiem Khlifi * 1 Simon du Toit 1 Jemma Daniel 1
Louay Ben Nessir 1 Louise Beyers 1 Claude Formanek 1 Liam Clark 1 Arnu Pretorius 1

Abstract
Multi-Agent Transformer

As multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
progresses towards solving larger and more complex problems, it becomes increasingly important that algorithms exhibit the key properties of
(1) strong performance, (2) memory efficiency,
and (3) scalability. In this work, we introduce
Sable, a performant, memory-efficient, and scalable sequence modelling approach to MARL.
Sable works by adapting the retention mechanism in Retentive Networks (Sun et al., 2023)
to achieve computationally efficient processing of
multi-agent observations with long context memory for temporal reasoning. Through extensive
evaluations across six diverse environments, we
demonstrate how Sable is able to significantly
outperform existing state-of-the-art methods
in a large number of diverse tasks (34 out of
45 tested). Furthermore, Sable maintains performance as we scale the number of agents, handling
environments with more than a thousand agents
while exhibiting a linear increase in memory usage. Finally, we conduct ablation studies to isolate the source of Sable’s performance gains and
confirm its efficient computational memory usage. All experimental data, hyperparameters,
and code for a frozen version of Sable used in
this paper are available on our website. An
improved and maintained version of Sable is
available in Mava.

35 11X

Sable (ours)

80

500

6.5X
6.5X

14

200

32

7X
0
Number of times
ranked best ↑

Throughput
(SPS) ↑

GPU Memory
(GB) ↓

Figure 1. Performance, memory, and scaling properties of Sable
compared to the Multi-Agent Transformer (MAT) (Wen et al.,
2022), the previous state-of-the-art, aggregated over 45 cooperative MARL tasks. Left: Sable ranks best in 34 out of 45 tasks,
outperforming all other MARL algorithms tested across 6 environments: RWARE, LBF, MABrax, SMAX, Connector, and MPE.
MAT ranked best of 3/45. Middle: Sable exhibits superior throughput, processing up to 6.5 times more steps per second compared to
MAT as we scale to 512 agents. Right: Sable scales efficiently to
thousands of agents, maintaining stable performance, while using
GPU memory significantly more efficiently than MAT.

require decision-making systems that have strong performance for accurate control, are memory efficient to maximize compute hardware and are able scale to a large number
of agents representing the different components of a complex system.
Although many existing MARL approaches exhibit one or
two of the above properties, a solution effectively encompassing all three remains elusive.

1. Introduction
Large-scale practical applications of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), such as autonomous driving (Lian
& Deshmukh, 2006; Zhou et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022) and
electricity grid control (Kamboj et al., 2011; Li et al., 2016),

To elaborate, we briefly consider the current spectrum of
MARL, from fully decentralised training, or independent
learning systems, to fully centralised learning. We consider
these paradigms in terms of their potential to exhibit:

*
Equal contribution 1 InstaDeep. Correspondence to: Ruan de
Kock, Arnu Pretorius <{r.dekock, a.pretorius}@instadeep.com>.

1. Strong performance: the general ability to solve tasks
at a moderate scale.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. Memory efficiency: the hardware memory require1

