Low-Rank Thinning

Annabelle Michael Carrell 1 Albert Gong 2 Abhishek Shetty 3 Raaz Dwivedi 2 Lester Mackey 4

Abstract

Harvey & Samadi, 2014; Phillips & Tai, 2020; Alweiss
et al., 2021; Dwivedi & Mackey, 2024; 2022; Shetty et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2024). We introduce a new analysis for
sub-Gaussian thinning algorithms that applies to any kernel
and shows that one can efficiently identify a better-thanuniform set of representative points whenever the kernel or
data matrix is nearly low-rank. This opens the door to a variety of impactful applications including approximate dotproduct attention in transformers, accelerating model training through gradient reordering, and distinguishing distributions with deep kernels in near-linear time.

The goal in thinning is to summarize a dataset
using a small set of representative points. Remarkably, sub-Gaussian thinning algorithms like
Kernel Halving and Compress can match the
quality of uniform subsampling while substantially reducing the number of summary points.
However, existing guarantees cover only a restricted range of distributions and kernel-based
quality measures and suffer from pessimistic dimension dependence. To address these deficiencies, we introduce a new low-rank analysis of
sub-Gaussian thinning that applies to any distribution and any kernel, guaranteeing high-quality
compression whenever the kernel or data matrix is approximately low-rank. To demonstrate
the broad applicability of the techniques, we design practical sub-Gaussian thinning approaches
that improve upon the best known guarantees
for approximating attention in transformers, accelerating stochastic gradient training through
reordering, and distinguishing distributions in
near-linear time.

In Sec. 2, we introduce our formal definition of thinning,
two kernel-based measures of thinning quality, and a suite
of candidate thinning algorithms. Sec. 3 presents our main
theorem relating thinning quality to low-rank properties of
a dataset and its induced kernel matrix. In Sec. 4, we translate the problem of approximating attention into a thinning
problem and develop a practical solution, Thinformer, with
state-of-the-art quality guarantees. In Sec. 5, we develop
a thinned stochastic gradient reordering rule that provably
accelerates training and bridges the theory-practice gaps
left open by prior work. Finally, in Sec. 6 we derive new
and improved power guarantees for practical thinned hypothesis tests that distinguish distributions in near-linear
time. Each section also includes its own discussion of related work.

1. Introduction
This work is about thinning, finding a small set of representative points to accurately summarize a larger dataset.
Here, we use the term “dataset” liberally to refer to any
collection of points, be they experimental observations (as
in Sec. 6), stochastic gradients (as in Sec. 5), or key-value
pairs (as in Sec. 4). State-of-the-art thinning techniques
provably improve upon uniform subsampling but only for
restricted classes of kernel-based quality measures and with
pessimistic dependence on the data dimension (see, e.g.,

Notation. For each n ∈ N and a, b ∈ R, we define
[n] ≜ {1, . . . , n}, a∧b ≜ min(a, b), and a∨b ≜ max(a, b).
We let ∥A∥op , ∥A∥max , and ∥A∥2,∞ respectively represent the maximum singular value, absolute entry, and row
Euclidean norm of a matrix A and let λr (K) denote the rth largest eigenvalue of a suitable matrix K. We also define
the Euclidean norm balls Bm ≜ {u ∈ Rm : ∥u∥2 ≤ 1}
and Bm (R) ≜ R Bm for each m ∈ N and R > 0. For
an event E and an integrable random variable X, we define EE [X] ≜ E[X · 1[E]]. We write an ≤ e
O(bn ) to mean
an ≤ bn polylog(n).

1
University of Cambridge 2 Cornell Tech 3 MIT 4 Microsoft
Research New England. Correspondence to: Annabelle Carrell
<ac2411@cam.ac.uk>, Albert Gong <agong@cs.cornell.edu>,
Abhishek
Shetty
<ashetty1995@gmail.com>,
Raaz
Dwivedi
<dwivedi@cornell.edu>,
Lester
Mackey
<lmackey@microsoft.com>.

2. Sub-Gaussian Thinning
We begin with a formal definition of our problem setting. Consider a fixed collection of nin input points Xin
belonging to a potentially larger universe of datapoints

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

