MuseControlLite: Multifunctional Music Generation
with Lightweight Conditioners

Fang-Duo Tsai 1 Shih-Lun Wu 2 Weijaw Lee 1 Sheng-Ping Yang 1 Bo-Rui Chen 1 Hao-Chung Cheng 1
Yi-Hsuan Yang 1

Abstract

mechanisms to exert controllability going beyond the simple
text prompt have been considered critical. As such, recent
months have seen an increasing body of research concerning
the addition of fine-grained, time-varying control to text-tomusic generation, such as those related to musical aspects of
chords, rhythm, melody, and dynamics. Exemplars include
Music ControlNet (Wu et al., 2024), MusiConGen (Lan
et al., 2024), JASCO (Tal et al., 2024), and DITTO (Novack
et al., 2024b), to name just a few.

We propose MuseControlLite, a lightweight mechanism designed to fine-tune text-to-music generation models for precise conditioning using various time-varying musical attributes and reference audio signals. The key finding is that positional embeddings, which have been seldom used
by text-to-music generation models in the conditioner for text conditions, are critical when the
condition of interest is a function of time. Using
melody control as an example, our experiments
show that simply adding rotary positional embeddings to the decoupled cross-attention layers
increases control accuracy from 56.6% to 61.1%,
while requiring 6.75 times fewer trainable parameters than state-of-the-art fine-tuning mechanisms,
using the same pre-trained diffusion Transformer
model of Stable Audio Open. We evaluate various forms of musical attribute control, audio inpainting, and audio outpainting, demonstrating
improved controllability over MusicGen-Large
and Stable Audio Open ControlNet at a significantly lower fine-tuning cost, with only 85M trainable parameters. Source code, model checkpoints,
and demo examples are available at: https:
//MuseControlLite.github.io/web/.

Despite the exciting progress that has been made, we find
two avenues for improvement. First, existing models might
be over-parameterized. In view of the success of ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024) in adding spatial control for text-to-image generation, a prominent approach has been to use similar idea to fine-tune pre-trained
text-to-music models to add conditioners for time-varying
conditions. For example, treating mel-spectrograms as images, Music ControlNet (Wu et al., 2024) offers multiple
conditions of melody, rhythm and dynamics. Stable Audio Open ControlNet (Hou et al., 2025) further improves
audio quality with latent diffusion, adapting the original
U-Net-based ControlNet encoder to a diffusion Transformer
architecture (Peebles & Xie, 2023). However, the ControlNet approach requires duplicating half of the diffusion
model as a trainable copy (Zhang et al., 2023), leading to
increased training and inference times. Lighter alternatives
for fine-tuning, such as the idea of decoupled cross-attention
presented in IP-adapter (Ye et al., 2023), can be studied.

1. Introduction

Second, while fine-tuning a text-to-music generation model
to consider conditions of musical attributes or conditions of
reference audio signals (Tsai et al., 2024) have been studied
separately, little work has been done to consider both types
of conditions at the same time. This capability may enable
various creative use cases, such as adding melody conditions
while performing audio inpainting or outpainting.

Text-to-music generation models have recently gained popularity as they hold the promise of empowering everyone
to create high-quality and expressive music without much
musical training and a reduced time cost (Copet et al., 2024).
However, for people who desire to be more deeply involved
in the creation process itself rather than the final output only,

We propose MuseControlLite, a lightweight fine-tuning
mechanism with significantly fewer trainable parameters
for controllable text-to-music generation. The key finding is that the decoupled cross-attention mechanism (Ye
et al., 2023), when augmented with positional embeddings,
achieves superior performance while using nearly an order

1

National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 2 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Fang-Duo Tsai <fundwotsai2001@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

