AdaptiveStep: Automatically Dividing Reasoning Step through Model
Confidence

intro main

Yuliang Liu * 1 2 Junjie Lu * 3 Chaofeng Qu 4 Zhaoling Chen 1 Zefan Cai 5 Jason Klein Liu 4 Chonghan Liu 4
Yunhui Xia 4 Li Zhao 6 Jiang Bian 6 Chuheng Zhang 6 Wei Shen 4 Zhouhan Lin 2 7
Manually Divided Steps

Abstract

Highly informative
Automatic
General

Current approaches for training Process Reward
Models (PRMs) often involve decomposing responses into multiple reasoning steps using rulebased techniques, such as using predefined placeholder tokens or setting the reasoning step’s
length to a fixed size. These approaches overlook
the fact that certain words don’t usually indicate
true decision points. To address this, we propose
AdaptiveStep, a method that divides reasoning
steps based on the model’s confidence in predicting the next word, offering more information on
decision-making at each step, improving downstream tasks like reward model training. Moreover, our method requires no manual annotation.
Experiments with AdaptiveStep-trained PRMs in
mathematical reasoning and code generation show
that the outcome PRM achieves state-of-the-art
Best-of-N performance, surpassing greedy search
strategy with token-level value-guided decoding,
while also reducing construction costs by over
30% compared to existing open-source PRMs.
We also provide a thorough analysis and case
study on its performance, transferability, and generalization capabilities. We provide our code on
https://github.com/Lux0926/ASPRM.

Rule-based Divided Steps
Highly informative
Automatic
General

AdaptiveStep

Informative

Highly informative
Automatic
General

Automatic

Figure 1: Rule-based reasoning step dividing (e.g., using
line breaks or a fixed number of tokens) is automated but
results in low informativeness at the end of the step and is
difficult to apply in domains that are hard to define rules. In
contrast, manual step division provides high informativeness
but is costly to scale and heavily reliant on the experts’ domain knowledge. AdaptiveStep, which divides steps based
on model confidence, addresses these challenges by offering
automation, efficiency, high informativeness, and applicability across various domains.
matical reasoning and code generation tasks (Huang et al.,
2024; Tyen et al., 2024; Mirzadeh et al., 2024; Shen &
Zhang, 2024). To address these challenges using the stepwise Chain of Thought (CoT) approach (Wei et al., 2023),
various strategies have been proposed by the research community (Qin et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Team
et al., 2025). One promising method is training Process
Reward Models (PRMs), which offer more fine-grained
rewards at each reasoning step compared to Outcome Reward Models (ORMs), guiding the LLM to generate higherquality responses than the original model output (Shao et al.,
2024; Sessa et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across various tasks. However, even
most advanced LLMs struggle to generate correct solutions
when facing complex reasoning problems, such as mathe*
Equal contribution 1 Nanjing University 2 Shanghai Innovation
Institute 3 University of Technology Sydney 4 Independent
5
UW-Madison 6 MSRA 7 Shanghai Jiaotong University. Correspondence to: Chuheng Zhang <zhangchuheng123@live.com>,
Wei Shen <shenwei0917@126.com>,
Zhouhan Lin
<lin.zhouhan@gmail.com>.

However, as illustrated in Figure 1, existing PRMs typically
divide a model’s response into multiple reasoning steps using rule-based methods, such as chopping with a pre-defined
symbol. This results in a series of coarse reasoning step divisions that lack decision-making information at steps (Wang
et al., 2024a; Lightman et al., 2023). Moreover, rule-based
methods also face challenges when applied to tasks where

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

