Layer-wise Quantization for Quantized Optimistic Dual Averaging

Anh Duc Nguyen 1 Ilia Markov 2 Frank Zhengqing Wu 3
Ali Ramezani-Kebrya 4 5 6 Kimon Antonakopoulos 3 Dan Alistarh 7 2 Volkan Cevher 3

Abstract

compressed variants while providing substantial savings in
communication costs (Alistarh et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2017; Faghri et al., 2020).

Modern deep neural networks exhibit heterogeneity across numerous layers of various types such
as residuals, multi-head attention, etc., due to
varying structures (dimensions, activation functions, etc.), distinct representation characteristics,
which impact predictions. We develop a general
layer-wise quantization framework with tight variance and code-length bounds, adapting to the heterogeneities over the course of training. We then
apply a new layer-wise quantization technique
within distributed variational inequalities (VIs),
proposing a novel Quantized Optimistic Dual Averaging (QODA) algorithm with adaptive learning
rates, which achieves competitive convergence
rates for monotone VIs. We empirically show that
QODA achieves up to a 150% speedup over the
baselines in end-to-end training time for training
Wasserstein GAN on 12+ GPUs.

Popular DNNs including convolutional architectures, transformers, and vision transformers have various types of layers
such as feed-forward, residual, multi-head attention including self-attention and cross-attention, bias, and normalization layers (He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Different types of layers learn distinct hierarchical features ranging from low-level patterns
to high-level semantic features (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; He
et al., 2016). They are also diverse in terms of number of
parameters and their impact on the final accuracy (Dutta
et al., 2020). Similar heterogeneity has been observed for
attention layers in large-scale transformers (Markov et al.,
2022). The current communication-efficient literature does
not rigorously take into account heterogeneity in terms of
representation power, impact on the final learning outcome,
and statistical heterogeneity across various layers of neural
networks and across training for each layer. Recently, layerwise and adaptive compression schemes have shown tremendous empirical success in accelerating training deep neural
networks and transformers in large-scale settings (Markov
et al., 2022; 2024), but they have yet to have theoretical guarantees and to handle statistical heterogeneity over the course
of training. Hence, these layer-wise compression schemes
suffer from a dearth of generalization and statistically rigorous argument to optimize the sequence of quantization and
the number of sparsification levels for each layer.

1. Introduction
In modern large-scale machine learning (ML) settings, communication costs for broadcasting huge stochastic gradients and dual vectors are the main performance bottleneck (Strom, 2015; Alistarh et al., 2017; Kairouz et al.,
2021). Several methods have been proposed to accelerate
large-scale training such as quantization, sparsification, and
reducing the frequency of communication through local
updates (Kairouz et al., 2021). In particular, unbiased quantization is unique due to offering both strong theoretical
guarantees and communication efficiency on the fly, i.e., it
converges under the same hyperparameters tuned for un-

In distributed learning, empirical risk minimization (ERM)
and finite-sum optimization problems are commonly tackled
using first-order solvers, which scale by distributing computations across multiple nodes synchronously (McMahan
et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; RamezaniKebrya et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2024). These nodes, for
instance hospitals and mobile devices, collaborate by partitioning data and aggregating local updates.1 However, many
real-world problems extend beyond ERM and require more
complex mathematical formulations. In particular, training
generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,

1

National University of Singapore (NUS), mostly work done
at LIONS, EPFL 2 Neural Magic 3 Laboratory for Information and
Inference Systems (LIONS), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 4 University of Oslo (UiO) 5 Integreat, Norwegian
Centre for Knowledge-driven Machine Learning 6 Visual Intelligence Centre 7 Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA).
Correspondence to: Anh Duc Nguyen <ducna@nus.edu.sg>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

For simplicity, we use the term node to refer to clients, FPGA,
APU, CPU, GPU, or workers throughout this work.

1

