Near Optimal Non-asymptotic Sample Complexity of 1-Identification

Zitian Li 1 Wang Chi Cheung 1

Abstract

problems. For example, consider a firm experimenting multiple new campaigns, and seeks to know if any new campaign is more effective than the existing one. The firm
may have a long history of applying the existing campaign,
with sufficient data to determine the impact and reward by
utilizing this campaign. Similar scenario applies to other
industries such as service operations, pharmaceutical tests,
simulation which involves comparisons between a benchmark and alternatives, in terms of profit, welfare or other
metrics.

Motivated by an open direction in existing literature, we study the 1-identification problem,
a fundamental multi-armed bandit formulation
on pure exploration. The goal is to determine
whether there exists an arm whose mean reward is
at least a known threshold µ0 , or to output None
if it believes such an arm does not exist. The
agent needs to guarantee its output is correct with
probability at least 1 − δ. (Degenne & Koolen,
2019) has established the asymptotically tight
sample complexity for the 1-identification problem, but they commented that the non-asymptotic
analysis remains unclear. We design a new algorithm Sequential-Exploration-Exploitation (SEE),
and conduct theoretical analysis from the nonasymptotic perspective. Novel to the literature, we
achieve near optimality, in the sense of matching
upper and lower bounds on the pulling complexity.
The gap between the upper and lower bounds is
up to a polynomial logarithmic factor. The numerical result also indicates the effectiveness of our
algorithm, compared to existing benchmarks.

Summary of Contributions. We make two contributions
to the 1-identification problem. Firstly, existing research
works only guarantee asymptotic optimality (Degenne &
Koolen, 2019; Jourdan & Réda, 2023), or non-asymptotic
near optimality in the case where all the mean rewards
are smaller than the threshold ((Jourdan & Réda, 2023),
or applying a Best Arm Identification algorithm). Novel
to the literature, our proposed algorithm achieves the nonasymptotic optimality in the sample complexity both the
positive case when there is a qualified arm, i.e. an arm
with mean reward at least the threshold, and the negative
case when there is no qualified arm. We prove matching
upper and lower sample complexity bounds, and the gap
between these upper and lower bounds is up to a polynomial
logarithm factor.

1. Introduction

Secondly, we conduct numeric experiments to compare the
performance of 1-identification algorithms. The numeric results suggest the excellency of our proposed SEE algorithm
and also the weakness of some benchmark algorithms.

The 1-identification problem is a fundamental multi-armed
bandit formulation on pure exploration. The goal of the
learning agent is to identify an arm whose mean reward is
at least a known threshold µ0 if such an arm exists, and
otherwise to return None if no such arm exists. We study
the fixed confidence setting, where the agent aims to return
the correct answer with probability at least 1 − δ for a given
tolerance parameter δ ∈ (0, 1), while ensuring the number
of arm pulls, aka sample complexity, as small as possible.

Notation. For an integer K > 0, denote [K] = {1, . . . , K}.
For µ ∈ [0, 1], we denote N (µ, σ 2 ) as the normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ 2 . Denote E and Eν,alg as
the expectation operator while the second one is to highlight
that the expectation is determined by both the instance ν
and algorithm alg.

The 1-identification problem models numerous real-world

2. Model

1

Department of Industrial Systems Engineering & Management, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Zitian Li <lizitian@u.nus.edu>, Wang Chi Cheung
<isecwc@nus.edu.sg>.

An instance of 1-identification is specified by the tuple Q =
([K], ν = {νa }a∈[K] , µ0 , δ). The set [K] represents the
collection of K arms. For each a ∈ [K], νa is the probability
distribution of the reward received by pulling arm a once.
The probability distribution νa , and in particular its mean

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

