NEAR: Neural Electromagnetic Array Response

Yinyan Bu 1 Jiajie Yu 1 Kai Zheng 1 Xinyu Zhang 1 Piya Pal 1

Abstract

due to its robustness to adverse weather conditions (e.g.
fog, snow, rain). Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output (MIMO)
radar (Li & Stoica, 2008) employs an array of transmit (Tx)
antennas which generate signals that are reflected by targets of interest, and received at a receiving (Rx) antenna
array. The distance and velocity of these targets are characterized by using the radar’s Range-Doppler (RD) map,
which is computed by applying Discrete-Time Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) on digitized receiver signals after Analogto-Digital Conversion (ADC) (Sun et al., 2020). Directionof-Arrival (DOA) estimation is then performed exclusively
on peaks that pass the constant false alarm rate (CFAR) detector (Scharf & Demeure, 1991) to determine the angular
orientation of objects. The angular resolution of MIMO
radar, which reveals how well it can identify two or more
closely spaced sources, is fundamentally constrained by the
number and configuration of the antenna array. For instance,
a device equipped with eight uniformly filled antenna arrays achieves at most an angular resolution of about 15◦
(Instruments, 2017). Thus, it is important to develop innovative technologies to enhance the angular resolution of radar
sensing, without incurring substantial hardware costs.

We address the challenge of achieving angular
super-resolution in multi-antenna radar systems
that are widely used for localization, navigation,
and automotive perception. A multi-antenna radar
achieves very high resolution by computationally
creating a large virtual sensing system using very
few physical antennas. However, practical constraints imposed by hardware, noise, and a limited
number of antennas can impede its performance.
Conventional supervised learning models that rely
on extensive pre-training with large datasets, often exhibit poor generalization in unseen environments. To overcome these limitations, we propose NEAR, an untrained implicit neural representation (INR) framework that predicts radar responses at unseen locations from sparse measurements, by leveraging latent harmonic structures
inherent in radar wave propagation. We establish
new theoretical results linking antenna array response to expressive power of INR architectures,
and develop a novel physics-informed and latent
geometry-aware regularizer. Our approach integrates classical signal representation with modern
implicit neural learning, enabling high-resolution
radar sensing that is both interpretable and generalizable. Extensive simulations and real-world
experiments using radar platforms demonstrate
NEAR’s effectiveness and its ability to adapt to
unseen environments.

For MIMO radar, range and Doppler resolution can be improved by adjusting signal bandwidth and frame time, which
correspond to the frequency range and duration of signal
pulses, respectively (Li et al., 2023). However, angular
resolution is strictly dependent on the radar hardware specifications, and cannot be improved through parameter adjustments. Achieving higher angular resolution in both azimuth
and elevation requires a large aperture in both horizontal and
vertical directions, which, for uniformly filled arrays, necessitates a significant number of antennas, resulting in high
hardware costs. An efficient alternative approach, which is
becoming increasingly relevant for next-generation sensing
(such as automotive radars) is to use sparse arrays (Pal &
Vaidyanathan, 2010; Qin et al., 2015; Sarangi et al., 2023).
Sparse arrays deploy a reduced number of transmit and receive antennas in order to achieve the same aperture as a
standard uniform array (with quadratically larger number of
sensors), which necessitates larger inter-element spacings.
They are designed so that their virtual (sum or difference)
co-arrays are dense uniform arrays filling the available aperture. This property can be utilized in several ways, such
as localization of more sources than sensors, and achieving

1. Introduction
In addition to Lidar and RGB-cameras, Radar has emerged
as a crucial sensing modality for advanced sensing tasks
such as driver assistance systems (ADAS) and autonomous
vehicles (Bijelic et al., 2020; Caesar et al., 2020), especially
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, United States.
Correspondence to: Yinyan Bu <y1bu@ucsd.edu>, Jiajie Yu
<jiy088@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

