Policy-Regret Minimization in Markov Games with Function Approximation

Thanh Nguyen-Tang 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract

measures the gap between the learner’s performance and
that of the best fixed strategy in hindsight. However, external regret fails to capture the counterfactual nature of
adaptivity: it overlooks how opponents might have reacted
differently had the learner chosen a different strategy.

We study policy-regret minimization problem in
dynamically evolving environments, modeled as
Markov games between a learner and a strategic,
adaptive opponent. We propose a general algorith√
mic framework that achieves the optimal O( T )
policy regret for a wide class of large-scale problems characterized by an Eluder-type condition–
extending beyond the tabular settings of previous
work. Importantly, our framework uncovers a
simpler yet powerful algorithmic approach for
handling reactive adversaries, demonstrating that
leveraging opponent learning in
√ such settings is
key to attaining the optimal O( T ) policy regret.

To address this limitation, policy regret (Arora et al., 2012b)
has emerged as a more suitable notion. Unlike external
regret, policy regret compares the learner’s performance
against the return they would have achieved by following
an alternate strategy, thereby accounting for the adaptive
behavior of opponents. Policy regret has been widely used
to analyze learning against adaptive adversaries in online
learning (Arora et al., 2012b; 2019) and repeated games
(Arora et al., 2018), but only recently extended to the setting of multi-agent RL. In particular, Nguyen-Tang & Arora
(2024a) initiated the study of policy regret in Markov games,
establishing fundamental barriers and providing sufficient
conditions for achieving sublinear policy regret in tabular
environments. Their results hinge on two simplifying assumptions: small discrete state and action spaces, and consistent behavior–the adversary’s response in a state depends
solely on the learner’s policy in that state.

1. Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success across a wide range of complex decisionmaking problems. Notable examples include mastering
games such as Go (Silver et al., 2016; 2017; 2018), realtime strategy games like StarCraft II (Vinyals et al., 2019)
and Dota (Berner et al., 2019), autonomous driving (ShalevShwartz et al., 2016), and socially interactive games such as
hide-and-seek (Baker et al., 2019), capture-the-flag (Jaderberg et al., 2019), and poker (Texas hold’em) (Moravčı́k
et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018). Many of these settings can be naturally formulated as instances of multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL), where multiple agents
interact and learn to make decisions in a shared environment (Yang & Wang, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021).

However, these assumptions are restrictive. In realistic environments, an opponent’s strategy in a particular state may
depend on the learner’s actions in other states. Moreover, in
many real-world applications such as robotics and games,
the state and action spaces can be exponentially large or even
continuous and high-dimensional. making tabular guarantees impractical. While function approximation has proven
effective in handling large-scale RL problems (Foster et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2021; Zhan et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2022), its role in
minimizing policy regret within MARL remains unexplored.
This motivates the central question of our work:

Despite these empirical advances, the theoretical and
algorithmic foundations of MARL remain relatively
underdeveloped–particularly in scenarios where the learner
faces adaptive opponents that adjust their strategies in response to the learner’s behavior. Most prior work addresses
this challenge through the lens of external regret, which

Can we design sample-efficient RL algorithms for policy
regret minimization with function approximation?

1

In this work, we introduce BOVL–the first algorithmic
framework for policy-regret minimization in Markov games
for a broad class of problems characterized by ℓ2 -type
Eluder coefficients. Our problem class subsumes the class of
tabular problems studied in (Nguyen-Tang & Arora, 2024a)
introduces a novel class of linear problems, extending the

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Raman Arora
<arora@cs.jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

