ABNet: Adaptive explicit-Barrier Net for Safe and Scalable Robot Learning

Wei Xiao 1 Tsun-Hsuan Wang 1 Chuang Gan 2 Daniela Rus 1

Abstract

train (Pereira et al., 2020) (Xiao et al., 2023) (Wang et al.,
2023b). It is desirable to merge these models as we can
get better performance controllers in general (Beygelzimer
et al., 2015) (Agarwal et al., 2020). Traditional mixture of
expert methods (Shazeer et al., 2017) (Riquelme et al., 2021)
(Zhou et al., 2022) or other merging approaches (Huang
et al., 2023) (Ramé et al., 2023) (Wang et al., 2024) are not
designed to retain the safety of the models. In this work,
we explore to leverage the collective power of many safetycritical models to handle complex tasks while preserving
the safety of the models.

Safe learning is central to AI-enabled robots
where a single failure may lead to catastrophic
results. Existing safe learning methods are not
scalable, inefficient and hard to train, and tend
to generate unstable signals under noisy inputs
that are challenging to be deployed for robots. To
address these challenges, we propose Adaptive
explicit-Barrier Net (ABNet) in which barriers
explicitly show up in the closed-form model that
guarantees safety. The ABNet has the potential to
incrementally scale toward larger safe foundation
models. Each head of ABNet could learn safe control policies from different features and focuses
on specific part of the observation. In this way, we
do not need to directly construct a large model for
complex tasks, which significantly facilitates the
training of the model while ensuring its stable output. Most importantly, we can still formally prove
the safety guarantees of the ABNet. We demonstrate the efficiency and strength of ABNet in 2D
robot obstacle avoidance, safe robot manipulation,
and vision-based end-to-end autonomous driving,
with results showing much better robustness and
guarantees over existing models1 .

There are various definitions of safety for robotics and autonomy, and safety can be basically defined as something
bad never happens. Mathematically, safety can be defined as
a continuously differentiable constraint with respect to the
system state and it can be further captured by the forward
invariance of the safe set over such a constraint (Ames et al.,
2017) (Xiao & Belta, 2021) (Glotfelter et al., 2017). In other
words, we can use different constraints and approaches to
enforce safety. The way we learn such safety enforcement
methods may depend on the focused observation feature.
For instance, some human drivers may focus on the left lane
boundary in driving in order to achieve safe lane keeping,
while others may focus on the right lane boundary, as shown
in Fig. 1. Merging these models enables us to build robust and powerful learning models. However, the adaptivity
of the merging method to different safe models is crucial,
especially in retaining safety.

1. Introduction

In the literature, differentiable Quadratic Programs (dQP)
(Amos & Kolter, 2017) and differentiable Model Predictive
Control (dMPC) (Amos et al., 2018) are widely used for
safe robot learning. However, dMPC is restricted to linear systems with linear constraints. Barrier-based learning
methods (Robey et al., 2020) (Pereira et al., 2020) (Srinivasan et al., 2020), such as the BarrierNet (Xiao et al., 2023)
(Wang et al., 2023b) (Liu et al., 2023), are widely used to
transform nonlinear problems into dQPs and can equip deep
learning systems with safety guarantees. However, there are
several limitations of these learning methods: (i) they are
involved with solving batch QPs during training, which is
inefficient, and dQPs tend to give awful solutions that significantly deteriorate the model; (ii) they can only implement
a single safety enforcement method as the last layer of the
neural network, which is not scalable to larger safe learning

Robot learning usually requires to leverage scalable training
and vast amount of data. There are many large models (Li
et al., 2022) for complex robotic tasks including manipulation, locomotion, autonomous driving (Bommasani et al.,
2021) (Singh et al., 2023) (Wang et al., 2023a). However,
these models are not trustworthy and have no safety guarantees. Existing methods that incorporate guarantees or
certificates into neural networks are not scalable and hard to
1 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT, USA
2 UMass Amherst and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA. Correspon-

dence to: Wei Xiao <weixy@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/Weixy21/
ABNet

1

