LLMs can see and hear without any training

Kumar Ashutosh 1 2 Yossi Gandelsman 1 3 Xinlei Chen 1 Ishan Misra 1 Rohit Girdhar 1

Abstract

MILS: a Multimodal Iterative LLM Solver, uses LLMs as
a “G ENERATOR” to propose candidate solutions to a given
task, and an off-the-shelf multimodal model as a “S CORER”
to evaluate the quality of each proposal for the said task.
The output of the S CORER is fed back into the G ENERATOR
to give it feedback, and helps produce the next set of candidates that are more likely to solve the task. This iterative
process is run until convergence, or a certain number of
steps, and produces an output for the task. We find this simple approach is surprisingly powerful and versatile, working
across a variety of tasks and modalities. Using different combinations of G ENERATORs and S CORERs, MILS is able to
tackle tasks including multimodal captioning, generation,
editing, and multimodal arithmetic.

We present MILS: Multimodal Iterative LLM
Solver, a surprisingly simple, training-free approach, to imbue multimodal capabilities into
your favorite LLM. Leveraging their innate ability
to perform multi-step reasoning, MILS prompts
the LLM to generate candidate outputs, each of
which are scored and fed back iteratively, eventually generating a solution to the task. This enables
various applications that typically require training
specialized models on task-specific data. In particular, we establish a new state-of-the-art on emergent zero-shot image, video and audio captioning.
MILS seamlessly applies to media generation as
well, discovering prompt rewrites to improve textto-image generation, and even edit prompts for
style transfer! Finally, being a gradient-free optimization approach, MILS can invert multimodal
embeddings into text, enabling applications like
cross-modal arithmetic. The code to reproduce
MILS is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/MILS.

Most prior work for such tasks uses specialized models,
often trained on data curated for that task. For instance,
zero-shot image captioning models are often still trained on
paired image-caption data. MILS, on the other hand, does
not need any such training, and exhibits emergent zero-shot
capabilities. For instance, for image captioning, MILS uses
a standard Llama (Dubey et al., 2024) LLM as the G ENERA TOR, along with CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as the S CORER.
Note that while CLIP is trained on image-text data, it is not
trained on clean image-caption data that typical captioning
models are trained on. Most vision language models that
produce captions leverage CLIP only as an initialization,
and require post-training on curated captioning data. Hence,
while such models may exhibit zero-shot generalization to a
new data distribution at test time, MILS exhibits emergent
zero-shot generalization to the new task of captioning.

1. Introduction
Test-time reasoning ability of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has emerged as a powerful tool for solving challenging tasks. Recently, OpenAI introduced O1 (OpenAI),
a model trained using reinforcement learning to leverage
test-time compute for progressively better results, especially
on complex math and coding tasks. Even without additional
training, LLMs have shown impressive improvements by using test time compute in the form Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
reasoning, by rolling out an execution plan to respond to a
user’s query (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022).

Furthermore, while there do exist some captioning approaches that do not leverage captioning data (Salewski
et al., 2023; Tewel et al., 2022; Shaharabany et al., 2023;
Zeng et al., 2024), they are limited to a specific modality
and more importantly, the specific task. These approaches
typically leverage gradients from CLIP to guide the next
token prediction, limiting them to captioning. MILS, on
the other hand, seamlessly generalizes to new tasks and
modalities by simply swapping out the G ENERATOR and
S CORER modules. For instance, a G ENERATOR constructed
by simply chaining an LLM to a Text-to-Image (T2I) model,
is able to improve over state-of-the-art T2I models by using
the LLM as a “prompt rewriter”, a capability not afforded
by prior work.

In this work, we leverage this innate reasoning ability
in LLMs to solve multimodal understanding and generation tasks, without needing any training! Our approach,
1

Meta AI 2 UT Austin 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Kumar Ashutosh <kumar.ashutosh@utexas.edu>, Rohit Girdhar
<rgirdhar@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

