Optimal Fair Learning Robust to Adversarial Distribution Shift

Sushant Agarwal 1 Amit Deshpande 2 Rajmohan Rajaraman 1 Ravi Sundaram 1

Abstract

tions in optimal fair classification (Menon & Williamson,
2018b). In group-fair classification, each data point has certain sensitive attributes indicating the demographic group(s)
to which it belongs (e.g., race, gender). Popular notions
of group-fairness such as statistical or demographic parity, equal opportunity, equalized odds, and predictive parity
are all motivated by the binary fair classification setting.
Demographic parity prescribes the positivity rates to be
equal across different groups (e.g., race, gender), whereas
equal opportunity prescribes the true positive rates to be
equal across different groups (Dwork et al., 2012; Hardt
et al., 2016). Previous work has looked at various trade-offs
between accuracy and fairness as well as the difficulty in satisfying multiple fairness constraints simultaneously (Celis
et al., 2020). Previous work has also mathematically characterized the Fair Bayes Optimal Classifier (BOC), namely, the
optimal deterministic classifiers for maximizing accuracy
subject to group-fairness constraints based such as demographic parity and equal opportunity (Menon & Williamson,
2018a; Chzhen et al., 2019; Celis et al., 2021; Zeng et al.,
2022). Pre-processing or re-weighing for training data imbalances, in-processing by fairness-constrained training loss,
and post-processing a model’s predictions for balanced outcomes are three known ways to realize fair and accurate
classifiers in practice (Kamiran & Calders, 2012; Agarwal
et al., 2018; Barocas et al., 2019).

Previous work in fair machine learning has characterised the Fair Bayes Optimal Classifier (BOC)
on a given distribution for both deterministic and
randomized classifiers. We study the robustness
of the Fair BOC to adversarial noise in the data
distribution. Kearns & Li (1988) implies that the
accuracy of the deterministic BOC without any
fairness constraints is robust (Lipschitz) to malicious noise in the data distribution. We demonstrate that their robustness guarantee breaks down
when we add fairness constraints. Hence, we
consider the randomized Fair BOC, and our central result is that its accuracy is robust to malicious noise in the data distribution. Our robustness result applies to various fairness constraints—
Demographic Parity, Equal Opportunity, Predictive Equality. Beyond robustness, we demonstrate
that randomization leads to better accuracy and
efficiency. However, we show that the randomized Fair BOC is nearly-deterministic, and gives
randomized predictions on at most one data point,
hence availing numerous benefits of randomness,
while using very little of it.

Biased or corrupted training data is a primary cause of unfairness in model predictions or outcomes. Moreover, robustness of a machine learning model under bias or corruption in
the data distribution has been a more pragmatic concern that
predates the research on fair machine learning. Learning
robust classifiers is important because training and test distributions are not always identical and the training data may
contain noise and malicious corruptions during data collection, curation, and annotation. Robustness of fair classifiers
under bias/shift in the data distribution is a well studied issue in fair machine learning literature. Akpinar et al. (2022)
empirically study the robustness of BOC and Fair BOC on
synthetic data distributions and provide a sandbox tool for
stress-testing fair classifiers. Sharma et al. (2023) and Ghosh
et al. (2023) empirically study robustness of fair classifiers
under data bias on semi-synthetic real-world datasets (i.e.,
real-world datasets with synthetically injected bias/shift).
In both these papers, Exponentiated Gradient Reduction

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of machine learning models has resulted
in improved efficiency across multiple domains but has also
raised concerns about their fairness and possible amplification of biases in their training data (Barocas et al., 2019).
When machine learning models are used to make decisions
that skew the distribution of important economic resources
or reinforce stereotypes, they compound disparities to cause
social and economic harm. Fair classification has been an
important topic of research, and binary fair classification
where the model makes yes/no decisions algorithmically is
a simple yet challenging setting to study foundational ques1
Northeastern University 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Sushant Agarwal <agarwal.sus@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

