S IMPLE M IX: Frustratingly Simple Mixing of Off- and On-policy Data
in Language Model Preference Learning

Tianjian Li 1 Daniel Khashabi 1

Abstract

2022), and produce responses aligned with human values
(Ouyang et al., 2022).

Aligning language models with human preferences relies on pairwise preference datasets.
While some studies suggest that on-policy data
consistently outperforms off -policy data for preference learning, others indicate that the advantages of on-policy data may be task-dependent,
highlighting the need for a systematic exploration
of their interplay.

The ongoing debate (Ivison et al., 2024; Tajwar et al., 2024;
Tang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024c) in the literature that
compares alignment with on-policy data (data is sampled
from the LM to be aligned) with off-policy data (data is
sampled not from the LM to be aligned). The debate arrives
at mismatched conclusions, with some works reporting onpolicy outperforms off-policy (Tajwar et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024c) while others reporting that the gains from on-policy
training are minimal, and sometimes even underperform offpolicy training (Ivison et al., 2024; Ahmadian et al., 2024;
Lambert et al., 2024a). Existing work (Ivison et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2024c) that compares on- and off-policy data does
not control using the same algorithm under different data
sources, and does not investigate the impact of task types
(Tang et al., 2024).

In this work, we show that on-policy and offpolicy data offer complementary strengths in preference optimization: on-policy data is particularly effective for reasoning tasks like math and
coding, while off-policy data performs better on
open-ended tasks such as creative writing and
making personal recommendations. Guided by
these findings, we introduce S IMPLE M IX, an approach to combine the complementary strengths
of on-policy and off-policy preference learning
by simply mixing these two data sources. Our
empirical results across diverse tasks and benchmarks demonstrate that S IMPLE M IX substantially
improves language model alignment. Specifically,
S IMPLE M IX improves upon on-policy DPO and
off-policy DPO by an average of 6.03% on Alpaca Eval 2.0. Moreover, it outperforms prior
approaches that are much more complex in combining on- and off-policy data, such as HyPO and
DPO-Mix-P, by an average of 3.05%.

To address these weaknesses, we vary only the data source
and break down the performances by different task types to
answer the following research questions:
(Q1 ) Under what circumstances on- vs off-policy data offer
different strengths?
(Q2 ) Can we leverage their complementarity for more efficient alignment?
With regards to (Q1 ), we observe that on-policy data and
off-policy data offer complementary strengths in preference
learning of LMs: On-policy data is most effective in tasks
that tend to have objective answers and require reasoning
skills, e.g., math and coding. Off-policy data is effective in
more open-ended tasks, e.g., creative writing and making
personal recommendations, where it is common to have
multiple differing preferred responses (§3).

1. Introduction
Alignment of Language Models (LMs) has bestowed them
with the ability to learn better from demonstrations (Brown
et al., 2020), extrapolate from reasoning chains (Wei et al.,

To address (Q2 ), we propose S IMPLE M IX: to mix on- and
off-policy data for preference learning. Our approach consistently improves upon only using on- or off-policy data
solely in data-constrained setups where the same amount of
responses is used for each method. Furthermore, we show
that S IMPLE M IX is able to outperform prior approaches that
mix on- and off-policy data in more complex ways (Song
et al., 2024b; Shi et al., 2024), showcasing the effectiveness

1

Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, US. Correspondence to: Tianjian Li
<tli104@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

