Explainable Concept Generation through Vision-Language Preference Learning
for Understanding Neural Networks’ Internal Representations

Aditya Taparia 1 Som Sagar 1 Ransalu Senanayake 1

Abstract

revelations help engineers in further improving models and
regulatory bodies in assessing their correctness. To help
these users, developing methods that communicate information in a human-centric way is essential for ensuring
usefulness.

Understanding the inner representation of a neural
network helps users improve models. Conceptbased methods have become a popular choice
for explaining deep neural networks post-hoc because, unlike most other explainable AI techniques, they can be used to test high-level visual “concepts” that are not directly related to
feature attributes. For instance, the concept of
“stripes” is important to classify an image as a
zebra. Concept-based explanation methods, however, require practitioners to guess and manually
collect multiple candidate concept image sets,
making the process labor-intensive and prone to
overlooking important concepts. Addressing this
limitation, in this paper, we frame concept image set creation as an image generation problem.
However, since naively using a standard generative model does not result in meaningful concepts, we devise a reinforcement learning-based
preference optimization (RLPO) algorithm that
fine-tunes a vision-language generative model
from approximate textual descriptions of concepts.
Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate
our method’s ability to efficiently and reliably
articulate diverse concepts that are otherwise
challenging to craft manually. Github: https:
//github.com/aditya-taparia/RLPO

Humans utilize high-level concepts as a medium for providing and perceiving explanations. In this light, post-hoc
concept-based explanation techniques, such as Testing with
Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV) (Kim et al., 2018), have
gained great popularity in recent years. Their ability to
use abstractions that are not necessarily feature attributes
or some pixels in test images helps with communicating
these high-level concepts with humans. For instance, as
demonstrated in TCAV, the concept of stripes is important
to explain why an image is classified as a zebra, whereas
the concept of spots is important to explain why an image
is classified as a jaguar. Given 1) a set of such high-level
concepts, represented as sample images (e.g., a collection of
stripe and spot images) and 2) test images of the class (e.g.,
zebra images), TCAV assigns a score to each concept on
how well the concept explains the class decision (i.e., zebra).
Although concept-based explanations are a good representation, their requirement to create collections of candidate
concept sets necessitate the human to know which concepts
to test for. This is typically done by guessing what concepts might matter and manually extracting such candidate
concept tests from existing datasets. While the stripe-zebra
analogy is attractive as an example, where it is obvious
that stripes is important to predict zebras, in most applications, we cannot guess what concepts to test for, limiting the
usefulness of concept-based methods in testing real-world
systems. Additionally, even if a human can guess a few
concepts, it does not encompass most concepts a DNN has
learned because the DNN was trained without any human
intervention. Therefore, it is important to automatically find
concepts that matter to the DNN’s decision-making process.

1. Introduction
In an era where black box deep neural networks (DNNs)
are becoming seemingly capable of performing complex
tasks, our ability to understand their internal representations
post-hoc has become even more important before deploying them in the real world. Among many use cases, such

As attempts to automatically discover and create such concept sets, several works has focused on segmenting the
image and using these segments as potential concepts, either
directly (Ghorbani et al., 2019) or through factor analysis (Fel et al., 2023; 2024). In such methods, which we refer
to as retrieval methods, because the extracted concept set is

1

School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona
State University, Tempe, United States of America. Correspondence to: Aditya Taparia <ataparia@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

