Graph-Supported Dynamic Algorithm Configuration for Multi-Objective
Combinatorial Optimization

Robbert Reijnen 1 Yaoxin Wu 1 Zaharah Bukhsh 1 Yingqian Zhang 1

Abstract

2022). DAC adjusts the configuration of algorithms in real
time, which is advantageous for algorithms facing changes
in the search space configuration during execution. This
adaptability is especially relevant for iterative algorithms,
such as Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), a prominent class
of Evolutionary Computation (EC) techniques for solving
complex optimization problems. The performance of EAs
relies on the precise adjustment of their parameters and may
require changes at various phases of the search process to
maintain optimal performance.

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been
widely used for dynamic algorithm configuration,
particularly in evolutionary computation, which
benefits from the adaptive update of parameters
during the algorithmic execution. However, applying DRL to algorithm configuration for multiobjective combinatorial optimization (MOCO)
problems remains relatively unexplored. This paper presents a novel graph neural network (GNN)
based DRL to configure multi-objective evolutionary algorithms. We model the dynamic algorithm
configuration as a Markov decision process, representing the convergence of solutions in the objective space by a graph, with their embeddings
learned by a GNN to enhance the state representation. Experiments on diverse MOCO challenges
indicate that our method outperforms traditional
and DRL-based algorithm configuration methods
in terms of efficacy and adaptability. It also exhibits advantageous generalizability across objective types and problem sizes, and applicability to
different evolutionary computation methods.

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been successfully
used to control parameter values for various single-objective
EC algorithms, as reported in the literature (Sharma et al.,
2019; Reijnen et al., 2024; Begnardi et al., 2025). These
approaches address the parameter configuration problem by
modeling it as a contextual Markov decision process (MDP)
(Biedenkapp et al., 2020). This enables dynamic algorithm
configuration to be approached as a sequential decisionmaking problem, enabling DRL to control algorithm configurations during search. Xue et al. (2022) extend the existing
DRL-based DAC approaches to address multi-objective optimization. Although these methods have demonstrated their
effectiveness in configuring parameters during the search,
their applications are primarily limited to (multi-objective)
continuous optimization, such as tuning hyperparameters of
machine learning models, as in AutoML (Biedenkapp et al.,
2020; Eimer et al., 2021), and benchmarking continuous
functions (Xue et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Selecting the right hyperparameters is crucial for the performance of optimization algorithms. Some automated algorithm configuration (AC) methods (López-Ibáñez et al.,
2016; Lindauer et al., 2022) have been developed to identify well-performing configurations and reduce the need for
labor-intensive trial-and-error tuning. As the optimal parameter values may change throughout different stages of
algorithmic deployment (Aleti, 2012), various dynamic algorithm configuration (DAC) methods have been proposed
in recent years (Biedenkapp et al., 2020; Adriaensen et al.,

In this paper, we propose a DRL-based, dynamic algorithm configuration method designed specifically for solving multi-objective combinatorial optimization problems
(MOCOs). Most (multi-objective) combinatorial optimization problems, such as machine scheduling, vehicle routing, and resource allocation problems, are NP-hard, as they
involve finding high-quality solutions in a large space of
discrete decision variables. Hence, practical approaches for
solving these problems typically rely on heuristics, among
which EAs have been widely used in various COPs (BartzBeielstein et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2011).

1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences,
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Yaoxin Wu <y.wu2@tue.nl>.

We expect (and confirm with the experiments in Section 4.1)
that the existing DAC approach designed for continuous optimization (i.e., MADAC (Xue et al., 2022)) may not work

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

