PIPA: Preference Alignment as Prior-Informed Statistical Estimation

Junbo Li 1 Zhangyang Wang 1 Qiang Liu 1

Abstract

web agent (Qin et al., 2025), and more. The fundamental approach to alignment involves supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
on the target domain, which essentially maximizes the likelihood of predicting the next token. However, numerous
empirical studies have shown that simple SFT on preferred
samples is inadequate for attaining optimal performance
(Shao et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022).

Offline preference alignment for language models
such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is
favored for its effectiveness and simplicity, eliminating the need for costly reinforcement learning.
Various offline algorithms have been developed
for different data settings, yet they lack a unified understanding. In this study, we introduce
Pior-Informed Preference Alignment (PIPA), a
unified, RL-free probabilistic framework that formulates language model preference alignment as
a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) problem with prior constraints. This method effectively accommodates both paired and unpaired
data, as well as answer and step-level annotations.
We illustrate that DPO and KTO are special cases
with different prior constraints within our framework. By integrating different types of prior information, we developed two variations of PIPA:
PIPA-M and PIPA-N. Both algorithms demonstrate a 3 ∼ 10% performance enhancement on
the GSM8K and MATH benchmarks across all
configurations, achieving these gains without additional training or computational costs compared
to existing algorithms.

Moving beyond basic imitation learning in SFT, it is suggested to learn from both positive and negative samples.
Sample quality can be measured by training reward models
to capture general preferences (Dong et al., 2024) or leveraging accurate rule-based rewards (Guo et al., 2025) for
specific tasks like math and coding. By treating the autoregressive generation of LLMs as a Markov decision process
(MDP), traditional reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
can be effectively applied, such as PPO (Ouyang et al.,
2022), SAC (Liu et al., 2024c), REINFORCE (Ahmadian
et al., 2024), etc.
While online RL-based methods deliver strong performance,
they face challenges such as high training costs, instability,
and the need for a strong base model as the initial policy. As a result, offline algorithms like direct preference
optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2024) are often preferred, thanks to their effectiveness and simplicity, particularly when high-quality datasets are accessible. The original
DPO algorithm has several limitations. It relies on paired
preference data, which is not essential for tasks with ground
truth such as math and coding. Additionally, it is unable to
accommodate step-level annotations. Furthermore, it treats
all tokens equally, lacking token-level credit assignment.
To address these issues, a series of approaches have been
developed, such as Kahneman-Tversky Optimization (KTO)
(Ethayarajh et al., 2024) for unpaired data, Step-DPO (Lai
et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024) and Step-KTO (Lin et al., 2025)
for step-level annotations, and RTO (Zhong et al., 2024),
TDPO (Zeng et al., 2024), and OREO (Wang et al., 2024) for
fine-grained token-level DPO. However, these methods are
designed from specific perspectives, each addressing only
particular challenges, and they lack a unified understanding
to integrate their solutions.

1. Introduction
Pre-training large language models (LLMs) from scratch on
trillions of text tokens allows for accurate prediction next tokens in natural language (Achiam et al., 2023; Dubey et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024b). Following this, alignment, achieved
through fine-tuning on smaller, high-quality datasets designed for specific tasks, becomes critical for enabling the
model to develop specialized skills, such as engaging in
conversation (Ouyang et al., 2022), math reasoning (Shao
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024), coding (Zhu et al., 2024),
1
The University of Texas at Austin, US. Correspondence to:
Qiang Liu <lqiang@cs.utexas.edu>.

In this work, we introduce a unified framework designed
to address all the aforementioned challenges in offline ap-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

