Craftium: Bridging Flexibility and Efficiency for Rich 3D Single- and
Multi-Agent Environments

Mikel Malagón 1 Josu Ceberio 1 Jose A. Lozano 1 2

Abstract
Advances in large models, reinforcement learning,
and open-endedness have accelerated progress toward autonomous agents that can learn and interact in the real world. To achieve this, flexible tools
are needed to create rich, yet computationally efficient, environments. While scalable 2D environments fail to address key real-world challenges
like 3D navigation and spatial reasoning, more
complex 3D environments are computationally
expensive and lack features like customizability
and multi-agent support. This paper introduces
Craftium, a highly customizable and easy-to-use
platform for building rich 3D single- and multiagent environments. We showcase environments
of different complexity and nature: from singleand multi-agent tasks to vast worlds with many
creatures and biomes, and customizable procedural task generators. Benchmarking shows that
Craftium significantly reduces the computational
cost of alternatives of similar richness, achieving
+2K steps per second more than Minecraft-based
frameworks.1

Figure 1. Examples of the diverse single- and multi-agent environments that can be created in Craftium. From surviving in
procedurally generated dungeons to exploring vast open worlds
filled with animals, monsters, and varied biomes.

well-known example is the Arcade Learning Environment
(ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013), which undoubtedly contributed to the advancement of the RL field, marking many
of its most important milestones. To name a few: the introduction of the Deep Q-Networks (Mnih et al., 2013), the
“infamously difficult Montezuma’s Revenge” (Bellemare
et al., 2016) that inspired many exploration strategies (Ostrovski et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019; Badia et al., 2020b),
and the first time an agent outperformed humans in all Atari
benchmarks (Badia et al., 2020a).
However, as observed throughout the literature, research in
these areas is bound to the challenges the employed environments introduce. The researcher often faces a dilemma
between computationally efficient but simplistic environments or substantially slower but richer environments. For
instance, Continual Reinforcement Learning (CRL) (Abel
et al., 2023), Unsupervised Environment Design (UED)
(Garcin et al., 2024), and Multi-Agent RL (MARL) (Ying
et al., 2023), are greatly affected by the efficiency of the
employed environments as they require learning from many
tasks or agents. Thus, in these works, experiments are often limited to simple environments as a consequence of the
computational cost of employing more complex alternatives
(Rigter et al., 2024; Malagon et al., 2024; Rutherford et al.,
2024). For example, Craftax relies on 2D grids (Matthews
et al., 2024), while OMNI-EPIC (Faldor et al., 2025) employs 3D environments of substantially limited diversity
compared to alternatives like MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022)

1. Introduction
Progress in Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto,
2018), embodied AI (Paolo et al., 2024), and open-ended
agents (Hughes et al., 2024) is inherently tied to the environments where agents are trained, evaluated, and analyzed.
Each new insight or advancement in the field is supported
by an environment that enables its emergence and study. A
1

Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, DonostiaSan Sebastian, Spain 2 Basque Center for Applied Mathematics
(BCAM), Bilbao, Spain. Correspondence to: Mikel Malagón
<mikel.malagon@ehu.eus>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/mikelma/
craftium.

1

