Parameters vs FLOPs: Scaling Laws for Optimal Sparsity for
Mixture-of-Experts Language Models

Samira Abnar 1 * Harshay Shah 2 * Dan Busbridge 1 Alaaeldin El-Nouby 1 Joshua M Susskind 1
Vimal Thilak 1 *

Abstract

stream task performance (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020; BIG-bench authors, 2023) and unlocks emergent capabilities (Wei et al., 2022a).

Scaling the capacity of language models has consistently proven to be a reliable approach for improving performance and unlocking new capabilities. Capacity can be primarily defined by
two dimensions: the number of model parameters and the compute per example. While scaling typically involves increasing both, the precise
interplay between these factors and their combined contribution to overall capacity remains not
fully understood. We explore this relationship in
the context of sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoEs),
which allow scaling the number of parameters
without proportionally increasing the FLOPs per
example. We investigate how varying the sparsity
level, i.e., the fraction of inactive parameters, impacts model’s performance during pretraining and
downstream few-shot evaluation. We find that under different constraints (e.g., parameter size and
total training compute), there is an optimal level
of sparsity that improves both training efficiency
and model performance. These results provide a
better understanding of the impact of sparsity in
scaling laws for MoEs and complement existing
works in this area, offering insights for designing
more efficient architectures.

A recurring notion in these studies is that model capacity
is well quantified by the total number of model parameters. However, the number of parameters is not the only
means to increase model capacity. Compute per example
(i.e., a fixed-sized input), measured in FLoating OPerations
(FLOPs), also plays a significant role (Clark et al., 2022).
In fact, several mechanisms (Shazeer et al., 2017; Dehghani
et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2022b; Goyal et al., 2024; Csord’as
et al., 2024) allow for independent variation of the number
of parameters or FLOPs per example within a model. For instance, Sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models (Shazeer
et al., 2017) introduce “FLOP-free parameters” by leveraging sparsity, where only a subset of expert modules is
activated for each input.
When studying scaling laws for specific classes of models,
e.g., vanilla transformers, the total number of parameters
can serve as a reasonable relative estimator of FLOPs per
example. Therefore, using the number of parameters as a
measure of model capacity in scaling law studies is appropriate. In scenarios or for architectures where the number of
parameters and FLOPs per example are not directly linked,
it is essential to jointly consider the effects of these variables
on scaling model capacity (Clark et al., 2022). We therefore
ask

1. Introduction

“Can we draw scaling laws for the optimal trade-off
between
parameter count and FLOPs per example?”

Empirical scaling laws for language model pretraining (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023;
2024; Gemini Team et al., 2024; Henighan et al., 2020; Clark
et al., 2022; Yun et al., 2024; Ludziejewski et al., 2024) have
demonstrated that proportionally increasing model capacity, along with data and total compute budget, consistently
decreases pretraining loss (i.e., perplexity), improves down-

To address this question, we study sparse Mixture-of-Expert
Transformers (MoEs) (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al.,
2021; Fedus et al., 2022; Zoph et al., 2022; Muennighoff
et al., 2024) in the context of language modeling. Existing scaling law studies for MoEs, investigate the role of
variables like number and granularity (Ludziejewski et al.,
2024) of experts, underlying dense model size and inference
compute in predicting the performance of the models under
different conditions such as training or inference compute
optimality (Du et al., 2021; Clark et al., 2022; Yun et al.,

*
Core Contributors 1 Apple 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Samira
Abnar <abnar@apple.com>, Vimal Thilak <vthilak@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

