CSV-Occ: Fusing Multi-frame Alignment for Occupancy Prediction with
Temporal Cross State Space Model and Central Voting Mechanism

Ziming Zhu 1 Yu Zhu 1 Jiahao Chen 1 Xiaofeng Ling 1 2 Huanlei Chen 3 Lihua Sun 1

Abstract
Recently, image-based 3D semantic occupancy
prediction has become a hot topic in 3D scene understanding for autonomous driving. Compared
with the bounding box form of 3D object detection, the ability to describe the fine-grained contours of any obstacles in the scene is the key insight of voxel occupancy representation, which
facilitates subsequent tasks of autonomous driving. In this work, we propose CSV-Occ to address the following two challenges: (1) Existing methods fuse temporal information based on
the attention mechanism, but are limited by high
complexity. We extend the state space model
to support multi-input sequence interaction and
conduct temporal modeling in a cascaded architecture, thereby reducing the computational complexity from quadratic to linear. (2) Existing
methods are limited by semantic ambiguity, resulting in the centers of foreground objects often
being predicted as empty voxels. We enable the
model to explicitly vote for the instance center
to which the voxels belong and spontaneously
learn to utilize the other voxel features of the
same instance to update the semantics of the internal vacancies of the objects from coarse to
fine. Experiments on the Occ3D-nuScenes dataset
show that our method achieves state-of-the-art in
camera-based 3D semantic occupancy prediction
and also performs well on lidar point cloud semantic segmentation on the nuScenes dataset. Code
will be available at https://github.com/
ZeaZoM/CSV-Occ.

Figure 1. Examples of Internal Occupancy Vacancy (IOV). The
yellow grids are the occupancy predictions of the model for “bus”,
purple for “truck”, cyan for “construction vehicle”, red for “pedestrian”, orange for “barrier”, light yellow for “traffic cone”, and
green for “vegetation”. In these four examples, IOV occurred for
“bus”, “truck”, and “construction vehicle”.

1. Introduction
Image-based 3D semantic occupancy prediction (Mescheder
et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2020) represents the structuring of
3D scenes into grids and determining whether the grids are
occupied and the specific semantic categories of the occupied grids only from visual images. In the environmental
understanding of autonomous driving, it provides more geometric details than 3D object detection and complements
LiDAR-based perception.
Temporal information is extremely crucial for the visual
system to understand the surrounding environment. For
example, detecting the multi-angle geometry of highly occluded objects or inferring the relative distance of objects is
very difficult for 2D images without depth information. And
temporal cues can make up for the inherent deficiencies of
static 2D images in these aspects. Taking the inspiration of
Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a) as
the starting point, some existing studies, such as (Koh et al.,
2023; Tong et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a),
will align historical BEV features (Li et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023a) based on the attention mechanism (Vaswani, 2017)

1

School of Information Science and Engineering, East China
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Sensing and Detection Technology,
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Motor Vehicle Inspection Certification & Tech Innovation Center Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yu
Zhu <zhuyu@ecust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

