Can We Predict Performance of Large Models across Vision-Language Tasks?

Qinyu Zhao 1 Ming Xu 1 Kartik Gupta 2 Akshay Asthana 2 Liang Zheng 1 Stephen Gould 1

Abstract

(A) Performance Matrix

Evaluating large vision-language models
(LVLMs) is very expensive, due to high computational cost and the wide variety of tasks.
The good news is that if we already have
some observed performance scores, we may
be able to infer unknown ones. In this study,
we propose a new framework for predicting
unknown performance scores based on observed
ones from other LVLMs or tasks. We first
formulate the performance prediction as a matrix
completion task. Specifically, we construct a
sparse performance matrix R, where each entry
Rmn represents the performance score of the
m-th model on the n-th dataset. By applying
probabilistic matrix factorization (PMF) with
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), we can
complete the performance matrix, i.e., predict
unknown scores. Additionally, we estimate the
uncertainty of performance prediction based on
MCMC. Practitioners can evaluate their models
on untested tasks with higher uncertainty first,
which quickly reduces the prediction errors.
We further introduce several improvements to
enhance PMF for scenarios with sparse observed
performance scores. Our experiments demonstrate the accuracy of PMF in predicting unknown
scores, the reliability of uncertainty estimates in
ordering evaluations, and the effectiveness of
our enhancements for handling sparse data. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
Qinyu-Allen-Zhao/CrossPred-LVLM.

LLaVA

65

GPT-4V

70

Cambrian
Gemini

50
32

71

64
75

42

59

(B) Normal Evaluation
Run LLaVA on Celebrity Recognition
Run LLaVA on Math Problem Solving
Run GPT-4V on Object Recognition
Run Cambrian on Scene Understanding
……
(C) TinyBenchmarks
Run LLaVA on Celebrity Recognition-Tiny,
estimate the original performance
Run LLaVA on Math Problem Solving-Tiny,
estimate the original performance
Run GPT-4V on Object Recognition-Tiny,
estimate the original performance
……

(D) Ours
𝐷

High uncertainty.
Do this experiment first.

𝐷

𝐷

𝐷

Learning

Predicting

Ranking

Figure 1. Framework. (A) Given a sparse matrix of performance
scores of LVLMs on various tasks, the goal is to estimate the missing entries. (B) A normal way is to evaluate untested model-dataset
pairs one-by-one. (C) TinyBenchmarks (Polo et al., 2024) runs
models on smaller test sets and reproduce the original performance.
(D) We use PMF to predict missing entries, reducing unnecessary
evaluations, and rank new experiments based on uncertainty.

tasks (Liu et al., 2024; 2023a; Wang et al., 2024b; Bai et al.,
2025; Lu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Achiam et al., 2023;
Reid et al., 2024). However, due to their large scale and
versatility, evaluating these models leads to high cost.
First, large-scale models result in significant computational
and memory costs. Second, since a single LVLM can handle
various tasks, hundreds of benchmarks have been proposed
to comprehensively assess the strengths and weaknesses of
models (Li & Lu, 2024; Li et al., 2023a; Fu et al., 2023).
Last, increase in model size, the development of video
LVLMs (Bai et al., 2025), and test-time scaling (OpenAI,
2024) techniques further raise evaluation cost. In our estimation, evaluating a 7B model on 50 benchmarks takes around
20 hours on one A100 GPU, and even three times longer
when using test-time scaling or on video benchmarks (Fu
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024) (Details in Section A).

1. Introduction
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have shown remarkable performance across a wide range of multimodal
1

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 2 Seeing
Machines Ltd, Canberra, Australia. Correspondence to: Qinyu
Zhao <qinyu.zhao@anu.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Fortunately, we have already observed performance scores
from some of these models on some tasks, for instance, from
1

