Position: An Empirically Grounded Identifiability Theory Will Accelerate
Self-Supervised Learning Research

Patrik Reizinger 1 2 Randall Balestriero 3 David Klindt 4 Wieland Brendel 1 2 5

Abstract

remarkable success builds on a plethora of algorithms and
engineering practices. However, the model zoo makes SSL
hard to navigate, divides the attention for a better theoretical
understanding and, we argue, dampens future advancements.
SSL is likely to continue being a foundational paradigm of
machine learning, but it needs to be consolidated, similar
to the program of unifying deep learning through geometry
(Bronstein et al., 2021). There were recent attempts to unify
the SSL model zoo (Wang & Isola, 2020; Morningstar et al.,
2024; Bizeul et al., 2024; Fleissner et al., 2025). Huh et al.
(2024) even argued, by positing the Platonic Representation Hypothesis (PRH), that neural networks converge to
effectively the same representation, despite different setups,
loss functions, data modalities, and engineering practices.
However, their analysis does not provide a conclusive mathematical answer when and why this happens. We do have
theories that can provide such an answer, but a gap exists between SSL theory and practice. Prevalent frameworks such
as identifiability theory (IT) cannot explain the role of initialization, stop gradients, or learning dynamics, and neither
can solve problems like dimensional collapse (Jing et al.,
2022) or loss saturation. An even larger problem of current
theory is generalization: The promise of self-supervised
representations to work well on many downstream tasks alludes to “universality,” or at least out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization. However, current theories mostly focus on
the i.i.d. case, and empirical methods generally perform
well only in-distribution (Montero et al., 2021; Schott et al.,
2021; Montero et al., 2024; Mayilvahanan et al., 2024a;b).

Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) powers many current AI systems. As research interest and investment grow, the SSL design space continues to
expand. The Platonic view of SSL, following the
Platonic Representation Hypothesis (PRH), suggests that despite different methods and engineering approaches, all representations converge to the
same Platonic ideal. However, this phenomenon
lacks precise theoretical explanation. By synthesizing evidence from Identifiability Theory (IT),
we show that the PRH can emerge in SSL. There
is a gap between SSL theory and practice: Current
IT cannot explain SSL’s empirical success, though
it has practically relevant insights. Our work formulates a blueprint for SSL research to bridge
this gap: we propose expanding IT into what
we term Singular Identifiability Theory (SITh),
a broader theoretical framework encompassing
the entire SSL pipeline. SITh would allow deeper
insights into the implicit data assumptions in SSL
and advance the field towards learning more interpretable and generalizable representations. We
highlight three critical directions for future research: 1) training dynamics and convergence
properties of SSL; 2) the impact of finite samples,
batch size, and data diversity; and 3) the role of
inductive biases in architecture, augmentations,
initialization schemes, and optimizers.

Position: empirical advancements alone are insufficient to accelerate SSL research, we need to bridge
the gap between theory and practice.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) drives many current AI
breakthroughs in language, vision, and image-text models (Radford et al., 2018; 2021; Assran et al., 2023). This

We need an empirically grounded theory, which
we call Singular Identifiability Theory (SITh), to
accelerate SSL research by:
(i) Designing realistic data generating processes
(DGPs), grounded in empirical observations;
(ii) Formalizing when and why self-supervised
representations are converging;
(iii) Providing principled recommendations for designing and evaluating SSL.

1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Germany 3 Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Rhode Island, USA 4 Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, USA
5
Tübingen AI Center, Germany. Correspondence to: Patrik
Reizinger <patrik.reizinger@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

