Accelerating Unbiased LLM Evaluation via Synthetic Feedback

Zhaoyi Zhou 1 Yuda Song 1 Andrea Zanette 1

Abstract

2024). However, this approach demands substantial time
and financial resources due to human involvement. When
conducted with active system users, it may also diminish
user experience, see Figure 2.

When developing new large language models
(LLMs), a key step is evaluating their final performance, often by computing the win-rate against a
reference model based on external feedback. Human feedback is the gold standard, particularly for
capturing nuanced qualities like coherence, readability, and alignment with human expectations.
However, human evaluations are costly — even
for large tech companies — and when conducted
with active users, they may negatively impact user
experience. A promising alternative is synthetic
feedback, where evaluations are conducted by
other large language models, including reward
models. While this eliminates the need for costly
human annotations, it introduces biases that may
distort the evaluation process. In this work, we
propose a statistically principled framework that
integrates human and synthetic feedback to reduce
reliance on human annotations while maintaining
unbiased win-rate calculations. Our experiments
demonstrate a reduction in human annotations
by up to 12.2% with an off-the-shelf synthetic
evaluator and up to 24.8% with a finetuned variant. Apart from being generalizable, scalable, and
free of hyper-parameter tuning, our method offers
predictable annotation savings, which can be estimated based on data-dependent characteristics.

In order to mitigate these challenges, recent works have
explored cost-efficient alternatives, most notably the use
of synthetic feedback generated by other LLMs, a concept
often referred to as “LLM-as-a-judge” (Zheng et al., 2023;
Dubois et al., 2024), to compute the head-to-head win rate.
This approach leverages the computational efficiency of
LLMs to evaluate other models, reducing the need for extensive human involvement. Despite its promise, synthetic feedback often introduces biases since LLM can not perfectly reflect human preference, undermining the evaluation reliability (Zheng et al., 2024). As a result, a critical need remains
for evaluation methods that reduce the cost of human annotation while maintaining the reliability and generalizability.
Besides replacing the evaluator, recently there has been a
growing interest in accelerating LLM evaluation (Ye et al.,
2023; Polo et al., 2024a; Zhou et al., 2024) with smaller
datasets. However, previous methods only focused on
reducing the number of prompts in a specific benchmark
with predefined answers (e.g., math problems). Thus it is
unclear if these methods generalize or apply to other tasks.
For example, in math benchmark it is easy to find some
problems that are “representative” of the whole benchmark,
but in general the prompts are more diverse and less structured, and sometimes they are generated on the fly, such
as when a user interacts with a language model via APIs.

1. Introduction

Towards reliable and cost-efficient LLM evaluation, in this
work we propose to leverage LLM generated synthetic feedback to reduce the number of human annotations, in the
standard head-to-head win rate setting (Chiang et al., 2024).
Specifically, we propose Control Variates Evaluation (Figure 1 left), an unbiased LLM evaluation method based on
the classical control variates technique (Lavenberg & Welch,
1981) that combines human annotations and synthetic feedback. Note that there are previous works (Chaganty et al.,
2018; Boyeau et al., 2024) that apply control variates to
machine learning evaluation, but they study settings like
single-response natural language evaluation or BT modelling (Bradley & Terry, 1952). Therefore, the performance
of control variates in head-to-head win rate estimation still

Accurately evaluating the performance of large language
models (LLMs) is crucial before large-scale deployment.
Human judgment remains the gold standard for this evaluation, as it captures nuanced qualities such as coherence,
harmlessness, and readability (Bai et al., 2022), while also
ensuring alignment with human values (Ouyang et al., 2022).
A widely accepted performance metric is the win rate, assessed by humans against a reference model (Chiang et al.,
1
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Zhaoyi Zhou
<zhaoyiz@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

