Incentivize without Bonus: Provably Efficient Model-based
Online Multi-agent RL for Markov Games

Tong Yang 1 Bo Dai 2 Lin Xiao 3 Yuejie Chi 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is emerging
as a crucial paradigm for solving complex decision-making
problems in various domains, including robotics, game theory, and machine learning (Busoniu et al., 2008). While
single-agent reinforcement learning (RL) has been extensively studied and theoretically analyzed, MARL is still in
its infancy, and many fundamental questions remain unanswered. Due to the interplay of multiple agents in an unknown environment, one of the key challenges is the design
of efficient strategies for exploration that can be seamlessly
implemented in the presence of a large number of agents1
without the need of complicated coordination among the
agents. In addition, due to the large dimensionality of the
state and action spaces, which grows exponentially with
respect to the number of agents in MARL, it necessitate
the adoption of function approximation to enable tractable
planning in modern RL regimes.

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) lies
at the heart of a plethora of applications involving
the interaction of a group of agents in a shared
unknown environment. A prominent framework
for studying MARL is Markov games, with the
goal of finding various notions of equilibria in a
sample-efficient manner, such as the Nash equilibrium (NE) and the coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE). However, existing sample-efficient
approaches either require tailored uncertainty estimation under function approximation, or careful
coordination of the players. In this paper, we propose a novel model-based algorithm, called VMG,
that incentivizes exploration via biasing the empirical estimate of the model parameters towards
those with a higher collective best-response values
of all the players when fixing the other players’
policies, thus encouraging the policy to deviate
from its current equilibrium for more exploration.
VMG is oblivious to different forms of function
approximation, and permits simultaneous and uncoupled policy updates of all players. Theoretically, we also establish that VMG achieves a
near-optimal regret for finding both the NEs of
two-player zero-sum Markov games and CCEs of
multi-player general-sum Markov games under
linear function approximation in an online environment, which nearly match their counterparts
with sophisticated uncertainty quantification.

A de facto approach in exploration in RL is the principle
of optimism in the face of uncertainty (Lai, 1987), which
argues the importance of quantifying the uncertainty, known
as the bonus term, in the pertinent objects, e.g., the value
functions, and using their upper confidence bound (UCB) to
guide action selection. This principle has been embraced in
the MARL literature, leading a flurry of algorithmic developments (Liu et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021;
Jin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Ni et al., 2022; Cui et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2024) that claim provable efficiency in solving Markov games (Littman, 1994),
a standard model for MARL. However, a major downside
of this approach is that constructing the uncertainty sets
quickly becomes intractable as the complexity of function
approximation increases, which often requiring a tailored
approach. For example, near-optimal techniques for constructing the bonus function in the tabular setting cannot
be applied for general function approximation using neural
networks.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA, USA 3 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Yuejie Chi
<ychi@meta.com>.

Therefore, it is of great interest to explore alternative exploration strategies without resorting to explicit uncertainty

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
In this paper, we use the term agent and player interchangeably.

1

