Neural Event-Triggered Control with Optimal Scheduling

Luan Yang * 1 Jingdong Zhang * 1 2 Qunxi Zhu 1 3 4 Wei Lin 1 2 3 4

Inter-event Time

0
0

Triggering Times
Neural ETC: 6
(a)
NLC: 1999

Control

1

(b)

Trajectories

Neural ETC
NLC

Time

1

−1

15

(c)

x

0.4

Learning-enabled controllers with stability certificate functions have demonstrated impressive
empirical performance in addressing control problems in recent years. Nevertheless, directly deploying the neural controllers onto actual digital
platforms requires impractically excessive communication resources due to a continuously updating demand from the closed-loop feedback controller. We introduce a framework aimed at learning the event-triggered controller (ETC) with optimal scheduling, i.e., minimal triggering times, to
address this challenge in resource-constrained scenarios. Our proposed framework, denoted by Neural ETC, includes two practical algorithms: the
path integral algorithm based on directly simulating the event-triggered dynamics, and the Monte
Carlo algorithm derived from new theoretical results regarding lower bound of inter-event time.
Furthermore, we propose a projection operation
with an analytical expression that ensures theoretical stability and schedule optimality for Neural
ETC. Compared to the conventional neural controllers, our empirical results show that the Neural
ETC significantly reduces the required communication resources while enhancing the control
performance in constrained communication resources scenarios.

ux

Abstract

0
-3
0

Time

1

0

Time

1

Figure 1. Comparison of Neural ETC (yellow) and neural Lyapunov control (NLC, purple) in stabilizing the Lorenz system
under the event-triggered control setting. (a): The inter-event time
of consecutive triggering events. The dashed lines represent the
minimal inter-event time of each control. (b): The control values
acting on variable x in the control process. (c): The controlled
trajectories of the variable x.

engineering. Previous research in the field of cybernetics
has applied the Lyapunov stability theory to formulate stabilizing policies for linear or polynomial dynamical systems,
including the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) (Khalil, 2002)
and the sum-of-squares (SOS) polynomials, using the semidefinite planning (SDP) (Parrilo, 2000). Stabilizing more
intricate dynamical systems with high dimension and nonlinearity, as encountered in real applications, has prompted the
integration of machine learning techniques into the cybernetics community(Tsukamoto et al., 2021). Recent advancements in learning neural networks based controllers with certificate functions, such as Lyapunov function (Chang et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2022a), LaSalle function (Zhang et al.,
2022b), barrier functions (Qin et al., 2020) and contraction
metrics (Sun et al., 2021), have demonstrated outstanding
performance in controlling diverse dynamics (Dawson et al.,
2022). Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that all these controllers require updating the control signal continuously
over time, leading to a considerable communication cost
between controller and platform.

1. Introduction
Stabilizing the complex nonlinear systems represents a
formidable focal task within the realms of mathematics and
*
Equal contribution 1 Research Institute of Intelligent Complex
Systems, Fudan University, China. 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, LMNS, and SCMS, Fudan University, China. 3 State Key
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University,
China. 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China. Correspondence to: Qunxi Zhu <qxzhu16@fudan.edu.cn>, Wei Lin
<wlin@fudan.edu.cn>.

The periodic control is mostly advocated for implementing feedback control laws on digital platforms (Franklin
et al., 2002). However, such implementations often incur
significant over-provisioning of the communication network,
especially in the recently developed large-scale resourceconstrained wireless embedded control systems (Lemmon,
2010). To mitigate this issue, event-triggering mechanism
is introduced to generate sporadic transmissions across the
feedback channels of the system. Compared to periodic

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

