Mask-Enhanced Autoregressive Prediction: Pay Less Attention to Learn More

Xialie Zhuang * 1 2 Zhikai Jia * 2 Jianjin Li * 3 Zhenyu Zhang 4 Li Shen 5
Zheng Cao 2 Shiwei Liu 6

Abstract

1. Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are discovered
to suffer from accurately retrieving key information. To address this, we propose Mask-Enhanced
Autoregressive Prediction (MEAP), a simple yet
effective training paradigm that seamlessly integrates Masked Language Modeling (MLM) into
Next-Token Prediction (NTP) to enhance the latter’s in-context retrieval capabilities. Specifically,
MEAP first randomly masks a small fraction of
input tokens and then directly performs the standard next-token prediction autoregressive using
a decoder-only Transformer. MEAP eliminates
the need for bidirectional attention or encoderdecoder architectures for MLM, incurring no additional computational overhead during pre-training
or inference. Intensive experiments demonstrate
that MEAP substantially outperforms NTP on
key information retrieval and long-context reasoning tasks, while performing on par or better
on commonsense reasoning tasks. The benefits
of MEAP also extend to supervised fine-tuning,
where it shows remarkable advantages in lostin-the-middle scenarios, outperforming NTP by
11.77% percentage points. Our analysis indicates
that MEAP’s effectiveness arises from its ability
to promote more distinguishable attention scores
by concentrating on a reduced set of non-masked
tokens. This mechanism improves the model’s focus on task-relevant signals while mitigating the
influence of peripheral context. These findings
position MEAP as a promising training paradigm
for large language models. Code is available at
https://github.com/scitix/MEAP.

Next-token prediction (NTP) (Radford, 2018) is the
foundational training objective for many large language
models (LLMs), including OpenAI’s GPT series (Brown,
2020). NTP trains models to predict the next word (or
token) in a sequence, given all preceding tokens. Its
scaling efficiency and exceptional performance in text
generation have established it as the dominant paradigm for
state-of-the-art LLMs such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023),
LLaMa3 (Dubey et al., 2024), Gemini 1.5 Pro (Team et al.,
2024), and DeepSeek-V3 (Liu et al., 2024a). However,
recent studies highlight the limitations of NTP-based LLMs
in accurately retrieving key information from context (Liu
et al., 2024b; Kamradt, 2023; Nelson et al., 2024).
In contrast, masked language modeling (MLM), used in
BERT (Devlin, 2018), adopts a denoising objective that reconstructs masked inputs using bidirectional attention. This
cloze-type nature makes MLM particularly effective for
tasks requiring precise information retrieval and sentencelevel understanding. However, MLM’s inherent focus on reconstructing masked tokens reduces its effectiveness in tasks
requiring coherent and long-form text generation (Wang &
Cho, 2019; Dong et al., 2019).
While intuitively appealing, combining NTP and MLM
to leverage their respective strengths remains a non-trivial
challenge. MLM typically operates best within two-stack
encoder-decoder architectures, and performance degrades
significantly when applied to decoder-only Transformers
(Tay et al., 2022). Efforts to integrate the two often rely on
unified pre-training pipelines where multiple objectives are
alternated during the pretraining process (Dong et al., 2019;
Tay et al., 2022). However, this multi-objective approach
introduces substantial complexity to the training pipeline,
making it cumbersome to scale, especially for models with
billions or trillions of parameters.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 2 SCITIX (SGP)
TECH PTE. LTD., Singapore 3 South China Normal University, China 4 University of Texas at Austin, USA 5 Sun YatSen University, China 6 University of Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Zheng Cao <zcao@scitix.ai>, Shiwei Liu <shiwei.liu@maths.ox.ac.uk>.

To this end, we propose Mask-Enhanced Autoregressive
Prediction (MEAP), a simple yet effective LLM training
paradigm that seamlessly integrates masked tokens into
next-token prediction. Specifically, we first randomly mask
a small fraction of the input tokens and then directly perform
standard next-token prediction using a decoder-only Transformer in an autoregressive manner. This straightforward

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

