Towards Understanding Gradient Dynamics
of the Sliced-Wasserstein Distance via Critical Point Analysis

Christophe Vauthier 1 Anna Korba 2 Quentin Mérigot 1

Abstract

such tasks has been to consider gradient flows, i.e., optimization dynamics on the space of probability measures, to minimize an objective functional of the form F(µ) := D(µ|ρ),
where D is a discrepancy (e.g. a distance, or a divergence)
between measures. In practice, these can be simulated by
considering an initial distribution that is a discrete measure uniformly supported on a set of particles. The particle positions then evolve according to a system of ODEs
Ẋ = −∇F (X), which corresponds to the gradient flow of
a functional F : (Rd )N → R, where d is the dimension of
the space and N the number of particles. Then, a practical
scheme is derived by discretizing in time this flow, e.g. with
gradient descent. Reversely, gradient descent on particles
can be seen as a discretized flow described by this system
of ODEs.

In this paper, we investigate the properties of
the Sliced Wasserstein Distance (SW) when employed as an objective functional. The SW metric
has gained significant interest in the optimal transport and machine learning literature, due to its
ability to capture intricate geometric properties of
probability distributions while remaining computationally tractable, making it a valuable tool for
various applications, including generative modeling and domain adaptation. Our study aims to
provide a rigorous analysis of the critical points
arising from the optimization of the SW objective.
By computing explicit perturbations, we establish
that stable critical points of SW cannot concentrate on segments. This stability analysis is crucial
for understanding the behaviour of optimization
algorithms for models trained using the SW objective. Furthermore, we investigate the properties of
the SW objective, shedding light on the existence
and convergence behavior of critical points. We
illustrate our theoretical results through numerical
experiments.

Many divergences or distances can be considered as the discrepancy D, each offering different tradeoffs between attractive geometrical properties and computational burden of the
associated training dynamics. Generally the objective function is chosen so that the dynamic is tractable given the available information on ρ. When the density of ρ is known up to
a normalization constant, as often the case in Bayesian inference, standard choices include the Kullback-Leibler divergence (Salim et al., 2020), Kernel Stein Discrepancy (Fisher
et al., 2021; Korba et al., 2021) or (eventually weighted)
Fisher Divergences (Cai et al., 2024a;b). On the other hand,
when samples of the target distribution are available, Integral
Probability Metrics (IPM) or Optimal Transport distances
are preferred, since they are well-defined for discrete measures. For instance in generative modeling, while original
Generative Adversarial Networks are known to optimize a
Jensen-Shannon divergence to the distribution of the samples (Goodfellow et al., 2020) and can be understood via the
perspective of Wasserstein flows (Yi et al., 2023), a wide
range of these metrics have been used for the training of
GAN variants, e.g. Wasserstein-1 (Arjovsky et al., 2017),
Sinkhorn divergences (Genevay et al., 2018), Maximum
Mean Discrepancies (Li et al., 2017) or novel metrics interpolating between IPM and f-divergences (Birrell et al.,
2022). Alternatively, recent work directly tackled generative modeling tasks through simulating Wasserstein gradient flows of such discrepancies, e.g. Sliced-Wasserstein
distances (Liutkus et al., 2019; Dai & Seljak, 2021; Du

1. Introduction
An important problem in statistical learning is to approximate an intractable target probability measure ρ on Rd with
a probability measure supported on a finite set of points.
Such problems arise in various contexts, such as sampling
from Bayesian posterior distributions (Blei et al., 2017;
Wibisono, 2018), generative modeling (Bond-Taylor et al.,
2021) and training neural networks (Chizat & Bach, 2018;
Mei et al., 2018). Recently, a popular framework to address
1
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Université ParisSaclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 2 Centre de recherche en économie
et statistique, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France. Correspondence
to: Christophe Vauthier <christophe.vauthier@universite-parissaclay.fr>, Anna Korba <anna.korba@ensae.fr>, Quentin
Mérigot <quentin.merigot@universite-paris-saclay.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

