Position: Medical Large Language Model Benchmarks Should
Prioritize Construct Validity

Ahmed Alaa 1 2 Thomas Hartvigsen 3 Niloufar Golchini 1 Shiladitya Dutta 1 Frances Dean 1 2
Inioluwa Deborah Raji 1 Travis Zack 2

Abstract

Source of
evaluation data

Medical large language models (LLMs) research
often makes bold claims, from encoding clinical
knowledge to reasoning like a physician. These
claims are usually backed by evaluation on competitive benchmarks—a tradition inherited from
mainstream machine learning. But how do we separate real progress from a leaderboard flex? Medical LLM benchmarks, much like those in other
fields, are arbitrarily constructed using medical licensing exam questions. For these benchmarks to
truly measure progress, they must accurately capture the real-world tasks they aim to represent. In
this position paper, we argue that medical LLM
benchmarks should—and indeed can—be empirically evaluated for their construct validity.
In the psychological testing literature, “construct
validity” refers to the ability of a test to measure
an underlying “construct”, that is the actual conceptual target of evaluation. By drawing an analogy between LLM benchmarks and psychological
tests, we explain how frameworks from this field
can provide empirical foundations for validating
benchmarks. To put these ideas into practice, we
use real-world clinical data in proof-of-concept
experiments to evaluate popular medical LLM
benchmarks and report significant gaps in their
construct validity. Finally, we outline a vision for
a new ecosystem of medical LLM evaluation centered around the creation of valid benchmarks.

Distribution of
benchmark usage

16.7%

40%

60%

10.4%
8.3%

6.2%
Real-world hospital data
Constructed benchmark

Figure 1. Overview of evaluation datasets for medical LLMs.
We analyzed the evaluation datasets used in the 100 most cited papers on medical LLMs over the past 5 years. The majority (60%) of
studies assess models on public benchmarks constructed based on
medical exams, while 40% rely on (private or public access) realworld hospital data. There is no clear consensus on a standard
benchmark—though MedQA is the most frequently used.

coding clinical knowledge (Singhal et al., 2023) to making
differential diagnoses (McDuff et al., 2023), summarizing
complex medical texts (Van Veen et al., 2024), mimicking clinical reasoning (Savage et al., 2024; Brodeur et al.,
2024), and even demonstrating empathy in patient interactions (Maida et al., 2024). Yet the question of how to evaluate these capabilities remains a subject of ongoing debate. In
the world of medicine, the gold standard for generating evidence is the randomized controlled trial (RCT). While some
studies indeed conduct RCTs with meaningful real-world
outcomes (Li et al., 2023; Brodeur et al., 2024), most research on medical LLMs leans on competitive benchmarks—
an evaluation practice inherited from the broader machine
learning community (Donoho, 2024; Orr & Kang, 2024).

1. Introduction

Benchmarks have always played a central role in driving
progress in machine learning, and we do not dispute their importance. Indeed, progress in areas such as computer vision
over the past decade would likely not have occurred without
benchmarks like ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). Public benchmarks are indispensable tools for the community
to enable frictionless democratization of progress (Donoho,
2024; Recht, 2024). However, the landscape of medical
LLM benchmarks remains fluid and fragmented. While flagship medical LLMs, such as Med-PaLM 2 (Singhal et al.,

In recent years, medical Large Language Models (LLMs)
have garnered significant attention, with a growing body of
research examining their capabilities. These range from en1 UC Berkeley 2 UCSF 3 University of Virginia. Correspondence
to: Ahmed Alaa <amalaa@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

