COGNATE: Acceleration of Sparse Tensor Programs
on Emerging Hardware using Transfer Learning

Chamika Sudusinghe 1 Gerasimos Gerogiannis 1 Damitha Lenadora 1
Charles Block 1 Josep Torrellas 1 Charith Mendis 1

Abstract

kernels (Kjolstad et al., 2017; Ye et al., 2023; Hong et al.,
2019; Jiang et al., 2020). However, the varying non-zero
distributions in input sparse matrices have made it difficult to develop performance optimizations for sparse tensor
programs that consistently work well across diverse inputs.

Sparse tensor programs are essential in deep learning and graph analytics, driving the need for optimized processing. To meet this demand, specialized hardware accelerators are being developed. Optimizing these programs for accelerators is challenging for two reasons: program
performance is highly sensitive to variations in
sparse inputs, and early-stage accelerators rely
on expensive simulators. Therefore, ML-based
cost models used for optimizing such programs
on general-purpose hardware are often ineffective for early-stage accelerators, as they require
large datasets for proper training. To this end,
we introduce COGNATE, a novel framework that
leverages inexpensive data samples from generalpurpose hardware (e.g., CPUs) to train cost models, followed by few-shot fine-tuning on emerging
hardware. COGNATE exploits the homogeneity
of input features across hardware platforms while
effectively mitigating heterogeneity, enabling cost
model training with just 5% of the data samples
needed by accelerator-specific models to achieve
comparable performance. We conduct extensive
experiments to demonstrate that COGNATE outperforms existing techniques, achieving average
speedups of 1.47× (up to 5.46×) for SpMM and
1.39× (up to 4.22×) for SDDMM.

To overcome this challenge, machine learning (ML)-based
program optimization techniques have been introduced to
optimize sparse tensor programs on established hardware
platforms (e.g., CPUs) (Won et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023).
These techniques adaptively select a program configuration
based on the input sparse matrix features. For example,
WACO (Won et al., 2023) introduces learned cost models to
predict the runtime cost of programs under different sparse
matrices and program configurations. Then, search-based
techniques are used to automatically find the optimal program configuration using the cost model’s output. Overall,
these ML-based techniques show superior performance and
adaptability across a diverse range of inputs compared to
manually crafted performance optimization techniques.
Recently, on the hardware front, new domain-specific machines specifically designed for sparse operations are emerging (Pal et al., 2018; Hegde et al., 2019; Aananthakrishnan et al., 2023; Gerogiannis et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023;
Muñoz-Martı́nez et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024). These machines, known as hardware accelerators, offer significant
speedups over established hardware platforms. Similar to
CPUs, sparse accelerators also provide various program
configurations (Gerogiannis et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2024;
Gerogiannis et al., 2024), which must be configured by software to achieve the hardware’s full potential. It is important
that this potential is tested during early-stage hardware development (i.e. before the actual chip is available) to inform
better hardware design decisions. For example, hardware architects face the risk of overprovisioning hardware resources
(e.g., increasing cache size) to address inefficiencies that
could potentially be resolved through improved software
strategies (e.g., adopting a better tiling strategy). Therefore,
it is crucial to automatically select the optimal program configuration during the design space exploration (DSE) phase
of accelerator development.

1. Introduction
Sparse tensor programs have gained increased significance
with the recent advancements in sparse deep learning and
graph analytics (Beltagy et al., 2020; Ye & Ji, 2021; Child
et al., 2019; Dao et al., 2021) workloads. As a result,
many hand-crafted performance optimization techniques
have been suggested to improve the performance of sparse
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA. Correspondence to: Chamika Sudusinghe <chamika2@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, finding the best program configuration for a given
1

