Efficient Core-set Selection for Deep Learning Through Squared Loss
Minimization
Jianting Chen 1

Abstract

rapidly growing data scales and constrained resources.
CS is often regarded as a static data pruning technique,
in contrast to dynamic data pruning (DDP) (Raju et al.,
2021; Nguyen et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024). Both aim
to enhance training efficiency but differ significantly: CS
retains only selected data, while DDP requires access to the
full dataset. Moreover, CS focuses on data value, whereas
DDP emphasizes the model and training process. While
both are valuable, this work mainly focuses on CS.

Core-set selection (CS) for deep learning has become crucial for enhancing training efficiency and
understanding datasets by identifying the most informative subsets. However, most existing methods rely on heuristics or complex optimization,
struggling to balance efficiency and effectiveness.
To address this, we propose a novel CS objective that adaptively balances losses between coreset and non-core-set samples by minimizing the
sum of squared loss across all samples. Building on this objective, we introduce the Maximum
Reduction as Maximum Contribution criterion
(MRMC), which identifies samples with the maximal reduction in loss as those making the maximal contribution to overall convergence. Additionally, a balance constraint is incorporated to
ensure an even distribution of contributions from
the core-set. Experimental results demonstrate
that MRMC improves training efficiency significantly while preserving model performance with
minimal computational cost.

Mainstream CS methods can be categorized into four types:
1 Geometry-based methods analyze data distribution in
⃝
the feature space and select representative samples by clustering algorithms, that cover the data distribution, ensuring diversity and consistency (Sorscher et al., 2022; Xia
2 Uncertainty-based methods prioritize samet al., 2023). ⃝
ples that provide the highest information gain based on the
model’s prediction uncertainty. Heuristic metrics include
forgetting events (Toneva et al., 2019), gradient norms (Paul
et al., 2021), loss variance (He et al., 2024), and decision
boundary errors (Yang et al., 2024). 3
⃝ Optimization-based
methods frame CS as a mathematical optimization problem,
aiming to maximize the core-set’s ability to substitute the
original dataset from the perspective of model parameter op4 Hybrid methods
timization (Killamsetty et al., 2021b;a). ⃝
combine geometric properties and uncertainty metrics to
balance diversity and information gain (Zheng et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Data-driven deep learning heavily depends on large-scale
datasets, but the growing size of models has led to exponentially increasing computational costs. This issue is particularly critical in resource-constrained scenarios, making
efficient learning an area of rising interest (Shen et al., 2023).
Core-set selection (CS), one of the tasks in efficient learning,
focuses on selecting a small, yet representative subset (coreset) from the original dataset to reduce sample size while
preserving model performance (Katharopoulos & Fleuret,
2018; Coleman et al., 2020). By optimizing data utilization,
CS plays a crucial role in alleviating the tension between

With the rise of large-scale models like large language models and multimodal systems, CS has gained new importance.
Recent studies focus on tailoring CS techniques to the specific characteristics of data and models, optimizing both
training and fine-tuning processes (Xia et al., 2024a; Wang
et al., 2024b; Evans et al., 2024).
Despite significant progress in CS, several challenges remain to be addressed. First, balancing diversity and uncertainty remains challenging. Diverse samples reflect the
global distribution, while uncertain samples emphasize local information gain. Diversity can be understood as the
uncertainty of the overall distribution given known local
information. Therefore, both factors are essential for a coreset, but their conflicting objectives complicate achieving an
effective balance. Second, there is a gap between heuristic
and principled methods. Heuristic methods are simple but

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji
University , Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Jianting Chen
<tj chenjt@tongji.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

