RIFLEx: A Free Lunch for Length Extrapolation in
Video Diffusion Transformers
Min Zhao 1 Guande He 2 Yixiao Chen 1 3 Hongzhou Zhu 1 3 Chongxuan Li 4 5 6 Jun Zhu 1 3 7

Abstract

2023; Bao et al., 2023), which combines the scalability of
diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021) with the expressive power of transformers (Vaswani, 2017).

Recent advancements in video generation have enabled models to synthesize high-quality, minutelong videos. However, generating even longer
videos with temporal coherence remains a major
challenge and existing length extrapolation methods lead to temporal repetition or motion deceleration. In this work, we systematically analyze the
role of frequency components in positional embeddings and identify an intrinsic frequency that
primarily governs extrapolation behavior. Based
on this insight, we propose RIFLEx, a minimal
yet effective approach that reduces the intrinsic
frequency to suppress repetition while preserving
motion consistency, without requiring any additional modifications. RIFLEx offers a true free
lunch—achieving high-quality 2× extrapolation
on state-of-the-art video diffusion transformers in
a completely training-free manner. Moreover, it
enhances quality and enables 3× extrapolation by
minimal fine-tuning without long videos. Project
page and codes: https://riflex-video.github.io/.

Despite these advancements, generating longer videos with
high-quality and temporal coherence remains a fundamental
challenge. Due to computational constraints and the sheer
scale of training data, existing models are typically trained
with a fixed maximum sequence length, limiting their ability
to extend content. Consequently, there is increasing interest
in length extrapolation techniques that enable models to
generate new and temporally coherent content that evolves
smoothly over time without training on longer videos.
However, existing extrapolation strategies (Chen et al.,
2023b; bloc97, 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024b;
Zhuo et al., 2024), originally developed for text and image
generation, fail when applied to video length extrapolation.
Our experiments show that these methods exhibit distinct
failure patterns: temporal repetition and slow motion. These
limitations suggest a fundamental gap in understanding how
positional encodings influence video extrapolation.
To address this, we isolate individual frequency components by zeroing out others and fine-tuning the target video
model. We find that high frequencies capture short-term
dependencies and induce temporal repetition, while low frequencies encode long-term dependencies but lead to motion
deceleration. Surprisingly, we identify a consistent intrinsic
frequency component across different videos from the same
model, which primarily dictates repetition patterns among
all components during extrapolation.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in video generation (Brooks et al., 2024;
Bao et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2024; Zhao
et al., 2023; Team, 2024b; Zhao et al., 2024) enable models to synthesize minute-long video sequences with high
fidelity and coherence. A key factor behind this progress
is the emergence of diffusion transformers (Peebles & Xie,

Building on this insight, we propose Reducing Intrinsic
Frequency for Length Extrapolation (RIFLEx), a minimal
yet effective solution that lowers the intrinsic frequency to
ensure it remains within a single cycle after extrapolation.
Without any other modification, it suppresses temporal repetition while preserving motion consistency. As a byproduct,
RIFLEx provides a principled explanation for the failure
modes of existing approaches and offers insights that naturally extend to spatial extrapolation of images.

1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, THU-Bosch ML
Center, Tsinghua University. 2 The University of Texas at Austin.
3
ShengShu. 4 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence Renmin University of China Beijing, China. 5 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance. 6 Engineering
Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE. 7 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu). Correspondence to: Chongxuan Li <chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn>, Jun Zhu
<dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Extensive experiments on state-of-the-art video diffusion
transformers, including CogVideoX-5B (Yang et al., 2024)
1

