Improving Out-of-Distribution Detection via Dynamic Covariance Calibration

Kaiyu Guo 1 2 Zijian Wang 1 Tan Pan 3 2 Brian C. Lovell 1 Mahsa Baktashmotlagh 1

Abstract
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection is essential
for the trustworthiness of AI systems. Methods using prior information (i.e., subspace-based methods) have shown effective performance by extracting information geometry to detect OOD data
with a more appropriate distance metric. However, these methods fail to address the geometry
distorted by ill-distributed samples, due to the
limitation of statically extracting information geometry from the training distribution. In this paper, we argue that the influence of ill-distributed
samples can be corrected by dynamically adjusting the prior geometry in response to new data.
Based on this insight, we propose a novel approach that dynamically updates the prior covariance matrix using real-time input features, refining its information. Specifically, we reduce the
covariance along the direction of real-time input
features and constrain adjustments to the residual space, thus preserving essential data characteristics and avoiding effects on unintended
directions in the principal space. We evaluate
our method on two pre-trained models for the
CIFAR dataset and five pre-trained models for
ImageNet-1k, including the self-supervised DINO
model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach significantly enhances OOD detection across various models. The code is released
at https://github.com/workerbcd/ooddcc.

(a) with dynamic adjustment (b) without dynamic adjustment
Figure 1. Visualization of Mahalanobis distance score distributions
with (w) and without (w/o) Dynamic Adjustment. We compare
scores from the CIFAR-100 dataset (ID) and the SVHN dataset
(OOD) using a CIFAR-100 pre-trained DenseNet. Without dynamic adjustment, the scores have high variance and a large overlapping region. With dynamic adjustment, the variance is lower
and the overlap is reduced.

ever, deep models are often well-fitted to the data they are
trained on, known as the in-distribution (ID) data, and may
perform poorly on unseen or novel data, referred to as outof-distribution (OOD) data. Recognizing OOD samples
is crucial for ensuring the safety and reliability of AI systems, especially in critical applications like autonomous
driving (Filos et al., 2020), medical diagnostics (Fu et al.,
2023), and surveillance (Idrees et al., 2018). Therefore,
OOD detection is proposed to separate ID and OOD data to
define the performance boundaries of deep learning models.
The goal of OOD detection is to define a score function s(·)
that assigns higher scores to ID data and lower scores to
OOD data. Using a threshold λ, we can classify inputs as:

1. Introduction


D(x, s, λ) =

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in pattern
recognition tasks (He et al., 2016; Han et al., 2022). How-

x ∈ ID
x ∈ OOD

if s(x) > λ
if s(x) < λ

A variety of score functions have been proposed for OOD
detection (Yang et al., 2024). In this paper, we focus on designing score functions for test-time OOD detection, where
models do not require retraining with ID data.

1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 2 Shanghai Academy
of AI for Science (SAIS), Shanghai, China 3 Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation Institute, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Mahsa Baktashmotlagh
<m.baktashmotlagh@uq.edu.au>.

With the widespread use of pre-trained models and contrastive learning, classifier-free methods for test-time OOD
detection have been proposed, among which measuring the
distance between features is an effective approach. Previous
works (Sehwag et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2018) have shown

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

