Learning State-Based Node Representations from a Class Hierarchy for
Fine-Grained Open-Set Detection

Spandan Pyakurel 1 Qi Yu 1

Abstract

Openset
Sparrow

Bird

Fine-Grained Openset Detection (FGOD) poses
a fundamental challenge due to the similarity between the openset classes and those closed-set
ones. Since real-world objects/entities tend to
form a hierarchical structure, the fine-grained relationship among the closed-set classes as captured
by the hierarchy could potentially improve the
FGOD performance. Intuitively, the hierarchical
dependency among different classes allows the
model to recognize their subtle differences, which
in turn makes it better at differentiating similar
open-set classes even they may share the same
parent. However, simply performing openset detection in a top-down fashion by building a local
detector for each node may result in a poor detection performance. Our theoretical analysis also
reveals that maximizing the probability of the path
leading to the ground-truth leaf node also results
in a sub-optimal training process. To systematically address this issue, we propose to formulate
a novel state-based node representation, which
constructs a state space based upon the entire hierarchical structure. We prove that the state-based
representation guarantees to maximize the probability on the path leading to the ground-truth leaf
node. Extensive experiments on multiple realworld hierarchical datasets clearly demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed method.

Seagull

Le Conte
Sparrow

Sparrow

California Ivory
Fox Grasshopper
Gull
Gull Sparrow Sparrow

Openset
Bird

Ring Necked
Pheasant

Figure 1. With the support of a hierarchy, fine-grained openset
detection can assign an openset data sample into different parent
nodes as shown: Le Conte Sparrow → Openset Sparrow, Ring
Necked Pheasant → Openset Bird

et al., 2020b; 2021; Yang et al., 2020; Zhang & Patel, 2016).
They typically quantify an openset score to measure the
difference between the openset sample and all the closedset classes as a whole. However, the semantic similarity
between openset samples with closed-set classes may vary
significantly. As the similarity increases, openset detection
becomes more challenging and such problems are referred
to as near OOD detection (Fang et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2021;
Fort et al., 2021). Theoretical results have also been developed to strictly quantify the difficulty of these problems
from the learnability perspective (Fang et al., 2022).
In many real-world settings, the fine-grained relationship
between the closed-set classes can be precisely captured
through a hierarchical structure. Such a hierarchy could
help to improve the detection performance of some openset
examples despite having a high semantic similarity with certain closed-set classes. As shown in Figure 1, the closed-set
training data consists of four types of birds, which can be further grouped into two parent classes, Seagull and Sparrow.
Due to migration of birds from other regions, one may need
to identify previously unseen species. Identifying the closest
related species of these new birds can help expand the existing hierarchy and provide insights into migration patterns.
By training a model that adequately captures the hierarchical
dependencies among different closed-set classes, it can be
better equipped to more accurately recognize openset samples with different levels of similarity with the closed-set
ones. For example, when being presented with a Le Conte
Sparrow, the knowledge learned from the hierarchy could

1. Introduction
Openset detection aims to identify data samples that are
not part of the known set (a.k.a., closed-set) of classes in
the training data. Most existing methods try to assign the
detected openset samples into a single openset class (Sun
et al., 2020; Bendale & Boult, 2016; Vaze et al., 2021; Chen
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York. Correspondence to: Qi Yu <qi.yu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

