Metastable Dynamics of Chain-of-Thought Reasoning:
Provable Benefits of Search, RL and Distillation

Juno Kim 1 Denny Wu 2 Jason D. Lee 3 Taiji Suzuki 1

Abstract

ford et al., 2018), is well known for its high computational
demands, and its scaling behavior has been extensively studied (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Dubey et al.,
2024). On the other hand, inference (running the trained
model to generate responses) was traditionally considered
computationally inexpensive, until a recent paradigm shift
demonstrating that model reasoning capabilities can drastically improve by allocating more computational resources
during inference time (Jaech et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025;
Kimi et al., 2025). Hence it is crucial to understand the advantages scaling inference computation can provide beyond
those achieved through pretraining (Jones, 2021; Snell et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2024).

A key paradigm to improve the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) is to
allocate more inference-time compute to search
against a verifier or reward model. This process
can then be utilized to refine the pretrained model
or distill its reasoning patterns into more efficient
models. In this paper, we study inference-time
compute by viewing chain-of-thought (CoT) generation as a metastable Markov process: easy reasoning steps (e.g., algebraic manipulations) form
densely connected clusters, while hard reasoning
steps (e.g., applying a relevant theorem) create
sparse, low-probability edges between clusters,
leading to phase transitions at longer timescales.
Under this framework, we prove that implementing a search protocol that rewards sparse edges
improves CoT by decreasing the expected number of steps to reach different clusters. In contrast,
we establish a limit on reasoning capability when
the model is restricted to local information of the
pretrained graph. We also show that the information gained by search can be utilized to obtain a
better reasoning model: (1) the pretrained model
can be directly finetuned to favor sparse edges
via policy gradient methods, and moreover (2) a
compressed metastable representation of the reasoning dynamics can be distilled into a smaller,
more efficient model.

Reasoning LLMs follow the chain-of-thought (CoT) (Nye
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022) format where intermediate
reasoning steps are iteratively generated before arriving at
a final answer. Various reinforcement learning (RL) based
approaches (Bai et al., 2022) have been proposed to improve
CoT quality at inference time, such as process reward modeling (Lightman et al., 2023; Uesato et al., 2022), Monte-Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) (Silver et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2023b;
Trinh et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024), and data self-generation
(Zelikman et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2024). Theoretically,
the benefit of (sufficiently long) CoT has been studied in
terms of expressive power and statistical efficiency (Merrill
& Sabharwal, 2023; Li et al., 2024b; Kim & Suzuki, 2024;
Wen et al., 2024).
Motivated by the discrete and sequential nature of CoT, we
follow Xu et al. (2019); Sanford et al. (2024a); Abbe et al.
(2024); Besta et al. (2024) and consider learning on graphs
as an ideal abstraction of complex reasoning tasks. We
model pretraining as the process of discovering the graph
structure, or the linguistic (world) model, upon which a
reasoning (inference) component is implemented to search
for a valid path between states (at a high level, this division
parallels the System 1 vs. System 2 distinction discussed in
Kahneman (2011); Xiang et al. (2025)). Building on the observation that intermediate reasoning steps vary in difficulty,
we assume the underlying graph consists of dense clusters
connected by sparse, low-probability edges representing
“hard” reasoning steps. We further model CoT generation
as a Markov process and characterize hitting/escape times

1. Introduction
Pretraining and inference constitute two distinct computational phases in large language models (LLMs). The pretraining phase, during which the model learns from vast
amounts of text data through next-token prediction (Rad1

University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP 2 New York University
and Flatiron Institute 3 Princeton University. Correspondence to:
Juno Kim <junokim@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

