FedClean: A General Robust Label Noise Correction for Federated Learning

Xiaoqian Jiang 1 Jing Zhang 1 *

Abstract

(Fang & Ye, 2022) becomes a critical challenge in federated learning, which significantly degrades the performance
of global models (Zeng et al., 2023). Therefore, federated
learning still has an urgent need to deal with label noise.

Many federated learning scenarios encounter label noises in the client-side datasets. The resulting
degradation in global model performance raises
the urgent need to address label noise. This paper proposes FedClean – a novel general robust
label noise correction for federated learning. FedClean first uses the local centralized noisy label
learning to select clean samples to train a global
model. Then, it employs a two-stage correction
scheme to correct the noisy labels from two distinct perspectives of local noisy label learning
and the global model. FedClean also proposes a
novel model aggregation method, further reducing the impact of label noises. FedClean neither
assumes the existence of clean clients nor the specific noise distributions, showing the maximum
versatility. Extensive experimental results show
that FedClean effectively identifies and rectifies
label noises even if all clients exhibit label noises,
which outperforms the state-of-the-art noise-label
learning methods for federated learning.

Label noise issue has been extensively studied within the
context of centralized learning (CL), leading to the development of numerous advanced methods (Song et al., 2022).
However, these CL-based methods cannot be directly applied to FL due to its inherent privacy constraints, which
prohibit sharing data between clients or with a global server.
As a result, the restricted size and insufficient diversity of
the local datasets in clients dramatically degrade the effectiveness of noise processing methods. For example, Xu et al.
(2022) have demonstrated that even the most sophisticated
label noise correction methods for CL (Li et al., 2020a;
Tanaka et al., 2018), when applied to client datasets, are
insufficient to alleviate performance degradation in FL.
Therefore, recent studies have begun to address the label
noise issue within the FL framework. Some methods attempt to mitigate label noise by discarding (Xu & Lyu,
2020) or re-weighting (Wan & Chen, 2021; Fu et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2020) the model updates in the clients that are
least similar to those in other clients. They treat the discarded or re-weighted clients as malicious ones, which is
obviously too radical. Many clients may simply have some
label noises in their local datasets, which, with proper correction, could still contribute valuable information to the
global model. To this end, latest methods were proposed to
distinguish between clean (where all labels of local training data are correct) and noisy clients and then use models
trained from clean clients to correct noisy labels in noisy
clients (Xu et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a powerful framework for decentralized machine learning (Liu et al., 2022),
enabling multiple clients to collaboratively train models
without sharing raw data, thus preserving privacy (Wen
et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). This learning paradigm is
especially valuable in privacy-sensitive domains (Nevrataki
et al., 2023) such as healthcare (Rani et al., 2023; Thummisetti & Atluri, 2024), finance (Li & Wen, 2023; Awosika
et al., 2024), and IoT (Yadav et al., 2022; Rjoub et al., 2024),
where data privacy regulations like GDPR (Zaeem & Barber, 2020) are imposed to protect user information strictly.
Since there is no centralized entity to preprocess the whole
training data, the presence of label noise in client datasets

However, all existing label noise correction methods (Xu
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024) for FL are
based on an idealized assumption that some clean clients
exist, which unfortunately does not always hold in reality. For example, federated crowdsourcing learning (Guo
et al., 2020) recruits non-expert workers from the Internet
to collect data and train local models, where each client
is probably imperfect. In other scenarios when clients are
maliciously attacked, data are contaminated, or devices are
compromised (Sharma & Marchang, 2024), the assumption also breaks up. Moreover, these methods distinguish

1

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, No.2 SEU Road, Nanjing 211189, China. Correspondence to:
Jing Zhang <jingz@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

