TabICL: A Tabular Foundation Model for In-Context Learning on Large Data

Jingang Qu 1 David Holzmüller 2 3 Gaël Varoquaux 1 Marine Le Morvan 1
In other data modalities, foundation models – particularly
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Zhou et al., 2024) – have
significantly advanced the ability to tackle new tasks and
few-shot learning. This is largely due to their remarkable
in-context learning (ICL) capabilities (Brown et al., 2020),
which enable them to capture patterns in prompts without
requiring parameter updates. This success combined with
the pervasiveness of tables have spurred interest in tabular
foundation models (van Breugel & van der Schaar, 2024).

Abstract
The long-standing dominance of gradient-boosted
decision trees on tabular data is currently challenged by tabular foundation models using InContext Learning (ICL): setting the training data
as context for the test data and predicting in a
single forward pass without parameter updates.
While TabPFNv2 foundation model excels on
tables with up to 10K samples, its alternating
column- and row-wise attentions make handling
large training sets computationally prohibitive.
So, can ICL be effectively scaled and deliver a
benefit for larger tables? We introduce TabICL, a
tabular foundation model for classification, pretrained on synthetic datasets with up to 60K samples and capable of handling 500K samples on
affordable resources. This is enabled by a novel
two-stage architecture: a column-then-row attention mechanism to build fixed-dimensional embeddings of rows, followed by a transformer for
efficient ICL. Across 200 classification datasets
from the TALENT benchmark, TabICL is on
par with TabPFNv2 while being systematically
faster (up to 10 times), and significantly outperforms all other approaches. On 53 datasets
with over 10K samples, TabICL surpasses both
TabPFNv2 and CatBoost, demonstrating the potential of ICL for large data. Pretraining code,
inference code, and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/soda-inria/tabicl.

While LLMs are primarily designed to model natural language, attempts to fine-tune them for tabular data have
emerged (Hegselmann et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024, and
references therein). These efforts rely on table serialization,
which is the process of converting table rows into text or sentences which can then be tokenized. Gardner et al. (2024)
fine-tuned Llama 3-8B on a corpus of serialized tables and
demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach compared
to tree-based models in the few-shot setting. However, such
language models-based approaches are limited by the size
of their context window to fit large serialized tables (e.g.
up to 32 or 64 shots in Gardner et al. 2024). Moreover, it
is unclear whether LLMs can effectively handle numerical
values (Thawani et al., 2021). Finally, as evidence shows
that LLMs are pretrained on many popular datasets (Bordt
et al., 2024), their evaluation on tabular prediction tasks
should also be conducted with care.
Taking a markedly different approach, Hollmann et al.
(2022) introduced TabPFN, a transformer-based tabular
foundation model for classification tasks, pretrained on synthetic tabular datasets only. A key feature of TabPFN is
ICL with tables, which eliminates the need for tokenization
and enables efficient handling of small tables with up to 1K
samples and 100 features. The same authors then introduced
TabPFNv2 (Hollmann et al., 2025), an improved version
that significantly outperforms tree-based and neural network
competitors on small-to-medium datasets with up to 10K
samples and 500 features. The great promise of tabular ICL
has spurred a new line of research (see Section 2.3), yet the
quadratic cost of self-attention is a threat to the scalability of
all of these. TabPFNv2 uses a two-way attention mechanism
alternating between column-wise and row-wise attentions,
which limits its scalability for large datasets. In real-world
scenarios, where industrial datasets can contain millions of
samples (Rubachev et al., 2024), the high computational

1. Introduction
Tabular data, structured in rows and columns, is widely
used in industries like healthcare (Cartella et al., 2021)
and finance (Johnson et al., 2016), where tabular classification problems underpin numerous real-world applications.
1
SODA team, INRIA Saclay, France 2 Sierra team, INRIA
Paris, France 3 Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Jingang Qu <jingang.qu@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

