Symmetric Reinforcement Learning Loss for
Robust Learning on Diverse Tasks and Model Scales

Ju-Seung Byun 1 Andrew Perrault 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs)
have shown impressive performance across various natural
language processing tasks (Chung et al., 2022; Wei et al.,
2023), robot control (Huang et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023),
and healthcare (Lee et al., 2023c; Huang et al., 2020). However, as these LLMs are typically trained to predict the next
word in a provided dataset, they require post-training processing to make them useful for particular tasks. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) trains LLMs
to generate responses aligned with user preferences through
human feedback. Additionally, Reinforcement Learning
from AI Feedback (RLAIF), which leverages feedback from
well-trained AI models, has also been employed (Lee et al.,
2023a; Bai et al., 2022). Thus, adapting fundamental Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms such as REINFORCE
(Williams, 1992), A2C (Mnih et al., 2016), and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) to suit the fine-tuning of LLMs for LLM
tasks is an area of active interest (Ahmadian et al., 2024;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023).

Reinforcement learning (RL) training is inherently unstable due to factors such as moving targets and high gradient variance. Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF)
introduce additional challenges. For instance, diverse preferences complicate the alignment process, and prediction errors in a trained reward
model can become more severe as the LLM generates unseen outputs. These RL challenges create confusion about whether the probability of
an action for a given state should be increased
or decreased, similar to the noise in labels for
classification tasks. In this work, we focus on
RL algorithms that share learning difficulties with
cross-entropy loss, especially for low-probability
predictions. To enhance stability, we adapt reverse
cross-entropy (RCE) from supervised learning for
noisy data, defining a symmetric RL loss. We
demonstrate performance improvements across
various tasks and scales. We conduct experiments
in discrete action tasks (Atari games) and continuous action space tasks (MuJoCo benchmark
and Box2D) using Symmetric A2C (SA2C) and
Symmetric PPO (SPPO). Notably, SPPO shows
strong performance across different hyperparameters. Furthermore, we validate the symmetric
RL loss in the RLHF framework using PPO for
natural language processing tasks such as IMDB
positive sentiment and TL;DR summarization.

RL methods (Sutton et al., 2000; Sutton & Barto, 2018a)
have lead to substantial breakthroughs in tasks such as robot
control and game playing. Still, they entail learning instability compared to supervised learning due to factors such as
moving targets, high-gradient variance, and training value
functions. The RL literature has proposed various methods
to make the RL process more robust, such as preventing
overestimation with Double DQN (van Hasselt et al., 2015),
reducing variance with Generalized Advantage Estimation
(GAE) (Schulman et al., 2018), updates within the trust
region (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017), and encouraging diverse behavior with Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.,
2018). In addition to the methods devised specifically for RL
problems, RL literature has also adopted supervised learning techniques to make the learning process more robust.
For example, ensembles have been used for more accurate
value function prediction, while Layer Normalization and
Batch Normalization have been employed to constrain predictions for out-of-distribution samples, thereby mitigating
the overestimation and extrapolation.

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The
Ohio State University. Correspondence to: Ju-Seung Byun
<byun.83@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023b) and RLAIF
(Lee et al., 2023a; Bai et al., 2022; Byun et al., 2024) po1

