“Why Is There a Tumor?”: Tell Me the Reason, Show Me the Evidence

Mengmeng Ma 1 Tang Li 1 Yunxiang Peng 1 Lu Lin 2 Volkan Beylergil 2 Binsheng Zhao 2 Oguz Akin 2
Xi Peng 1

Abstract
Methods

Medical AI models excel at tumor detection and
segmentation. However, their latent representations often lack explicit ties to clinical semantics,
producing outputs less trusted in clinical practice.
Most of the existing models generate either segmentation masks/labels (localizing where without why) or textual justifications (explaining why
without where), failing to ground clinical concepts
in spatially localized evidence. To bridge this gap,
we propose to develop models that can justify
the segmentation or detection using clinically relevant terms and point to visual evidence. We
address two core challenges: First, we curate a rationale dataset to tackle the lack of paired images,
annotations, and textual rationales for training.
The dataset includes 180K image-mask-rationale
triples with quality evaluated by expert radiologists. Second, we design rationale-informed
optimization that disentangles and localizes finegrained clinical concepts in a self-supervised manner without requiring pixel-level concept annotations. Experiments across medical benchmarks
show our model demonstrates superior performance in segmentation, detection, and beyond.
The code is available at https://github.com/deepreal/MedRationale.

Seg. Model

UNet
SAMed

Prediction Rationales
Predictions

MLLM

Category-level

Concept
Bottleneck

Category

OpenAI o1

Category

Ours

Visual
Evidence

Seg. Mask

GradCAM
XML

Clinical
Concepts

Seg. Mask

Concept-level

Figure 1: In contrast to existing methods, our proposed
method not only conducts accurate predictions, but can
also provide its prediction rationales using clinical concepts
supported by valid visual evidence.

evidence, guiding clinical action. AI is increasingly integrated into this workflow, assisting radiologists in detecting
and segmenting tumors (Ozer et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2024).
Data-driven methods (Ronneberger et al., 2015; Isensee
et al., 2021) enable AI models to achieve remarkable accuracy. However, most existing models process images
via statistical pattern recognition, mapping pixels to labels
through latent representations that lack explicit ties to medical semantics. Consequently, these models often produce
outputs that lack clinical interpretability. For instance, they
can localize anomalies using segmentation masks without
explaining why regions are suspicious. This raises a critical question: Can AI models justify their prediction using
clinical terms and point to visual evidence?

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) interpretation workflow typically begins with analyzing anatomical and functional sequences to identify deviated visual patterns. These
patterns are then mapped to standardized clinical lexicons,
ensuring consistency in reporting. Structured reports explicitly link these clinical terms to corresponding visual

There are attempts to enhance models to perform beyond
segmentation and detection, yet they often fall short of clinical needs. The large-language models trained on radiology
reports (Yang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a) can generate
textual justifications for their diagnosis, but these explanations often lack spatial grounding, making it difficult for
radiologists to verify whether key findings correspond to the
correct anatomical regions. Similarly, concept bottleneck
models (Gao et al., 2024; Patrı́cio et al., 2023) can justify
the prediction using clinical concepts, yet fail at associating
the concepts with correct pixels (Margeloiu et al., 2021).
Conversely, models focused on visual localization—such as

1
Department of Computer & Information Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA 2 Department of Radiology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Xi Peng <xipeng@udel.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

