Taming Knowledge Conflicts in Language Models

Gaotang Li 1 Yuzhong Chen 2 Hanghang Tong 1

Abstract
Language Models (LMs) often encounter knowledge conflicts when parametric memory contradicts contextual knowledge. Previous works
attribute this conflict to the interplay between
“memory heads” and “context heads”, attention
heads assumed to promote either memory or context exclusively. In this study, we go beyond this
fundamental assumption by uncovering a critical phenomenon we term the superposition of
contextual information and parametric memory,
where highly influential attention heads simultaneously contribute to both memory and context. Building upon this insight, we propose
Just Run Twice (J U ICE), a test-time attention
intervention method that steers LMs toward either parametric beliefs or contextual knowledge
without requiring fine-tuning. J U ICE identifies
a set of reliable attention heads and leverages
a dual-run approach to mitigate the superposition effects. Extensive experiments across 11
datasets and 6 model architectures demonstrate
that J U ICE sets the new state-of-the-art performance and robust generalization, achieving significant and consistent improvement across different domains under various conflict types. Finally, we theoretically analyze knowledge conflict
and the superposition of contextual information
and parametric memory in attention heads, which
further elucidates the effectiveness of J U ICE in
these settings. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/GaotangLi/JUICE.

Prior Belief

Our Finding

Transformer Layer

Transformer Layer

Memory
Head

Memory
Head

Context
Head

Context
Head

parametric memory

contextual information

Figure 1. Our finding goes beyond the prior notion of exclusive
“memory head” and “context head”, where we show that memory
and contexts are encoded in attention heads in superposition.

inference, they leverage this parametric memory alongside
the provided context to generate the next token. However,
conflicts can arise when parametric memory contradicts
contextual information—a phenomenon known as knowledge conflict (Xu et al., 2024). In such cases, the model
may become uncertain about which source of knowledge to
trust. These conflicts are particularly prevalent in real-world
applications, especially in context-heavy Large Language
Models (LLMs) systems like retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Gao et al., 2023), LLM agents (Xi et al., 2025),
and tool-augmented LLMs (Qu et al., 2025). Depending on
the application, user may require an LLM to either remain
faithful to its parametric memory or prioritize contextual
reliance for accurate and reliable outputs.
Prior works have explored the behavior of LMs under knowledge conflicts, either by treating the model as an oracle to
analyze how different contexts influence its predictions (Xie
et al., 2024) or by treating the context as an oracle to evaluate
how effectively the model follows it (Longpre et al., 2021).
While these studies provide valuable insights into knowledge conflicts, the intrinsic mechanisms underlying these
conflicts and corresponding mitigation strategies largely remain unexplored. Some studies have taken important steps
to characterize (Yu et al., 2023) and intervene (Jin et al.,
2024b) in knowledge conflicts, primarily focusing on a single conflict type (e.g., substitution-based conflicts). While
pioneering, these efforts leave opportunities for more comprehensive understanding of diverse conflict types and the
development of fine-grained approaches to address knowl-

1. Introduction
Language Models (LMs) store vast amounts of information during pretraining as parametric knowlege. During
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Visa Research. Correspondence to: Gaotang Li <gaotang3@illinois.edu>, Hanghang
Tong <htong@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

