Towards the Causal Complete Cause of Multi-Modal Representation Learning

Jingyao Wang 1 2 * Siyu Zhao 2 * Wenwen Qiang 1 2 Jiangmeng Li 1 2
Changwen Zheng 1 2 Fuchun Sun 1 3 Hui Xiong 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
The initial inspiration for artificial intelligence is to imitate
human perceptions which are based on different modalities
(Jordan & Mitchell, 2015; Mahesh, 2020), e.g., sight, sound,
and touch. Each modality provides unique information with
distinct statistical properties (Baltrušaitis et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2023c). A fundamental aspect of human perception
is the ability to simultaneously integrate data from different
modalities to understand the world (Xu et al., 2023). Multimodal learning (MML) (Huang et al., 2021a; Ge et al., 2023)
has emerged as a promising approach to emulate human sensory perception. It aims to learn good representations from
multiple modalities that can achieve accurate decisions.

Multi-Modal Learning (MML) aims to learn effective representations across modalities for accurate predictions. Existing methods typically
focus on modality consistency and specificity to
learn effective representations. However, from a
causal perspective, they may lead to representations that contain insufficient and unnecessary information. To address this, we propose that effective MML representations should be causally sufficient and necessary. Considering practical issues
like spurious correlations and modality conflicts,
we relax the exogeneity and monotonicity assumptions prevalent in prior works and explore the
concepts specific to MML, i.e., Causal Complete
Cause (C 3 ). We begin by defining C 3 , which
quantifies the probability of representations being
causally sufficient and necessary. We then discuss the causal identifiability of C 3 and introduce
an instrumental variable to support identifying
C 3 with non-exogeneity and non-monotonicity.
Building on this, we conduct the C 3 measurement, i.e., C 3 risk. We propose a twin network
to estimate it through (i) the real-world branch:
utilizing the instrumental variable for sufficiency,
and (ii) the hypothetical-world branch: applying
gradient-based counterfactual modeling for necessity. Theoretical analyses confirm its reliability.
Based on these results, we propose C 3 Regularization, a plug-and-play method that enforces the
causal completeness of the learned representations by minimizing C 3 risk. Extensive experiments demonstrate its effectiveness.

In this context, a key question arises: what defines a “good”
MML representation? Existing methods typically define
good MML representations from two perspectives: modality consistency and modality specificity (Zhang et al., 2023a;
Ge et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2024; Dong
et al., 2024). The former emphasizes extracting modalityshared semantics related to primary events within the MML
task. This type of method (Liang et al., 2022a; Xia et al.,
2024; Abdollahzadeh et al., 2021) aims to obtain unified
representations by mapping features from different modalities into a common embedding space. In contrast, the
second perspective believes modality specificity captures
the distinct statistical properties of each modality, reflecting
different aspects of the primary events. This type of method
(Dong et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2022; Frost et al., 2015;
Zhou et al., 2021) decomposes features within each modality into modality-specific and modality-shared components,
learning all shared components while applying distance constraints on modality-specific features to enhance diversity.
However, from a causal perspective (Ahuja et al., 2020;
Koyama & Yamaguchi, 2020), these methods may result in
the learned representations being insufficient or unnecessary.
Specifically, sufficiency indicates that the use of the representations will establish the label, while necessity indicates
that the label becomes incorrect when the representations
are absent (Pearl, 2009). Figure 1 provides an example. If
the MML model only focuses on causal sufficiency, it will
lose important modality-specific semantics, affecting generalization; if the model only focuses on causal necessity, the

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Software Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to: Wenwen Qiang <qiangwenwen@iscas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

