To Each Metric Its Decoding: Post-Hoc Optimal Decision Rules of Probabilistic
Hierarchical Classifiers
Roman Plaud 1 2 Alexandre Perez-Lebel 3 4 Matthieu Labeau 1 Antoine Saillenfest 2 Thomas Bonald 1
Blur level =0

Abstract
Hierarchical classification offers an approach
to incorporate the concept of mistake severity
by leveraging a structured, labeled hierarchy.
However, decoding in such settings frequently
relies on heuristic decision rules, which may not
align with task-specific evaluation metrics. In this
work, we propose a framework for the optimal
decoding of an output probability distribution
with respect to a target metric. We derive optimal
decision rules for increasingly complex prediction
settings, providing universal algorithms when
candidates are limited to the set of nodes. In the
most general case of predicting a subset of nodes,
we focus on rules dedicated to the hierarchical
hFβ scores, tailored to hierarchical settings. To
demonstrate the practical utility of our approach,
we conduct extensive empirical evaluations,
showcasing the superiority of our proposed optimal strategies, particularly in underdetermined
scenarios. These results highlight the potential
of our methods to enhance the performance
and reliability of hierarchical classifiers in
real-world applications. The code is available
at https://github.com/RomanPlaud/
hierarchical decision rules

Blur level =3

Blur level =6

Blur level =9

hF1 opt. (ours):golden_retriever golden_retriever
Majority:golden_retriever golden_retriever
Argmax:golden_retriever golden_retriever

hunting_dog
hunting_dog
wire-haired_fox_terrier

hunting_dog
carnivore
persian_cat

Figure 1: Underdetermination amplifies decision-making disparities between decoding strategies. Predictions of three decoding strategies based on the probability estimates of a pretrained
VGG11 model, for images with blur levels σ ∈ {0, 3, 6, 9}. Correct predictions are highlighted in green, incorrect in red.

broader superclasses (Deng et al., 2009; Chang et al., 2021).
The severity of a misclassification error is then related to the
distance between the predicted class and the true class in
this hierarchy: the larger the distance, the more severe the
error. For any given hierarchy, one can define misclassification costs not only between the leaf nodes (corresponding
to the initial classes), but across all nodes of the tree, including internal nodes. It may then be interesting to allow the
prediction of internal nodes of the hierarchy. For example,
it can be difficult to distinguish between two specific types
of cancer that require different treatments. In such a case,
the best decision would probably be to predict a more general category – such as simply indicating that the patient
has cancer – allowing for a general treatment, effective for
different types of cancer.
Given a conditional probability distribution over the hierarchy, the optimal prediction can be theoretically defined as
the one minimizing the expected misclassification cost. This
principle has long been established: the optimal decision
corresponds to minimizing the conditional risk (Duda &
Hart, 1973; Berger, 1985; Smith, 2005). In the context of
hierarchical classification, misclassification costs are often
embedded in evaluation metrics that inherently reflect the
hierarchical structure and therefore encode the severity of
errors. Numerous works in the literature propose such hierarchical evaluation measures (Kosmopoulos et al., 2014;
Amigo & Delgado, 2022). However, the task of optimally
decoding from a posterior probability distribution, given a
target hierarchical metric, has received comparatively little
attention. Some optimal strategies exist for specific metrics (Bi & Kwok, 2012; Ramaswamy et al., 2015) but, in

1. Introduction
In many real-world classification tasks, the costs associated
with misclassification are not uniform (Domingos, 1999;
Elkan, 2001). In autonomous driving for instance, mistaking a lamppost for a tree is less critical than mistaking a
pedestrian for a tree. One way to model the severity of misclassifications is by organizing classes into a hierarchical
tree structure, where classes are grouped into progressively
1
Institut Polytechnique de Paris 2 Onepoint, 29 rue des
Sablons, 75016, Paris, France 3 Soda, Inria Saclay, France
4
Fundamental Technologies, USA. Correspondence to: Roman
Plaud <plaud.roman@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

