WyckoffDiff – A Generative Diffusion Model for Crystal Symmetry

Filip Ekström Kelvinius 1 Oskar B. Andersson 2 Abhijith S. Parackal 2 Dong Qian 1 Rickard Armiento 2
Fredrik Lindsten 1

Abstract

This is an aspect that only recently has been built into generative models (Jiao et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Levy et al.,
2025). Instead, models without any built-in mechanisms
that ensure symmetry in materials have and are still being
developed (Xie et al., 2022; Jiao et al., 2023; Merchant et al.,
2023; Zeni et al., 2025). As demonstrated by several works
(Levy et al., 2025; Cheetham & Seshadri, 2024; Zeni et al.,
2025), materials generated from methods without these explicit constraints often lack the symmetrical characteristics
of materials found in databases. For example, Cheetham
& Seshadri (2024) find that roughly 34 % of the materials
generated by the GNoME model (Merchant et al., 2023) belong to four different space groups of which only one exists
in the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (Belsky et al.,
2002) where it makes up only 1 %, and Zeni et al. (2025)
mention that their MatterGen model tends to generate less
symmetric structures than are present in the training data.

Crystalline materials often exhibit a high level of
symmetry. However, most generative models do
not account for symmetry, but rather model each
atom without any constraints on its position or
element. We propose a generative model, Wyckoff Diffusion (W YCKOFF D IFF), which generates
symmetry-based descriptions of crystals. This
is enabled by considering a crystal structure representation that encodes all symmetry, and we
design a novel neural network architecture which
enables using this representation inside a discrete
generative model framework. In addition to respecting symmetry by construction, the discrete
nature of our model enables fast generation. We
additionally present a new metric, Fréchet Wrenformer Distance, which captures the symmetry
aspects of the materials generated, and we benchmark W YCKOFF D IFF against recently proposed
generative models for crystal generation. As a
proof-of-concept study, we use W YCKOFF D IFF
to find new materials below the convex hull of
thermodynamical stability.

The symmetry of a material can be encoded in a protostructure description (Parackal et al., 2024, see also Section 2.1),
where elements occupy Wyckoff positions in crystal structures categorized into space groups. This description avoids
specifying the exact atomic coordinates, while maintaining the key structural information, which has been shown
to be efficient for searching for novel stable materials by
enabling an initial step where candidate crystal structures
with high likelihood of being stable are identified based on
the symmetry description alone. This step avoids wasting
computational resources on exact coordinate calculations
across all possible materials (Goodall et al., 2022). Additionally, the infinite space of continuous coordinates also
opens the risk of generating degenerate materials or structures outside of the symmetry proximity. Since materials of
high symmetry are generally the interesting materials to explore, generation of large sets of low symmetry materials is
inefficient. Explicitly encoding symmetry could allow a generative model to only generate within a space of interesting
materials of higher symmetry, allowing a symmetry-infused
generative model to generate a broader variety of relevant
crystalline materials compared to a generative model using
exact coordinate representations.

1. Introduction
Materials science is a field of research that is essential for
technological advancement. With machine learning seeing
success in a variety of fields, materials science is no exception. In the search for new materials, so called generative
models are an attractive class of methods, and a number of
models that can generate new materials have been developed (see, e.g., Park et al., 2024, for an overview). However,
crystalline materials are often characterized by their specific
symmetries, which are integral to their materials properties.
1

Department of Computer and Information Science (IDA),
Linköping University, Sweden 2 Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology (IFM), Linköping University, Sweden. Correspondence to: Filip Ekström Kelvinius or Oskar B. Andersson
<filip.ekstrom@liu.se, oskar.andersson@liu.se>.

Explicitly enforcing knowledge about symmetry in generative models for crystal structures is currently an underexplored research direction. Our approach is different from

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

