Generative Social Choice: The Next Generation
Niclas Boehmer 1 Sara Fish 2 Ariel D. Procaccia 2

Abstract

ments based on votes — can be viewed as a social choice
problem. Specifically, it is an instance of committee elections, where the statements play the role of candidates. It
is therefore possible to formalize what it means for a selection to be “representative” using powerful notions of proportionality developed in the computational social choice
literature (Aziz et al., 2017a).

A key task in certain democratic processes is to
produce a concise slate of statements that proportionally represents the full spectrum of user
opinions. This task is similar to committee elections, but unlike traditional settings, the candidate
set comprises all possible statements of varying
lengths, and so it can only be accessed through
specific queries. Combining social choice and
large language models, prior work has approached
this challenge through a framework of generative
social choice. We extend the framework in two
fundamental ways, providing theoretical guarantees even in the face of approximately optimal
queries and a budget limit on the overall length
of the slate. Using GPT-4o to implement queries,
we showcase our approach on datasets related
to city improvement measures and drug reviews,
demonstrating its effectiveness in generating representative slates from unstructured user opinions.

Our starting point is the work of Fish et al. (2024), who
propose taking a broader viewpoint: instead of restricting
the set of candidates to the specific statements submitted
by participants, we view every possible (well-formed and
reasonably concise) statement as a potential candidate. This
gives rise to two related challenges when creating “representative” sets of statements: generating consensus statements
and predicting the preferences of participants over newly
generated statements. In practice, both of these challenges,
Fish et al. (2024) argue, can be effectively addressed using
large language models (LLMs).
To simultaneously tap the theoretical rigor of social choice
and the (notoriously inscrutable) power of LLMs, Fish et al.
(2024) put forward a two-step framework: generative social
choice. In Step 1, they seek to design a democratic process
that converts survey responses into a provably representative
slate of k statements, assuming perfect answers to certain
queries, which constitute the building blocks of their process. In Step 2, they implement and validate those queries,
showing that modern LLMs (specifically, GPT-4o) can reliably (albeit imperfectly) realize them. In an end-to-end pilot
with hundreds of participants, the LLM-based democratic
process of Fish et al. (2024) generated a slate of 5 statements
that faithfully represents the views of the US population on
the topic of chatbot personalization.

1. Introduction
In the realm of AI and democracy, one of the most widely
discussed systems is Polis (Small et al., 2021). It enables
online participants to submit statements about a given policy question and vote on the statements submitted by others.
These inputs are then aggregated into a report that highlights
a subset of statements seen as representative, in that they
capture different salient viewpoints expressed by participants. Polis has been famously used in Taiwan, Australia,
and elsewhere for national-level policymaking. A closely
related system, Remesh, has been deployed by the United
Nations for peacebuilding activities (Alavi et al., 2022).1

1.1. Our Contributions

Halpern et al. (2023) observe that the task performed by
these systems — selecting a representative subset of state-

In our opinion, the framework of Fish et al. (2024) provides
a compelling vision for how AI can support democratic
innovation. But their implementation is, at this point, largely
a proof of concept; there is much more work to do before
generative social choice can be put into practice. In this
paper, we make progress in this direction by enhancing
generative social choice along two distinct dimensions.

1

Hasso Plattner Institute, Germany 2 Harvard University, USA.
Correspondence to: Niclas Boehmer <Niclas.Boehmer@hpi.de>,
Sara Fish <sfish@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Polis and Remesh are both examples of collective response
systems (Ovadya, 2023).

1. Costs and budgets. The number k of statements put in
the slate can be chosen to match the attention span of
1

