Emergent Symbolic Mechanisms Support
Abstract Reasoning in Large Language Models

Yukang Yang 1 Declan Campbell 2 Kaixuan Huang 1 Mengdi Wang 1 Jonathan Cohen 2 Taylor Webb 3

Abstract

2022; Mirchandani et al., 2023), even rivaling human performance in some cases (Webb et al., 2023; Musker et al.,
2024; Webb et al., 2025), but other studies have questioned
these conclusions (Wu et al., 2024; McCoy et al., 2023;
Lewis & Mitchell, 2024). In particular, LLMs appear to
perform more poorly in some reasoning domains, such as
mathematical reasoning (Dziri et al., 2024) or planning (Momennejad et al., 2024); and, even in domains in which they
have shown strong performance such as analogical reasoning (Webb et al., 2023), some studies have questioned the
robustness of these capabilities (Lewis & Mitchell, 2024).

Many recent studies have found evidence for
emergent reasoning capabilities in large language
models (LLMs), but debate persists concerning
the robustness of these capabilities, and the extent to which they depend on structured reasoning mechanisms. To shed light on these issues,
we study the internal mechanisms that support
abstract reasoning in LLMs. We identify an emergent symbolic architecture that implements abstract reasoning via a series of three computations.
In early layers, symbol abstraction heads convert input tokens to abstract variables based on
the relations between those tokens. In intermediate layers, symbolic induction heads perform
sequence induction over these abstract variables.
Finally, in later layers, retrieval heads predict
the next token by retrieving the value associated
with the predicted abstract variable. These results point toward a resolution of the longstanding
debate between symbolic and neural network approaches, suggesting that emergent reasoning in
neural networks depends on the emergence of
symbolic mechanisms.

These conflicting findings raise the question: are LLMs genuinely capable of structured human-like reasoning, or are
they merely mimicking this capacity by statistically approximating their training data? One way to answer this question is to look at the internal mechanisms that support this
capacity. It has long been hypothesized that innate symbolprocessing mechanisms are required to support human-like
abstraction (Marcus, 2001; Dehaene et al., 2022; Wong et al.,
2023). It has also been demonstrated that neural networks
are capable, at least in principle, of implementing some of
the key properties of symbolic systems (Smolensky, 1990;
Hummel & Holyoak, 2003; Kriete et al., 2013), and that
the incorporation of these properties as architectural inductive biases can support data-efficient acquisition of abstract
symbolic reasoning (Webb et al., 2021; Altabaa et al., 2024;
Webb et al., 2024). It remains unclear, however, in the case
of transformer-based LLMs that do not obviously possess
such strong inductive biases, what mechanisms support their
emergent capability for abstraction.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become the dominant paradigm in artificial intelligence, but there is ongoing
debate concerning the limits and reliability of their capabilities. One major focus of this debate has been the question
of whether they can reason systematically in an abstract or
human-like manner. Many studies have documented impressive performance on various reasoning tasks (Wei et al.,

Here, we report evidence for a set of emergent symbolic mechanisms that support abstract reasoning in LLMs.
Specifically, we identify an emergent three-stage architecture consisting of the following mechanisms: 1) in early
layers, symbol abstraction heads convert input tokens to
abstract variables (i.e., symbols) based on the relations between those tokens, 2) in intermediate layers, symbolic
induction heads, perform sequence induction over these
variables, and 3) in later layers, retrieval heads perform
next-token prediction by retrieving the value associated with
the predicted variable. These mechanisms capture two key
properties of symbol processing. First, they operate over

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 2 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 3 Microsoft Research,
New York, NY. Correspondence to: Taylor Webb <taylor.w.webb@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

