Topology-Aware Dynamic Reweighting for Distribution Shifts on Graph

Weihuang Zheng * 1 Jiashuo Liu * 2 Jiaxing Li 1 Jiayun Wu 2 Peng Cui 2 Youyong Kong 1

Abstract

become cornerstone models for node classification. However, these GNN models typically assume that the training
and test graph data are drawn from the same distribution,
which does not always hold in practice. In real-world graph
data, sample selection bias (Fan et al., 2022; He et al., 2020)
and the methods used for graph construction (Qiao et al.,
2018; Zhou et al., 2023) often brings distribution shifts
between training nodes and test nodes. For instance, In
WebKB (Pei et al., 2020) datasets, web pages (nodes) and
categories (labels) are heavily affected by the university
they originate from, leading to distribution shifts among
nodes drawn from different universities. Therefore, addressing distribution shifts is crucial to improving the practical
effectiveness of GNNs for node classification.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely used
for node classification tasks but often fail to generalize when training and test nodes come from
different distributions, limiting their practicality.
To address this challenge, recent approaches have
adopted invariant learning and sample reweighting techniques from the out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization field. However, invariant learningbased methods face difficulties when applied to
graph data, as they rely on the impractical assumption of obtaining real environment labels
and strict invariance, which may not hold in realworld graph structures. Moreover, current sample
reweighting methods tend to overlook topological information, potentially leading to suboptimal
results. In this work, we introduce the TopologyAware Dynamic Reweighting (TAR) framework
to address distribution shifts by leveraging the
inherent graph structure. TAR dynamically adjusts sample weights through gradient flow on the
graph edges during training. Instead of relying
on strict invariance assumptions, we theoretically
prove that our method is able to provide distributional robustness, thereby enhancing the out-ofdistribution generalization performance on graph
data. Our framework’s superiority is demonstrated through standard testing on extensive node
classification OOD datasets, exhibiting marked
improvements over existing methods.

To address the distribution shift problem on the node classification task, recent works (Wu et al., 2021; Xia et al.,
2024; Wu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023) adopt the idea of
invariant learning. Invariant learning (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2021a) stems from the causal inference literature, and now becomes one of the key approaches to solve
distribution shifts problem on graphs. The core concept of
invariant learning is to identify invariant features with stable
prediction mechanisms across different environments (distributions), thereby mitigating performance degradation under
distribution shifts. Despite its success, methods based on
invariant learning are built upon strong invariance assumptions that lack further validation for their actual validity (Liu
et al., 2024). In different environments, invariant features
may not exist, as the environment can influence the mapping
relationship between features and labels. For example, in
social networks, users with the same profile (age, interests,
etc.) may exhibit different behaviors depending on their
location. In region A (where personalized ads are allowed),
they may frequently click on ads, while in region B (where
privacy regulations limit ad tracking), their click-through
rate may significantly decrease.

1. Introduction
Node classification tasks have widespread applications in
real life, such as advertising recommendation (Jiang et al.,
2023), social network anomaly detection (Tang et al., 2022),
and more. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have

Besides, sample reweighting methods, particularly those
based on distributionally robust optimization (DRO), have
also been used to address distribution shifts in graph data
(Hu & Hong, 2013; Wang et al., 2024; Gui et al., 2022).
These methods reweight the probability distribution of training samples within a predefined distribution set to identify
the worst-case distribution under which the model performs
the poorest. By optimizing against this worst-case distribu-

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University 2 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Youyong
Kong <kongyouyong@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

