Divide and Conquer: Grounding LLMs as Efficient Decision-Making Agents
via Offline Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Zican Hu 1 2 * Wei Liu 3 Xiaoye Qu 2 Xiangyu Yue 4 Chunlin Chen 1 Zhi Wang 1 2
high planer

Abstract

Hier

Task: boiling water

While showing sophisticated reasoning abilities,
large language models (LLMs) still struggle with
long-horizon decision-making tasks due to deficient exploration and long-term credit assignment,
especially in sparse-reward scenarios. Inspired
by the divide-and-conquer principle, we propose
an innovative framework GLIDER (Grounding
Language Models as EffIcient Decision-Making
Agents via Offline HiErarchical Reinforcement
Learning) that introduces a parameter-efficient
and generally applicable hierarchy to LLM policies. We develop a scheme where the low-level
controller is supervised with abstract, step-bystep plans that are learned and instructed by
the high-level policy. This design decomposes
complicated problems into a series of coherent
chain-of-thought reasoning sub-tasks, providing
flexible temporal abstraction to significantly enhance exploration and learning for long-horizon
tasks. Furthermore, GLIDER facilitates fast online adaptation to non-stationary environments
owing to the strong transferability of its taskagnostic low-level skills. Experiments on ScienceWorld and ALFWorld benchmarks show that
GLIDER achieves consistent performance gains,
along with enhanced generalization capabilities.

Yu Cheng 4

w/o Hier

68.34
53.94

go to kitchen low executor

1. open kitchen door
2. go to kitchen
: in kitchen

prepare tools

1. pick up pot
2. take thermometer
: prepare done

filling water

1. move pot to sink
2. activate sink
: sink is broken

Figure 1: GLIDER’s hierarchical framework, showing significant performance gain over non-hierarchical approaches.
2024). Recent attempts to exploit large language models
(LLMs) as agents have shown commendable results in tackling interactive decision-making tasks (Li et al., 2022; Yao
et al., 2023b; Song et al., 2024). Prompt-based methods, like
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023),
recursively augment the prompt to a frozen LLM with verbal feedback. They are prone to exceed the input length
limit of in-context learning, especially for long-horizon
tasks. Scaling with supervised fine-tuning techniques can
further unlock the potential of LLMs for downstream applications (Zeng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Lin et al.,
2023). However, their performance is highly dependent on
expensive expert demonstrations and can be limited due to
deficient exploration of target environments.

1. Introduction
A longstanding goal of artificial general intelligence is to
build agents capable of reasoning, decision-making, and
communication (Wooldridge & Jennings, 1995; Xu et al.,

Intelligent agents must excel at both imitating demonstrations and adapting behaviors through trial-and-error (Silver
et al., 2021; Rafailov et al., 2023). Modern approaches adopt
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to steer LLMs toward user-specified tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022), such as
offline Q-learning (Snell et al., 2023), PPO (Zhai et al.,
2024; Szot et al., 2024), or DPO (Song et al., 2024). This
paradigm enables SOTA performance in advanced LLMs
like OpenAI o1 and DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025). However, RL intrinsically requires tedious and vast environment
interactions, leading to brittle performance and poor sam-

1

Nanjing University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 4 The Chinese University
of Hong Kong. * Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding Authors: Zhi Wang <zhiwang@nju.edu.cn>, Yu
Cheng <chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>. The code is available at
https://github.com/NJU-RL/GLIDER.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

