Safety Certificate against Latent Variables with Partially Unidentifiable
Dynamics

Haoming Jing 1 Yorie Nakahira 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Existing control techniques often assume access
to complete dynamics or perfect simulators with
fully observable states, which are necessary to
verify whether the system remains within a safe
set (forward invariance) or safe actions are persistently feasible at all times. However, many
systems contain latent variables that make their
dynamics partially unidentifiable or cause distribution shifts in the observed statistics between
offline and online data, even when the underlying mechanistic dynamics are unchanged. Such
“spurious” distribution shifts can break many techniques that use data to learn system models or
safety certificates. To address this limitation, we
propose a technique for designing probabilistic
safety certificates for systems with latent variables.
A key technical enabler is the formulation of invariance conditions in probability space, which
can be constructed using observed statistics in
the presence of distribution shifts due to latent
variables. We use this invariance condition to construct a safety certificate that can be implemented
efficiently in real-time control. The proposed
safety certificate can persistently find feasible actions that control long-term risk to stay within
tolerance. Stochastic safe control and (causal)
reinforcement learning have been studied in isolation until now. To the best of our knowledge, the
proposed work is the first to use causal reinforcement learning to quantify long-term risk for the
design of safety certificates. This integration enables safety certificates to efficiently ensure longterm safety in the presence of latent variables. The
effectiveness of the proposed safety certificate is
demonstrated in numerical simulations.

Autonomous control systems must operate safely even in
the presence of latent variables. For instance, autonomous
ground vehicles must anticipate objects suddenly emerging from behind occlusions or pedestrians unexpectedly
changing their intent to cross the road. In such scenarios,
risk-critical variables may be unobservable. These latent
variables can induce distribution shifts between offline and
online settings in visible variables and render the partial
models associated with the latent variables unidentifiable.
Therefore, in the design of control policies, one must explicitly differentiate between statistical models (Schölkopf
et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2024), which capture correlations
in observed states, and mechanistic models, which encode
the causal structure of the system. Designing safety certificates directly from data without this distinction can lead to
vulnerabilities from spurious distribution shifts–divergence
between offline versus online statistics even when the underlying dynamics remain unchanged (see Section 2.2 for
mathematical details). Moreover, the effects of latent variables on observed states may remain subtle within a short
time horizon, but by the time they become apparent, corrective action may no longer be feasible. For example, if a
child suddenly emerges from behind a large bus, the vehicle
may not have sufficient time to stop safely. The presence of
such irrecoverable states further complicates safety assurance. While myopic safety can often be efficiently enforced,
it is insufficient for ensuring long-term safety. However,
the complexity of safety assurance increases unfavorably
with the time horizon, particularly in the presence of latent
variables.
Motivated by these challenges, this paper explores the following research question:
How can we efficiently assure long-term safety for stochastic
systems in the presence of latent variables, which induce
distribution shifts in offline vs. online statistics and partially
unobservable dynamics?

1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Yorie
Nakahira <ynakahir@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Existing safety certificates often rely on complete system
models or fully observable states to verify whether the system remains within a safe set and whether safe actions exist continuously (Hsu et al., 2023; Wabersich et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

