Understanding and Mitigating Miscalibration in Prompt Tuning for
Vision-Language Models

Shuoyuan Wang 1 Yixuan Li 2 Hongxin Wei 1

Abstract

tation (Liang et al., 2023) and knowledge-augmented retrieval (Ming & Li, 2024). To efficiently adapt CLIP
to domain-specific downstream tasks, various parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques, such as prompt
tuning (Zhou et al., 2022b) and adapter (Gao et al., 2024),
have been proposed. While these methods improve accuracy, they largely overlook reliability concerns such as
confidence calibration in fine-tuned CLIP. Without fully understanding the miscalibration in fine-tuned CLIP, it can
exacerbate safety concerns in high-stakes applications like
medical diagnosis and autonomous driving.

Confidence calibration is critical for the safe deployment of machine learning models in the real
world. However, such issue in vision-language
models like CLIP, particularly after fine-tuning,
has not been fully addressed. In this work, we
demonstrate that existing prompt tuning methods
usually lead to a trade-off of calibration between
base and new classes: the cross-entropy loss used
in standard prompt tuning (e.g., CoOp) causes
overconfidence in new classes by increasing textual label divergence, whereas regularizationbased tuning (e.g., KgCoOp) maintains the confidence level but results in underconfidence in base
classes due to the improved accuracy. Inspired by
the observations, we introduce Dynamic Outlier
Regularization (DOR) to ensure the confidence
calibration on both base and new classes after finetuning. In particular, DOR minimizes the feature
deviation of novel textual labels (instead of base
classes) sampled from a large vocabulary set. In
effect, DOR prevents the increase in textual divergence for new labels while easing restrictions
on base classes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DOR can notably enhance the calibration performance of current fine-tuning methods.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ml-statSustech/Outlier-Calibration.

In confidence calibration, we generally expect the model’s
confidence level to be consistent with its empirical accuracy (Tu et al., 2023). In the literature, zero-shot CLIP is
often recognized for its excellent performance in confidence
calibration (Minderer et al., 2021). Prior work (Wang et al.,
2024) has shown that fine-tuning CLIP on base classes often
leads to miscalibration on novel classes within the same
task, where the model is expected to generalize (Zhou et al.,
2022b; Yao et al., 2023). While these studies focus on
miscalibration in novel classes unseen during fine-tuning,
they do not adequately address calibration issues on base
classes. Overall, the community still lacks a comprehensive
understanding of the fundamental cause of miscalibration
in fine-tuned CLIP and effective strategies for mitigation.
In this work, we first investigate how existing prompt tuning methods affect the confidence calibration of CLIP. In
general, these methods can be fell into two categories: standard fine-tuning (e.g., CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b)) and
regularization-based fine-tuning (e.g., KgCoOp (Yao et al.,
2023)). Our empirical analysis first reveals that both approaches struggle to maintain calibration across base and
novel classes simultaneously, inevitably compromising one:
CoOp exhibits overconfidence on new classes while KgCoOp provides underconfident predictions on base classes.
To thoroughly understand such a phenomenon, we explain
it from the perspective of textual feature divergence. In
particular, CoOp increases the divergence of textual label
distribution through cross-entropy loss, resulting in excessively high confidence misaligned with actual accuracy on
new classes. Conversely, KgCoOp constrains the divergence
increase, preserving confidence levels across both base and

1. Introduction
Large pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) like
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) have become the de facto
standard in today’s zero-shot tasks including image recognition (Wortsman et al., 2022), open-vocabulary segmen1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. 2 Department of
Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA.
Correspondence to: Hongxin Wei <weihx@sustech.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

