The Butterfly Effect: Neural Network Training Trajectories Are
Highly Sensitive to Initial Conditions

Gül Sena Altıntaş * 1 2 Devin Kwok * 3 4 Colin Raffel 1 2 David Rolnick 3 4

Abstract

3

θT′

CE

Neural network training is inherently sensitive
to initialization and the randomness induced by
stochastic gradient descent. However, it is unclear
to what extent such effects lead to meaningfully
different networks, either in terms of the models’ weights or the underlying functions that were
learned. In this work, we show that during the
initial “chaotic” phase of training, even extremely
small perturbations reliably causes otherwise identical training trajectories to diverge—an effect
that diminishes rapidly over training time. We
quantify this divergence through (i) L2 distance
between parameters, (ii) the loss barrier when interpolating between networks, (iii) L2 and barrier
between parameters after permutation alignment,
and (iv) representational similarity between intermediate activations; revealing how perturbations
across different hyperparameter or fine-tuning settings drive training trajectories toward distinct
loss minima. Our findings provide insights into
neural network training stability, with practical
implications for fine-tuning, model merging, and
diversity of model ensembles. 1

θt′
+εt
θ0

θt

t = 0.0%

θt∗∗
+ε

θT∗

t∗

θ t⋆

t = 0.5%

θT

t = 2.0%

2
1
0

10 6 10 4 10 2
t = 10.0%

t = 50.0%

Figure 1. Left: illustration of the “butterfly effect”: a network θ0
is trained until time t and perturbed by ε early (εt ) or later (εt∗ )
in training. Both copies are trained deterministically until T and
their divergence is measured (purple loss basins). Right: barriers
(training cross-entropy loss) at T versus perturbation magnitude
(σ = 1 is the network’s initialization scale). A perturbation of as
little as one weight (leftmost points) reliably causes divergence
when applied early, but not when applied at later t (colors).

parameterize identical or similar functions.
Although training instability affects convergence in general
(Iyer et al., 2023; Jastrzebski et al., 2020), it also prevents
different runs of the same network from consistently reaching one particular solution, which has practical implications
for model merging (Singh & Jaggi, 2020; Ainsworth et al.,
2023) and ensembling. Prior work has categorized training into chaotic (early) and stable (late) phases (Fort et al.,
2020; Frankle et al., 2020a), but it is not clear if instability
is more a product of noise (e.g. batch noise, data augmentations, GPU indeterminacy), a network’s current state (e.g.
random vs. pre-trained), or the training procedure itself
(e.g. optimizer and hyperparameter selection). A thorough
understanding of instability should disentangle these factors, since their influence may vary over training time and
between different settings. Furthermore, depending on the
task, not all of these factors can be controlled— when finetuning a pre-trained model one can vary hyperparameters
but not the initial weights, for instance, while the opposite
may be true when pre-training the same model.

1. Introduction
Neural network training is known to be unstable in the sense
that noise can disrupt convergence to a particular minimum
(Frankle et al., 2020a; Wu et al., 2018). This is true even
when considering solutions that perform equally well, since
symmetries and connected minima in the loss landscape
give rise to many different ways for a neural network to
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute
McGill University 4 Mila – Quebec AI Institute. Correspondence
to: Gül Sena Altıntaş <gsaltintas@cs.toronto.edu>, Devin Kwok
<devin.kwok@mail.mcgill.ca>.
3

These limitations motivate us to study training stability absent the effects of noise. Drawing from the dynamical systems perspective, we consider how much a deterministic
training map diverges when a controlled perturbation is applied to its initial conditions (i.e. the starting weights of a
network). By selecting initial weights from models trained

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
gsaltintas/lmc

1

