FIC-TSC: Learning Time Series Classification
with Fisher Information Constraint
Xiwen Chen 1 Wenhui Zhu 2 Peijie Qiu 3 Hao Wang 1 Huayu Li 4
Zihan Li 5 Yalin Wang 2 Aristeidis Sotiras 3 Abolfazl Razi 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Time series analysis is crucial in a wide range of applications, such as network traffic management (Ferreira et al.,
2023), healthcare (Vrba & Robinson, 2001; Niknazar &
Mednick, 2024), environmental science (Wu et al., 2023b),
and economics (Sezer et al., 2020). This is due to the fact
that much of the data they generate or collect naturally follows a time series format. Representative examples include
stock prices in finance, electrocardiogram (ECG) signals in
healthcare monitoring, and network traffic, activity logs, and
social media data. In this work, we focus on the study of the
time series classification (TSC) problem, one of the most
important tasks in time series analysis (Bagnall et al., 2017;
Chen et al., 2024; Ruiz et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024c),
which enables the categorization of these data sequences
into distinct behaviors or outcomes.

Analyzing time series data is crucial to a wide
spectrum of applications, including economics,
online marketplaces, and human healthcare. In
particular, time series classification plays an indispensable role in segmenting different phases
in stock markets, predicting customer behavior,
and classifying worker actions and engagement
levels. These aspects contribute significantly to
the advancement of automated decision-making
and system optimization in real-world applications. However, there is a large consensus that
time series data often suffers from domain shifts
between training and test sets, which dramatically
degrades the classification performance. Despite
the success of (reversible) instance normalization
in handling the domain shifts for time series regression tasks, its performance in classification
is unsatisfactory. In this paper, we propose FICTSC, a training framework for time series classification that leverages Fisher information as the
constraint. We theoretically and empirically show
this is an efficient and effective solution to guide
the model converge toward flatter minima, which
enhances its generalizability to distribution shifts.
We rigorously evaluate our method on 30 UEA
multivariate and 85 UCR univariate datasets. Our
empirical results demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method over 14 recent state-of-theart methods.

There is broad consensus that time series data often experiences training/testing domain shifts, where the testing
time series distribution differs significantly from that of
the training data, resulting in a significant drop in performance (Kim et al., 2022b). This domain shift issue is largely
attributed to several factors, including sensor variability, environmental changes, differences in measurement or preprocessing methods, and data collection at different times.
A common approaches to mitigate domain shifts involve
designing normalization to reduce domain-specific biases,
enhance feature invariance, mitigate covariate shifts, and
promote more generalizable representation learning (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015; Ulyanov et al., 2016; Wu & He, 2018;
Li et al., 2018). One representative normalization method
is Reversible Instance Normalization (RevIN, Kim et al.,
2022b; Liu et al., 2023), which has been widely used in
time series forecasting (regression) tasks. However, adjusting normalization may pose significant challenges to
model training, e.g., gradient instability, increased sensitivity to hyperparameters, difficulty in optimizing the loss
landscape, and potential overfitting to the training domain.
Consequently, this leads to a mismatch between training and
inference loss (Dinh et al., 2017b; Zhou et al., 2021). More
importantly, its effectiveness in time series classification
remains unexplored in previous literature.

1

Clemson University, USA. 2 Arizona State University, USA.
Washington University in St. Louis, USA. 4 University of Arizona,
USA 5 University of Massachusetts Boston, USA . Correspondence to: Xiwen Chen <xiwenc@g.clemson.edu>, Abolfazl Razi
<arazi@clemson.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

