PARM: Multi-Objective Test-Time Alignment via Preference-Aware
Autoregressive Reward Model

Baijiong Lin 1 Weisen Jiang 2 Yuancheng Xu 3 Hao Chen 4 Ying-Cong Chen 1 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

The alignment of large language models (LLMs) is crucial
to ensure that their outputs reflect human values (Wang et al.,
2023; Casper et al., 2024). In practice, human preferences
and values are often multifaceted and may conflict. For
example, users may expect LLM responses to be simultaneously helpful, harmless, and humorous. These competing
objectives pose a challenge for single-objective alignment
methods to meet such complex demands. To address this,
multi-objective alignment enables LLMs to dynamically adjust trade-offs among different preference dimensions based
on specific user needs (represented as a preference vector).

Multi-objective test-time alignment aims to adapt
large language models (LLMs) to diverse multidimensional user preferences during inference
while keeping LLMs frozen. Recently, GenARM
(Xu et al., 2025) first independently trains Autoregressive Reward Models (ARMs) for each
preference dimension without awareness of each
other, then combines their outputs based on userspecific preference vectors during inference to
achieve multi-objective test-time alignment, leading to two key limitations: the need for multiple ARMs increases the inference cost, and the
separate training of ARMs causes the misalignment between the guided generation and the user
preferences. To address these issues, we propose
Preference-aware ARM (PARM), a single unified
ARM trained across all preference dimensions.
PARM uses our proposed Preference-Aware Bilinear Low-Rank Adaptation (PBLoRA), which
employs a bilinear form to condition the ARM
on preference vectors, enabling it to achieve precise control over preference trade-offs during inference. Experiments demonstrate that PARM
reduces inference costs and achieves better alignment with preference vectors compared with existing methods. Additionally, PARM enables weakto-strong guidance, allowing a smaller PARM to
guide a larger frozen LLM without expensive
training, making multi-objective alignment accessible with limited computing resources. The
code is available at https://github.com/
Baijiong-Lin/PARM.

Current multi-objective alignment methods (Zhou et al.,
2024; Rame et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2024a; Guo et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b; Zhong et al.,
2024) require extensive computations for LLM training that
many researchers and practitioners cannot access when the
LLM is large (e.g., with 65B parameters). Different from
existing methods, we focus on multi-objective test-time
alignment that trains a small reward model rather than the
original LLM, reducing computation cost largely and making multi-objective alignment accessible with limited computing resources.
GenARM (Xu et al., 2025), the recent state-of-the-art testtime alignment method, introduces an Autoregressive Reward Model (ARM) to predict token-level rewards for guiding the generation of frozen LLMs during inference, resulting in effective and efficient test-time alignment. However,
when adapted to multi-objective settings, GenARM requires
training an ARM for each objective. During inference, each
ARM computes its respective next-token reward, and the
LLM’s generation is guided by a weighted sum of these rewards using the given preference vector as weights. Hence,
GenARM faces two main limitations in multi-objective testtime alignment: (i) the need for multiple ARMs generation
increases the inference cost, and (ii) the separate training of ARMs leads to potential misalignment between the
guided generation and the specified preference vector.

1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
University of Maryland, College Park 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Baijiong Lin <bj.lin.email@gmail.com>, Ying-Cong Chen <yingcongchen@ust.hk>.

To address these limitations, we propose preference-aware
ARM (PARM) to achieve effective and efficient multiobjective test-time alignment. Unlike GenARM, which

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

