On Learning Parallel Pancakes with Mostly Uniform Weights

Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Daniel M. Kane 2 Sushrut Karmalkar 3 4 Jasper C.H. Lee 5 Thanasis Pittas 1

Abstract

which is one of the most studied problems in statistics and
machine learning, with a large body of research over the past
few decades, e.g., Vempala & Wang (2002); Kannan et al.
(2005); Achlioptas & McSherry (2005) — see Appendix A
for a detailed literature review.

We study the complexity of learning k-mixtures
of Gaussians (k-GMMs) on Rd . This task is
known to have complexity dΩ(k) in full generality.
To circumvent this exponential lower bound on
the number of components, research has focused
on learning families of GMMs satisfying additional structural properties. A natural assumption
posits that the component weights are not exponentially small and that the components have the
same unknown covariance. Recent work gave a
dO(log(1/wmin )) -time algorithm for this class of
GMMs, where wmin is the minimum weight. Our
first main result is a Statistical Query (SQ) lower
bound showing that this quasi-polynomial upper
bound is essentially best possible, even for the
special case of uniform weights. Specifically, we
show that it is SQ-hard to distinguish between
such a mixture and the standard Gaussian. We
further explore how the distribution of weights
affects the complexity of this task. Our second
main result is a quasi-polynomial upper bound for
the aforementioned testing task when most of the
weights are uniform while a small fraction of the
weights are potentially arbitrary.

The setup is as follows: the learning algorithm observes
i.i.d. samples from a k-component GMM model (k-GMM)
Pk
in Rd , P = i=1 wi N (µi , Σi ), and the goal is to either
learn the mixture in total variation distance, learn its parameters, or cluster samples from the GMM correctly. The first
task is known to be information-theoretically feasible with
poly(d, k) samples, as are the second and third, provided
the components are sufficiently well-separated, however
known algorithms often require more. While the particular
case of spherical mixtures (i.e., Σi = I) can be learned in
poly(d, k) time and samples, (Liu & Li, 2022; Diakonikolas
& Kane, 2024), the best-known algorithms for learning arbitrary GMMs (i.e. with arbitrary weights, and arbitrary and
different component covariances) have sample complexity
that scales with dO(k) (Bakshi et al., 2022). In this paper,
we are concerned with an intermediate regime between the
two extremes, where the components share an unknown but
common covariance matrix.
Diakonikolas et al. (2017) showed that for such mixtures,
any sub-exponential time algorithm in the Statistical Query
(SQ) model requires a sample complexity of dΩ(k) . The
SQ model consists of algorithms that, instead of drawing
samples from the data distribution, make queries to approximate expectations of bounded functions (formally defined
in Definition 1.2).

1. Introduction
Learning mixture models in high dimensions is a classic and
fundamental task with applications in a plethora of domains,
such as bioinformatics, astrophysics, and marketing (Lindsay, 1995; Garcı́a-Escudero et al., 2010); see Titterington
et al. (1985) for an extensive list of applications. The prototypical case is that of Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs)

The hard instances they proposed are “parallel pancakes”
GMMs—mixtures of pairwise-separated Gaussians whose
component means are collinear along an unknown direction
v, with arbitrary variance in the v-direction and identity
covariance in the orthogonal subspace. This will be
formally defined in Problem 1.1. Bruna et al. (2021);
Gupte et al. (2022) further extended the hardness result to
general algorithms but under cryptographic assumptions;
similar hardness results were also shown for sum-of-squares
algorithms (Diakonikolas et al., 2024).

Author names in alphabetical order 1 Department of Computer
Sciences, University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, United
States 2 University of California San Diego, San Diego, United
States 3 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, England 4 Some of this
work was done while the author was a postdoctoral researcher
at UW-Madison. 5 University of California Davis, Davis, United
States. Correspondence to: Thanasis Pittas <pittas@wisc.edu>.

While these results together might suggest that k-GMM
learning is fully understood algorithmically, the current
theory remains unsatisfactory, in the following sense: the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

