GRADEO: Towards Human-Like Evaluation for Text-to-Video Generation
via Multi-Step Reasoning

Zhun Mou 1 Bin Xia 2 Zhengchao Huang 1 Wenming Yang 1 Jiaya Jia 3

Abstract

Question: Can you evaluate the creativity of this video ?
The video portrays an intense,
futuristic arena scene featuring two
large robots engaging in a confrontation
with another central robot…

Assessment

The video exhibits a high degree of
creativity by blending futuristic and
competitive themes in a visually
captivating way…

Analysis

Description

Existing Metrics
Directly Give Score
(Scaled to 1-5)

Overview

Generated Video

understanding perception

(Rate it in 1-5. 1 means low creativity, 5 means high creativity)

Recent great advances in video generation models have demonstrated their potential to produce
high-quality videos, bringing challenges to effective evaluation. Unlike human evaluation, existing automated evaluation metrics lack highlevel semantic understanding and reasoning capabilities for video, thus making them infeasible
and unexplainable. To fill this gap, we curate
GRADEO-Instruct, a multi-dimensional T2V
evaluation instruction tuning dataset, including
3.3k videos from over 10 existing video generation models and multi-step reasoning assessments
converted by 16k human annotations. We then
introduce GRADEO, one of the first specifically
designed video evaluation models, which grades
AI-generated videos for explainable scores and
assessments through multi-step reasoning. Experiments show that our method aligns better with
human evaluations than existing methods. Furthermore, our benchmarking reveals that current
video generation models struggle to produce content that aligns with human reasoning and complex real-world scenarios.

GRADEO

Figure 1: Traditional evaluation methods, limited by small
datasets and model parameters, suffer from three key issues:
(1) inability to accurately understand video content, (2) lack
of explainability with only score outputs, and (3) a focus
on low-level features like video quality, neglecting highlevel aspects such as rationality, safety and creativity. We
propose GRADEO, a novel approach that leverages humanlike reasoning for comprehensive video evaluation, enabling
accurate and interpretable assessments.
completely wrong videos. (Huang et al., 2024; Liu et al.,
2024b;c; Kou et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Bansal et al.,
2024) Thus, there is a significant demand for automated
frameworks that can objectively, accurately, and efficiently
evaluate T2V models across diverse test sets, facilitating
continuous performance and quality improvements.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in Text-to-Video (T2V) generation
models (Zhang et al., 2024a; Guo et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024b; Zheng et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024) have led to
remarkable advancements in the field, demonstrating the
potential to generate long-duration and realistic videos.
However, existing models still generate hallucinated content, videos that do not align with real-world scenarios, or

Early T2V generation evaluation method (Chivileva et al.,
2023) introduces the T2V-CL framework, which focuses on
image naturalness and text similarity but oversimplifies the
evaluation. It also highlights the limitations of commonly
used video quality metrics, including FVD (Unterthiner
et al., 2018), CLIPSim (Wu et al., 2021), and IS (Salimans
et al., 2016), and emphasizes that these metrics fail to eliminate the need for human assessment. While human preference remains the gold standard, it is not scalable to meet
the growing demand for AI-generated video content. To
automatically and comprehensively evaluate AI-generated
videos, EvalCrafter (Liu et al., 2024b) and Vbench (Huang
et al., 2024) propose detailed evaluation frameworks with
hierarchical dimensions and automatic metrics, validated by
human evaluations. On the other hand, some studies (Wu

1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen, China 2 CSE department, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,China 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong,China. Correspondence to:
Wenming Yang <yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

