The Sample Complexity of Online Strategic Decision Making with Information
Asymmetry and Knowledge Transportability

Jiachen Hu 1 Rui Ai 2 Han Zhong 3 Xiaoyu Chen 4 Liwei Wang 3 4 Zhaoran Wang 5 Zhuoran Yang 6

Abstract

their diverse private information and their drive to maximize
individual rewards, which give rise to what is termed information asymmetry (Myerson, 1982; Gan et al., 2022a).
Due to information asymmetry, the agents always strategically choose their actions according to the predetermined
and publicly known policy of the principal, while keeping their private information concealed from the principal’s
awareness. Here, we say agents are “strategical” because
they will choose their strategic actions based on personal
types and aim at maximum obtainment. A famous example
in economics is the generalized principal-agent problem
(Myerson, 1982), where a principal interacts with several
myopic agents with private types and type-based strategic
bidding.

Information asymmetry is a pervasive feature of
multi-agent systems, especially evident in economics and social sciences. In these settings,
agents tailor their actions based on private information to maximize their rewards. These strategic
behaviors often introduce complexities due to confounding variables. Simultaneously, knowledge
transportability poses another significant challenge, arising from the difficulties of conducting
experiments in target environments. It requires
transferring knowledge from environments where
empirical data is more readily available. Against
these backdrops, this paper explores a fundamental question in online learning: Can we employ
non-i.i.d. actions to learn about confounders even
when requiring knowledge transfer? We present
a sample-efficient algorithm designed to accurately identify system dynamics under information asymmetry and to navigate the challenges of
knowledge transfer effectively in reinforcement
learning, framed within an online strategic interaction model. Our method provably achieves learning of an ϵ-optimal policy with a tight sample
complexity of Õ(1/ϵ2 ).

On the other hand, it’s also common and sometimes necessary for the learner in machine learning to generalize the
knowledge from one domain to other related domains, which
is often referred to as transfer learning (Zhuang et al., 2020).
Similar phenomena have also been observed in casual inference, which is known as knowledge transportability (Pearl
& Bareinboim, 2011). Knowledge transportability studies the problem of transferring information learned from
experiments to different environments, where conducting
active experiments is difficult or unfeasible but only passive observations are allowed. Social problems, particularly
medical issues, frequently involve instances of knowledge
transportability (Pearl & Bareinboim, 2011; Bareinboim &
Pearl, 2013). A motivating example is to transfer the learned
effect of a treatment from one population (e.g., experiments
done in New York City) with a large number of samples to
other populations where massive experiments might be not
available (e.g., investigating the outcome of that treatment
in Los Angeles).

1. Introduction
Multi-agent systems are widely applied in reinforcement
learning (RL) (Littman, 1994; Wang et al., 2019; Dubey
& Pentland, 2021), economics (Brero et al., 2022), social
science (Sabater & Sierra, 2005), and robotics (Yan et al.,
2013). In systems like these, agents are characterized by

In this paper, we hope to theoretically study online decisionmaking under information asymmetry arising from the
agents’ side and knowledge transportability needed by the
principal. Inspired by the generalized principal-agent problem, we model a scenario in which a principal sequentially
interacts with a series of agents. Each agent, driven by shortterm objectives, myopically maximizes her rewards based
on her private information (Zhong et al., 2021). This model
captures the dynamics of a principal engaging with a con-

1

School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Institute for
Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 Center for Data Science, Peking University 4 National Key
Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 5 Northwestern
University 6 Yale University. Correspondence to: Zhuoran Yang
<zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

