Global Optimization with a Power-Transformed Objective and Gaussian
Smoothing

Chen Xu 1

Abstract

cally optimal solution (Mertikopoulos et al., 2020; Lei et al.,
2019; Choromanska et al., 2015).

We propose a novel method, namely Gaussian
Smoothing with a Power-Transformed Objective
(GS-PowerOpt), that solves global optimization
problems in two steps: (1) perform a (exponential) power-N transformation to the not necessarily differentiable objective f : Rd → R and get
fN , and (2) optimize the Gaussian-smoothed fN
with stochastic approximations. Under mild conditions on f , for any δ > 0, we prove that with
a sufficiently large power Nδ , this method converges to a solution in the δ-neighborhood of f ’s
global optimum point, at the iteration complexity
of O(d4 ε−2 ). If we require that f is differentiable
and further assume the Lipschitz condition on f
and its gradient, the iteration complexity reduces
to O(d2 ε−2 ), which is significantly faster than
the standard homotopy method. In most of the experiments performed, our method produces better
solutions than other algorithms that also apply the
smoothing technique.

Gaussian smoothing (e.g., Section 3 in (Nesterov &
Spokoiny, 2017)) refers to convolving f with a Gaussian
density to obtain a surrogate objective
fˆσ (µ) := Ex∼N (µ,σ2 Id ) [f (x)],

(2)

where N denotes a multivariate Gaussian distribution, σ >
0 is called the scaling parameter, and Id denotes a d × d
identity matrix. The smoothing effect possibly eliminates
certain local extremes of the objective, and this technique
is applied by the widely used homotopy methods for global
optimizations.
Homotopy (e.g., (Mobahi & Fisher, 2015)), also called the
graduated continuation, is a class of methods that aim to find
a global solution to (1), with many applications in machine
learning (Xu et al., 2016; Iwakiri et al., 2022). It converts
the original problem to
max

µ∈Rd ,σ≥0

Eξ [f (µ + σξ)],

(3)

where ξ is a random vector with a pre-selected distribution, such as a standard multivariate Gaussian distribution (Gaussian Homotopy, GH) or a uniform distribution
in a unit sphere. Based on the observation that µ∗σ :=
arg maxµ E[f (µ+σξ)] approaches1 x∗ as σ decreases to 0,
the standard homotopy method adopts a double-loop mechanism: the outer loop iteratively decreases σ, and for each
fixed value of σ, the inner loop solves maxµ E[f (µ + σξ)],
with the solution found in the current inner loop as the
starting search point in the next inner loop.

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider the global optimization problem
of
max f (x),
(1)
x∈S⊂Rd

where S is a compact set and f : S → R is a continuous
and possibly non-concave function with a unique global
maximum point x∗ = arg maxx∈S f (x). The minimizeversion of this problem is often encountered in machine
learning, such as model trainings and adversarial attacks in
computer vision. The gradient-based algorithms are commonly used, such as the (stochastic) gradient descent. In
general, these methods only guarantee to approximate a loDepartment of Engineering, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, Shenzhen, P. R. China. Correspondence to: Chen Xu
<xuchen@smbu.edu.cn>.

The double-loop mechanism is costly in time. To tackle this
issue, (Iwakiri et al., 2022) proposes a single-loop Gaussian homotopy (SLGH) method that updates both µ and
σ in each iteration. Although SLGH aims at the global
optimums, in theory, it only guarantees to approximate a
local optimum2 , which is not necessarily a global one. A
time-efficient algorithm that aims at the global maximum is
still to be found.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Note that E[f (µ + σξ)] = f (µ) if σ = 0.
Theorem 4.1 in (Iwakiri et al., 2022) shows that SLGH approximates a solution x̂ such that E[∇f (x̂)] = 0.

1

1

2

1

