Learning Configurations for Data-Driven Multi-Objective Optimization

Zhiyang Chen 1 Hailong Yao 2 3 Xia Yin 1

Abstract

exact set of Pareto-optimal solutions is generally intractable
for most multi-objective optimization problems, since the
optimal Pareto set may contain an exponential number of
solutions. In practice, heuristic algorithms are often applied
to tackle multi-objective optimization. For example, approximation algorithms (Ravi & Goemans, 1996; Chen & Young,
2020) are designed to simultaneously approximate multiple
objectives. Another widely used heuristic is the weighted
sum method, e.g., turning a two-objective optimization problem maxx (c1 (x), c2 (x)) into a single-objective one by optimizing a convex combination of objectives,

Multi-objective optimization problems arise
widely in various fields. In practice, multiobjective optimization is generally solved by
heuristics with tunable parameters that are highly
application-specific. Tuning parameters based on
real-world instances (a.k.a. algorithm configuration) are generally empirical without theoretical
guarantees. In this work, we establish the theoretical foundation of data-driven multi-objective
optimization through the lens of machine learning theory. We provide generalization guarantees
on selecting parameters for multi-objective optimization algorithms based on sampled problem
instances. Moreover, if the performance metric
of the algorithm is the Pareto volume, we can
PAC-learn the approximately optimal configuration in polynomial time. We apply our framework
to various algorithms, including approximation
algorithms, local search, and linear programming.
Experiments on multiple problems verify our theoretical findings.

max (1 − ρ) · c1 (x) + ρ · c2 (x),
x

where 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1.
However, both approximation algorithms and the weighted
sum method contain tunable parameters. An approximation
algorithm (Ravi & Goemans, 1996; Chen & Young, 2020)
may contain parameters to balance the approximation ratio
of different objectives. The weighted sum method also requires setting the weight ρ. The user may select a parameter
configuration to optimize the algorithmic performance, or
even select multiple configurations to form a solution portfolio to provide more decision options. The selection of parameters significantly impacts the algorithmic performance.
There is usually no universal best configuration, and the user
needs to tune the parameters based on application-specific
problem instances carefully. Many algorithm configuration
methods (Schede et al., 2022) are proposed to automatically
select parameters with good performances. Researchers
even apply neural networks (Li et al., 2021) to predict good
parameters for multi-objective optimization.

1. Introduction
Multi-objective optimization problems arise widely in various fields, including operations research (Herzel et al.,
2021), machine learning (Sener & Koltun, 2018), and design automation (Chen & Young, 2020). A multi-objective
optimization problem may involve multiple contradictory
objectives that require simultaneous optimization. Therefore, a best-of-all-world solution that is optimal for every
objective may not exist. Algorithm designers instead seek a
trade-off between multiple objectives.

Although multi-objective optimization algorithms are
widely used in practice, the theoretical foundation of parameter selection is limited. In this work, we study the problem of algorithm configuration for multi-objective optimization through the lens of machine learning theory. Recently,
there has been a growing interest in the sample complexity of learning algorithm parameters for a given application domain, a.k.a., data-driven algorithm design (Balcan,
2020). Concretely, there is a probabilistic distribution over
instances of a multi-objective optimization problem. Given
a training set sampled from this distribution, the learning
algorithm selects one or multiple parameters that optimize
the algorithmic performance from a parameterized family

A notion of optimality for multi-objective optimization is
the so-called Pareto optimality. However, computing the
1
Tsinghua University, China 2 University of Science and Technology Beijing, China 3 Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials and
Devices for Post-Moore Chips, Ministry of Education of China.
Correspondence to: Hailong Yao <hailongyao@ustb.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

