FedBEns: One-Shot Federated Learning based on Bayesian Ensemble

Jacopo Talpini 1 Marco Savi 1 Giovanni Neglia 2

Abstract

communication between clients and the server (Guha et al.,
2019).

One-Shot Federated Learning (FL) is a recent
paradigm that enables multiple clients to cooperatively learn a global model in a single round of
communication with a central server. In this paper,
we analyze the One-Shot FL problem through the
lens of Bayesian inference and propose FedBEns,
an algorithm that leverages the inherent multimodality of local loss functions to find better
global models. Our algorithm leverages a mixture of Laplace approximations for the clients’
local posteriors, which the server then aggregates
to infer the global model. We conduct extensive
experiments on various datasets, demonstrating
that the proposed method outperforms competing
baselines that typically rely on unimodal approximations of the local losses.

Several One-Shot FL algorithms have been proposed in the
literature. Existing relevant work leverages knowledge distillation at the server (Lin et al., 2020), neuron matching
strategies (Singh & Jaggi, 2020) or adopts an optimization
approach, trying to directly approximate the global loss at
the server starting from the local losses of each client (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Matena & Raffel,
2022). Our contribution is in line with the last group of work,
which generally employs a unimodal approximation of each
local loss. As an example, Jhunjhunwala et al. (2024) make
use of a quadratic approximation of local losses through
opportune Fisher information matrices.
However, neural network loss functions are known to be
highly non-convex (Izmailov et al., 2021; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020; Fort et al., 2019; Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017) with multiple local minima, some of which may generalize better than others. This fact can be extremely relevant
for the considered One-Shot FL setting and motivated us
to introduce a novel algorithm that explicitly takes into account the different modes of the loss surface, guided by a
Bayesian analysis of the FL problem.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative machine learning
paradigm that has recently gained significant attention from
the research community. It enables the training of models using decentralized datasets stored locally on multiple clients,
without requiring direct access to the raw data (McMahan
et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021). This paradigm is particularly appealing in scenarios involving highly sensitive data,
where clients are reluctant to share them, due to privacy
or security concerns. Most FL algorithms typically train
models using iterative optimization techniques that require
numerous rounds of communication between the clients and
the central server that aggregates the local models.

Figure 1 shows the importance of considering multiple
modes, motivating our proposed approach. The figure illustrates that the local minimum corresponding to the broader,
less sharply-peaked mode of client 1’s local loss, is crucial for accurately reconstructing the optimal global model.
Moreover, it is worth noting that this represents a relatively
simple scenario where the global loss is unimodal. In general, however, the global loss exhibits a complex landscape
with multiple optima, and selecting just one of them as
global model may lead to suboptimal results (Wilson & Izmailov, 2020). We argue that this consideration is especially
crucial for learning a model in a One-Shot setting while
achieving good predictive performance, as we will show
in the rest of the paper. The key insight, well-established
in Bayesian inference (MacKay, 2003), is that describing
the whole posterior distribution should be the main goal
of learning from data, while a local description around the
posterior’s maximum may not be sufficiently informative.

The frequent server-client interactions represent a bottleneck in FL (Guha et al., 2019; Kairouz et al., 2021), which
has been addressed by a new paradigm called One-Shot
FL, where the global model is learned in a single round of
1
Department of Informatics, Systems and Communication
(DISCo), University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy; 2 Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, Sophia Antipolis, France. Correspondence to:
Jacopo Talpini <j.talpini@campus.unimib.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Contributions. In this paper, we introduce FedBEns (Federated Bayesian Ensemble), a straightforward and principled
1

