DiffAdvMAP: Flexible Diffusion-Based Framework for Generating Natural
Unrestricted Adversarial Examples

Zhengzhao Pan 1 Hua Chen 2 Xiaogang Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been prosperous in various vision tasks these years, such as object detection, face
recognition, and semantic segmentation. However, many
works have shown that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial
examples. Adversarial examples are images intentionally
crafted by adding tiny perturbations to natural images. Such
modified images can deceive DNNs to make wrong predictions while remaining imperceptible to humans, bringing
security risks to decision-critical systems. This vulnerability poses great threats to lots of vision tasks such as image
classification (Goodfellow et al., 2014), (Carlini & Wagner,
2017), (Madry et al., 2017), segmentation (Li et al., 2023),
and tracking (Li et al., 2021b), (Li et al., 2023).

Unrestricted adversarial examples(UAEs) have
posed greater threats to deep neural networks(DNNs) than perturbation-based adversarial
examples(AEs) because they can make extensive
changes to images without being restricted in a
fixed norm perturbation budget. Although current diffusion-based methods can generate more
natural UAEs than other unrestricted attack methods, the overall effectiveness of such methods is
restricted since they are designed for specific attack conditions. Additionally, the naturalness of
UAEs still has room for improvement, as these
methods primarily focus on leveraging diffusion
models as strong priors to enhance the generation process. This paper proposes a flexible
framework named Diffusion-based Adversarial
Maximum a Posterior(DiffAdvMAP) to generate
more natural UAEs for various scenarios. DiffAdvMAP approaches the generation of UAEs
by sampling images from posterior distributions,
which is achieved by approximating the posterior
distribution of UAEs using the prior distribution
of real data learned by the diffusion model. This
process enhances the naturalness of the UAEs.
By incorporating an adversarial constraint to ensure the effectiveness of the attack, DiffAdvMAP
exhibits excellent attack ability and defense robustness. A reconstruction constraint is designed
to enhance its flexibility, which allows DiffAdvMAP to be tailored to various attack scenarios.
Experimental results on ImageNet show that we
achieve a better trade-off between image quality,
flexibility, and transferability than baseline unrestricted adversarial attack methods.

Unlike traditional perturbation-based adversarial examples
(AEs), which limit perturbations to a small range to maintain
imperceptibility, unrestricted adversarial examples (UAEs)
are generated by applying extensive natural transformations
to images, such as color conversion, which significantly
reduces the noticeable noise patterns in AEs. UAEs can also
be generated by training a generative model like AC-GAN
(Song et al., 2018), enabling the attacker to produce a more
natural and unlimited number of UAEs. Such approaches
do not require perturbing real images with restricted perturbations, thus being more concealed and effective than
traditional AEs. As a result, UAEs have emerged as a significant area of study in adversarial examples over the past few
years due to their potential threat to deep neural networks.
Though generative models like GANs and VAEs can learn
and sample from data distribution effectively, it’s difficult
to perform well on complex and high-quality datasets like
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) because of their weak interpretability. Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) have shown
their superiority in synthesizing realistic and high-quality
images in recent years, thus, they become powerful competitors to GANs and VAEs in generating UAEs. Inspired
by this, recent works (Dai et al., 2025), (Chen et al., 2023),
(Liu et al., 2023a) explore new methods to generate realistic
UAEs on complex datasets with diffusion models and obtain
better performance than previous works.

1

College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan
University, Changsha, China 2 College of Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China. Correspondence to: Hua Chen <chua@hnu.edu.cn>, Xiaogang Zhang
<zhangxg@hnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, there still exist some problems that affect the
effectiveness and naturalness of UAEs generated by diffu1

