TimeDART: A Diffusion Autoregressive Transformer
for Self-Supervised Time Series Representation

Daoyu Wang 1 Mingyue Cheng* 1 Zhiding Liu 1 Qi Liu 1
Pre-training

Abstract

Forward Process

𝑥%%

Autoregressive

Self-supervised learning has garnered increasing
attention in time series analysis for benefiting various downstream tasks and reducing reliance on
labeled data. Despite its effectiveness, existing
methods often struggle to comprehensively capture both long-term dynamic evolution and subtle
local patterns in a unified manner. In this work,
we propose TimeDART, a novel self-supervised
time series pre-training framework that unifies
two powerful generative paradigms to learn more
transferable representations. Specifically, we first
employ a causal Transformer encoder, accompanied by a patch-based embedding strategy, to
model the evolving trends from left to right. Building on this global modeling, we further introduce a denoising diffusion process to capture
fine-grained local patterns through forward diffusion and reverse denoising. Finally, we optimize the model in an autoregressive manner. As a
result, TimeDART effectively accounts for both
global and local sequence features in a coherent
way. We conduct extensive experiments on public datasets for time series forecasting and classification. The experimental results demonstrate
that TimeDART consistently outperforms previous compared methods, validating the effectiveness of our approach. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Melmaphother/TimeDART.

𝑥!%

𝑥!"

𝑥"#

𝑥"%

𝑥$$

𝑥$%

Denoising
Decoder

Reverse Process

Causal-masked
Transformer
Encoder

Fine-tuning

Transformer
Encoder

Predicted Window

Look-back Window

Predicted Label

Flatten
Head
Pooling
Head

Figure 1: Two-stage training process. Pre-training:
TimeDART teaches an encoder to learn temporal representations through a noising process and autoregressive denoising.
Fine-tuning: The pre-trained encoder is adapted with taskspecific heads for downstream applications.
ios often involve massive amounts of unlabeled real-world
data. To analyze and leverage such data, self-supervised
learning has emerged as a widely adopted approach (Zhang
et al., 2024b). This approach extracts valuable knowledge
from abundant unlabeled data, which can be subsequently
transferred to boost downstream task performance (Park
et al., 2024; Dong et al., 2024b).

1. Introduction

Reviewing previous studies (Zhang et al., 2024b), existing
methods for time series self-supervised learning primarily fall into three categories. The first category is masked
autoencoders, which focus on reconstructing masked or
corrupted parts of the input and excel at learning the underlying patterns of the time series (He et al., 2022; Zerveas
et al., 2021). A common challenge with these models is the
inconsistency between pre-training and fine-tuning due to
newly injected masked embeddings (Cheng et al., 2023b).
Contrastive-based methods, as the second category, specialize in sequence-level modeling and distinguish between
similar and dissimilar time-series segments (Eldele et al.,

The analysis of time-series data has become increasingly
critical across diverse application domains, including healthcare (Cheng et al., 2024), finance (Black & Scholes, 1973)
and energy management (Zhou et al., 2024). These scenar1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Correspondence
to: Mingyue Cheng <mycheng@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

