Metadata Conditioning Accelerates Language Model Pre-training

Tianyu Gao 1 Alexander Wettig 1 Luxi He 1 Yihe Dong 1 Sadhika Malladi 1 Danqi Chen 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs) achieve remarkable generalpurpose capabilities by training on vast web-sourced corpora. For instance, Internet documents about Apple CEO
Tim Cook range from memes (“Tim doesn’t cook anymore”)
to biographies (“Tim Cook is the CEO of Apple”). Treating
data from these heterogeneous sources identically causes
two issues: (1) it overlooks crucial contextual signals that
aid comprehension, and (2) it can impede models from
reliably surfacing appropriate behaviors (e.g., humor or factuality) for downstream tasks.

The vast diversity of styles, domains, and quality levels present in language model pre-training
corpora is essential in developing general model
capabilities, but efficiently learning and deploying the correct behaviors exemplified in each
of these heterogeneous data sources is challenging. To address this, we propose a new method,
termed Metadata Conditioning then Cooldown
(MeCo), to incorporate additional learning cues
during pre-training. MeCo first provides metadata (e.g., URLs like en.wikipedia.org)
alongside the text during training, then transitions to a cooldown phase using only standard
text—enabling the model to perform well even
without metadata. MeCo significantly accelerates pre-training across different model scales
(600M to 8B parameters) and training corpora
(C4, RefinedWeb, and DCLM). Notably, a 1.6B
language model trained with MeCo matches the
downstream task performance of standard pretraining while using 33% less data. Additionally, MeCo allows us to steer language models
by conditioning the inference prompt on either
real or fabricated metadata that encodes the desired output properties—for example, prepending wikipedia.org to reduce harmful generations or factquizmaster.com (fabricated)
to improve performance on common knowledge
tasks. We further demonstrate that MeCo is compatible with various types of metadata, such as
model-generated topics. MeCo is remarkably simple, adds no computational overhead, and shows
promise for producing more capable and steerable language models. Our models, data, and
code are available at https://github.com/
princeton-pli/MeCo.

To provide additional information about each document’s
source, we propose conditioning documents with their corresponding metadata during pre-training by prepending the
widely available source URLs to each document. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, adding the source URLs to
Tim Cook documents helps the model distinguish among
a meme, a biography, an interview article, and a financial
report. To ensure the model operates effectively with or without metadata during inference, we implement a cooldown
phase for the final 10% of training, during which we train
on standard data without metadata. We call this pre-training
method Metadata Conditioning then Cooldown (MeCo).
Metadata conditioning has been investigated in various
contexts, such as steering model generations (Keskar
et al., 2019), improving model robustness against malicious
prompts (Korbak et al., 2023a), and enhancing knowledge
memorization in synthetic settings (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024).
Distinct from prior explorations, our work establishes the
general-purpose utility of this method in two crucial ways.
First, we demonstrate that this paradigm can directly accelerate realistic language model pre-training and improve
downstream performance. Second, the cooldown phase in
MeCo ensures the model can perform inference without
metadata—a key advantage over previous methods. We
outline the contributions of this work below.
1. MeCo substantially accelerates pre-training (§ 3).
We demonstrate that MeCo enables a 1.6B model to
achieve the same average downstream performance as
a standard pre-trained model using 33% less training
data. MeCo exhibits consistent gains across model
scales (600M, 1.6B, 3B, and 8B) and pre-training cor-

1

Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Tianyu Gao <tianyug@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

