SAE-V: Interpreting Multimodal Models for Enhanced Alignment

Hantao Lou * 1 2 Changye Li * 1 2 Jiaming Ji 1 2 Yaodong Yang 1 2

Abstract

Landscape

With the integration of image modality, the semantic space of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) is more complex than text-only models, making their interpretability more challenging and their alignment less stable, particularly
susceptible to low-quality data, which can lead
to inconsistencies between modalities, hallucinations, and biased outputs. As a result, developing
interpretability methods for MLLMs is crucial
for improving alignment quality and efficiency.
In text-only LLMs, Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs)
have gained attention for their ability to interpret
latent representations. However, extending SAEs
to multimodal settings presents new challenges
due to modality fusion and the difficulty of isolating cross-modal representations. To address these
challenges, we introduce SAE-V, a mechanistic
interpretability framework that extends the SAE
paradigm to MLLMs. By identifying and analyzing interpretable features along with their corresponding data, SAE-V enables fine-grained interpretation of both model behavior and data quality,
facilitating a deeper understanding of cross-modal
interactions and alignment dynamics. Moreover,
by utilizing cross-modal feature weighting, SAEV provides an intrinsic data filtering mechanism
to enhance model alignment without requiring additional models. Specifically, when applied to the
alignment process of MLLMs, SAE-V-based data
filtering methods could achieve more than 110%
performance with less than 50% data. Our results
highlight SAE-V’s ability to enhance interpretability and alignment in MLLMs, providing insights
into their internal mechanisms. *

Multimodal LLM
SAE-V
Dataset
Dataset D

← Low Quality High Quality →

Interpretable
Features

Filtered Dataset D'
← Filtered

Figure 1. Operational Dynamics of SAE-V Based Data Filtering Method. SAE-V encodes and interprets the representation
inside MLLM during alignment and inference time. Based on
this representation, we could reveal the modality gap within the
data, and improve the alignment process through the selection of
modality-fused, high-quality data. This pipeline performs data
filtering without requiring additional models, relying instead on
MLLM itself to prioritize high-value data effectively.

1. Introduction
With the development and success of large language models (LLMs) (Dubey et al., 2024; Achiam et al., 2023), researchers have begun to introduce visual understanding to
these models, thereby extending their operational scope
from language to a mix of vision and language, resulting in
the creation of powerful multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) (Alayrac et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024a; Team
et al., 2024; Team, 2024). To enhance the multimodal understanding capabilities of MLLMs, the research community
has explored various architectures, including using individual image/text encoders to encode cross-modal information
into a joint representation space (Zhang et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2024a; Zhu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024c) and leveraging image tokenizers to transform all inputs into a unified
token sequence (Team, 2024; Xie et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2024a; Wang et al., 2024). Despite the difference in the architectures of these models, their essential goal is the same:
Fuse the text and image representation space into a joint
multimodal semantic space.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for AI, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Institute for AI, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Hantao Lou <hantaolou.htlou@gmail.com>, Yaodong Yang
<yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
*
Our codebase and model are released at Github and Huggingface.

As MLLMs continue to scale up in both size and capability,
1

