Position: Editing Large Language Models Poses Serious Safety Risks

Paul Youssef 1 Zhixue Zhao 2 Daniel Braun 1 Jörg Schlötterer 1 3 Christin Seifert 1

Performant Stealthy

Section 3.3

3 Vulnerable AI Ecosystem
Unverified
Updates

2 Malicious Use Cases of KEs
Section 3.2

Section 3.1

Large Language Models (LLMs) contain large
amounts of facts about the world. These facts
can become outdated over time, which has led to
the development of knowledge editing methods
(KEs) that can change specific facts in LLMs with
limited side effects. This position paper argues
that editing LLMs poses serious safety risks that
have been largely overlooked. First, we note the
fact that KEs are widely available, computationally inexpensive, highly performant, and stealthy
makes them an attractive tool for malicious actors.
Second, we discuss malicious use cases of KEs,
showing how KEs can be easily adapted for a variety of malicious purposes. Third, we highlight
vulnerabilities in the AI ecosystem that allow unrestricted uploading and downloading of updated
models without verification. Fourth, we argue that
a lack of social and institutional awareness exacerbates this risk, and discuss the implications for
different stakeholders. We call on the community
to (i) research tamper-resistant models and countermeasures against malicious model editing, and
(ii) actively engage in securing the AI ecosystem.

Accessible Affordable

Backdoors

Bias

Jailbreaking Misinformation

4 Lack of Awareness
Section 3.4

1 Properties of KEs

Abstract

Social
Institutional
Awareness Awareness

Figure 1. Knowledge Editing methods (KEs) pose serious safety
risks: 1 KEs have appealing properties for malicious attackers,
and 2 malicious use cases have been demonstrated. Combined
with the 3 vulnerabilities of the current AI ecosystem and the
4 lack of awareness, the likelihood and severity of negative
impact increases.

development of knowledge editing methods (KEs).1 KEs
conduct targeted changes in the model, which ideally alter
only specific facts without affecting other facts in the model
without the need for expensive re-training.
Recent work has led to the development of a multitude of
high-performance KEs (Meng et al., 2022; 2023; Tan et al.,
2024). Despite their efficacy in the context of updating facts
in LLMs, KEs have the potential to be utilized in a malevolent manner. Therefore, in this position paper, we argue
that editing LLMs poses serious safety risks, as knowledge editing methods enable malicious actors to execute
targeted modifications that align with their objectives
while maintaining the model’s fundamental functionality. Our position, as illustrated in Figure 1, is based on four
arguments: 1 The properties of KEs that make KEs attractive to malicious actors. 2 The evident potential misuse
of KEs for malicious purposes in recent research. 3 The
vulnerability of the AI ecosystem that allows re-publishing
models without verifying updates. 4 The lack of awareness
at social and institutional levels.

1. Introduction
LLMs are utilized in a multitude of applications across various domains (Brahmavar et al., 2024; Van Veen et al., 2024).
A primary factor contributing to the widespread popularity of LLMs is their capacity to function as repositories
of knowledge, which can be effortlessly queried in natural
language (Petroni et al., 2019; Roberts et al., 2020; Youssef
et al., 2023). Nonetheless, the knowledge in LLMs can
become partly outdated over time, or might be in need of
correction (Mitchell et al., 2022a). This limitation led to the
1
Marburg University, Marburg, Germany 2 University
of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 3 University of Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany.
Correspondence to: Zhixue Zhao
<zhixue.zhao@sheffield.ac.uk>.

We first give an overview of the various types of KEs and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
“knowledge editing” is also referred to as “model editing”, we
use both terms interchangeably in this paper.

1

