Stream-level Flow Matching with Gaussian Processes

Ganchao Wei 1 Li Ma 1

Abstract

objective and proposed the flow matching (FM) algorithm.
FM exploits the fact that the marginal vector field inducing
a desired CNF can be learned through a regression formulation, approximating per-sample conditional vector fields
using a smoother such as a deep neural network (Lipman
et al., 2023). In the original FM approach, the training
objective is conditioned on samples from the target distribution, and the source distribution has to be Gaussian. This
limitation was later relaxed, allowing the target distribution
to be supported on manifolds (Chen & Lipman, 2024) and
the source distribution to be non-Gaussian (Pooladian et al.,
2023). Tong et al. (2024) provided a unifying framework
with arbitrary transport maps by conditioning on both ends.
While their framework is general, its application requires
the induced conditional probability paths to be readily sampled from, and as such, they considered several Gaussian
probability paths. Moreover, most existing FM methods
only consider the inclusion of two endpoints, and hence
cannot accommodate data involving multiple correlated observations, such as time series and data with a grouping
structure. Notably, Albergo et al. (2024) recently proposed
multimarginal stochastic interpolants, which aim to learn a
multivariate distribution based on correlated observations.

Flow matching (FM) is a family of training algorithms for fitting continuous normalizing flows
(CNFs). Conditional flow matching (CFM) exploits the fact that the marginal vector field of a
CNF can be learned by fitting least-squares regression to the conditional vector field specified
given one or both ends of the flow path. In this
paper, we extend the CFM algorithm by defining
conditional probability paths along “streams”, instances of latent stochastic paths that connect data
pairs of source and target, which are modeled
with Gaussian process (GP) distributions. The
unique distributional properties of GPs help preserve the “simulation-free” nature of CFM training. We show that this generalization of the CFM
can effectively reduce the variance in the estimated marginal vector field at a moderate computational cost, thereby improving the quality of the
generated samples under common metrics. Additionally, adopting the GP on the streams allows
for flexibly linking multiple correlated training
data points (e.g., time series). We empirically
validate our claim through both simulations and
applications to image and neural time series data.

In this paper, we go one level deeper in Bayesian hierarchical modeling of FM algorithm and specify distributional
assumptions on streams, which are latent stochastic paths
connecting the two endpoints. Our approach extends the
stochastic interpolant framework proposed by Albergo &
Vanden-Eijnden (2023); Albergo et al. (2023), and it leads
to a class of CFM algorithms that condition at the “stream”
level, which broadens the range of conditional probability
paths allowed in CFM training. By endowing the streams
with Gaussian process (GP) distributions, these GP-CFM algorithms provide a smoother marginal vector field and wider
sampling coverage over its support. Furthermore, conditioning on GP streams allows for flexible integration of correlated observations through placing them along the streams
between two endpoints and for incorporating additional
prior information, while maintaining the analytical tractability and computational efficiency of CFM algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models aim to estimate and sample from an
unknown probability distribution. Continuous normalizing
flows (CNFs, Chen et al. (2018)) construct an invertible and
differentiable mapping, using neural ordinary differential
equations (ODEs), between a source and the target distribution. However, traditionally, it has been difficult to scale
CNF training to large datasets (Chen et al., 2018; Grathwohl et al., 2019; Onken et al., 2021). Recently, Lipman
et al. (2023); Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden (2023); Liu et al.
(2023) showed that CNFs can be trained via a regression
1

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham,
NC 27708, USA. Correspondence to: Ganchao Wei <ganchao.wei@duke.edu>, Li Ma <li.ma@duke.edu>.

In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as
follows.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1. We generalize CFM training by augmenting the spec1

