Behavioral Exploration: Learning to Explore via In-Context Adaptation

Andrew Wagenmaker 1 Zhiyuan Zhou 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract

fully directed attempts, use the information collected from
these attempts to infer the correct behavior, and then successfully solve the objective. In other words, humans exhibit fast
online exploration and adaptation—attempting different behaviors to acquire useful information and adjusting their
behavior based on this information to solve the objective. A
fundamental goal in the fields of robotics and machine learning is to develop autonomous agents which exhibit such
fast online exploration and adaptation. While much work
has been devoted to achieving this, existing methods often fall short, typically relying on expensive trial-and-error
approaches to exploration that require an infeasibly large
number of interactions, and slow, gradient-based behavior
updates which are unable to quickly adapt behaviors online.

Developing autonomous agents that quickly explore an environment and adapt their behavior
online is a canonical challenge in robotics and machine learning. While humans are able to achieve
such fast online exploration and adaptation, often
acquiring new information and skills in only a
handful of interactions, existing algorithmic approaches tend to rely on random exploration and
slow, gradient-based behavior updates. How can
we endow autonomous agents with such capabilities on par with humans? Taking inspiration from
recent progress on both in-context learning and
large-scale behavioral cloning, in this work we
propose behavioral exploration: training agents
to internalize what it means to explore and adapt
in-context over the space of “expert” behaviors.
To achieve this, given access to a dataset of expert
demonstrations, we train a long-context generative model to predict expert actions conditioned
on a context of past observations and a measure
of how “exploratory” the expert’s behaviors are
relative to this context. This enables the model to
not only mimic the behavior of an expert, but also,
by feeding its past history of interactions into its
context, to select different expert behaviors than
what have been previously selected, thereby allowing for fast online adaptation and targeted,
“expert-like” exploration. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in both simulated locomotion and manipulation settings, as well as on
real-world robotic manipulation tasks, illustrating
its ability to learn adaptive, exploratory behavior.

What would successful exploration and adaptation behavior
look like for an autonomous agent? As an example, consider
telling a robot “hand me a cup”. In this scenario, the robot
should attempt to pick up whichever cups are in the scene
until it successfully picks up the right one. It should not,
however, move its arm randomly, try to pick up a plate, or
repeatedly pick up the same cup when there are other cups
in the scene it has not yet attempted to pick up. Instead,
the correct behavior requires first leveraging knowledge of
the scene and what it means to “hand me a cup” to direct
actions to the most relevant features, and then quickly adapting based on the attempts that have already been made in
order to continue attempting novel, potentially correct, actions. Such a semantic, informed approach to exploration,
coupled with fast online adaptation, is much more akin to
how humans behave and dramatically more efficient than the
“uninformed” novelty-seeking exploration strategies that are
more often considered in the existing literature.
In this work we take steps towards developing autonomous
agents which exhibit such behavior, focusing in particular
on settings where we have access to expert demonstration
datasets that provide a prior on what behaviors may be “reasonable” for our task of interest. We are inspired by the
recent success of in-context learning to enable fast online
adaptation in language domains (Brown et al., 2020), and
seek to leverage similar in-context learning capabilities in
our setting. We propose training a long-context policy to
internalize both which actions an expert would take in a
given state, and which expert actions are most exploratory.
To instill the policy with in-context adaptation capabilities,

1. Introduction
When tasked with achieving some objective in a novel scenario, humans are often able to make a small number of care1

Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science,
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Andrew
Wagenmaker <ajwagen@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

