Sample Complexity of Correlation Detection in the Gaussian Wigner Model

Dong Huang 1 Pengkun Yang 1

Abstract

two graphs represent the same object under different
rotations (Berg et al., 2005; Mateus et al., 2008).

Correlation analysis is a fundamental step in
uncovering meaningful insights from complex
datasets. In this paper, we study the problem of detecting correlations between two random graphs
following the Gaussian Wigner model with unlabeled vertices. Specifically, the task is formulated
as a hypothesis testing problem: under the null
hypothesis, the two graphs are independent, while
under the alternative hypothesis, they are edgecorrelated through a latent vertex permutation,
yet maintain the same marginal distributions as
under the null. We focus on the scenario where
two induced subgraphs, each with a fixed number of vertices, are sampled. We determine the
optimal rate for the sample size required for correlation detection, derived through an analysis of
the conditional second moment. Additionally, we
propose a polynomial-time algorithm that significantly reduces running time.

• In natural language processing, each sentence can be
represented as a graph, where nodes correspond to
words or phrases, and the weighted edges represent
syntactic and semantic relationships (Hughes & Ramage, 2007). The ontology alignment problem refers to
uncovering the correlation between knowledge graphs
that are in different languages (Haghighi et al., 2005).
• In computational biology, protein–protein interactions
(PPI) and their networks are crucial for all biological
processes. Proteins can be regarded as vertices, and
the interactions between them can be formulated as
weighted edges (Singh et al., 2008; Vogelstein et al.,
2015).
Following the hypothesis testing framework proposed in
Barak et al. (2019), we formulate the graph correlation
detection problem in Problem 1.1. For a weighted graph
G with vertex set V (G) and edge set E(G), the weight
associated with each edge uv is typically denoted as βuv (G)
for any u, v ∈ V (G).
Problem 1.1. Let G1 and G2 be two weighted random
graphs with vertex sets V (G1 ), V (G2 ) and edge sets
E(G1 ), E(G2 ). Under the null hypothesis H0 , G1 and G2
are independent; under the alternative hypothesis H1 , there
exists a correlation between E(G1 ) and E(G2 ). Given G1
and G2 , the goal is to test H0 against H1 .

1. Introduction
Understanding the correlation between datasets is one of
the most significant tasks in statistics. In many applications,
the observations may not be the familiar vectors but rather
graphs. Recently, there have been many studies on the
problem of detecting graph correlation and recovering the
alignments of two correlated graphs. This problem arises
across various domains:

1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Dong
Huang <hd23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Pengkun Yang <yangpengkun@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

A variety of studies have extensively investigated detection
problems. However, the previous studies typically required
full observation of all edges in G1 and G2 for detection,
which is impractical when the entire graph is unknown in
certain scenarios. In such cases, graph sampling—the process of sampling a subset of vertices and edges from the
graph—becomes a powerful approach for exploring graph
structure. This technique has been widely used in various
settings, as it allows for inference about the graph without
needing full observation (Leskovec & Faloutsos, 2006; Hu
& Lau, 2013). In fact, there are several motivations leading
us to consider the graph sampling method:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• Lack of data. In social network analysis, the entire
network is often unavailable due to API limitations.

• In computer vision, 3-D shapes can be represented
as graphs, where nodes are subregions and weighted
edges represent adjacency relationships between different regions. A fundamental task for pattern recognition and image processing is determining whether

1

