IBCircuit: Towards Holistic Circuit Discovery with Information Bottleneck

Tian Bian * 1 2 Yifan Niu * 3 Chaohao Yuan 1 Chengzhi Piao 4 Bingzhe Wu 5 Long-Kai Huang 6 Yu Rong 2 7
Tingyang Xu 2 7 Hong Cheng 1 Jia Li 3

Abstract

heads and MLPs in Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017))
that either partially or fully explain the model’s behaviors
on tasks like Indirect Object Identification (IOI), modular
arithmetic, and forecasting subsequent dates (Wang et al.,
2022; Nanda et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024). The challenge
of circuit discovery lies in the fact that circuits are hidden in
the complex black boxes of language models which involve
complex non-linear interactions in densely-connected layers
and embed in a high-dimensional space (Wang et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2025a).

Circuit discovery has recently attracted attention
as a potential research direction to explain the
non-trivial behaviors of language models. It aims
to find the computational subgraphs, also known
as circuits, within the model that are responsible
for solving specific tasks. However, most existing studies overlook the holistic nature of these
circuits and require designing specific corrupted
activations for different tasks, which is inaccurate and inefficient. In this work, we propose
an end-to-end approach based on the principle
of Information Bottleneck, called IBCircuit, to
identify informative circuits holistically. IBCircuit is an optimization framework for holistic circuit discovery and can be applied to any given
task without tediously corrupted activation design.
In both the Indirect Object Identification (IOI)
and Greater-Than tasks, IBCircuit identifies more
faithful and minimal circuits in terms of critical
node components and edge components compared
to recent related work. The code is available at
https://github.com/ivanniu/IBCircuit.

Recent circuit discovery works seek to decode these models
by reverse engineering (Räuker et al., 2023), such as activation patching (Meng et al., 2022) and attribution patching (Nanda, 2023). The activation patching (Geiger et al.,
2021; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023; Conmy et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2022) performs causal interventions independently on each component, ignoring that the circuit is a
holistic system rather than an independent combination.
Additionally, they do not scale well with the model size. Another research line has proposed attribution patching (Nanda,
2023) and its variants (Chintam et al., 2023; Hanna et al.,
2022; Marks et al., 2024) to efficiently estimate the importance of each component in the computational graph based
on gradient methods. However, they still need to redesign
corrupted activations for different tasks, which is inconvenient and complicated.

1. Introduction
Circuit discovery in language models usually involves identifying the subgraphs (circuits) within the model that are
responsible for solving specific tasks (Olah et al., 2020).
Previous efforts to identify circuits within language models have led to the discovery of components (e.g., attention

An ideal minimal circuit should (i) contain only the essential components for specific tasks, and (ii) exclude any
irrelevant or redundant components. Intuitively, to identify
high-quality circuits, we should maximize the circuit’s relevance to the tasks while minimizing irrelevant components.
Interestingly, the objective of circuit discovery aligns with
the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle. The IB leverages
Shannon mutual information to distill the compressed yet
informative data distributions (Tishby et al., 2000). From
the IB perspective, circuit discovery is to (i) find circuits
that are the most informative to the specific tasks and (ii)
compress them from the overall language models.

*
Equal contribution; alphabetical order by last name.
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China 3 Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou,
China 4 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong, China 5 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China 6 Tencent, Shenzhen, China
7
Hupan Lab, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Tingyang Xu
<xuty 007@hotmail.com>, Jia Li <jialee@ust.hk>.

1

In this work, we propose the Information Bottleneck Circuit
(IBCircuit), a novel IB framework designed to identify the
informative components within Transformer-based language
models. IBCircuit is an optimization framework for holistic

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

