MERIT: Maximum-normalized Element-wise Ratio for
Language Model Large-batch Training

Yang Luo 1 Zangwei Zheng 1 Ziheng Qin 1 Zirui Zhu 1 Yong Liu 1 Yang You 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large-batch training has become a cornerstone
in accelerating the training of deep neural networks, yet it poses challenges in optimization and
generalization. Existing optimizers like AdamW
present performance degradation during language
models’ large-batch training, due to the information bottleneck in attention layers caused by the
sharp increase of max attention logit. While the
LAMB optimizer partially addresses this issue,
some attention layers still face this issue. The reason is that l2 -norm-based trust ratios in LAMB are
less effective in directly influencing the max value
of query/key weights. Furthermore, the weightwise trust ratio in LAMB is error-prone as it overlooks relationships of weight values within rows
or columns. Building on these observations, we
propose a novel optimizer, MERIT, which leverages the max-norm to calculate the trust ratio to
constrain the max attention logit more effectively.
Moreover, we further construct element-wise trust
ratios to provide more robust update scaling by
focusing on local weight structures. Extensive
experiments of large-batch training across various sizes of GPT-2 models demonstrate the superior performance of MERIT. Notably, during
the training of GPT-2 Medium, MERIT enables
a 6k batch size without any performance degradation compared to the standard batch size (480)
with 48B training tokens. This work highlights
the importance of considering the max attention
logit and finer-granularity trust ratio in large-batch
training. It successfully improves the training
stability and paves the way for larger batch usage, enabling faster development and iteration
of large language models. Code is available at
https://github.com/NUS-HPC-AI-Lab/MERIT/.

The advent of large language models has revolutionized
natural language processing, achieving unprecedented performance across a wide range of tasks (Touvron et al., 2023;
Dubey et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024). However, the increasing
size and complexity of language models always result in a
high time cost for the training. With the growing availability
of powerful GPU clusters and specialized hardware accelerators, large-batch training can dramatically reduce the time
required to train state-of-the-art models, making it possible
to iterate faster and explore more ambitious architectures by
processing more data in parallel.
While large-batch training offers the potential for increased
parallelism and faster convergence, it also introduces complex optimization dynamics that can impede model performance and stability (Keskar et al., 2017; Goyal et al., 2018;
Shallue et al., 2019). Training large language models with
large batches typically encounters one main issue: research
has shown that training with large batches often leads to
models performing poorly on unseen data. When using
AdamW optimizer with large batch size, Figure 1 shows
clear performance degradation, requiring additional training
tokens to reach comparable generalization levels.
This paper identifies a crucial problem in large-batch training of language models: we observe the sharp increase
of max attention logit in attention layers during the training process using AdamW optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2017;
Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). The inflated max attention
logit can result in overly sharp attention distributions, potentially causing the model to focus on specific tokens or
patterns overly, thus hindering its ability to capture overall
information in the data (Zhai et al., 2023).
While LAMB (You et al., 2020) successfully reduces the
max attention logit in the first layer of GPT-2 models (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) by applying a weightwise trust ratio, it faces limitations in further decreasing the
value in the medium layer. The limitation arises from the
lower efficiency of l2 norm than max norm (largest absolute value) in preventing query/key weights from reaching
extremely high values.

1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yang You <youy@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Moreover, our analysis reveals that rows and columns in
1

