Adapting to Evolving Adversaries with Regularized Continual Robust Training

Sihui Dai * 1 2 Christian Cianfarani * 3 Vikash Sehwag 4 Prateek Mittal 2 Arjun Bhagoji 5

Abstract
Robust Accuracy (%)

100

Robust training methods typically defend against
specific attack types, such as ℓp attacks with fixed
budgets, and rarely account for the fact that defenders may encounter new attacks over time. A
natural solution is to adapt the defended model
to new adversaries as they arise via fine-tuning,
a method which we call continual robust training (CRT). However, when implemented naively,
fine-tuning on new attacks degrades robustness
on previous attacks. This raises the question: how
can we improve the initial training and fine-tuning
of the model to simultaneously achieve robustness
against previous and new attacks? We present
theoretical results which show that the gap in
a model’s robustness against different attacks is
bounded by how far each attack perturbs a sample
in the model’s logit space, suggesting that regularizing with respect to this logit space distance can
help maintain robustness against previous attacks.
Extensive experiments on 3 datasets (CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNette) and over 100 attack combinations demonstrate that the proposed
regularization improves robust accuracy with little overhead in training time. Our findings and
open-source code1 lay the groundwork for the
deployment of models robust to evolving attacks.

`2 Attack
StAdv Attack

80
60
40
20
0
No ALR

ALR

t=0
Train on `2 Attack

No ALR

ALR

t=1
Fine-tune on StAdv

Figure 1: Impact of our proposed regularization term
(ALR) in both training and fine-tuning on CIFAR-10.
Adversarial ℓ2 regularization (ALR) significantly improves
generalization to the unforeseen StAdv attack when performing adversarial training for ℓ2 robustness. Using ALR
when subsequently fine-tuning with only StAdv attack also
decreases the drop in ℓ2 robustness.
et al., 2019; Croce et al., 2020) assume that the adversary is
restricted to a narrow threat model such as an ℓp ball of fixed
radius around the input. When this assumption is violated,
the robustness of adversarially trained models can significantly degrade (Dai et al., 2023; Kaufmann et al., 2019).
Additionally, due to rapid development of new types of attacks (Xiao et al., 2018; Laidlaw & Feizi, 2019; Laidlaw
et al., 2021; Kaufmann et al., 2019), it is difficult to anticipate all types of attacks in advance. This raises the question:
how can we defend models as new attacks emerge?
For long-term robustness, models must quickly adapt to new
attacks without sacrificing robustness to previous ones, a
goal known as continual adaptive robustness (CAR) (Dai
et al., 2024b) (§2). A natural approach is to apply adversarial
training on known attacks and fine-tune when new ones
emerge, a process we call continual robust training (CRT).
However, adversarial training provides poor generalization
to unseen attacks, leading to suboptimal starting points for
fine-tuning, and fine-tuning itself can degrade robustness
against past attacks (Figure 1).

1. Introduction
For safety critical applications, it is important to defend machine learning (ML) models against test-time attacks. However, many existing defenses (Madry et al., 2018; Zhang
*

Equal contribution 1 CapitalOne 2 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Princeton University 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of Chicago 4 Google Deepmind 5 Centre for Machine Intelligence and Data Science, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. Correspondence to:
Sihui Dai <sihui.dai@capitalone.com>, Christian Cianfarani
<crc@uchicago.edu>.

We theoretically show that the robustness gap between attacks is linked to logit-space distances between perturbed
and clean inputs and that regularizing these distances can
improve generalization to new attacks and reduce drops
in robustness on previous attacks. Extensive experiments
confirm these findings. Our key contributions are as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at: https://github.com/
inspire-group/continual_robust_training/

1

