A Recipe for Causal Graph Regression: Confounding Effects Revisited

Yujia Yin * 1 Tianyi Qu * 2 3 Zihao Wang 4 Yifan Chen 1

Abstract
Through recognizing causal subgraphs, causal
graph learning (CGL) has risen to be a promising approach for improving the generalizability of
graph neural networks under out-of-distribution
(OOD) scenarios. However, the empirical successes of CGL techniques are mostly exemplified
in classification settings, while regression tasks,
a more challenging setting in graph learning, are
overlooked. We thus devote this work to tackling
causal graph regression (CGR); to this end we reshape the processing of confounding effects in existing CGL studies, which mainly deal with classification. Specifically, we reflect on the predictive power of confounders in graph-level regression, and generalize classification-specific causal
intervention techniques to regression through a
lens of contrastive learning. Extensive experiments on graph OOD benchmarks validate the efficacy of our proposals for CGR. The model implementation and the code are provided on https:
//github.com/causal-graph/CGR.

S

G

C

Y

G : Full Graph
C : Causal Subgraph
S : Confounding Subgraph
Y : Response

Figure 1. Structural causal model (SCM) for graph regression.

The core methodology of causal learning involves the identification and differentiation of causal features from confounding ones. As shown in Figure 1, causal features C are those
directly deciding responses Y , whereas confounding features S (shorthand for “spurious”) solely present spurious
correlations. Therefore, understanding how causal features
(as well as confounding features) and responses interact
plays a central role in practical designing of causal learning
methods. From this perspective, causal graph regression
(CGR) warrants specialized handling since the interaction
between features and responses therein is significantly different from classification. Furthermore, regression is in general
a more challenging task than classification, and techniques
working for classification, Perceptron (Rosenblatt, 1958) for
example, may not apply to regression.

1. Introduction

Specifically in CGL, the identification of causal subgraphs
is seemingly transferable since this step, explicitly or implicitly, relies on the calculation of mutual information and
is compatible with both settings (c.f. Section 3.2). However, the empirical performance of this vanilla adaptation
on regression tasks is dwarfed by empirical risk minimization (Vapnik, 1991, ERM) w.r.t. least squares loss (see the
results in Sections 5.3 and 5.4).

Causal graph learning (CGL) (Lin et al., 2021) holds particular importance due to its relevance in fields such as drug
discovery (Qiao et al., 2024) and climate modeling (Zhao
et al., 2024). However, previous CGL studies focus on classification settings. Some of them cannot be directly extended
to regression tasks, such as property prediction (Rollins
et al., 2024), traffic flow forecasting (Li et al., 2021), and
credit risk scoring (Ma et al., 2024), because the transition
from finite to infinite support makes discrete labels unavailable. Graphs thus cannot be informatively grouped. A
systematical understanding of how CGL techniques should
be adapted to graph-level regression is still under-explored.

To crack CGR, we revisit the processing of confounding effects, which conceptually constitutes causal graph learning
along with causal subgraph identification as shown in Figure 1. Existing CGL methods, such as CAL (Sui et al., 2022)
and DisC (Fan et al., 2022), are built on a strong assumption
that confounding subgraphs contain strictly no predictive
power. We reflect on this assumption and speculate it is
hardly practical due to the contradiction with real-world
observations: in molecular property prediction, for example,
molecular weight is noncausal to toxicity while does exhibit
strong correlations.

*
Equal contribution 1 Hong Kong Baptist University 2 SF Tech
Zhejiang University 4 Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology. Correspondence to: Tianyi Qu <qutianyi@sfexpress.com>, Yifan Chen <yifanc@hkbu.edu.hk>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

