Machine Learning Meets Algebraic Combinatorics: A Suite of Datasets
Capturing Research-level Conjecturing Ability in Pure Mathematics

Herman Chau * 1 Helen Jenne * 2 Davis Brown * 2 3 Jesse He 2 4 Mark Raugas 2 Sara C. Billey 1
Henry Kvinge 2 1

Abstract

is now increasing evidence that frontier AI systems are
capable of performing tasks requiring high-level reasoning
capabilities. These trends have led to excitement around
the use of machine learning in mathematics. Much of this
research explores the use of LLMs and related models to
aid in proof writing and mathematical formalization (Song
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024). While this is an essential
part of the mathematician’s workflow, there is also a need
for machine assisted conjecture generation using (what we
call) ‘raw’ mathematical data. Before identifying a claim
that they want to try to prove, a mathematician needs to
work through many examples to build intuition and better
understand their object of study. For example, when trying
to better understand the coefficients of a particular family of
polynomials (e.g., Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials in Section
4), a mathematician may search through countless examples,
looking for patterns or other features of interest that may be
the basis of future theorems.

With recent dramatic increases in AI system capabilities, there has been growing interest in utilizing machine learning for reasoning-heavy, quantitative tasks, particularly mathematics. While
there are many resources capturing mathematics
at the high-school, undergraduate, and graduate
level, there are far fewer resources available that
align with the level of difficulty and open endedness encountered by professional mathematicians
working on open problems. To address this, we introduce a new collection of datasets, the Algebraic
Combinatorics Dataset Repository (ACD Repo),
representing either foundational results or open
problems in algebraic combinatorics, a subfield
of mathematics that studies discrete structures
arising from abstract algebra. Further differentiating our dataset collection is the fact that it
aims at the conjecturing process. Each dataset includes an open-ended research level question and
a large collection of examples (up to 10M in some
cases) from which conjectures should be generated. We describe all nine datasets, the different
ways machine learning models can be applied to
them (e.g., training with narrow models followed
by interpretability analysis or program synthesis
with LLMs), and discuss some of the challenges
involved in designing datasets like these.

Existing applications of machine learning to raw mathematics data tend to fall into several clusters. The first are
toy problems (for which we already know many solutions),
which are used by the interpretability and science of deep
learning communities as a stand-in for more complicated
real-world tasks (Zhong et al., 2024; Nanda et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2023; Lee et al.). Another group uses reinforcement
learning methods to search for counterexamples to conjectures (Charton et al., 2024; Mehrabian et al., 2024; Wagner,
2021). There is also a growing body of work coming from
the mathematics community where off-the-shelf ML methods are just one of several tools used to make progress on a
specific problem (Coates et al., 2024; Wagner, 2021; Bao
et al., 2022; Kazalicki & Vlah, 2023; Davies et al., 2021).
Finally in a few instances, foundation models have begun
to be deployed to address specific mathematical questions
(Romera-Paredes et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Modern approaches to machine learning (ML) have been
shown to be capable of extracting sophisticated patterns
from large and complex datasets. At the same time, there
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Washington 2 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 3 University of Pennsylvania 4 University
of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Herman Chau
<hchau@uw.edu>, Henry Kvinge <henry.kvinge@pnnl.gov>.

While these works either present interesting methodological
progress in ML or valuable results in mathematics, none aim
to provide a range of datasets accessible to the broader ML
community that represent open or equivalently challenging
research-level problems. To fill this gap, we present the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

