Dimensionality Reduction on Complex Vector Spaces
for Euclidean Distance with Dynamic Weights

Simone Moretti 1 * Paolo Pellizzoni 2 1 * Francesco Silvestri 1

Abstract

The weighted Euclidean distance is a frequently used primitive in several learning tasks for improving output quality, as
weights can capture the estimated relevance of a feature on
the output (Niño-Adan et al., 2021). In the context of LLMs,
attention scores are used to weight the relative importance of
each component in a sequence relative to the other elements
in that sequence (Vaswani et al., 2017), while weighted lowrank approximation is used to compress models by taking
into account the importance of parameters (Hsu et al., 2022;
Woodruff & Yasuda, 2024). In recommendation systems,
weights can improve the accuracy of prediction since it can
enhance the role of relevant products while reducing the
impacts of irrelevant products (Wang et al., 2015; Gu et al.,
2016; Yu et al., 2003). Text k-NN classifiers use weights
for taking into account the distribution of the terms across
classes estimated from training data (Moreo et al., 2020;
Bhattacharya et al., 2017). Most algorithmic methods supporting these applications assume that weights are known
and fixed. However, weights might change over time or
be not known at preprocessing time, a setting that we hereinafter refer to as “dynamic weights”. Examples include
nearest neighbor methods (Indyk & Motwani, 1998) for
classification or recommender systems (Baumgärtner et al.,
2022), where the relative importance of features might depend on the type of query at hand. Weights might be estimated on highly dynamic datasets that require a frequent
update of the parameters (e.g., (Banihashem et al., 2024)).
Moreover, weights might be user dependent and it might be
too expensive to construct indexes for each possible set of
weights, as in the aforementioned case of recommendation
systems. For this reason, recent works have been addressing
dynamic settings, such as for weighted Euclidean distance
for the near neighbor search problem (Lei et al., 2019; Hu
& Li, 2021).

The weighted Euclidean norm ∥x∥w of a vector x ∈ Rd with weights w ∈ Rd is the Euclidean norm where the contribution of each
dimension is scaled by a given weight. Approaches to dimensionality reduction that satisfy
the Johnson–Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma can be
easily adapted to the weighted Euclidean distance
if weights are known and fixed: it suffices to
scale each dimension of the input vectors according to the weights, and then apply any standard
approach. However, this is not the case when
weights are unknown during the dimensionality
reduction or might dynamically change. In this
paper, we address this issue by providing a linear
function that maps vectors into a smaller complex
vector space and allows to retrieve a JL-like estimate for the weighted Euclidean distance once
weights are revealed. Our results are based on
the decomposition of the complex dimensionality reduction into several Rademacher chaos random variables, which are studied using novel concentration inequalities for sums of independent
Rademacher chaoses.

1. Introduction
The weighted Euclidean distance between two vectors is a
Euclidean distance where the contribution of each dimension is scaled by a given weight representing the relevance
of the dimension. Specifically, given a vector x ∈ Rd and a
weight vector w ∈ Rd (with wi ≥ 0 for all i ∈ {1, . . . d}),
the weighted
qP norm of x with weights w is defined as
d
2 2
∥x∥w =
i=1 wi xi . The weighted Euclidean distance
between two vectors x, y is then defined as ∥x − y∥w .

The goal of this paper is to investigate the impact of dynamically weighted distance in dimensionality reduction
techniques. Dimensionality reduction methods map highdimensional vectors into a space with lower dimensionality,
while keeping some information on the original vectors; the
low-dimension vectors reduce communication and storage
costs and mitigate the curse of dimensionality in the running
time. A well-known result on dimensionality reduction is
provided by the Johnson–Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma (John-

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Padova, Italy 2 Max Planck
Institute of Biochemistry, Germany. Correspondence to: Francesco
Silvestri <francesco.silvestri@unipd.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

