Eigenspectrum Analysis of Neural Networks without Aspect Ratio Bias

Yuanzhe Hu 1 Kinshuk Goel 2 3 Vlad Killiakov 4 Yaoqing Yang 2

Abstract

while enabling more effective layer-wise hyperparameter assignment. In one of the LLM pruning
experiments, FARMS reduces the perplexity of
the LLaMA-7B model by 17.3% when compared
with state-of-the-art methods.

Diagnosing deep neural networks (DNNs) by analyzing the eigenspectrum of their weights has
been an active area of research in recent years.
One of the main approaches involves measuring
the heavytailness of the empirical spectral densities (ESDs) of weight matrices. This analysis has
been shown to provide insights to help diagnose
whether a model is well-trained or undertrained,
and has been used to guide training methods involving layer-wise hyperparameter assignment.
In this paper, we address an often-overlooked
challenge in estimating the heavytailness of these
ESDs: the impact of the aspect ratio of weight
matrices. We demonstrate that matrices of varying sizes (and aspect ratios) introduce a nonnegligible bias in estimating the heavytailness of
ESDs, leading to inaccurate model diagnosis and
layer-wise hyperparameter assignment. To overcome this challenge, we propose FARMS (FixedAspect-Ratio Matrix Subsampling), a method that
normalizes the weight matrices by subsampling
submatrices with a fixed aspect ratio. Instead of
measuring the heavytailness of the original ESD,
we measure the average ESD of these subsampled
submatrices. We show that this method effectively
mitigates the aspect ratio bias. We validate our
approach across various optimization techniques
and application domains that involve eigenspectrum analysis of weights, including image classification in computer vision (CV) models, scientific
machine learning (SciML) model training, and
large language model (LLM) pruning. Our results
show that despite its simplicity, FARMS uniformly
improves the accuracy of eigenspectrum analysis

1. Introduction

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, NH, USA 3 Department of
Computer Science & Engineering, SRM Institute of Science &
Technology, India 4 Independent Researcher, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yuanzhe Hu
<yuanzhe.hu@dartmouth.edu>.

Random Matrix Theory (RMT) has long been used as a
foundational tool in multiple research domains (Guhr et al.,
1998; Tulino & Verdú, 2004; Bai & Silverstein, 2010; Tao,
2012; Nadakuditi & Newman, 2012) and has now been
applied to providing precise characterizations of neural networks (NNs) (Pennington & Worah, 2017; Dobriban & Wager, 2018; Adlam & Pennington, 2020; Mei & Montanari,
2022; Hastie et al., 2022; Hu & Lu, 2022; Ba et al., 2022;
Couillet & Liao, 2022; Derezinski et al., 2020). Among
several emerging topics in this field, Heavy-Tailed SelfRegularization (HT-SR) (Martin & Mahoney, 2021; Mahoney & Martin, 2019; Martin et al., 2021) Theory has been
gaining significant attention. Unlike conventional RMT
studies, HT-SR Theory focuses on studying weight matrices
with strongly correlated elements, a typical characteristic of
well-trained, practical DNNs. These strong correlations lead
to heavy-tailed (HTed) ESDs (Martin & Mahoney, 2021).
Analyzing these HT ESDs provides valuable insights into
the quality of trained models, enabling both model diagnostics and improvements in model training. For example, Martin & Mahoney (2021) show that one can locate
undertrained layers by finding weight matrices with less
HTed ESDs, which provides useful metrics for model selection and ranking (Martin et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023).
Furthermore, one can use a larger learning rate on the undertrained layers (Zhou et al., 2024), which provides an empirically successful training method to balance these layers
with other, more well-trained ones. This technique has been
developed into a general approach to improve test accuracy,
training efficiency, and model interpretability in various applications, such as image classification (Zhou et al., 2024),
LLM model pruning (Lu et al., 2024), and SciML model
training and fine-tuning (Liu et al., 2024; 2025b).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The core of the HT-SR theory lies in the measurement of
the heavytailness of ESDs. In this context, we identified
an often-overlooked issue in prior studies: weight matrices

1

1

