NTPP: Generative Speech Language Modeling for Dual-Channel Spoken
Dialogue via Next-Token-Pair Prediction

Qichao Wang * 1 Ziqiao Meng * 1 2 Wenqian Cui 3 Yifei Zhang 4 Pengcheng Wu 4 Bingzhe Wu 5 Irwin King 3
Liang Chen Peilin Zhao 1 6

Abstract

(b) Backchannel

(a) Overlap

Uh-huh.

(c) Reflective Pause

Inspired by the impressive capabilities of GPT4o, there is growing interest in enabling speech
language models (SLMs) to engage in natural,
fluid spoken interactions with humans. Recent
advancements have led to the development of
several SLMs that demonstrate promising results
in this area. However, current approaches have
yet to fully exploit dual-channel speech data,
which inherently captures the structure and dynamics of human conversation. In this work, we
systematically explore the use of dual-channel
speech data in the context of modern large language models, and introduce a novel generative modeling paradigm—Next-Token-Pair Prediction (NTPP)—to enable speaker-independent
dual-channel spoken dialogue learning using
decoder-only architectures for the first time. We
evaluate our approach on standard benchmarks,
and empirical results show that our proposed
method, NTPP, significantly improves the conversational abilities of SLMs in terms of turntaking prediction, response coherence, and naturalness. Moreover, compared to existing methods,
NTPP achieves substantially lower inference latency, highlighting its practical efficiency for realtime applications. Demo and code can be found
at https://audio-3059.pages.dev.

Let me think, err... , for example, you can tell a story.

(d) Interruption
You can take

…Silence…

Alright, that's enough.

Figure 1. The dual-channel speech encapsulates various conversational turn-taking events, including: (a) Overlap, (b) Backchannel,
(c) Pause, and (d) Interruption. These events are intermingled
within the single-channel audio stream but could be explicitly observed in the dual-channel audio stream.

1. Introduction

*Equal contribution. This work is done when the first
two authors work as interns in Tencent AI Lab. 1 Tencent
2
National University of Singapore 3 The Chinese University
of Hong Kong 4 Nanyang Technological University 5 Shenzhen
University 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence
to: Ziqiao Meng <zq-meng@nus.edu.sg>, Peilin Zhao <masonzhao@tencent.com>.

The emergence of large language models (LLMs), especially the GPT series as referenced in (Patel et al., 2023;
OpenAI, 2023; 2024), has significantly revolutionized the
realm of artificial intelligence. These potent language models (LMs) derive their capabilities from pretraining on vast
text corpora, utilizing decoder-only transformer architectures, and are steered by a next-token prediction (NTP)
objective function. Recently, there’s been a surge of interest in merging LLMs with other modalities, such as images
(Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b), audio
(Zhang et al., 2023a; Hassid et al., 2023), protein sequences
(Lin et al., 2022; Madani et al., 2023), and more. Among
these modalities, audio or speech data is particularly crucial
as it allows LLMs to engage in real-time vocal interactions
with humans. The recently introduced GPT-4o model (OpenAI, 2024) demonstrates exceptional proficiency in handling
real-time interactions with users in conversational contexts.
During the demo presentation, it was capable of generating genuine emotional responses and engaging users with
prompt reactions. However, these functionalities present
additional challenges, as the model must accurately interpret
the unique audio information embedded in human speech
while performing inference with minimal delay.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

A wide range of advanced speech language models (SLMs)
(Xie & Wu, 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a; Fang et al., 2024;
Hassid et al., 2023; Rubenstein et al., 2023; Nguyen et al.,
1

