Persistent Topological Features in Large Language Models

Yuri Gardinazzi* 1 2 Karthik Viswanathan* 1 3 Giada Panerai 1 2
Alessio Ansuini 1 Alberto Cazzaniga 1 Matteo Biagetti 1

Abstract

about interpretability and transparency (Liao & Vaughan,
2023). Moreover, their large scale demands a considerable
amount of computational resources (Samsi et al., 2023; Bai
et al., 2024), making it essential to reduce their size without
compromising performance (Ma et al., 2023; Gromov et al.,
2024; Men et al., 2024).

Understanding the decision-making processes
of large language models is critical given their
widespread applications. To achieve this, we
aim to connect a formal mathematical framework—zigzag persistence from topological data
analysis —with practical and easily applicable
algorithms. Zigzag persistence is particularly effective for characterizing data as it dynamically
transforms across model layers. Within this framework, we introduce topological descriptors that
measure how topological features, p-dimensional
holes, persist and evolve throughout the layers.
Unlike methods that assess each layer individually and then aggregate the results, our approach
directly tracks the full evolutionary path of these
features. This offers a statistical perspective on
how prompts are rearranged and their relative positions changed in the representation space, providing insights into the system’s operation as an
integrated whole. To demonstrate the expressivity
and applicability of our framework, we highlight
how sensitive these descriptors are to different
models and a variety of datasets. As a showcase application to a downstream task, we use
zigzag persistence to establish a criterion for layer
pruning, achieving results comparable to state-ofthe-art methods while preserving the system-level
perspective.

One strategy for addressing these issues has been to study
the models’ internal representations. Early works (Zeiler &
Fergus, 2014) demonstrated that visualization techniques
can effectively uncover hierarchical representations within
convolutional neural networks, highlighting how lower layers focus on edge detection while higher layers correspond
to object parts and semantic concepts. Additionally, (Olah
et al., 2018) illustrated that analyzing weight matrices and
neuron activations can reveal interpretable features and organizational structures within deep networks, providing insights into how complex patterns are encoded and processed.
More recently, geometric studies made progress by introducing concepts like intrinsic dimension to characterize
the manifold of internal representations and its evolution
across layers (Ansuini et al., 2019; Doimo et al., 2020; Pope
et al., 2021). These methods have been successfully applied
to transformer models in various works (Valeriani et al.,
2023; Tulchinskii et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2023; 2024;
Viswanathan et al., 2025). One notable achievement of
this approach has been to show the emergence of semantic
knowledge and abstraction phases in the middle layers of
models, rather than at the final layers, as might be intuitively
expected.
However, these approaches provide only a static view of
internal representations and suffer limitations in tracking
their changes across layers.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language processing by achieving unprecedented performance levels across a wide range of tasks (see Raiaan
et al. (2024) for a review). Despite their success, the blackbox nature of these models has raised significant concerns

A natural framework to address these limitations and to offer a more comprehensive characterization of the geometry
of internal representations of neural networks is Topological Data Analysis (TDA). TDA is a set of unsupervised
techniques that offers robust methods to describe the shape
and structure of complex datasets. It has seen exponential
growth with applications in computational biology (Mandal et al., 2020), cosmology (Biagetti et al., 2021; Yip
et al., 2024)], personalized medicine (Skaf & Laubenbacher,
2022), time-dependent data analysis (El-Yaagoubi et al.,

*

Equal contribution 1 Area Science Park 2 University of Trieste
University of Amsterdam. Correspondence to: Matteo Biagetti
<matteo.biagetti@areasciencepark.it>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

