Latent Diffusion Planning for Imitation Learning

Amber Xie 1 Oleh Rybkin 2 Dorsa Sadigh 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract

collect. While it is often easier to collect in-domain data that
is suboptimal or action-free, these methods are not designed
to use such data, as they rely on directly modeling optimal
actions.

Recent progress in imitation learning has been
enabled by policy architectures that scale to complex visuomotor tasks, multimodal distributions,
and large datasets. However, these methods often rely on learning from large amount of expert
demonstrations. To address these shortcomings,
we propose Latent Diffusion Planning (LDP), a
modular approach consisting of a planner which
can leverage action-free demonstrations, and an
inverse dynamics model which can leverage suboptimal data, that both operate over a learned latent space. First, we learn a compact latent space
through a variational autoencoder, enabling effective forecasting of future states in image-based
domains. Then, we train a planner and an inverse
dynamics model with diffusion objectives. By
separating planning from action prediction, LDP
can benefit from the denser supervision signals of
suboptimal and action-free data. On simulated visual robotic manipulation tasks, LDP outperforms
state-of-the-art imitation learning approaches, as
they cannot leverage such additional data. 1

Prior works in offline RL, reward-conditioned policies, or
imitation learning from suboptimal demonstrations attempt
to leverage suboptimal trajectories, though they are still unable to utilize action-free data. Notably, these works often
make restrictive assumptions like access to either reward
labels (Kumar et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Kumar et al.,
2019a), the optimality of demonstrations (Beliaev et al.,
2022), or similar metrics (Zhang et al., 2022), which can be
impractical or noisy to label. Other works implicitly attempt
to use unlabelled, suboptimal data via pretraining on such
data and later fine-tuning the policy on the optimal data (Radosavovic et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b; Cui et al., 2024).
While these approaches can potentially learn representations
during pretraining, it does not necessarily improve planning
capabilities of these methods.
Our key idea is to take a modular approach, where we separate learning a video planner from learning an inverse dynamics model. Each one of these two components can
leverage different types of data. For instance, a planner
can benefit from action-free data, while an IDM can leverage unlabelled suboptimal data. While using a modular
approach has been proposed in recent prior work (Du et al.,
2023a; Black et al., 2023), prior approaches focus on highlevel decision making by forecasting subgoals, limiting its
capabilities for closed loop re-planning in robotics tasks.
These works also operate across images, which are highdimensional and expensive to generate. To create an efficient
modular approach that can benefit from all forms of data
(suboptimal, action-free, and optimal), we propose learning the planner and inverse-dynamics model over a learned,
compact latent space, allowing for closed-loop robot policies. Our imitation learning objective consists of forecasting
a dense trajectory of latent states, scaling up gracefully to
vision-based domains without the computational complexities of video generation.

1. Introduction
Combining large-scale expert datasets and powerful imitation learning policies has been a promising direction for
robot learning. Recent methods using transformer backbones or diffusion heads (Octo Model Team et al., 2024;
Kim et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Chi et al., 2023) have capitalized on new robotics datasets pooled together from many
institutions (Khazatsky et al., 2024; Open X-Embodiment
Collaboration et al., 2023), showing potential for learning
generalizable robot policies. However, this recipe is fundamentally limited by expert data, as robotics demonstration
data can be challenging, time-consuming, and expensive to
1
Stanford 2 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Amber Xie <amberxie@stanford.edu>.

We propose Latent Diffusion Planning (LDP), which learns
a planner that can be trained on action-free data; and an inverse dynamics model (IDM) that can be trained on data that
may be suboptimal. First, it trains a variational autoencoder

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Project Website and Code: https://amberxie88.
github.io/ldp/

1

