Learning Policy Committees for Effective Personalization
in MDPs with Diverse Tasks
Luise Ge 1 Michael Lanier 1 Anindya Sarkar 1 Bengisu Guresti 1 Chongjie Zhang 1 Yevgeniy Vorobeychik 1

Abstract

crap, 2015) to game playing (Xu et al., 2018). However,
many real-world applications involve highly diverse sets
of tasks, making it impractical to rely on a single, fixed
policy. In these settings, both the reward structures and
the transition dynamics can vary significantly across tasks.
Existing approaches, such as multi-task RL (MTRL) and
meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL), struggle to generalize effectively for diverse and previously unseen tasks.

Many dynamic decision problems, such as robotic
control, involve a series of tasks, many of which
are unknown at training time. Typical approaches
for these problems, such as multi-task and metareinforcement learning, do not generalize well
when the tasks are diverse. On the other hand,
approaches that aim to tackle task diversity, such
as using task embedding as policy context and
task clustering, typically lack performance guarantees and require a large number of training
tasks. To address these challenges, we propose
a novel approach for learning a policy committee
that includes at least one near-optimal policy with
high probability for tasks encountered during execution. While we show that this problem is in
general inapproximable, we present two practical
algorithmic solutions. The first yields provable
approximation and task sample complexity guarantees when tasks are low-dimensional (the best
we can do due to inapproximability), whereas the
second is a general and practical gradient-based
approach. In addition, we provide a provable
sample complexity bound for few-shot learning.
Our experiments on MuJoCo and Meta-World
show that the proposed approach outperforms
state-of-the-art multi-task, meta-, and task clustering baselines in training, generalization, and
few-shot learning, often by a large margin. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
CERL-WUSTL/PACMAN/.

Multi-task RL methods typically train a single policy or a
shared representation across tasks (Vithayathil Varghese &
Mahmoud, 2020). However, they often face negative transfer, where optimizing for one task degrades performance
on others (Zhang et al., 2022). On the other hand, metaRL approaches, such as Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML) (Finn et al., 2017b) and PEARL (Rakelly et al.,
2019), aim to enable fast adaptation to new tasks but rely
heavily on fine-tuning at test time, which can be computationally expensive and ineffective in environments with high
variability in both rewards and transitions, like Meta-World
benchmark tasks (Yu et al., 2020b).
Several lines of work attempt to address the problem of
diverse tasks and negative transfer. The first is to learn policies through MTRL or meta-RL that explicitly take task
representation as input (Lan et al., 2024; Grigsby et al.,
2024; Sodhani et al., 2021; Zintgraf et al., 2020). However,
such approaches rely on shared parameters, which limit the
model’s flexibility. When tasks are highly diverse, using a
single neural network— even with a multi-head architecture— may not generalize effectively. Moreover, the greater
the task variation, the more data is typically required to train
policies that can effectively condition on task embeddings,
and the model will often generalize poorly when the number
of training tasks is small.

1. Introduction

Several alternative methods have thus emerged that propose
clustering tasks and training distinct policies for each cluster (Ackermann et al., 2021; Ivanov & Ben-Porat, 2024).
The associated algorithmic approaches commonly leverage
EM-style methods that interleave RL and task clustering. In
practice, however, they also require a large number of training tasks to be effective and consequently perform poorly
when the number of training tasks is small. In addition, if
the number of clusters is too small, some clusters may still

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in a variety of domains, from robotic control (Lilli1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis. Correspondence to: Luise Ge
<g.luise@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

