Beyond Confidence: Exploiting Homogeneous Pattern
for Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation

Rui Sun 1 * Huayu Mai 2 3 * Wangkai Li 2 3 Yujia Chen 2 3 Naisong Luo 2 Yuan Wang 2 Tianzhu Zhang 2 3

Abstract

widespread applications such as embodied intelligence (Everingham et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2022), autonomous driving (Asgari Taghanaki et al., 2021), etc. However, its datadriven nature makes it labor-intensive and time-consuming
to gather massive pixel-level annotations as training data.
For example, it takes around 1.5 hours to label a single
image on Cityscapes (Cordts et al., 2016) with merely 19
classes. To alleviate the data-hunger issue, considerable
works (Yang et al., 2022a; Sun et al., 2023c; Hu et al., 2021)
have turned their attention to semi-supervised semantic segmentation task. Since only limited labeled data is accessible,
how to fully exploit a large amount of unlabeled data to improve the model’s generalization performance for robust
segmentation is thus extremely challenging.

The critical challenge of semi-supervised semantic segmentation lies in how to fully exploit a large
volume of unlabeled data to improve the model’s
generalization performance for robust segmentation. Existing methods mainly rely on confidencebased scoring functions in the prediction space
to filter pseudo labels, which suffer from the inherent trade-off between true and false positive
rates. In this paper, we carefully design an agent
construction strategy to build clean sets of correct
(positive) and incorrect (negative) pseudo labels,
and propose the Agent Score function (AgScore)
to measure the consensus between candidate pixels and these sets. In this way, AgScore takes
a step further to capture homogeneous patterns
in the embedding space, conditioned on clean
positive/negative agents stemming from the prediction space, without sacrificing the merits of
the confidence score, yielding a better trade-off.
We provide a theoretical analysis to understand
the mechanism of AgScore, and demonstrate its
effectiveness by integrating it into three semisupervised segmentation frameworks on Pascal
VOC, Cityscapes, and COCO datasets, showing
consistent improvements across all data partitions.

To leverage unlabeled data effectively, consistency regularization (Sajjadi et al., 2016; Laine & Aila, 2016) and
pseudo-labeling (Lee et al., 2013; Rizve et al., 2021) have
emerged as mainstream paradigms for semi-supervised segmentation. Recently, these two paradigms are often assembled in the form of a teacher-student scheme (Wang et al.,
2022a; Chen et al., 2023). In this scheme, the teacher network, with a weakly augmented view, generates pseudo
labels to instruct the learning of the student model under a
strongly augmented view. The success of this scheme relies
on the correctness of the pseudo labels, as the quality of the
selected pseudo labels determines the upper bound of performance. Therefore, it is crucial to design an appropriate
criterion (referred to as scoring function) to detect and reject
incorrect pseudo labels with low scores.

1. Introduction

Recently, confidence-based methods (Sohn et al., 2020; Mai
et al., 2024b; Na et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022b), such as
UniMatch (Yang et al., 2022a), have dominated this field
credited to their simplicity and competitive performance.
The mainstream practice is to attempt to set a hard threshold (e.g., 0.95) as a scoring function to filter out pixel-level
pseudo labels with low confidence in the prediction space.
However, this scoring function tends not to be preferred ascribed to the inherent trade-off between the true positive rate
(TPR) and false positive rate (FPR), as illustrated in Figure 1
(a). On the one hand, a high confidence threshold ensures
the quality of pseudo labels (low FPR), but it discards numerous unconfident yet correct pseudo labels (unfavorably low

Semantic segmentation, which aims to predict a specific
semantic class for each pixel, has achieved conspicuous
achievements attributed to the recent advances in deep neural network (Long et al., 2015) in computer vision with
*
Equal contribution 1 Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University 2 MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and
Technology of China 3 National Key Laboratory of Deep Space
Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory. Correspondence
to: Tianzhu Zhang <tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

