Differential Coding for Training-Free ANN-to-SNN Conversion

Zihan Huang 1 Wei FangB 2 Tong Bu 1 Peng Xue 3 4 Zecheng Hao 1 Wenxuan Liu 1 Yuanhong TangB 1
Zhaofei Yu 1 5 Tiejun Huang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are sometimes regarded
as the third generation of neural network models (Maass,
1997) for their unique neural dynamics and high biological
plausibility (Gerstner et al., 2014), making them a competitive candidate to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) (Li
et al., 2024). A significant difference between ANNs and
SNNs is the information representation. ANNs transmit
dense floating values between layers. While in SNNs, communications between layers are based on sparse and binary
spikes, which are triggered by the membrane potentials of
spiking neurons across the threshold, bringing event-driven
computations and extremely low power consumption on neuromorphic chips (Merolla et al., 2014; Davies et al., 2018;
DeBole et al., 2019; Pei et al., 2019).

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) exhibit significant potential due to their low energy consumption. Converting Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) to SNNs is an efficient way to achieve
high-performance SNNs. However, many conversion methods are based on rate coding, which
requires numerous spikes and longer time-steps
compared to directly trained SNNs, leading to
increased energy consumption and latency. This
article introduces differential coding for ANNto-SNN conversion, a novel coding scheme that
reduces spike counts and energy consumption by
transmitting changes in rate information rather
than rates directly, and explores its application
across various layers. Additionally, the threshold iteration method is proposed to optimize
thresholds based on activation distribution when
converting Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) to
spiking neurons. Experimental results on various Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Transformers demonstrate that the proposed
differential coding significantly improves accuracy while reducing energy consumption, particularly when combined with the threshold iteration method, achieving state-of-the-art performance. The source codes of the proposed
method are available at https://github.
com/h-z-h-cell/ANN-to-SNN-DCGS.

However, the discrete and non-differentiable spike firing
process causes huge learning challenges in SNNs. Recently,
this issue is solved partly by the surrogate learning method
(Neftci et al., 2019), which redefines the gradient of spike
firing process by a smooth and differentiable surrogate function. Enabled by the surrogate gradients, deep SNNs can be
trained by powerful backward propagation and gradient descent methods, and their performance are greatly improved
(Fang et al., 2021; Duan et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2024). The
applications of SNNs are also extended to complex eventbased vision tasks (Cordone et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025). Unfortunately, the surrogate gradient method is a coarse approximation, and may
mislead the gradient descent direction in multi-layer SNNs
(Gygax & Zenke, 2024). The time dimension of SNNs
leads to the employment of backpropagation through time
(BPTT), which requires nearly T times of training resources
than ANNs. Here T is the sequence-length, and is also
the number of time-steps of SNNs. Although some online
learning methods (Xiao et al., 2022; Bohnstingl et al., 2023;
Meng et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024) can estimate the full
gradients of BPTT by accumulation of single-step gradients,
their task accuracy is sub-optimal.

1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China 3 Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 4 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen,
China 5 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Wei Fang <fwei@pku.edu.cn>,
Yuanhong Tang <ydtang@pku.edu.cn>.

In addition to the surrogate gradient methods, the ANN
to SNN conversion methods (Cao et al., 2015; Han et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2021; Deng & Gu, 2021; Bu et al., 2022a;
2024) are another spiking deep learning methodology that

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

