Scaling Value Iteration Networks to 5000 Layers
for Extreme Long-Term Planning

Yuhui Wang * 1 Qingyuan Wu * 2 Dylan R. Ashley 1 3 Francesco Faccio 1 3 Weida Li 4
Chao Huang 2 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 3

Abstract

some older algorithms (e.g., Dyna (Sutton, 1991), A* (Hart
et al., 1968), and others (Schmidhuber, 1990a;b)) and many
recent ones (e.g., the Predictron (Silver et al., 2017), the
Dreamer family of algorithms (Hafner et al., 2020; 2021;
2023), SoRB (Eysenbach et al., 2019), SA-CADRL (Chen
et al., 2017), and the LLM-planner (Song et al., 2023)), effective planning is a long-standing and important challenge
in artificial intelligence (AI).

The Value Iteration Network (VIN) is an end-toend differentiable neural network architecture for
planning. It exhibits strong generalization to unseen domains by incorporating a differentiable
planning module that operates on a latent Markov
Decision Process (MDP). However, VINs struggle to scale to long-term and large-scale planning
tasks, such as navigating a 100 × 100 maze—a
task that typically requires thousands of planning
steps to solve. We observe that this deficiency
is due to two issues: the representation capacity of the latent MDP and the planning module’s
depth. We address these by augmenting the latent
MDP with a dynamic transition kernel, dramatically improving its representational capacity, and,
to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem, introduce an “adaptive highway loss” that constructs
skip connections to improve gradient flow. We
evaluate our method on 2D/3D maze navigation
environments, continuous control, and the realworld Lunar rover navigation task. We find that
our new method, named Dynamic Transition VIN
(DT-VIN), scales to 5000 layers and solves challenging versions of the above tasks. Altogether,
we believe that DT-VIN represents a concrete step
forward in performing long-term large-scale planning in complex environments.

Traditional search-based planning algorithms like A* require an accurate environmental model. Thus, these algorithms are less effective in scenarios with unknown environmental models or when the state and action spaces are
large or continuous. In such scenarios, a policy can be
learned either through imitation learning (IL), which leverages expert demonstrations, or through trial and error with
reinforcement learning (RL). Within RL and IL, the Value
Iteration Network (VIN) (Tamar et al., 2016) stands out as
quite unique due to its distinctive architecture that integrates
a differentiable latent “planning module” into the deep neural network, rather than maintaining an explicit learned
environment model like Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020) or
MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020). This integrated planning structure of VINs endows them with powerful generalization capabilities for unseen planning tasks. VINs have
been shown to perform well in some small-scale short-term
planning situations, like path planning (Pflueger et al., 2019;
Jin et al., 2021), autonomous navigation (Wöhlke et al.,
2021), and complex decision-making in dynamic environments (Li et al., 2021). However, they still struggle to solve
larger-scale and longer-term planning problems. We refer to
large-scale planning tasks as those with high-dimensional
observation space (e.g., the maze size), and long-term planning tasks as those necessitating extended planning horizons
to achieve the goal. For example, in a 100 × 100 maze navigation task, the success rate of VINs in reaching the goal
drops to well below 40% (see Figure 1(b)). Even in smaller
35 × 35 mazes, the success rate of VINs drops to 0% when
the required planning steps exceed 60 (see Figure 1(c)).

1. Introduction
Planning is the problem of finding a sequence of actions
that achieves a specific pre-defined goal. As the aim of both
*

Equal contribution 1 Center of Excellence for Generative AI,
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 2 The University of Southampton 3 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI,
Switzerland 4 National University of Singapore. Correspondence
to: Yuhui Wang <yuhui.wang@kaust.edu.sa>.

Our work identifies that the principal deficiency causing
this is the mismatch between the complexity of planning
and the comparatively weak representational capacity of

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

