nd

Leveraging 2

Online Curvature-Aware Replay:
Order Information for Online Continual Learning

Edoardo Urettini 1 2 Antonio Carta 1

Abstract

Learning (CL) approaches cannot be applied (Aljundi et al.,
2019b; Mai et al., 2022). Many specific OCL methods have
been developed, nearly all replay-based (Yoo et al., 2024),
but several shortcomings still exist: (Soutif-Cormerais et al.,
2023) shows that most OCL methods have high forgetting
and fail to beat a simple replay baseline on some metrics;
(De Lange et al., 2023; Caccia et al., 2022) discovered the
stability gap, a sudden drop in performance at task boundaries; (Dohare et al., 2024) even observed loss of plasticity,
limiting the ability to learn in time.

Online Continual Learning (OCL) models continuously adapt to nonstationary data streams,
usually without task information. These settings
are complex and many traditional CL methods
fail, while online methods (mainly replay-based)
suffer from instabilities after the task shift. To
address this issue, we formalize replay-based
OCL as a second-order online joint optimization
with explicit KL-divergence constraints on replay
data. We propose Online Curvature-Aware Replay (OCAR) to solve the problem: a method that
leverages second-order information of the loss
using a K-FAC approximation of the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) to precondition the gradient.
The FIM acts as a stabilizer to prevent forgetting while also accelerating the optimization in
non-interfering directions. We show how to adapt
the estimation of the FIM to a continual setting,
stabilizing second-order optimization for non-iid
data, uncovering the role of the Tikhonov damping in the stability-plasticity tradeoff. Empirical
results show that OCAR outperforms state-of-theart methods in continual metrics, achieving higher
average accuracy throughout the training process
in three different benchmarks.

These results suggest fundamental failures of the algorithms.
Most methods focus on preventing forgetting at the end
of a learning task, an approach that does not ensure stable
optimization throughout the entire stream (stability gap);
furthermore, stability is often optimized at the expense of
plasticity. We argue that a proper CL optimizer should seek
to maximize both stability and plasticity, assuming that the
model is large enough, at every step in time, interpreting it
as a continual filtering process (filter intended as in nonstationary time series literature (Durbin & Koopman, 2012)).
This paper proposes Online Curvature-Aware Replay
(OCAR), a novel method designed for replay-based online continual learning, aiming at tackling the challenges in
both plasticity and stability inherent in this scenario with a
continual optimization approach at every step in time. We
formalize OCL as the joint optimization on past and new
data, with past data approximated using a limited replay
buffer, and adding an explicit constraint on the variation of
KL-divergence on previous information. The Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) is used to capture the loss function’s
curvature, providing both plasticity and stability constraints
in the model distribution space. When the KL divergence
is used as a metric, the FIM has the additional value of
describing the curvature of the parameter space itself, being the Riemannian metric tensor of that space (Amari,
2016). We can directly adapt our gradient to the geometry
of the space in stark contrast with traditional CL methods that use the FIM as a penalization term (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017). Kronecker-factored Approximate Curvature
(K-FAC) (Martens & Grosse, 2015) is used to efficiently approximate the FIM, with some critical adjustments to make
it work in OCL settings.

1. Introduction
Online Continual Learning (OCL) models are trained continuously on a nonstationary data stream. The goal is to obtain
a model that is accurate at any point in time, quickly adapts
to new data (i.e. plasticity), and does not forget old information (i.e. stability), without any information about task start,
end, or identity. In this setting, many standard Continual
1
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy 2 Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.
Correspondence to: Edoardo Urettini <edoardo.urettini@sns.it>, Antonio Carta <antonio.carta@unipi.it>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

