Three-Dimensional Trajectory Prediction with 3DMoTraj Dataset

Hao Zhou * 1 2 3 Xu Yang * 4 Mingyu Fan 5 Lu Qi 6 Xiangtai Li 7 Ming-Hsuan Yang 8 Fei Luo 1 3

Abstract

2D trajectory prediction
izing
optim
Y-axis

With the growing interest in embodied and spatial
intelligence, accurately predicting trajectories in
3D environments has become increasingly critical. However, no datasets have been explicitly
designed to study 3D trajectory prediction. To
this end, we contribute a 3D motion trajectory
(3DMoTraj) dataset collected from unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) operating in oceanic environments. Mathematically, trajectory prediction
becomes significantly more complex when transitioning from 2D to 3D. To tackle this challenge,
we analyze the prediction complexity of 3D trajectories and propose a new method consisting of two
key components: decoupled trajectory prediction
and correlated trajectory refinement. The former
decouples inter-axis correlations, thereby reducing prediction complexity and generating coarse
predictions. The latter refines the coarse predictions by modeling their inter-axis correlations. Extensive experiments show that our method significantly improves 3D trajectory prediction accuracy
and outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Both
the 3DMoTraj dataset and the method are available at https://github.com/zhouhao94/3DMoTraj.

Parameters:
X-axis

3D trajectory prediction
g

Y
-a
xis

Z-axis

n
izi
tim
op

X-a
xis

Parameters:

Decoupled 3D trajectory prediction

Decoupling the
prediction along
different axes.

izing
optim
izing
optim

izing
optim
Parameters:

Figure 1: Illustrations of different trajectory predictions and
their prediction complexities. The 2D, 3D, and decoupled
3D predictions for each point correspond to optimizing one
2D, one 3D, and three 1D Gaussian distributions, which
involve optimizing 5, 9, and 6 free parameters, respectively.
which emphasize the ability to understand, reason about,
and manipulate information within a three-dimensional (3D)
space (Zhu et al., 2025; Ishida, 2024). Such advancement
highlights the critical role of 3D trajectory prediction, which
enables systems to effectively navigate and interact with
dynamic environments by anticipating future movements
in space. For example, in unmanned systems, accurate 3D
motion path prediction for unmanned underwater vehicles
(UUVs) (Cao et al., 2022) and unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) (Zhang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023) helps them
avoid obstacles and plan efficient navigation routes in ocean
and air environments.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the embodied (Wang et al., 2024; Kaur
et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2024) and spatial intelligence (Huang
et al., 2024) have witnessed rapid advancement, both of
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing and Information
Technology, Great Bay Institute for Advanced Study/Great Bay
University, Dongguan, China. 2 Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China.
3
Dongguan Key Laboratory for Intelligence and Information Technology, Dongguan, China. 4 State Key Laboratory of Multimodal
Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 5 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Donghua University, Shanghai, China. 6 Insta360 Research,
Shenzhen, China. 7 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
8
University of California Merced, Merced, USA. Correspondence
to: Fei Luo <luofei@gbu.edu.cn>.

Despite the significant importance of 3D trajectory prediction for embodied and spatial intelligence, most current
trajectory prediction tasks, including pedestrian (Mohamed
et al., 2020; Mangalam et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021) and
vehicle (Gao et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2022)
trajectory prediction, focus primarily on 2D trajectories due
to the scarcity of publicly available 3D trajectory datasets.
To this end, we contribute a 3D motion trajectory (3DMo-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

