MARGE: Improving Math Reasoning with Guided Exploration

Jingyue Gao 1 Runji Lin 2 Keming Lu 2 Bowen Yu 2 Junyang Lin 2 Jianyu Chen 1 3
64
MATH 500 accuracy %

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit strong
potential in mathematical reasoning, yet their
effectiveness is often limited by a shortage
of high-quality queries. This limitation necessitates scaling up computational responses
through self-generated data, yet current methods
struggle due to spurious correlated data caused
by ineffective exploration across all reasoning
stages. To address such challenge, we introduce MARGE: Improving Math Reasoning with
Guided Exploration, a novel method to address
this issue and enhance mathematical reasoning
through hit-guided exploration. MARGE systematically explores intermediate reasoning states
derived from self-generated solutions, enabling
adequate exploration and improved credit assignment throughout the reasoning process. Through
extensive experiments across multiple backbone
models and benchmarks, we demonstrate that
MARGE significantly improves reasoning capabilities without requiring external annotations
or training additional value models. Notably,
MARGE improves both single-shot accuracy and
exploration diversity, mitigating a common tradeoff in alignment methods. These results demonstrate MARGE’s effectiveness in enhancing mathematical reasoning capabilities and unlocking the
potential of scaling self-generated training data.

62
60
58

SFT
DPO
PPO
GRPO
Ours-MARGE

56
54
52
0

20
40
60
self-generated training responses per query

80

Figure 1. The y-axis represents the accuracy on MATH500, and the
x-axis represents the number of self-generated responses for training Qwen2-7B-Instruct. The dots and the star show when models
start to converge, and the dashed line exhibits their scaling trends
as the generation amount for training increases. The top-right
zone is preferred, as we can easily scale generation and achieve
better performance when queries are limited. By improving the
exploration process, MARGE enables the scaling of self-generated
responses for training and improves reasoning ability. We discuss
more about the scaling trend in Appx. D.

Despite these advances, improving LLM performance in
long-horizon reasoning tasks, particularly mathematical
problem solving, remains challenging due to two fundamental challenges: the scarcity of high-quality training data
and the inherent difficulty of exploring the vast space of
possible reasoning paths.
While Self-training approaches (Zelikman et al., 2022) partially address data scarcity by self-generating abundant training examples, they struggle to scale computation during
training to improve reasoning. This limitation is evident
in our observations: model performance initially improves
during self-training but quickly plateaus or even declines
as training data increases. These trends, consistent with
Setlur et al. (2024), indicate spurious correlations between
reasoning steps in self-generated datasets.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in text generation and instruction following
through post-training techniques such as Reinforcement
Learning (RL) (Stiennon et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Alibaba Group 3 Shanghai
Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to:
Runji Lin <linrunji.lrj@alibaba-inc.com>, Jianyu Chen
<jianyuchen@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

As explained below, we argue that insufficient exploration
causes spurious correlated datasets. Our primary research
question now becomes: How can we enhance exploration
across all reasoning stages to generate higher-quality
training data, improve credit assignments, and enable
scaling of self-generated training pipelines?

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Fig. 3 exhibits a challenge in mathematical reasoning and
helps explain why insufficient exploration causes spurious
correlations: even when a model correctly executes all pre-

1

1

