The Limits of Predicting Agents from Behaviour

Alexis Bellot 1 Jonathan Richens 1 Tom Everitt 1

Abstract

tween beliefs and behaviour that is foundational to rational
agents (Davidson, 1963).

As the complexity of AI systems and their interactions with the world increases, generating
explanations for their behaviour is important for
safely deploying AI. For agents, the most natural abstractions for predicting behaviour attribute
beliefs, intentions and goals to the system. If an
agent behaves as if it has a certain goal or belief,
then we can make reasonable predictions about
how it will behave in novel situations, including
those where comprehensive safety evaluations are
untenable. How well can we infer an agent’s beliefs from their behaviour, and how reliably can
these inferred beliefs predict the agent’s behaviour
in novel situations? We provide a precise answer
to this question under the assumption that the
agent’s behaviour is guided by a world model.
Our contribution is the derivation of novel bounds
on the agent’s behaviour in new (unseen) deployment environments, which represent a theoretical
limit for predicting intentional agents from behavioural data alone. We discuss the implications
of these results for several research areas including fairness and safety.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems appear to have similarly
general capabilities, not totally unlike that of humans and
animals. They can generate text that is fluent and accurate in
response to a very diverse set of questions. Whenever they
display consistent types of behaviour across many different
tasks, we are tempted to apply our own mentalistic language
more or less at face value (Shanahan, 2024), taking seriously
questions such as: What do the AIs know? What do they
think, and believe? Taking the analogy further, it is as if
they learn “world models” that mirror the causal relationships of the environment they are trained on, guiding their
future plans and behaviour1 . And as a consequence, their
interactions with an environment will leave clues that might
give us the ability to predict their future behaviour in novel
domains. This possibility engages with a core AI Safety
problem: how to guarantee and predict whether AI systems
will act safely and beneficially?
The main result of this paper is to offer a new perspective
on this problem by showing that:
With an assumption of competence and optimality,
the behaviour of AI systems partially determines
their actions in novel environments.

1. Introduction

Here behaviour means our observations of the decisions
made by the AI system, contextual variables, and utility or
reward values in some environment. The “partial” determination of actions in new environments is a consequence of
our lack of knowledge about the AI’s actual world model
(different models may induce different optimal actions).
However, even though we can’t uniquely identify the AI’s
future behaviour and beliefs, we can narrow it down to a
range of possible outcomes. This paper characterises those
outcomes.

Humans understand each other through the use of abstractions. We explain our intentions by appealing to our “goals”
and “beliefs” about the world around us without knowing the
underlying cognition going on inside our heads. According
to Dennett (1989; 2017) the same is true of our understanding of other systems. For example, a bear hibernates during
winter as if it believes that the lower temperatures cause
food scarcity. This is a useful description of the bear’s behaviour, with real predictive power. For example, it gives us
(human observers) the ability to anticipate how bears might
act as the climate changes. There is a correspondence be-

1

Recent research suggests that an AI’s behaviour, to the extent
that it is consistent with rationality axioms, can be formally described by a (causal) world model (Halpern & Piermont, 2024).
The same conclusion can also be obtained for AIs capable of solving tasks in multiple environments (Richens & Everitt, 2024). For
large language models, there is increasing empirical evidence for
the “world model” hypothesis, see e.g., Toshniwal et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2022; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023; Goldstein & Levinstein,
2024 and Vafa et al., 2024.

1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Alexis Bellot <abellot@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

