Optimizing Adaptive Attacks against Watermarks for Language Models

Abdulrahman Diaa 1 Toluwani Aremu 2 Nils Lukas 2

Abstract

Provider’s LLM

KeyGen

Large Language Models (LLMs) can be misused
to spread unwanted content at scale. Content watermarking deters misuse by hiding messages in
content, enabling its detection using a secret watermarking key. Robustness is a core security
property, stating that evading detection requires
(significant) degradation of the content’s quality.
Many LLM watermarking methods have been proposed, but robustness is tested only against nonadaptive attackers who lack knowledge of the watermarking method and can find only suboptimal
attacks. We formulate watermark robustness as an
objective function and use preference-based optimization to tune adaptive attacks against the specific watermarking method. Our evaluation shows
that (i) adaptive attacks evade detection against
all surveyed watermarks, (ii) training against any
watermark succeeds in evading unseen watermarks, and (iii) optimization-based attacks are
cost-effective. Our findings underscore the need
to test robustness against adaptively tuned attacks.
We release our adaptively tuned paraphrasers at
https://github.com/nilslukas/ada
-wm-evasion.

Secret key

| Provider
| Adversary Uniform
Random
Sample

KeyGen

Generate
Surrogate LLM

Surrogate key 1
…

Generate
…

Secret key
Evasion at Test Time

Verify

Surrogate key

Paraphrase

Verify

Generate

Update Paraphraser to
Improve Evasion Rate
Maximize Expected Evasion Rate over all surrogate keys
Surrogate key N

Figure 1: Adaptive attackers know the watermarking algorithms (K EY G EN, V ERIFY), but not the secret key, so they
can optimize a paraphraser against a specific watermark.

Content watermarking enables the detection of generated
outputs by embedding hidden messages that can be extracted
with a secret watermarking key. Some LLM providers, such
as DeepMind (2024) and Meta (San Roman et al., 2024),
have already deployed watermarking to promote the ethical
use of their models. A threat to these providers are users
who perturb generated text to evade watermark detection
while preserving text quality. Such undetectable, generated
text could further erode trust in the authenticity of digital
media (Federal Register, 2023).
A core security property of watermarking is robustness,
which requires that evading detection is only possible by significantly degrading text quality. Testing robustness requires
identifying the most effective attack against a specific watermarking method. However, existing content watermarks
for LLMs (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023a; Aaronson & Kirchner, 2023; Christ et al., 2023; Kuditipudi et al., 2024) test
robustness only against non-adaptive attackers, who lack
knowledge of the watermarking algorithms. This reliance
on obscurity makes watermarking vulnerable to adaptive
attacks (Lukas et al., 2024; Jovanović et al., 2024) when
information about the watermarking algorithms is leaked.

1. Introduction
A few Large Language Model (LLM) providers empower
many users to generate human-quality text at scale, raising
concerns about dual use (Barrett et al., 2023). Untrustworthy users can misuse the provided LLMs to generate harmful
content, such as online spam (Weidinger et al., 2021), misinformation (Chen & Shu, 2024), or to facilitate phishing
attacks (Shoaib et al., 2023). The ability to detect generated
text can control these risks (Grinbaum & Adomaitis, 2022).

We propose a method to curate preference datasets and
adaptively optimize an attack against known content watermarking algorithms. Optimization is challenging due to (i)
the complexity of optimizing within the discrete textual domain and (ii) the limited computational resources available
to attackers. We demonstrate that adaptively tuned, openweight LLMs such as Llama2-7b (Touvron et al., 2023)
evade detection at negligible impact on text quality against
Llama3.1-70b (Dubey et al., 2024). Our attacker spends

1

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 2 Mohammed Bin Zayed University of
Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE. Correspondence to: Abdulrahman Diaa <abdulrahman.diaa@uwaterloo.ca>,
Nils Lukas <nils.lukas@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

