Scaling Sparse Feature Circuits For Studying In-Context Learning

Dmitrii Kharlapenko * 1 Stepan Shabalin * 2 Arthur Conmy 3 Neel Nanda 3

Abstract

caused by the interventions Templeton et al. (2024). In this
work, we address these limitations by interpreting in-context
learning (ICL), a widely studied phenomenon in LLMs. In
summary, we show that SAEs a) enable the discovery of
novel circuit components (task-detection features; Section 4.2) and b) refine existing interpretations of ICL, by e.g.
decomposing task vectors Todd et al. (2024); Hendel et al.
(2023) into task-execution features (Section 3).

Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are a popular tool
for interpreting large language model activations,
but their utility in addressing open questions in
interpretability remains unclear. In this work, we
demonstrate their effectiveness by using SAEs
to deepen our understanding of the mechanism
behind in-context learning (ICL). We identify abstract SAE features that (i) encode the model’s
knowledge of which task to execute and (ii) whose
latent vectors causally induce the task zero-shot.
This aligns with prior work showing that ICL is
mediated by task vectors. We further demonstrate
that these task vectors are well approximated by a
sparse sum of SAE latents, including these taskexecution features. To explore the ICL mechanism, we scale the sparse feature circuits methodology of Marks et al. (2024) to the Gemma 1 2B
model for the more complex task of ICL. Through
circuit finding, we discover task-detecting features with corresponding SAE latents that activate
earlier in the prompt, that detect when tasks have
been performed. They are causally linked with
task-execution features through the attention and
MLP sublayers.

In-context learning (ICL; Brown et al. (2020)) is a fundamental capability of large language models that allows
them to adapt to new tasks without fine-tuning. ICL is a
significantly more complex and important task than other
behaviors commonly studied in circuit analysis (such as IOI
in Wang et al. (2022) and Kissane et al. (2024), or subjectverb agreement and Bias-in-Bios in Marks et al. (2024)).
Recent work by (Todd et al., 2024) and Hendel et al. (2023)
has introduced the concept of task vectors to study ICL in
a simple setting, which we follow throughout this paper.1
In short, task vectors are internal representations of simple
operations performed by language models during the processing of few-shot prompts, e.g. as “hot → cold, big →
small, fast → slow”. We call these simple operations tasks.
Task vectors can be extracted and added into different LLM
forward passes to induce 0-shot task behavior, e.g. making
LLMs predict that “slow” follows “fast →” without explicit
context. Section 2.3 provides a full introduction.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to decompose task vectors by naively applying sparse autoencoders to reconstruct
them. This is because task vectors are out-of-distribution
for SAEs and empirically, their SAE decompositions tend
to be cluttered with irrelevant features. To address this
limitation, we developed the TASK VECTOR CLEANING
(TVC) algorithm (Section 3.1), which enabled us to extract
task-execution features: SAE latents that preserve most of
the task vector’s effect on task loss while being more interpretable. These task-execution features demonstrated two
key properties: they could partially substitute for complete
task vectors in steering experiments, and they often exhibited clear task-related patterns in their maximum-activating
tokens. Through extensive testing across diverse tasks, we

1. Introduction
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs; Ng (2011); Bricken et al.
(2023); Cunningham et al. (2023)) are a promising method
for interpreting large language model (LLM) activations.
However, the full potential of SAEs in interpretability research remains to be explored, since most recent SAE research either i) interprets a single SAE’s features rather than
the model’s computation as a whole Bricken et al. (2023),
or ii) performs high-level interventions in the model, but
does not interpret the effect on the downstream computation
*
Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, US 3 Joint senior authors. Correspondence to:
Dmitrii Kharlapenko <dkharlapenko@ethz.ch>, Stepan Shabalin
<sshabalin3@gatech.edu>.

1

Task vectors Hendel et al. (2023) are also called “function
vectors” Todd et al. (2024), but we use “task vectors” throughout
this paper for consistency.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

