Vision-Language Model Selection and Reuse for Downstream Adaptation

Hao-Zhe Tan 1 2 Zhi Zhou 1 Yu-Feng Li 1 3 Lan-Zhe Guo 1 2

Abstract

diction capabilities on visual tasks. However, though VLM
shows impressive general ability, as highlighted in Radford
et al. (2021), VLMs often fall short of supervised expert
models in many downstream tasks. To address this limitation, numerous studies (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Yu et al.,
2022; Fang et al., 2023) enhanced the zero-shot performance
of VLMs by studying model architectures, pre-training
datasets, and training/fine-tuning methods. This effort has
led to the development of many open-source pre-trained
VLMs with diverse structures and parameters, contributing
to VLM model hubs like open-clip (Ilharco et al., 2021),
which currently hosts more than 100 pre-trained VLMs.

Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are
becoming increasingly popular across various visual tasks, and several open-sourced VLM variants have been released. However, selecting the
best-performing pre-trained VLM for a specific
downstream task is challenging since no single
VLM can achieve promising performance on all
downstream tasks, and evaluating all available
VLMs is impossible due to time and data limitations. To address this problem, this paper
proposes a novel paradigm to select and reuse
VLM for downstream tasks, called Model Label
Learning (MLL). The proposal contains three key
modules: model labeling, which assigns labels to
each VLM to describe their specialty and utility;
model selection, which matches the requirements
of the target task with model labels; and model
reuse, which applies selected VLMs to the target task in an ensemble manner. The proposal
is highly computationally efficient and growable
since the model labeling process is completed target task independent and the ability could grow
with the number of candidate VLMs. We also introduce a new benchmark for evaluating VLM selection methods, including 49 VLMs and 17 target
task datasets. Experimental results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
for selecting and reusing VLMs.

With the increasing availability of open-source VLMs, selecting and reusing a pre-trained model has become a practical alternative to training one from scratch, which demands
extensive training data and computing resources (Li et al.,
2021), struggling with catastrophic forgetting during the
incremental refinement of the trained model in open environments (Guo et al., 2025). Consequently, a critical
problem naturally arises: how to select a VLM to reuse
for specific downstream tasks. Although we can directly
utilize the best-performing model on a universal dataset
such as ImageNet, previous work (Fang et al., 2022) has
shown that the performance of VLMs can vary greatly depending on dataset domain. For example, we evaluate the
performance of various pre-trained VLMs in the open-clip
library across several downstream tasks (1(a)) and within
different classes of a specific task (1(b)). Figure 1(a) reveals
that each VLM demonstrates distinct strengths in zero-shot
visual tasks, with no single model outperforming all others
across every task. Interestingly, models that perform worse
on general tasks can sometimes surpass stronger models in
specific downstream tasks. Furthermore, even in the same
task, different VLMs exhibit varying levels of performance
across specific classes, as illustrated in Figure 1(b).

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), which are pre-trained
on large-scale image-text datasets, have recently attracted
significant attention due to their remarkable zero-shot pre-

Therefore, it is important to design VLM selection methods,
and it would be better if we could achieve more fine-grained
selection, i.e., select different VLMs to handle different
classes. The direct way to select a model is to evaluate all
candidate models’ performance on the target task. However, it is unrealistic due to time and computational resource
limitations. Additionally, previous works on model selection (Tran et al., 2019; You et al., 2021) primarily focus
on single-modal models, making them unsuitable for VLM

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China 2 School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, Nanjing University, China 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Yu-Feng
Li <liyf@nju.edu.cn>, Lan-Zhe Guo <guolz@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

