A Large Recurrent Action Model:
xLSTM Enables Fast Inference for Robotics Tasks
Thomas Schmied 1 Thomas Adler 1 Vihang Patil 1 Maximilian Beck 1 2 Korbinian Pöppel 1 2
Johannes Brandstetter 1 2 Günter Klambauer 1 2 Razvan Pascanu 3 4 Sepp Hochreiter 1 2

Abstract

and sequence models trained via behavior cloning (Chen
et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021). Such approaches, in which
agents are trained on large-scale offline datasets with causal
sequence modeling objectives, have been driven by the proliferation of Transformer-based architectures and gave rise
to what we refer to as Large Action Models (LAMs) to
highlight their similarity to large language models (LLMs)
(Radford et al., 2018). LAM approaches can also be used
in multi-task settings to develop generalist agents such as
Gato (Reed et al., 2022).

In recent years, there has been a trend in the
field of Reinforcement Learning (RL) towards
large action models trained offline on large-scale
datasets via sequence modeling. Existing models are primarily based on the Transformer architecture, which results in powerful agents. However, due to slow inference times, Transformerbased approaches are impractical for real-time
applications, such as robotics. Recently, modern recurrent architectures, such as xLSTM and
Mamba, have been proposed that exhibit parallelization benefits during training similar to the
Transformer architecture while offering fast inference. In this work, we study the aptitude of these
modern recurrent architectures for large action
models. Consequently, we propose a Large Recurrent Action Model (LRAM) with an xLSTM
at its core that comes with linear-time inference
complexity and natural sequence length extrapolation abilities. Experiments on 432 tasks from 6
domains show that LRAM compares favorably to
Transformers in terms of performance and speed.

Existing LAMs are primarily based on the Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture. Because of their
powerful predictive performance, robotics has become an
emergent application area for large models (Brohan et al.,
2023b;a; Octo Model Team et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023), and a number of large multi-task datasets
were collected (Jia et al., 2024; Embodiment Collaboration
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023; Mandlekar et al., 2023).
This development bears the potential to produce robotics
agents that learn to master complex tasks in a wide range of
environments and even different embodiments. For example, recently it has been demonstrated, albeit in restricted
settings, that sequence models trained on multi-episodic contexts can perform in-context learning (ICL) (Laskin et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2023). One potential application of ICL
can be to learn new related tasks in robotics without the
need for re-training or fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been responsible for impressive success stories such as game-playing (Silver et al.,
2016; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Patil et al.,
2022), plasma control for fusion (Degrave et al., 2022),
or navigation of stratospheric balloons (Bellemare et al.,
2020). While these successes were based on classical RL
approaches, in which agents have been trained online with
RL objectives, recently there has been a trend towards offline
RL settings (Levine et al., 2020; Schweighofer et al., 2022)

One of the key reasons for the success of Transformer-based
models is their ability to scale to large datasets through their
efficient parallelization during training. However, despite
numerous success stories in RL, language modeling (Brown
et al., 2020) or computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021;
He et al., 2022), a persistent drawback of Transformer-based
architectures is their high inference cost in terms of both
speed and memory (Kim et al., 2023). Consequently, deploying Transformer-based models in resource-constrained
scenarios, such as on devices with limited hardware capacity and/or real-time constraints, e.g., robots or smartphones,
is prohibitive because of the required fast inference times
(Firoozi et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2023). A basic principle of
control theory is that the controller sample rate should be
in the order of magnitude of the sample rate of the sensors

1

ELLIS Unit, LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU
Linz, Austria 2 NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria 3 Google DeepMind
4
Mila - Québec AI Institute.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

