Explicit Preference Optimization:
No Need for an Implicit Reward Model

Xiangkun Hu * 1 Lemin Kong * 2 Tong He 1 David Wipf 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The generated responses of large language models
(LLMs) are often fine-tuned to human preferences
through a process called reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF). As RLHF relies
on a challenging training sequence, whereby a
separate reward model is independently learned
and then later applied to LLM policy updates, ongoing research effort has targeted more straightforward alternatives. In this regard, direct preference
optimization (DPO) and its many offshoots circumvent the need for a separate reward training
step. Instead, through the judicious use of a reparameterization trick that induces an implicit reward, DPO and related methods consolidate learning to the minimization of a single loss function.
And yet despite demonstrable success in some
real-world settings, we prove that DPO-based objectives are nonetheless subject to sub-optimal
regularization and counter-intuitive interpolation
behaviors, underappreciated artifacts of the reparameterizations upon which they are based. To
this end, we introduce an explicit preference optimization framework termed EXPO that requires
no analogous reparameterization to achieve an implicit reward. Quite differently, we merely posit
intuitively-appealing regularization factors from
scratch that transparently avoid the potential pitfalls of key DPO variants, provably satisfying
regularization desiderata that prior methods do
not. Empirical results serve to corroborate our
analyses and showcase the efficacy of EXPO.

*

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Bai
et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2009;
Ziegler et al., 2019) represents an effective means of aligning the output of powerful pre-trained large language models
(LLMs) (Bubeck et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024; Achiam
et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023a) with human preferences
(Bai et al., 2022b; Gallegos et al., 2023). On the downside
though, RLHF requires a potentially-unstable multi-step
process whereby first a reward model is learned using a
labeled preference dataset. Subsequently, a new LLM policy is trained to maximize this reward while minimizing
deviations from the original pre-trained LLM (the reference
policy). To mitigate this complexity, various reparameterization schemes have recently been introduced that obviate the
need for training a separate reward model. Instead, so-called
direct human preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al.,
2024) and follow-up variants (Azar et al., 2024; Tang et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Zhao et al., 2023b) are instantiated
via the minimization of a single closed-form training loss,
within which an implicit reward function is concomitantly
optimized.
Although these DPO-based alternatives to RLHF dramatically streamline the modeling pipeline, as we will detail
herein, they are nonetheless saddled with underappreciated
limitations of their own, such as sub-optimal regularization
effects, degenerate minima, and other counter-intuitive behaviors linking back to the original reparameterizations and
the viability of the implicit rewards involved. To this end,
our paper is devoted to addressing these shortcomings via
the introduction of intuitive new training objectives that we
term EXPO, for explicit preference optimization, which rely
on no such implicit rewards or associated reparameterizations. After presenting basic concepts and the details of
existing preference optimization models in Section 2, the remainder of the paper devoted to our technical contributions
can be distilled as follows:

1
Equal contribution
Amazon Web Services 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence
to:
Xiangkun Hu <xkhu17@fudan.edu.cn>,
Lemin
Kong
<1155165468@link.cuhk.edu.hk>,
Tong
He
<htong@amazon.com>, David Wipf <davidwipf@gmail.com>.

• We introduce new evaluation criteria that comport with
intuition regarding how a preference model ideally
should behave, and yet (somewhat surprisingly) are
provably not satisfied by a broad class of existing DPObased approaches. In particular, we show that because

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

