The Role of Randomness in Stability

Max Hopkins * 1 Shay Moran * 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Stability is a central property in learning and statistics
promising the output of an algorithm A remains similar
when applied to similar datasets S and S ′ . It is an elementary fact that any sufficiently stable algorithm (e.g. one
returning the same result with high probability, or one satisfying differential privacy) is either randomized, or constant.1
This raises a natural question: how much randomness is
needed for algorithmic stability?

Stability is a central property in learning and statistics promising the output of an algorithm A does
not change substantially when applied to similar
datasets S and S ′ . It is an elementary fact that any
sufficiently stable algorithm (e.g. one returning
the same result with high probability, satisfying
privacy guarantees, etc.) must be randomized.
This raises a natural question: can we quantify
how much randomness is needed for algorithmic
stability? We study the randomness complexity
of two influential notions of stability in learning:
replicability (which promises A usually outputs
the same result when run over samples from the
same distribution), and differential privacy (which
promises the output distribution of A remains
similar under neighboring datasets). In particular, building on the ideas of (Dixon, Pavan, Vander Woude, and Vinodchandran ICML 2024) and
(Cannone, Su, and Vadhan ITCS 2024), we prove
a ”weak-to-strong” boosting theorem for stability
in these settings: the randomness complexity of a
task M is tightly controlled by the best replication
probability of any deterministic algorithm solving M, a parameter known as M’s ”global stability” (Chase, Moran, Yehudayoff FOCS 2023).
Finally, we use this connection to characterize
the randomness complexity of PAC Learning: a
class has bounded randomness complexity iff it
has finite Littlestone dimension, and moreover
scales at worst logarithmically in the excess error
of the learner. As a corollary, we resolve a question of (Chase, Chornomaz, Moran, and Yehudayoff STOC 2024) about the error-dependent
list-replicability of agnostic learning.

In this work, we study the role of randomness in two fundamental notions of stability: replicability, and differential
privacy. Replicability is the core scientific and algorithmic
tenet that an experiment, run twice on data from the same
underlying distribution, should produce the same output
with high probability. Given a statistical task M and an
algorithm for the task A (e.g. hypothesis selection, classification), one might reasonably define the replicability of A
to be its (worst-case) collision probability over independent
samples, that is:
o
n
min Pr n [A(S) = A(S ′ )]
D

S∼D

where D ranges over the possible data distributions of M.
To achieve true replicability, we’d hope to construct an algorithm with collision probability near 1. Unfortunately,
it turns out this is unachievable. The best such parameter,
called the global stability of M (Bun et al., 2020), is universally capped at 12 for any non-trivial statistical task (Chase
et al., 2023). Motivated by this fact, (Impagliazzo et al.,
2022) recently proposed an elegant relaxation of global
stability allowing shared internal randomness, calling an
algorithm A ρ-replicable if over independent samples S, S ′
and a shared random string r:
∀D :

Pr

S,S ′ ∼D n ,r

[A(S; r) = A(S ′ ; r)] > 1 − ρ.

Global stability is then exactly the best replicability parameter achieved by any deterministic algorithm solving M.2

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, USA 2 Faculty of Mathematics, Technion, Haifa, Israel 3 Google Research, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Max Hopkins <mh4067@princeton.edu>, Shay Moran
<smoran@technion.ac.il>.

1

Why? This depends on the model of stability. A deterministic
DP algorithm, for instance, must have exactly the same output over
all neighboring samples. Since one can always construct a path of
neighbors between any inputs S and S ′ , A is inherently constant.
In replicability a similar argument is possible but one interpolates
between underlying distributions rather than samples.
2
Traditionally a globally stable algorithm isn’t assumed to be

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

