NMA-tune: Generating Highly Designable
and Dynamics Aware Protein Backbones

Urszula Julia Komorowska 1 Francisco Vargas 1 Alessandro Rondina 2 Pietro Lio 1 Mateja Jamnik 1

Abstract

Motif scaffolding encompasses various other tasks ranging
from designing novel antibodies (Correia et al., 2014) to
scaffolding enzyme active sites (Watson et al., 2023).

Protein’s backbone flexibility is a crucial property
that heavily influences its functionality. Recent
work in the field of protein diffusion probabilistic
modelling has leveraged Normal Mode Analysis
(NMA) and, for the first time, introduced information about large scale protein motion into the generative process. However, obtaining molecules
with both the desired dynamics and designable
quality has proven challenging. In this work,
we present NMA-tune, a new method that introduces the dynamics information to the protein
design stage. NMA-tune uses a trainable component to condition the backbone generation on
the lowest normal mode of oscillation. We implement NMA-tune as a plug-and-play extension to
RFdiffusion, show that the proportion of samples
with high quality structure and the desired dynamics is improved as compared to other methods
without the trainable component, and we show the
presence of the targeted modes in the Molecular
Dynamics simulations.

However, often the biological mechanisms behind protein
functionality depend not only on the structure, but also on
the dynamics (Berendsen & Hayward, 2000). Currently, the
beginning stage of the design, more than validation and refinements stages, is limited by the available tools to include
dynamics constraints. Often Molecular Dynamics (MD)
simulations are ran to understand the relevant motions, then
one makes an informed change in the current design model
and runs the MD simulation again (Childers & Daggett,
2017). Since it is not immediately known how the MD trajectory will change under a specific structure modification,
this step must be reiterated many times, which is inefficient
and costly.
Recently, a new method emerged that overcomes this
design→assess→refine loop. Komorowska et al. (2024)
introduce dynamics conditioning, a way to design a protein
backbone whose chosen subset of Cα carbons have userspecified displacements in the lowest non-trivial normal
mode, which corresponds to the large scale collective
motion. They capture the coarse-grained dynamics using the
Normal Mode Analysis (NMA) (Bahar & Rader, 2005), a
computational method to obtain the eigenvectors of motion
under an assumed force-field. This is extended to joint
conditioning, which is structure and dynamics conditioning
applied together. Here, for ease, we call the dynamics conditioning from Komorowska et al. (2024) NMA-guidance.

1. Introduction
Generative AI has had a tremendous impact on the field
of protein design in the recent years. Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models (DDPMs), such as RFdiffusion (Watson et al., 2023), Chroma (Ingraham et al., 2023) or
FrameDiff (Yim et al., 2023b), have been applied to design
novel protein backbones with given structural properties.
A common task is to perform motif scaffolding, that is,
to design a stable protein backbone that consists of a
pre-defined motif and a scaffold that holds the motif in place.

NMA-guidance takes first steps towards dynamics-informed
design, but also suffers from a number of shortcomings. In
DDPMs, the protein generation is driven by the unconditional term (does the new sample resemble real protein?)
and conditional term (does the sample meet the imposed
conditions?). Previous work uses a simple analytical function to link the dynamics of the protein with the probability
of sampling such protein under conditional real data distribution. This method, while beneficial from the perspective
of the model design and generalisability, is sensitive to the
user defined sampling parameters. Moreover, the generation of high quality samples with both desired structural
and dynamical properties has not yet been achieved. This

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Department
of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy. Correspondence to: Urszula Julia Komorowska
<ujk21@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

