On Path to Multimodal Generalist: General-Level and General-Bench
Hao Fei * 1 Yuan Zhou * 2 Juncheng Li * 3 Xiangtai Li * 2 Qingshan Xu * 2 Bobo Li * 1 Shengqiong Wu * 1
Yaoting Wang 4 Junbao Zhou 2 Jiahao Meng 5 Qingyu Shi 5 Zhiyuan Zhou 6 Liangtao Shi 6 Minghe Gao 3
Daoan Zhang 7 Zhiqi Ge 3 Siliang Tang 3 Kaihang Pan 3 Yaobo Ye 3 Haobo Yuan 2 Tao Zhang 8
Weiming Wu 9 Tianjie Ju 10 Zixiang Meng 8 Shilin Xu 5 Liyu Jia 2 Wentao Hu 2 Meng Luo 1
Jiebo Luo 7 Tat-Seng Chua 1 Shuicheng Yan 1 11 Hanwang Zhang 2

Abstract

preserve synergy across comprehension and generation, as well as across multimodal interactions.
To evaluate the comprehensive abilities of various generalists, we present a massive multimodal
benchmark, General-Bench, which encompasses a broader spectrum of skills, modalities,
formats, and capabilities, including over 700 tasks
and 325,800 instances. The evaluation results that
involve over 100 existing state-of-the-art MLLMs
uncover the capability rankings of generalists,
highlighting the challenges in reaching genuine
AI. We expect this project to pave the way for future research on next-generation multimodal foundation models, providing a robust infrastructure
to accelerate the realization of AGI.

The Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM)
is currently experiencing rapid growth, driven
by the advanced capabilities of language-based
LLMs. Unlike their specialist predecessors, existing MLLMs are evolving towards a Multimodal
Generalist paradigm. Initially limited to understanding multiple modalities, these models have
advanced to not only comprehend but also generate across modalities. Their capabilities have expanded from coarse-grained to fine-grained multimodal understanding and from supporting singular modalities to accommodating a wide array
of or even arbitrary modalities. To assess the
capabilities of various MLLMs, a diverse array
of benchmark test sets has been proposed. This
leads to a critical question: Can we simply assume
that higher performance across tasks indicates a
stronger MLLM capability, bringing us closer to
human-level AI?

Project Page: https://generalist.top/
Leaderboard: https://generalist.top/
leaderboard/
Benchmark: https://huggingface.co/
General-Level/

We argue that the answer is not as straightforward as it seems. In this project, we introduce an
evaluation framework to delineate the capabilities
and behaviors of current multimodal generalists.
This framework, named General-Level, establishes 5-scale levels of MLLM performance
and generality, offering a methodology to compare MLLMs and gauge the progress of existing
systems towards more robust multimodal generalists and, ultimately, towards AGI (Artificial General Intelligence). Central to our framework is the
use of Synergy as the evaluative criterion, categorizing capabilities based on whether MLLMs

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI,
2022a) and LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023)) have revolutionized the NLP field by serving as generalists addressing
a vast spectrum of NLP tasks. This breadth of capability
has edged humans ever closer to the realization of Artificial
General Intelligence (AGI). Yet, human intelligence inherently operates across multiple modalities, not solely through
language. This observation has spurred the development of
multimodal LLMs (Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a;
Liu et al., 2023a; OpenAI, 2022b), i.e., multimodal generalists, which are rapidly gaining traction and evolving towards
AGI. The recent progress in MLLMs is marked by significant advancements. For example, the initial multimodal
agents where LLMs serve as mere task schedulers, later have
evolved into joint foundation MLLMs (Zhu et al., 2023a;
Liu et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2023a; OpenAI, 2022b; Wu
et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024a; Sun et al., 2024). Also,

*
Equal contribution 1 NUS 2 NTU 3 ZJU 4 KAUST 5 PKU 6 HFUT
UR 8 WHU 9 NJU 10 SJTU 11 Skywork AI. Correspondence to:
Shuicheng Yan <yansc@nus.edu.sg>, Hanwang Zhang <hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg>.
7

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

