Quantifying Memory Utilization with Effective State-Size

Rom N. Parnichkun * 1 2 Neehal Tumma * 1 Armin W. Thomas 1
Alessandro Moro 2 Qi An 2 Taiji Suzuki 2 3 Atsushi Yamashita 2
Michael Poli † 1 4 Stefano Massaroli † 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, the success of autoregressive sequence
modeling in the context of deep learning has largely been
driven by advancements in highly parallelizable causal architectures, such as the transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017).
However, despite their strong performance and hardware
efficiency, understanding the inner workings of these neural networks remains a challenging task due to their nonlinearity and the diversity of fundamental building blocks
used. To this end, we leverage a new class of model abstractions, allowing for the development of a unified framework for the analysis of these computational units.

As the space of causal sequence modeling architectures continues to grow, the need to develop a general framework for their analysis becomes increasingly important. With this aim,
we draw insights from classical signal processing
and control theory, to develop a quantitative measure of memory utilization: the internal mechanisms through which a model stores past information to produce future outputs. This metric,
which we call effective state-size (ESS), is tailored to the fundamental class of systems with
input-invariant and input-varying linear operators, encompassing a variety of computational
units such as variants of attention, convolutions,
and recurrences. Unlike prior work on memory utilization, which either relies on raw operator visualizations (e.g. attention maps), or simply the total memory capacity (i.e. cache size)
of a model, our metrics provide highly interpretable and actionable measurements. In particular, we show how ESS can be leveraged to improve initialization strategies, inform novel regularizers and advance the performance-efficiency
frontier through model distillation. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the effect of context delimiters (such as end-of-speech tokens) on ESS highlights cross-architectural differences in how large
language models utilize their available memory
to recall information. Overall, we find that ESS
provides valuable insights into the dynamics that
dictate memory utilization, enabling the design
of more efficient and effective sequence models.

In particular, we note that the majority of sequence models of practical interest can formally be expressed as either
linear systems (y = T u) or systems with input-varying
linear operators (y = fT (u)u), the latter of which we
abbreviate as LIV1 . Like the decoupling of the “attention
matrix” from the full nonlinear attention operation, the
LIV framework decouples the input-varying construction
of matrix T (u 7→ T := fT (u)) from the linear mapping
(y = T u). This decoupling enables a wide array of deep
learning primitives beyond attention variants [67; 34; 64] to
be uniformly formulated and analyzed, including sequence
models like convolutions [40; 46; 35; 55] and linear statetransition recurrences [15; 18; 27; 60; 29; 26; 74; 48; 16].
Current approaches to analyzing the inner workings of
LIVs often rely upon simple visualizations of T (or the aggregation of T across multiple layers and residuals) [44; 68;
1; 4; 73; 62]. However, these visualizations alone often fail
to highlight critical properties that explain how different
models construct internal representations of the input data.
Moreover, prior attempts in obtaining quantitative metrics,
such as through spectral analysis of the operator T (Min &
Li, 2024; Bhojanapalli et al., 2020), are either limited to a
specific model class or do not appropriately take into account important conflating factors like the causal masking

*
Equal contribution. The order of authorship was determined
by a coin flip. 1 Liquid AI 2 The University of Tokyo 3 RIKEN
4
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Rom N. Parnichkun
<rom.parnichkun@gmail.com>.

1
We abbreviate them as LIVs instead of IVLs to conform
to the classical convention, where linear time-varying and timeinvariant systems are abbreviated as LTVs and LTIs respectively,
as well as recent works such as (Zancato et al., 2024), which call
them “linear input-varying systems”.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

