Learning Single Index Models with Diffusion Priors

Anqi Tang * 1 Youming Chen * 1 Shuchen Xue 2 3 Zhaoqiang Liu 1

Abstract

Rauhut, 2013; Scarlett & Cevher, 2021):
y = Ax∗ + e,

Diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated remarkable ability to generate diverse and highquality images by efficiently modeling complex
data distributions. They have also been explored
as powerful generative priors for signal recovery,
resulting in a substantial improvement in the quality of reconstructed signals. However, existing
research on signal recovery with diffusion models either focuses on specific reconstruction problems or is unable to handle nonlinear measurement models with discontinuous or unknown link
functions. In this work, we focus on using DMs to
achieve accurate recovery from semi-parametric
single index models, which encompass a variety of popular nonlinear models that may have
discontinuous and unknown link functions. We
propose an efficient reconstruction method that
only requires one round of unconditional sampling and (partial) inversion of DMs. Theoretical
analysis on the effectiveness of the proposed methods has been established under appropriate conditions. We perform numerical experiments on image datasets for different nonlinear measurement
models. We observe that compared to competing
methods, our approach can yield more accurate
reconstructions while utilizing significantly fewer
neural function evaluations.

(1)

where A ∈ Rm×n is the measurement matrix, x∗ ∈ Rn
is the signal to be recovered, e ∈ Rm is the additive noise
vector, and y ∈ Rm is the observed vector.
Although the linear measurement model utilized in compressed sensing can serve as a good testbed for demonstrating conceptual phenomena, in many real-world problems,
it may not be justifiable or even feasible. For instance, the
binary measurement model employed in 1-bit compressed
sensing (Boufounos & Baraniuk, 2008) has attracted substantial interest. This is due to its cost-effective and efficient
hardware. It has also been shown that 1-bit compressed sensing is robust against certain nonlinear distortions (Laska &
Baraniuk, 2012). The limitations of the linear data model
have prompted the study of general nonlinear measurement
models. Among these, the semi-parametric single index
model (SIM) is arguably the most popular (Horowitz, 2009).
The SIM models the observations as follows:
y = f (Ax∗ ),

(2)

where A consists of i.i.d. standard Gaussian entries, and f :
R → R is an unknown and possibly random nonlinear link
function that is applied element-wise. The aim is to estimate
the signal x∗ using the knowledge of A and y, despite
the unknown nonlinear link f . It is well-known that in the
SIM, x∗ is generally not identifiable (Plan & Vershynin,
2016), since any scaling of x∗ can be incorporated into
the unknown f . Consequently, it is common to impose the
identifiability constraint ∥x∗ ∥2 = 1.

1. Introduction

To enable efficient and reliable recovery of the underlying
signal x∗ , the predominant approach is to introduce structural modeling assumptions, such as sparse and conventional
generative priors. For instance, the research works following
(Bora et al., 2017) typically achieve signal reconstruction
under the assumption that the underlying signal lies within
the range of a variational autoencoder (VAE) or a generative
adversarial network (GAN) (Van Veen et al., 2018; Hand
et al., 2018; Heckel & Hand, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Asim
et al., 2020; Ongie et al., 2020; Whang et al., 2020; Jalal
et al., 2021b; Nguyen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021b; 2022a;
Genzel et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024).

The objective of compressed sensing is to accurately recover the underlying high-dimensional sparse signal from
a small number of linear measurements, with the measurement model as follows (Candes & Wakin, 2008; Foucart &
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS. Correspondence to: Zhaoqiang Liu <zqliu12@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

