Leveraging Predictive Equivalence in Decision Trees

Hayden McTavish * 1 Zachery Boner * 1 Jon Donnelly * 1 Margo Seltzer 2 Cynthia Rudin 1

Abstract

et al., 2022; Aglin et al., 2020) – including algorithms for
enumerating the entire set of near-optimal decision trees
(the Rashomon set; Xin et al., 2022) – have garnered substantial research interest. These advances have enabled new
perspectives on predictive multiplicity (Marx et al., 2020;
Watson-Daniels et al., 2023) and variable importance (Dong
& Rudin, 2020; Fisher et al., 2019; Donnelly et al., 2023).

Decision trees are widely used for interpretable
machine learning due to their clearly structured
reasoning process. However, this structure belies
a challenge we refer to as predictive equivalence:
a given tree’s decision boundary can be represented by many different decision trees. The presence of models with identical decision boundaries
but different evaluation processes makes model
selection challenging. The models will have different variable importance and behave differently
in the presence of missing values, but most optimization procedures will arbitrarily choose one
such model to return. We present a boolean logical representation of decision trees that does not
exhibit predictive equivalence and is faithful to the
underlying decision boundary. We apply our representation to several downstream machine learning tasks. Using our representation, we show that
decision trees are surprisingly robust to test-time
missingness of feature values; we address predictive equivalence’s impact on quantifying variable
importance; and we present an algorithm to optimize the cost of reaching predictions.

However, decision trees can be misleading, because they
correspond not just to a classifier but also to a particular
way of evaluating the classifier. Consider the two equivalent
trees in Figure 1. The two trees encode the same logical
AND decision function, but they suggest different orders of
querying X1 and X2 . A practitioner would typically deploy
only one of these trees, but either order is equally justified.
X1

X2

X2

0
0

X1

0
1

0

1

(X1 ∧ X2 )
Figure 1. Two decision trees, suggesting a different evaluation
order, but which represent the same logical formula (X1 ∧ X2 ).

1. Introduction

This phenomenon, which we call predictive equivalence
(Sober, 1996), poses several distinct challenges:

Decision trees are widely used for interpretable machine
learning (Rudin et al., 2022). Their structure of discrete
decisions has long been leveraged for difficult tasks such as
handling missing data (Therneau et al., 1997) and measuring variable importance (Breiman, 1984). Recent advances
in decision tree optimization (Lin et al., 2020; Demirović

(1) Decision trees imply an evaluation procedure that can
get stuck on irrelevant missing information. If x1 is missing
and x2 = 0, the first tree in Figure 1 cannot be traversed,
but the second tree clearly predicts 0.
(2) Tree-based variable importance metrics change across
predictively equivalent trees. For example, Gini importance
will suggest that x2 is more important to the first tree in
Figure 1, even though this order is arbitrary.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Correspondence to: Hayden McTavish <hayden.mctavish@duke.edu>, Zachery Boner <zachery.boner@duke.edu>.

(3) Logically equivalent trees with different evaluation orders appear in the Rashomon set as distinct trees. This
phenomenon causes some models to be over-represented in
the Rashomon set, which biases some downstream tasks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
Code for our algorithms and experiments can be found
at
https://github.com/HaydenMcT/predictiveequivalence

(4) A decision tree implies a constrained order for evaluating
variables, but this order may be sub-optimal when each
variable has an associated cost.
1

