A Generalization Result for Convergence in Learning-to-Optimize

Michael Sucker 1 Peter Ochs 2

Abstract

however, proving convergence is a hard and long-standing
problem. This is due to the fact that the problem instances
are functions, which cannot be observed globally. Rather,
the region explored during training is strongly influenced by
the chosen initialization and the maximal number of iterations. This begs a fundamental problem for the theoretical
analysis:

Learning-to-optimize leverages machine learning
to accelerate optimization algorithms. While empirical results show tremendous improvements
compared to classical optimization algorithms,
theoretical guarantees are mostly lacking, such
that the outcome cannot be reliably assured. Especially, convergence is hardly studied in learningto-optimize, because conventional convergence
guarantees in optimization are based on geometric arguments, which cannot be applied easily to
learned algorithms. Thus, we develop a probabilistic framework that resembles classical optimization and allows for transferring geometric
arguments into learning-to-optimize. Based on
our new proof-strategy, our main theorem is a
generalization result for parametric classes of potentially non-smooth, non-convex loss functions
and establishes the convergence of learned optimization algorithms to critical points with high
probability. This effectively generalizes the results of a worst-case analysis into a probabilistic
framework, and frees the design of the learned
algorithm from using safeguards.

It typically prevents the usage of both limits and the
mathematical argument of induction.
As convergence is, by definition, tied to the notion of limits,
this subtlety prevents proving that the learned algorithm
converges. A way to mitigate this problem rather easily is
the usage of safeguards: The update step of the algorithm is
restricted to such an extent that it can be analyzed similar to
a hand-crafted algorithm, independently of the training. Yet,
this comes at a price:
Not only the analysis of the learned algorithm, also its
performance is restricted and eventually similar to
hand-crafted algorithms.
Intuitively, the degradation in performance can be explained
by the fact that this approach attempts to directly apply
traditional convergence results, which are not well-suited
for learning-to-optimize. Instead, we advocate for taking a
new perspective, in which we make more use of our greatest
advantage compared to traditional optimization:

1. Introduction
Learning-to-optimize utilizes machine learning techniques
to tailor an optimization algorithm to a concrete family of optimization problems with similar structure. While this often
leads to enormous gains in performance for problems similar to the ones during training, the learned algorithm might
completely fail for others. Thus, to have trustworthy algorithms, guarantees are needed. In optimization, the best way
to show that the algorithm behaves correctly is by proving
its convergence to a critical point. In learning-to-optimize,

We can actually observe the algorithm during training.
Thus, we present a new proof-strategy that allows us to
derive convergence in learning-to-optimize by means of
generalization. The core idea is to show that the properties
of the trajectory, which are needed to deduce convergence of
the algorithm, actually generalize to unseen problems (test
cases). To demonstrate this, we combine a general convergence result from variational analysis with a PAC-Bayesian
generalization theorem. This results in our main theorem,
which is applicable in a (possibly) non-smooth non-convex
optimization setup, and lower bounds the probability to observe a trajectory, generated by the learned algorithm, that
converges to a critical point of the loss function. Here, we
want to emphasize that, while we derive a convergence result for learning-to-optimize, the idea is not restricted to

1

Department of Mathematics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany 2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Michael Sucker <michael.sucker@math.unituebingen.de>, Peter Ochs <ochs@math.uni-saarland.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

