Runtime Analysis of Evolutionary NAS for Multiclass Classification

Zeqiong Lv 1 Chao Qian 2 Yun Liu 1 Jiahao Fan 1 Yanan Sun

Abstract

1

2022; Liu et al., 2023; Miikkulainen et al., 2024) employs
evolutionary techniques, primarily evolutionary algorithms
(EAs), for the automation and has been widely used in realworld applications (Sun et al., 2019b; So et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2024). However,
the theoretical research of ENAS is still underdeveloped.

Evolutionary neural architecture search (ENAS)
is a key part of evolutionary machine learning,
which commonly utilizes evolutionary algorithms
(EAs) to automatically design high-performing
deep neural architectures. During past years, various ENAS methods have been proposed with
exceptional performance. However, the theory
research of ENAS is still in the infant. In this
work, we step for the runtime analysis, which is
an essential theory aspect of EAs, of ENAS upon
multiclass classification problems. Specifically,
we first propose a benchmark to lay the groundwork for the analysis. Furthermore, we design a
two-level search space, making it suitable for multiclass classification problems and consistent with
the common settings of ENAS. Based on both designs, we consider (1+1)-ENAS algorithms with
one-bit and bit-wise mutations, and analyze their
upper and lower bounds on the expected runtime.
We prove that the algorithm using both mutations
can find the optimum with the expected runtime
upper bound of O(rM ln rM ) and lower bound
of Ω(rM ln M ). This suggests that a simple onebit mutation may be greatly considered, given that
most state-of-the-art ENAS methods are laboriously designed with the bit-wise mutation. Empirical studies also support our theoretical proof.

Generally, the theoretical research of ENAS follows the conventional theory of EAs. One essential topic in this aspect
is the runtime analysis (Auger & Doerr, 2011; Neumann &
Witt, 2010; Zhou et al., 2019; Doerr & Neumann, 2020),
which represents the expected number of fitness evaluations
until an optimal or approximate solution is found for the
first time. In practice, the runtime analysis is very challenging, primarily due to the randomized nature of EAs.
Therefore, the community typically begins with (1+1)-EA
with various mutations upon benchmark problems which
have mathematically formulated fitness functions. For example, theoreticians (Droste et al., 2002; Doerr et al., 2008;
Doerr & Goldberg, 2013; Witt, 2013) have analyzed the
runtime of (1+1)-EA with one-bit mutation or bit-wise mutation on O NE M AX and L EADING O NES functions. These
analyses further provide theoretical insights for configuring
EAs to solve complex problems like the dynamic makespan
scheduling problem, where (1+1)-EA with bit-wise mutation efficiently maintains a good discrepancy when the
processing time of a job changes dynamically (Neumann &
Witt, 2015).
In the context of runtime analysis, mathematically formulated fitness function plays the role of directly assessing
the progress of the search process of EAs (Auger & Doerr,
2011; Neumann & Witt, 2010; Zhou et al., 2019; Doerr
& Neumann, 2020). However, constructing such a mathematically formulated fitness function for ENAS is very
challenging. This is because the fitness of a neural architecture is obtained by training itself with learning algorithms,
of which the whole process is difficult to be mathematically
formulated since it is inherently black-box.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) can automate the design
of effective deep neural architectures (Elsken et al., 2019),
making itself a crucial step in automating machine learning (He et al., 2021). Evolutionary NAS (ENAS) (Real et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019; Ünal & Başçiftçi,
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, and
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Yanan Sun <ysun@scu.edu.cn>.

In the literature, there is only rare work making attempts
to mathematically formulate fitness functions for machine
learning tasks. Fischer et al. (2023) considered the classification of points on the unit hypersphere and constructed
a fitness function that quantitatively reflects the proportion
of correctly classified points. This is done by leveraging

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

