On the Importance of Gaussianizing Representations

Daniel Eftekhari 1 2 Vardan Papyan 3 1 2

Abstract

the maximal amount of information (Shannon, 1948). This
can be viewed as a desirable property in learning systems
such as neural networks, where the activations of successive
layers equivocates to successive representations of the data.

The normal distribution plays a central role in
information theory – it is at the same time the
best-case signal and worst-case noise distribution,
has the greatest representational capacity of any
distribution, and offers an equivalence between
uncorrelatedness and independence for joint distributions. Accounting for the mean and variance of activations throughout the layers of deep
neural networks has had a significant effect on
facilitating their effective training, but seldom
has a prescription for precisely what distribution these activations should take, and how this
might be achieved, been offered. Motivated by
the information-theoretic properties of the normal
distribution, we address this question and concurrently present normality normalization: a novel
normalization layer which encourages normality
in the feature representations of neural networks
using the power transform and employs additive
Gaussian noise during training. Our experiments
comprehensively demonstrate the effectiveness
of normality normalization, in regards to its generalization performance on an array of widely
used model and dataset combinations, its strong
performance across various common factors of
variation such as model width, depth, and training
minibatch size, its suitability for usage wherever
existing normalization layers are conventionally
used, and as a means to improving model robustness to random perturbations.

Moreover, a signal following the normal distribution is maximally robust to random perturbations (Cover & Thomas,
2006), and thus presents a desirable property for the representations of learning systems; especially deep neural
networks, which are susceptible to random (Ford et al.,
2019) and adversarial (Szegedy et al., 2014) perturbations. Concomitantly, the normal distribution is informationtheoretically the worst-case perturbative noise distribution
(Cover & Thomas, 2006), which suggests models gaining
robustness to Gaussian noise should be robust to any other
form of random perturbations.
We show that encouraging deep learning models to encode
their activations using the normal distribution in conjunction
with applying additive Gaussian noise during training, helps
improve generalization. We do so by means of a novel layer
– normality normalization – so-named because it applies
the power transform, a technique used to gaussianize data
(Box & Cox, 1964; Yeo & Johnson, 2000), and because it
can be viewed as an augmentation of existing normalization
techniques such as batch (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), layer (Ba
et al., 2016), instance (Ulyanov et al., 2016), and group (Wu
& He, 2018) normalization.
Our experiments comprehensively demonstrate the general
effectiveness of normality normalization, in terms of its
generalization performance, its strong performance across
various common factors of variation such as model width,
depth, and training minibatch size, which furthermore serve
to highlight why it is effective, its suitability for usage wherever existing normalization layers are conventionally used,
and its effect on improving model robustness under random
perturbations.

1. Introduction
The normal distribution is unique – information theory
shows that among all distributions with the same mean
and variance, a signal following this distribution encodes

In Section 2 we outline some of the desirable properties
normality can imbue in learning models, which serve as
motivating factors for the development of normality normalization. In Section 3 we provide a brief background on the
power transform, before presenting normality normalization
in Section 4. In Section 5 we describe our experiments,
analyze the results, and explore some of the properties of
models trained with normality normalization. In Section

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Department
of Mathematics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Daniel Eftekhari <defte@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

