Position: Democratic AI is Possible. The Democracy Levels
Framework Shows How It Might Work.

Aviv Ovadya 1 Kyle Redman 1 2 Luke Thorburn 1 3 Quan Ze Chen 1 4 Oliver Smith 1
Flynn Devine 5 Andrew Konya 6 1 Smitha Milli 7 Manon Revel 7 K. J. Kevin Feng 4 Amy X. Zhang 4
Bilva Chandra Michiel A. Bakker 8 Atoosa Kasirzadeh 9

Abstract

incentives, geopolitical incentives, and jurisdictional arbitrage opportunities pose unprecedented challenges (Allen &
Weyl, 2024).

This position paper argues that effectively “democratizing AI” requires democratic governance
and alignment of AI, and that this is particularly
valuable for decisions with systemic societal impacts. Initial steps—such as Meta’s Community
Forums and Anthropic’s Collective Constitutional
AI—have illustrated a promising direction, where
democratic processes could be used to meaningfully improve public involvement and trust in critical decisions. To more concretely explore what
increasingly democratic AI might look like, we
provide a “Democracy Levels” framework and
associated tools that: (i) define milestones toward
meaningfully democratic AI—which is also crucial for substantively pluralistic, human-centered,
participatory, and public-interest AI, (ii) can help
guide organizations seeking to increase the legitimacy of their decisions on difficult AI governance
and alignment questions, and (iii) support the evaluation of such efforts.1

Thankfully, recent innovations in collective decision-making
point towards a new generation of processes, infrastructures, and institutions to navigate these challenges (Ovadya,
2023a; OECD, 2020; CIP, 2024; Stilgoe, 2024). They provide new ways to ensure that the development of AI remains
human-centered, not just at an individual human level, but
societally and even globally; and not just by individual governments, but also by democratic processes commissioned
by corporations, governments, and multilateral institutions.
Building on such democratic innovations, our position
is that democratic AI is possible—and valuable for navigating the systemic societal impacts of AI.
To illustrate more concretely what democratizing AI might
look like, we provide the “Democracy Levels” framework which: (a) articulates milestones for the democratic AI (CIP, 2024), pluralistic AI (Sorensen et al., 2024;
Kasirzadeh, 2024), participatory AI (Delgado et al., 2023;
Groves et al., 2023; Wong et al., 2022), and public AI (Vincent et al., 2023; Public AI Network, 2024) ecosystems—a
rapidly evolving set of organizations, institutions, and initiatives interested in ensuring that we have the necessary
“democratic infrastructure” for navigating the transition to a
world with highly-capable AI systems; (b) can help guide
organizations and institutions that need to increase the legitimacy of difficult AI governance and alignment decisions;
and (c) supports evaluation to identify opportunities for improvement of democratic systems and keep AI organizations
accountable.

1. Introduction
Who should steer the development of AI? Similar questions have emerged with previous technological advances
(Ziewitz & Brown, 2013; DeNardis, 2014; Radu, 2019), and
existing institutions and power structures will clearly play
a significant role in adjudicating these questions. However,
with AI’s general-purpose nature, the pace of change, market
1
AI & Democracy Foundation 2 newDemocracy Foundation
King’s College London 4 University of Washington 5 Boundary
Object Studio 6 Remesh 7 Meta AI, FAIR Labs 8 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 9 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Aviv Ovadya <aviv@aidemocracyfoundation.org>.
3

We see this framework as applicable to each of the yellow components in Figure 1: AI systems, AI organizations,
and AI regulators (and the decision-making processes that
feed into these). The ultimate intent is to provide a clear
map of what it would take to enable meaningful democratic
governance and alignment of AI, in a way that is useful
both internally to organizations making decisions about AI,
and externally to those supporting this work and providing
accountability.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
This framework will continue to be evolved by the AI &
Democracy Foundation (AIDF) and associated working groups at
democracylevels.org.

1

