Adaptive Data Collection for Robust Learning Across Multiple Distributions

Chengbo Zang 1 Mehmet Kerem Turkcan 2 Gil Zussman 1 Zoran Kostic 1 Javad Ghaderi 1

Abstract

healthcare (Moody & Mark, 1992; Zang et al., 2023), and
object detection in smart cities (Cordts et al., 2016; Turkcan
et al., 2024)–necessitate the collection and annotation of
custom datasets to address the unique characteristics of their
respective problem.

We propose a framework for adaptive data collection aimed at robust learning in multi-distribution
scenarios under a fixed data collection budget. In
each round, the algorithm selects a distribution
source to sample from for data collection and
updates the model parameters accordingly. The
objective is to find the model parameters that minimize the expected loss across all the data sources.
Our approach integrates upper-confidence-bound
(UCB) sampling with online gradient descent
(OGD) to dynamically collect and annotate data
from multiple sources. By bridging online optimization and multi-armed bandits, we provide theoretical guarantees for our UCB-OGD approach,
demonstrating that it achieves a minimax regret
1
1
of O(T 2 (K ln T ) 2 ) over K data sources after T
rounds. We further provide a lower bound showing that the result is optimal up to a ln T factor.
Extensive evaluations on standard datasets and a
real-world testbed for object detection in smartcity intersections validate the consistent performance improvements of our method compared to
baselines such as random sampling and various
active learning methods.

As a motivating example in smart-city applications, consider
the task of vehicle detection at an urban traffic intersection.
The objective is to develop a robust vehicle detection model
that is capable of operating effectively under varying conditions, such as changes in lighting, occlusions, and weather
variations. Three strategically placed cameras, each providing a unique perspective of traffic flow, are available for data
collection. The trained model will be deployed across all
three cameras, with the goal of optimizing the worst-case detection performance among them. However, annotating data
for complex tasks such as detection, tracking, and segmentation is particularly expensive. This involves meticulous
labeling of bounding boxes, object identities across frames,
and pixel-level masks to generate accurate ground truths.
Given a limited annotation budget (e.g. 2,500 images), it is
crucial to strategically allocate the annotation budget across
the three cameras to maximize the worst-case detection
performance at the intersection.
In this paper, we present a framework for adaptive data
collection and model training in multi-distribution scenarios under a fixed data annotation budget. The proposed
framework operates iteratively, alternating between data collection (annotation) and model optimization in each round.
Our objective is to devise a budget allocation strategy across
the distribution sources such that the trained model achieves
performance guarantee across all the distributions.

1. Introduction
In modern deep learning systems, sufficient and high-quality
data is essential for robust model performance (Hestness
et al., 2017). Although numerous standard datasets and pretrained models are publicly available, they could fail to meet
the diverse and specific requirements of applications, especially when applied to novel or previously unseen scenarios.
Consequently, many applications–such as vision-language
modeling (Laurençon et al., 2024), intelligent monitoring in

1.1. Related Work
Active Learning. The challenge of data annotation has
driven significant advancements in the field of active learning (AL). The key idea of AL is to let the learning algorithm
interactively query an annotator to label a subset of data
points from a set of unlabeled data (Settles, 2009). In particular, pool-based methods assume that a pre-existing pool
of unlabeled data is available and aim to select the most
relevant samples from the pool to query for their labels.
The relevance of a sample is often determined by criteria
such as uncertainty measure (Lewis & Catlett, 1994) or

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York NY, USA 2 Department of Civil Engineering,
Columbia University, New York NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Chengbo Zang <cz2678@columbia.edu>, Javad Ghaderi
<jg3465@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

