Taming Rectified Flow for Inversion and Editing

Jiangshan Wang * 1 2 Junfu Pu * † 2 Zhongang Qi 2 Jiayi Guo 1 Yue Ma 3
Nisha Huang 1 Yuxin Chen 2 Xiu Li 1 Ying Shan 2
Task 1: Image Inversion and Reconstruction
“… cake, fork, beer
and orange …”

Task 2: Video Inversion and Reconstruction

“… a child holding a
phone by a laptop…”

“… a vibrant red train traveling
through a rural landscape…”

Source
image

Source
video

RFSolver

RFSolver

Vanilla
Rectified
flow

Vanilla
Rectified
flow

Task 3: Image Editing (resolution: 1360 ×768)
+ “magazine”

“truck”

“plane” “summer”

“… a giant panda walking through
a snowy environment…”

Task 4: Video Editing (resolution: 1360 ×768; 96 frames)
“autumn”

“woman”

Source
image

Source
video

Edited
image

Edited
video

“African woman”

Figure 1. RF-Solver for downstream tasks in image and video. We propose RF-Solver to solve the rectified flow ODE with reduced
error, thereby enhancing both sampling quality and inversion-reconstruction accuracy for rectified-flow-based generative models (BlackForest-Labs, 2024; Zheng et al., 2024). Furthermore, we propose RF-Edit, which utilizes the RF-Solver for editing. Our methods
demonstrate impressive performance across generation, inversion, and editing tasks in both image and video modalities.

Abstract

propose RF-Solver, a novel training-free sampler
that effectively enhances inversion precision by
mitigating the errors in the ODE-solving process
of rectified flow. Specifically, we derive the exact
formulation of the rectified flow ODE and apply
the high-order Taylor expansion to estimate its
nonlinear components, significantly enhancing
the precision of ODE solutions at each timestep.
Building upon RF-Solver, we further propose RFEdit, a general feature-sharing-based framework
for image and video editing. By incorporating
self-attention features from the inversion process
into the editing process, RF-Edit effectively
preserves the structural information of the source
image or video while achieving high-quality
editing results. Our approach is compatible with

Rectified-flow-based diffusion transformers
like FLUX and OpenSora have demonstrated
outstanding performance in the field of image and
video generation. Despite their robust generative
capabilities, these models often struggle with
inversion inaccuracies, which could further limit
their effectiveness in downstream tasks such as
image and video editing. To address this issue, we
*

Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent
PCG 3 HKUST. † Project lead: Junfu Pu <jevinpu@tencent.com>.
Correspondence to: Zhongang Qi <zhongangqi@gmail.com>,
Xiu Li <li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

