Sparse Causal Discovery with Generative Intervention
for Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation

Junyu Luo 1 2 Yuhao Tang 2 Yiwei Fu 2 Xiao Luo 3 Zhizhuo Kou 4 Zhiping Xiao 5
Wei Ju 1 2 Wentao Zhang 2 Ming Zhang 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated their
effectiveness in graph-structured data analysis, including
molecular structures (Turutov & Radinsky, 2024; Kim et al.,
2023), social networks (Kumar et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021),
traffic networks (Chowdhury et al., 2024) and RAG (Jiang
et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025). Graph classification is an
important task in graph learning, which targets at predicting
the labels of the entire graphs (Ying et al., 2018; Ranjan
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2018). GNN-based graph classification approaches typically use a message-passing network
in conjunction with a readout operator to aggregate the
node features into graph-level representations, followed by
a classifier for downstream tasks such as molecular property
prediction in drug and material science (Xu et al., 2021).

Unsupervised Graph Domain Adaptation (UGDA)
leverages labeled source domain graphs to achieve
effective performance in unlabeled target domains despite distribution shifts. However, existing methods often yield suboptimal results due
to the entanglement of causal-spurious features
and the failure of global alignment strategies.
We propose SLOGAN (Sparse Causal Discovery
with Generative Intervention), a novel approach
that achieves stable graph representation transfer
through sparse causal modeling and dynamic intervention mechanisms. Specifically, SLOGAN
first constructs a sparse causal graph structure,
leveraging mutual information bottleneck constraints to disentangle sparse, stable causal features while compressing domain-dependent spurious correlations through variational inference. To
address residual spurious correlations, we innovatively design a generative intervention mechanism
that breaks local spurious couplings through crossdomain feature recombination while maintaining
causal feature semantic consistency via covariance constraints. Furthermore, to mitigate error
accumulation in target domain pseudo-labels, we
introduce a category-adaptive dynamic calibration strategy, ensuring stable discriminative learning. Extensive experiments on multiple real-world
datasets demonstrate that SLOGAN significantly
outperforms existing baselines.

Despite the effectiveness of existing approaches, their assumption of consistent distribution between training and
inference datasets rarely holds, especially in real-world scenarios. This mismatch leads to out-of-distribution (OOD)
challenges (Wu et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2023; You et al.,
2022). In addition, the scarcity of labeled data in the target
domain brings extra challenges, making supervised methods infeasible (Hao et al., 2020; Suresh et al., 2021). One
typical method to tackle this problem is Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA), which leverages labeled data from
a source domain to enable task performance in an unlabeled
target domain (Deng et al., 2021; Long et al., 2018).
UDA has been extensively studied in the context of Euclidean data (e.g., images) through self-learning (Wei et al.,
2021a; Xiao & Zhang, 2021), adversarial domain transfer (Ganin et al., 2016; Saito et al., 2018), or domain
discrepancy minimization techniques (Lee et al., 2019a).
However, it is non-trivial to develop a UDA approach
for non-Euclidean graph data. There are significant challenges due to the complex topology and rich semantics of
graphs (Velickovic et al., 2019; Huang & Zitnik, 2020),
which are mainly attributed to: (1) Feature entanglement
and persistent spurious correlations. Graph data inherently
encodes both causal relationships and statistical correlations.
Traditional methods that rely solely on semantic labels for
model training often fail to distinguish between these two

1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, PKU-Anker LLM Lab 2 Peking University 3 University of California, Los Angeles 4 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Paul G. Allen School of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Xiao Luo <xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>, Zhiping Xiao <patxiao@uw.edu>, Ming Zhang <mzhang_cs@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

