Position: The AI Conference Peer Review Crisis
Demands Author Feedback and Reviewer Rewards
Jaeho Kim * 1 Yunseok Lee * 1 Seulki Lee 1

Abstract

AI Conference Submissions

The peer review process in major artificial intelligence (AI) conferences faces unprecedented challenges with the surge of paper submissions (exceeding 10,000 submissions per venue), accompanied by growing concerns over review quality
and reviewer responsibility. This position paper
argues for the need to transform the traditional
one-way review system into a bi-directional
feedback loop where authors evaluate review
quality and reviewers earn formal accreditation, creating an accountability framework
that promotes a sustainable, high-quality peer
review system. The current review system can
be viewed as an interaction between three parties:
the authors, reviewers, and system (i.e. conference), where we posit that all three parties share
responsibility for the current problems. However,
issues with authors can only be addressed through
policy enforcement and detection tools, and ethical concerns can only be corrected through selfreflection. As such, this paper focuses on reforming reviewer accountability with systematic rewards through two key mechanisms: (1) a twostage bi-directional review system that allows authors to evaluate reviews while minimizing retaliatory behavior, (2) a systematic reviewer reward
system that incentivizes quality reviewing. We
ask for the community’s strong interest in these
problems and the reforms that are needed to enhance the peer review process.

NeurIPS
CVPR
AAAI
ICML
ICLR

Counts

15000
10000
5000

19

20

21

22

Years

23

24

25

Figure 1: AI Conference Submission Counts. The number of
paper submissions to most major AI conferences (e.g. NeurIPS,
CVPR, AAAI, ICML, ICLR) exceeded 10,000 by 2025. For example, there was a 59.8% increase in ICLR submissions in 2025
alone. We forecast similar growth in other venues as well.

for cutting-edge research dissemination, fostering intellectual discourse and collaboration among researchers. Unlike
traditional scientific areas where journals are the primary
publication outlets (Kim, 2019), the fast-paced nature of
AI research has elevated these conferences to the status
of first-tier venues, with their double-blind peer-reviewed
papers carrying impact comparable to many prestigious journals (Freyne et al., 2010). However, over recent years, the
number of paper submissions to major AI conferences has
skyrocketed (Figure 1), overwhelming the traditional peer
review system (Tran et al., 2020). With such rapid growth,
the authors believe that the current AI conference system
is becoming increasingly unsustainable where the hardearned conference’s established reputation is breaking
down. To put this more directly, this translates to declined
review quality.1 This issue, however, cannot be attributed
solely to the reviewers - the responsibility and consequent
adverse effects are shared among all three main stakeholders:
Authors, Reviewers, and the System.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) conferences (e.g. ICML, ICLR,
NeurIPS, CVPR, etc) play a crucial role as a premier venue

Definition 1.1 (Authors). Authors are individuals who submit manuscripts to AI conferences for peer review and po-

*
Equal contribution 1 Artificial Intelligence Graduate School,
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST),
Ulsan, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Seulki Lee
<seulki.lee@unist.ac.kr>.

1

We stress that the majority of authors and reviewers maintain
high professional standards. However, even a small number of
participants who deviate from these standards can significantly
impact the reputation and trust built on these peer review process,
creating challenges that affect the entire AI community.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

