LLM Alignment as Retriever Optimization: An Information Retrieval
Perspective

Bowen Jin 1 2 Jinsung Yoon 2 Zhen Qin 3 Ziqi Wang 1 Wei Xiong 1 Yu Meng 4 Jiawei Han 1 Sercan Ö. Arık 2

Abstract

tial of LLMs while ensuring their ethical, safe, and highquality performance hinges on effective alignment (Wang
et al., 2023). However, existing reinforcement learningbased LLM alignment methods (e.g., PPO (Ouyang et al.,
2022)) involve multi-stage training and are challenging to
optimize. To this end, direct LLM preference optimization
methods (e.g., DPO (Rafailov et al., 2024)) are proposed to
simplify the alignment process.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized artificial intelligence with capabilities in reasoning, coding, and communication, driving innovation across industries. Their true potential
depends on effective alignment to ensure correct,
trustworthy and ethical behavior, addressing challenges like misinformation, hallucinations, bias
and misuse. While existing Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based alignment methods are notoriously complex, direct optimization approaches
offer a simpler alternative. In this work, we introduce a novel direct optimization approach for
LLM alignment by drawing on established Information Retrieval (IR) principles. We present
a systematic framework that bridges LLM alignment and IR methodologies, mapping LLM generation and reward models to IR’s retriever-reranker
paradigm. Building on this foundation, we propose LLM Alignment as Retriever Preference
Optimization (L AR PO), a new alignment method
that enhances overall alignment quality. Extensive experiments validate L AR PO’s effectiveness
with 38.9 % and 13.7 % averaged improvement
on AlpacaEval2 and MixEval-Hard respectively.
Our work opens new avenues for advancing LLM
alignment by integrating IR foundations, offering
a promising direction for future research.

In this work, we further enhance direct LLM preference optimization, focusing on bringing Information Retrieval (IR)
perspectives (Tay et al., 2022). Striking parallels exist between IR methodologies and LLM alignment techniques
(Lin et al., 2022). For example, IR’s retriever-reranker
framework, which uses a retriever for broad semantic matching to generate a candidate set and a reranker for finegrained refinement, offers a compelling analogy to the Bestof-N approach in LLM alignment (Dong et al., 2023; Sessa
et al., 2024). In this analogy, the LLM acts as the retriever,
while the reward model serves as the reranker. Furthermore, the common use of dual-encoder architectures in both
LLM generation and IR retrievers, coupled with the reliance
on cross-encoder architectures in reward models and IR
rerankers, further underscores this synergy. Leveraging established IR techniques offers the potential to develop novel,
easily implementable LLM alignment methods grounded in
IR principles, leading to improved alignment quality.
Despite the promising connections between LLM alignment
and IR, a systematic exploration of this synergy remains
lacking. Specifically, three key gaps exist: (1) a clear mapping between LLM alignment mechanisms and core IR principles has not been established; (2) empirical evaluations
of LLMs through an IR lens are scarce; and (3) proven IR
techniques like retriever optimization, hard negative mining,
and candidate list construction are underutilized for LLM
alignment. This paper directly addresses these gaps by systematically bridging LLM alignment and IR methodologies.
Our contributions are fourfold:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Team
et al., 2024a) have demonstrated remarkable capacities in
a wide range of fields including conversational modeling
(Zhao et al., 2023a), reasoning (Wei et al., 2022) and code
generation (Jiang et al., 2024). Unlocking the full poten1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Google Cloud
AI Research 3 Google DeepMind 4 University of Virginia. Correspondence to: Bowen Jin <bowenj4@illinois.edu>.

• We introduce a comprehensive framework that connects
LLM alignment techniques with the established IR principles, providing a new perspective on LLM alignment.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We demonstrate the significance of three key IR prin1

