Context-Informed Neural ODEs Unexpectedly Identify Broken Symmetries:
Insights from the Poincaré–Hopf Theorem

In Huh 1 2 Changwook Jeong 3 4 Muhammad Ashraful Alam 1

Abstract

structing accurate mathematical models that seamlessly integrate observational data with physical principles. Properly
modeled dynamical systems allow for the prediction of rare
events or even unobserved phenomena, providing scientific
intuition and opportunities for groundbreaking discoveries.
Recently, learning dynamical systems directly from data
has emerged as a promising alternative to traditional modeling approaches, offering a partial automation of scientific
discovery (Brunton et al., 2016; Fotiadis et al., 2023; Huh
et al., 2020; Kirchmeyer et al., 2022; Mouli et al., 2024;
Nzoyem et al., 2025; Yin et al., 2021a;b). To serve as viable alternatives to physics-based models, these approaches
must demonstrate robust forecasting capabilities beyond
their training domain, making Out-Of-Domain (OOD) generalization a critical challenge (Göring et al., 2024).

Out-Of-Domain (OOD) generalization is a significant challenge in learning dynamical systems,
especially when they exhibit bifurcation, a sudden topological transition triggered by a model
parameter crossing a critical threshold. A prevailing belief is that machine learning models, unless
equipped with strong priors, struggle to generalize across bifurcations due to the abrupt changes
in data characteristics. Contrary to this belief, we
demonstrate that context-dependent Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODEs), trained
solely on localized, pre-bifurcation, symmetric
data and without physics-based priors, can still
identify post-bifurcation, symmetry-breaking behaviors, even in a zero-shot manner. We interpret
this capability to the model’s implicit utilization
of topological invariants, particularly the Poincaré
index, and offer a formal explanation based on the
Poincaré–Hopf theorem. We derive the conditions under which NODEs can recover—or erroneously hallucinate—broken symmetries without
explicit training. Building on this insight, we
showcase a topological regularizer inspired by
the Poincaré–Hopf theorem and validate it empirically on phase transitions of systems described
by the Landau–Khalatnikov equation.

Formally, a continuous dynamical system is represented by
a phase space Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE):
ẋ(t) = f (x(t); µ), x ∈ M, µ ∈ Rn , f : M×Rn → T M,
where x(t) is a phase space state at time t, µ is a ndimensional model parameter vector, f (·; ·) is a vector field
of the µ-parameterized ODE, and M is a phase manifold.
Here, the model parameters µ refer to factors that characterize the physical environment of the system, such as the
mass of a pendulum1 . Trajectories of ODEs are given by
Z T
x(T ; x(0), µ) = x(0) +
f (x(t); µ)dt,
0

1. Introduction

where x(0) is called the initial condition. The goal of learning dynamics is to use machine learning models like Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Brenner et al., 2022; 2025;
Vlachas et al., 2018) or Neural ODEs (NODEs) (Chen et al.,
2018; Rubanova et al., 2019) to accurately approximate the
unknown vector field f (·; ·) based on the trajectory data.
Clearly, for a given trajectory over T , there are two degrees
of freedom: the initial condition x(0) and the model parameter µ. Therefore, OOD challenges in the learning dynamics
problem can be categorized into two types: generalizations
to the unseen x(0) and to the unseen µ (Mouli et al., 2024).

The laws of physical systems are frequently expressed by
differential equations rooted in dynamical systems theory.
Across all scientific disciplines, a key objective lies in con1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University 2 CSE Team, Samsung Electronics
3
Graduate School of Semiconductor Materials and Devices Engineering, UNIST 4 Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST.
Correspondence to: In Huh <ihuh@purdue.edu>, Changwook
Jeong <changwook.jeong@unist.ac.kr>, Muhammad Ashraful
Alam <alam@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Therefore, we will use the terms environment and parameter interchangeably, though the latter specifically referring to a
numerical value that characterizes the environment.

1

