Make LoRA Great Again: Boosting LoRA with
Adaptive Singular Values and Mixture-of-Experts Optimization Alignment

Chenghao Fan * 1 Zhenyi Lu * 1 Sichen Liu 1 Chengfeng Gu 2 Xiaoye Qu 1 Wei Wei 1 Yu Cheng 3

Abstract

et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2024). To reduce costs, parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques (Hu et al., 2021;
Pfeiffer et al., 2021; Houlsby et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2024;
Fan et al., 2024b) have been proposed. Among them, LoRA
(Hu et al., 2021) is popular for its simplicity and effectiveness. It reparameterizes the weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n into
W = W0 + BA, where W0 ∈ Rm×n is a frozen full-rank
matrix, and B ∈ Rm×r ,A ∈ Rr×n are low-rank adapters
to be learned. Since the rank r ≪ min(m, n), LoRA only
updates a small fraction of the parameters, greatly reducing
memory usage.

While Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) enables
parameter-efficient fine-tuning for Large Language Models (LLMs), its performance often falls
short of Full Fine-Tuning (Full FT). Current methods optimize LoRA by initializing with static singular value decomposition (SVD) subsets, leading
to suboptimal leveraging of pre-trained knowledge. Another path for improving LoRA is incorporating a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture.
However, weight misalignment and complex gradient dynamics make it challenging to adopt SVD
prior to the LoRA MoE architecture. To mitigate
these issues, we propose Great LoRA Mixture-ofExpert (GOAT), a framework that (1) adaptively
integrates relevant priors using an SVD-structured
MoE, and (2) aligns optimization with full finetuned MoE by deriving a theoretical scaling factor. We demonstrate that proper scaling, without
modifying the architecture or training algorithms,
boosts LoRA MoE’s efficiency and performance.
Experiments across 25 datasets, including natural
language understanding, commonsense reasoning, image classification, and natural language
generation, demonstrate GOAT’s state-of-the-art
performance, closing the gap with Full FT. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/
Facico/GOAT-PEFT.

Despite its computational efficiency, LoRA often underperforms full fine-tuning (Full FT) (Wang et al., 2024d;c; Fan
et al., 2024a), even with Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures (Zadouri et al., 2024; Liu & Luo, 2024; Tian et al.,
2024). Our rigorous analysis identifies two key factors limiting LoRA’s performance: (1) Suboptimal Initialization:
The isotropic random initialization for matrix A and zero
initialization for matrix B provide a non-informative prior,
resulting in unguided optimization subspaces. While Wang
et al. (2024b); Meng et al. (2024) applied singular value
decomposition (SVD) for better initialization, their reliance
on a static, predefined subset of pre-trained weights limits
the capture of the full range of pre-trained knowledge. It
raises the question: Can we adaptively integrate relevant
priors of pre-trained knowledge based on input? (2) Unaligned Optimization: Furthermore, the intrinsic low-rank
property of LoRA leads to large gradient gaps and slow convergence in optimization, therefore underperforming Full
FT. In LoRA MoE scenarios, the total rank is split among
experts, resulting in lower ranks and further increasing this
challenge. Existing strategies (Wang et al., 2024c;d) focus
only on single LoRA architectures and ignore the added
complexity of random top-k routing and multiple expert
weights within MoE architecture. When SVD-based initialization is applied to LoRA MoE, weight alignment becomes
a challenge, which has never been considered in previous
methods that used zero initialization. This further raises the
question: How do we mitigate the optimization gap in LoRA
MoE initialized with prior information?

1. Introduction
Recent large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive capabilities (Dai et al., 2024; Touvron et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2024; OpenAI et al., 2024), but fine-tuning them
for downstream tasks is computationally expensive (Hu
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Zhejiang
University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Wei Wei <weiw@hust.edu.cn>.

To address these challenges, we propose GOAT (Great
LoRA Mixture-of-Experts), which employs an SVD-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

