A Near Linear Query Lower Bound for Submodular Maximization

Binghui Peng 1 Aviad Rubinstein 2

Abstract

scales sublinearly with n.

We revisit the problem of selecting k-out-of-n elements with the goal of optimizing an objective
function, and ask whether it can be solved approximately with sublinear query complexity. For
objective functions that are monotone submodular, [Li, Feldman, Kazemi, Karbasi, NeurIPS’22;
Kuhnle, AISTATS’21] gave an Ω(n/k) query
lower bound for approximating to within any constant factor. We strengthen their lower bound to a
e
nearly tight Ω(n).
This lower bound holds even
for estimating the value of the optimal subset.
When the objective function is additive, we prove
that finding an approximately optimal subset still
requires near-linear query complexity, but we can
e
estimate the value of the optimal subset in O(n/k)
queries, and that this is tight up to polylog factors.

In full generality, it is clearly hopeless to find anapproximately optimal k-subset without querying all nk subsets
(not to mention sublinear query complexity), so as is common in the literature we restrict our attention to monotone
submodular objective functions, i.e. we assume that the
marginal contribution from each additional element is diminishing, yet it is always non-negative (see Section 2 for
a formal definition). Since our result for worst-case functions in this class is quite negative, we also consider the
most important special P
case: (monotone) additive objective
functions, i.e. f (S) = i∈S wi for unknown wi ≥ 0.
Monotone submodular maximization has important applications in machine learning (see e.g. the recent survey
of Bilmes (2022) and references therein), and the problem sizes in those machine learning applications increases
rapidly. This inspired over the past decade an extensive
effort in obtaining sublinear time algorithms for approximate submodular maximization by parallelization (Balkanski et al., 2016; Balkanski & Singer, 2018; Balkanski et al.,
2018; 2019; Chekuri & Quanrud, 2019a;b; Chen et al., 2019;
Ene & Nguyen, 2019; Fahrbach et al., 2019; Kazemi et al.,
2019a; Breuer et al., 2020; Ene & Nguyen, 2020; Balkanski et al., 2022a;b). In contrast, in this work we look for
algorithms whose total work (specifically, total query complexity) is sublinear. Indeed, this is motivated in part by the
increasing monetary and environmental cost of total work
of state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms that already
achieve significant parallelization. Beyond these important
connections to applications in machine learning, submodular maximization itself is generally a fundamental problem
in optimization.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of selecting the “best” k-out-of-n
elements, e.g. selecting k locations to place sensors, selecting k features to include in data analysis, or selecting k
samples for training a model. We are particularly interested
in the case where:
Expensive query access We are not given an explicit function to compute what makes one subset “better” than another: rather we have expensive query access to an oracle
that evaluates different candidate subsets (e.g. estimating the
quality of prediction from a subset of features or samples
by training a smaller model on them).
Sublinear query complexity Motivated by the expensive
query constraint and large problem sizes in machine learning applications, we ask whether it is possible to obtain
approximately optimal subsets with query complexity that
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, United States 2 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, United States.
Correspondence to:
Binghui Peng <binghuip@stanford.edu>, Aviad Rubinstein
<aviad@cs.stanford.edu>.

The question of sublinear-query algorithms for submodular
maximization was considered by Li et al. (2022); Kuhnle
(2021), who showed that any constant factor approximation algorithm requires query complexity Ω(n/k); Li et al.
n
(2022) additionally proved a lower bound of Ω( log(n)
) for
the special case of k = Θ(n). Hence, for the special case
of k = Θ(1) and k = Θ(n), previous work rules out truly
sublinear query complexity algorithms.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Our first result strengthens this impossibility result by ruling out approximate submodular maximization in sublinear
query complexity for any k ≪ n, even if we’re just inter-

1

1

