Position: Lifetime tuning is incompatible with continual reinforcement learning

Golnaz Mesbahi 1 2 Parham Mohammad Panahi 1 2 Olya Mastikhina 1 2 Steven Tang 1 2 Martha White 1 2 3
Adam White 1 2 3

Abstract

ment (Janjua et al., 2024), and many other industrial control
settings. Even our popular deep RL benchmarks could naturally be treated as continual RL tasks: Atari agents could
play games forever, switching to a new game when they
die or complete each game (similar to the Switching ALE
benchmark (Abbas et al., 2023)). Mujoco tasks are naturally
continuing, but common practice is to truncate experiments
after a fixed number of interactions, resetting to some initial
configuration. In continual RL tasks, we should design and
evaluate our agents with limited access to the environment
and then deploy the learning system as-is without further
tuning of its hyperparameters during the rest of its lifetime.

In continual reinforcement learning (RL) we want
agents capable of never-ending learning, and yet
our evaluation methodologies do not reflect this.
The standard practice in RL is to assume unfettered access to the deployment environment for
the full lifetime of the agent. For example, agent
designers select the best performing hyperparameters in Atari by testing each for 200 million frames
and then reporting results on 200 million frames.
In this position paper, we argue and demonstrate
the pitfalls of this inappropriate empirical methodology: lifetime tuning. We provide empirical evidence to support our position by testing DQN and
SAC across several continuing and non-stationary
environments with two main findings: (1) lifetime
tuning does not allow us to identify algorithms
that work well for continual learning—all algorithms equally succeed; (2) recently developed
continual RL algorithms outperform standard noncontinual algorithms when tuning is limited to a
fraction of the agent’s lifetime. The goal of this
paper is to provide an explanation for why recent
progress in continual RL has been mixed and motivate the development of empirical practices that
better match the goals of continual RL.

The vast majority of algorithmic progress in deep RL has
focused on the non-continual setting. Agent designers test
algorithmic variations and hyperparameter combinations
in the deployment environment for the full lifetime of the
agent and then report the best performance across these
deployments. For example, if one were to develop a new exploration algorithm for Atari, then this new algorithm would
be extensively tested over 200 million frames, tuning any
new hyperparameters introduced by evaluating each over
200 million frames. In this sense, the standard methodology is to design and evaluate our agents given access to the
full, finite, lifetime of the agent. This is critical because it
means that designers can tweak hyperparameters such that
performance is optimized for a particular lifetime length.
For example, one could tune the epsilon decay schedule of
DQN to maximize area under the learning curve, generating
the best result possible over 200 million frames. But if that
agent was run for 800 million frames, or 10 million frames,
the resultant performance would be suboptimal.

1. Do not peek at the test set!
Continual reinforcement learning (RL) arises in many applications. In HVAC control, agents learn to adapt process setpoints daily, with deployment lasting for weeks or months,
but the agent does not exploit knowledge of the length of the
deployment (Luo et al., 2022) and the agent designer might
not know how long the agent will run. Similar situations
arise in data-center cooling (Lazic et al., 2018), water treat-

There has been increased focus on extending or modifying
existing deep RL agents for continual RL, with limited success. These approaches can be roughly categorized into
three groups: 1) resetting, 2) regularization, and 3) normalization. In the first approach, parts of the agent’s network
are reset to random initial values, causing large drops in
performance but eventually leading to improved final performance (Nikishin et al., 2022; 2023; D’Oro et al., 2022).
Regularization balances error reduction with keeping the
agent’s network parameters close to initialization (Kumar
et al., 2024); this helps because the random initial parameters help the network learn quickly. Finally, recent work

1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Adam White
<amw8@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

