Stability and Generalization Capability of Subgraph Reasoning Models for
Inductive Knowledge Graph Completion

Minsung Hwang 1 Jaejun Lee 1 Joyce Jiyoung Whang 1

Abstract

observed entities and utilize the learned representations to
predict missing links (Chung et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023a).

Inductive knowledge graph completion aims to
predict missing triplets in an incomplete knowledge graph that differs from the one observed
during training. While subgraph reasoning models have demonstrated empirical success in this
task, their theoretical properties, such as stability
and generalization capability, remain unexplored.
In this work, we present the first theoretical analysis of the relationship between the stability and
the generalization capability for subgraph reasoning models. Specifically, we define stability as
the degree of consistency in a subgraph reasoning
model’s outputs in response to differences in input subgraphs and introduce the Relational Tree
Mover’s Distance as a metric to quantify the differences between the subgraphs. We then show that
the generalization capability of subgraph reasoning models, defined as the discrepancy between
the performance on training data and test data, is
proportional to their stability. Furthermore, we
empirically analyze the impact of stability on generalization capability using real-world datasets,
validating our theoretical findings.

As real-world KGs continually expand, recent research has
shifted its focus to inductive KGC, where the KG that appears during inference differs from the one used for training (Teru et al., 2020). Most models designed for transductive KGC are unsuitable for inductive inference because
they cannot handle unobserved entities, as these entities lack
learned representations. To overcome this limitation, recent
studies have adopted subgraph reasoning approaches (Teru
et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Zhang & Yao, 2022). Unlike
models that learn representations for individual entities and
use the learned representations for link prediction, subgraph
reasoning models determine the validity of a triplet by utilizing the structure of the subgraph extracted around the triplet.
Consequently, these models can effectively perform inductive link prediction using the subgraph structures extracted
from the inference KG.
To theoretically explain the empirical success of KGC models, several analyses have been conducted. Most of these
studies focus on understanding what these models are capable of learning. For example, some investigate the graph
structures that the models can distinguish (Barcelo et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2023), while others examine the rules
within a KG that the models can infer (Qiu et al., 2024). In
contrast, relatively little attention has been given to two critical theoretical properties of subgraph reasoning models: (1)
generalization capability, which refers to the discrepancy between a model’s performance on training and test data, and
(2) stability, defined as the degree to which a model’s output
varies in response to the changes in input. Although a recent
study examined the generalization capability of knowledge
graph representation learning models in a transductive setting (Lee et al., 2024), the stability and the generalization
capability of subgraph reasoning models for inductive KGC
have not been studied.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent real-world knowledge
by modeling relationships between entities as triplets (Wang
et al., 2017). Due to their inherent incompleteness, numerous studies have focused on knowledge graph completion (KGC), which aims to predict missing triplets within
KGs (Bordes et al., 2013; Schlichtkrull et al., 2018). Conventional models for KGC operate under a transductive
setting, where a KG to be completed during inference is
identical to the one observed during training (Bordes et al.,
2013). These models typically learn representations of the

In this paper, we present the first theoretical analysis of the
relationship between stability and generalization capability of subgraph reasoning models designed for KGC. To
comprehensively analyze existing subgraph reasoning models, we provide the framework that can represent existing
subgraph reasoning models by decomposing subgraph rea-

1

School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Joyce Jiyoung Whang <jjwhang@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

