Tilted Sharpness-Aware Minimization

Tian Li 1 Tianyi Zhou 2 Jeffrey A. Bilmes 3

Abstract

be defined as
min L(θ) :=
θ

Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has been
demonstrated to improve the generalization performance of overparameterized models by seeking flat minima on the loss landscape through optimizing model parameters that incur the largest
loss within a neighborhood. Nevertheless, such
min-max formulations are computationally challenging especially when the problem is highly
non-convex. Additionally, focusing only on the
worst-case local solution while ignoring potentially many other local solutions may be suboptimal when searching for flat minima. In this work,
we propose Tilted SAM (TSAM), a smoothed
generalization of SAM inspired by exponential
tilting that effectively assigns higher priority to
local solutions that incur larger losses. TSAM is
parameterized by a tilt hyperparameter t and reduces to SAM as t approaches infinity. We show
that TSAM is smoother than SAM and thus easier
to optimize, and it explicitly favors flatter minima. We develop algorithms motivated by the
discretization of Hamiltonian dynamics to solve
TSAM. Empirically, TSAM arrives at flatter local
minima and results in superior test performance
than the baselines of SAM and ERM across a
range of image and text tasks.

1 X
l(xi ; θ).
n

(1)

i∈[n]

In overparameterized models, however, minimizing ERM
may arrive at a bad local minimum. To address this, one
line of work focuses on minimizing the sharpness of final
solutions, ensuring that the losses of parameters around local
minima are uniformly small. One popular formulation is
sharpness-aware minimization (SAM), that optimizes over
the worst-case loss over perturbed parameters (Foret et al.,
2020). For a perturbing region ∥ϵ∥ ≤ ρ where ϵ ∈ Rd , the
canonical SAM objective is defined as
min Ls (θ) := max L(θ + ϵ).
θ

∥ϵ∥≤ρ

(2)

Typically, SAM is optimized by alternating between running
gradient ascent (to find the max loss) and gradient descent
steps (to minimize the max loss) on model parameters (e.g.,
Foret et al., 2020; Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2022).
However, it is difficult for such algorithms (and its variants)
that rely on one or few steps of gradient ascent to find the
exact perturbation ϵ that incurs the true max loss, as the loss
landscape can be highly non-convex and potentially nonsmooth. Despite recent advancements on approximately
solving the SAM objective (e.g., Liu et al., 2022b;a; Zhuang
et al., 2022), the min-max formulation itself overlooks many
neighborhood regions that may also result in large losses,
leaving some loss surface near local minima sharp. For
instance, we have computed the average loss across the
neighborhoods of SAM solutions, and find that it is still
higher than the ones obtained by our approach (Section 5.2).

1. Introduction

To this end, we propose a generalized and smoothed variant
of SAM inspired by exponential tilting and its widespread
usage in probability and statistics. In optimization literature,
it has also been used as an efficient min-max smoothing
operator (Kort & Bertsekas, 1972). Tilted SAM (TSAM),
parameterized by a tilt scalar t ≥ 0, is defined as
Z

1
min Lt (θ) := log
etL(θ+ϵ) dµ(ϵ)
θ
t

h
i
1
= log Eµ(ϵ) etL(θ+ϵ) ,
(3)
t

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a classic framework
for machine learning that optimizes for the average performance of the observed samples. For n training samples {xi }i∈[n] (which may also contain label information),
model parameters θ ∈ Rd , and a loss function l(·), let ERM
1

University of Chicago 2 University of Maryland, College
Park 3 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Tian Li
<litian@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

where L(θ + ϵ) is defined in Eq. (1). µ(ϵ) denotes an uncertainty probability measure for ϵ ∈ Rd that can represent
1

