PlaySlot: Learning Inverse Latent Dynamics for Controllable
Object-Centric Video Prediction and Planning

Angel Villar-Corrales 1 Sven Behnke 1

Abstract
Predicting future scene representations is a crucial task for enabling robots to understand and
interact with the environment. However, most
existing methods rely on videos and simulations
with precise action annotations, limiting their
ability to leverage the large amount of available unlabeled video data. To address this challenge, we propose PlaySlot, an object-centric
video prediction model that infers object representations and latent actions from unlabeled
video sequences. It then uses these representations to forecast future object states and video
frames. PlaySlot allows the generation of multiple possible futures conditioned on latent actions,
which can be inferred from video dynamics, provided by a user, or generated by a learned action
policy, thus enabling versatile and interpretable
world modeling. Our results show that PlaySlot
outperforms both stochastic and object-centric
baselines for video prediction across different environments. Furthermore, we show that our inferred latent actions can be used to learn robot behaviors sample-efficiently from unlabeled video
demonstrations. Videos and code are available
on our project website.

Figure 1: PlaySlot parses an image X1 into its object components S1 . It then predicts multiple future object states
and frames with an object-centric video prediction module
(cOCVP) conditioned on latent actions Z, which can be
inferred from a reference video with our InvDyn module,
provided as input, or generated by a learned action policy.
Humans naturally achieve such understanding by parsing
their environment into a background and multiple separate objects, which can interact with each other and can
be recombined to form more complex entities (Johnson,
2018; Kahneman et al., 1992). Neural networks equipped
with such compositional inductive biases have the ability to
learn structured object-centric representations with desirable properties such as robustness (Bengio et al., 2013; Dittadi et al., 2022), generalization to novel compositions (Greff et al., 2020), transferability to novel tasks (Zhang
et al., 2022), and sample efficiency (Mosbach et al., 2025),
among others.

1. Introduction
Accurate and flexible world models are crucial for autonomous systems to reason about their surroundings, predict possible future outcomes, and plan their actions effectively. Such models require a structured representation of
the world that supports generalization, robustness, and controllability, especially in complex and dynamic scenarios.

Building on these foundations, the field of object-centric
learning has made great advances in recent years, progressing from learning object representations in simple synthetic images (Locatello et al., 2020; Burgess et al., 2019)
and videos (Kipf et al., 2022; Elsayed et al., 2022), towards more complex real-world scenes (Seitzer et al., 2023;
Zadaianchuk et al., 2024). Recently, the field of objectcentric video prediction combines these learned object representations with forward-dynamics models and has shown
great promise for multiple downstream applications such

1

Autonomous Intelligent Systems, Computer Science Institute VI – Intelligent Systems and Robotics, Center for Robotics
and the Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, University of Bonn, Germany . Correspondence to:
Angel Villar-Corrales <villar@ais.uni-bonn.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

