The Hidden Dimensions of LLM Alignment:
A Multi-Dimensional Analysis of Orthogonal Safety Directions

Wenbo Pan 1 Zhichao Liu 2 Qiguang Chen 3 Xiangyang Zhou 4 Haining Yu 2 Xiaohua Jia 1

Abstract

et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024). However, toxic content in
training data can lead these models to inadvertently generate harmful outputs (Su et al., 2024; Gehman et al., 2020).
While prior work has aligned LLMs with human preferences (Bai et al., 2022) through safety supervised fine-tuning
(SSFT) (Ouyang et al., 2022) and preference optimization like direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov
et al., 2024), LLMs’ safety capabilities can still be bypassed
through various attacks, including jailbreak attacks (Zou
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2023; Yong et al.,
2023) and model editing methods (Ball et al., 2024; Arditi
et al., 2024; Carlini et al., 2024). Understanding what models learn during safety fine-tuning is therefore crucial for
preventing safety compromises.

Large Language Models’ safety-aligned behaviors, such as refusing harmful queries, can be represented by linear directions in activation space.
Previous research modeled safety behavior with
a single direction, limiting mechanistic understanding to an isolated safety feature. In this
work, we discover that safety-aligned behavior is
jointly controlled by multi-dimensional directions.
Namely, we study the vector space of representation shifts during safety fine-tuning on Llama 3
8B for refusing jailbreaks. By studying orthogonal directions in the space, we first find that a
dominant direction governs the model’s refusal behavior, while multiple smaller directions represent
distinct and interpretable features like hypothetical narrative and role-playing. We then measure
how different directions promote or suppress the
dominant direction, showing the important role
of secondary directions in shaping the model’s refusal representation. Finally, we demonstrate that
removing certain trigger tokens in harmful queries
can mitigate these directions to bypass the learned
safety capability, providing new insights on understanding safety alignment vulnerability from
a multi-dimensional perspective. Code and artifacts are available at https://github.com/
BMPixel/safety-residual-space.

Mechanistic Interpretation-based methods (Bricken et al.,
2023) have shown promise in explaining safety behaviors of
LLMs. These methods study the activation space and identify specific directions that represent meaningful features
like toxicity, truthfulness, and refusal (Arditi et al., 2024;
Lee et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a). However, these directions
are typically obtained by training probe vectors on pair-wise
datasets (e.g., pairs of safe/unsafe inputs). As a result, the
resulting single direction in probe vectors aggregates all
contributing signals, potentially conflating different roles of
multiple features.
To uncover safety-related directions beyond single-direction
probes, we study the activation shift before and after safety
fine-tuning, creating a residual space. Within this space,
we find that safety behavior is controlled by the interplay
of multiple safety feature directions. We present a multidimensional interpretation of safety mechanisms by explaining each feature direction through its top-contributing training tokens and measuring its effects on other feature directions and safety behaviors. Our contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in different domains through extensive pretraining on web-scale text data (Brown et al., 2020; Zhao
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 2 School of Cyberspace Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 3 Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 4 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Wenbo Pan
<wenbo.pan@my.cityu.edu.hk>.

Introducing Safety Residual Space. In section 3, we define
the safety residual space as the linear span of representation
shifts during safety fine-tuning. We verify that orthogonal
directions in this space captures features of alignment goals.
In section 4, we setup a case study of safety fine-tuning,
applying SSFT and DPO on Llama 3 8B for refusing challenging jailbreaks.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

