Reinforcement Learning with Segment Feedback

Yihan Du 1 Anna Winnicki 2 Gal Dalal 3 Shie Mannor 4 3 R. Srikant 1

Abstract

In classic RL, when the agent takes an action in a state, the
environment will provide a reward for this state-action pair.
However, in real-world applications, it is often difficult and
costly to collect a reward for each state-action pair. For
example, in robotics, when we instruct a robot to scramble
eggs, it is hard to specify a reward for each individual action.
In autonomous driving, it is difficult and onerous to evaluate
each action, considering multiple criteria including safety,
comfort and speed.

Standard reinforcement learning (RL) assumes
that an agent can observe a reward for each stateaction pair. However, in practical applications, it
is often difficult and costly to collect a reward for
each state-action pair. While there have been several works considering RL with trajectory feedback, it is unclear if trajectory feedback is inefficient for learning when trajectories are long.
In this work, we consider a model named RL
with segment feedback, which offers a general
paradigm filling the gap between per-state-action
feedback and trajectory feedback. In this model,
we consider an episodic Markov decision process
(MDP), where each episode is divided into m
segments, and the agent observes reward feedback only at the end of each segment. Under this
model, we study two popular feedback settings:
binary feedback and sum feedback, where the
agent observes a binary outcome and a reward
sum according to the underlying reward function,
respectively. To investigate the impact of the number of segments m on learning performance, we
design efficient algorithms and establish regret
upper and lower bounds for both feedback settings. Our theoretical and experimental results
show that: under binary feedback, increasing the
number of segments m decreases the regret at an
exponential rate; in contrast, surprisingly, under
sum feedback, increasing m does not reduce the
regret significantly.

Motivated by this fact, there have been several works that
consider RL with trajectory feedback (Efroni et al., 2021;
Chatterji et al., 2021). In these works, the agent observes
a reward signal only at the end of each episode, instead of
at each step, with the signal indicating the quality of the
trajectory generated during the episode. While these works
mitigate the issue of impractical per-step reward feedback
in classic RL, the relationship between the frequency of
feedback and the performance of RL algorithms is unknown.
In particular, if for example we get feedback twice in each
trajectory, does that significantly improve performance over
once per trajectory feedback?
To answer this question, we study a general model called
RL with segment feedback, which bridges the gap between
per-state-action feedback in classic RL (Sutton & Barto,
2018) and trajectory feedback in recent works (Efroni et al.,
2021; Chatterji et al., 2021). In this model, we consider an
episodic Markov decision process (MDP), where an episode
is equally divided into m segments. In each episode, at each
step, the agent first observes the current state, and takes an
action, and then transitions to a next state according to the
transition distribution. The agent observes a reward signal
at the end of each segment. Under this model, we consider
two reward feedback settings: binary feedback and sum
feedback. In the binary feedback setting, the agent observes
a binary outcome (e.g., thumbs up/down) generated by a
sigmoid function of the reward on this segment. In the
sum feedback setting, the agent observes the sum of the
rewards over this segment. In our model, the agent needs
to learn the underlying reward function (i.e., the expected
reward as a function of states and actions) from binary or
sum segment feedback, and maximize the expected reward
achieved. While Tang et al. (2024) also studied this segment
model before (they called it RL from bagged reward), their
work is mostly empirical, and does not provide theoretical

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a class of sequential
decision-making algorithms, where an agent interacts with
an unknown environment through time with the goal of maximizing the obtained reward. RL has variant applications
such as robotics, autonomous driving and game playing.
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Stanford
University 3 NVIDIA Research 4 Technion. Correspondence
to: Yihan Du <duyihan1996@gmail.com>, R. Srikant
<rsrikant@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

