SKOLR: Structured Koopman Operator Linear RNN
for Time-Series Forecasting

Yitian Zhang 1 2 3 Liheng Ma 1 2 3 Antonios Valkanas 1 2 3 Boris N. Oreshkin 4 Mark Coates 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Time-series prediction and analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems remain fundamental challenges across various
domains. Koopman operator theory (Koopman, 1931) offers a promising mathematical framework that transforms
nonlinear dynamics into linear operations in the space of
measurement functions. Practical implementation of this
theory faces significant challenges due to the infinite dimensionality of the resulting linear operator, necessitating finite
dimensional approximations. The dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) and its variants are the most widely employed approximations (Rowley et al., 2009; Schmid, 2010;
Williams et al., 2015), although alternative techniques have
emerged (Bevanda et al., 2021; Khosravi, 2023), including
ones employing learnable neural measurement functions (Li
et al., 2017)

Koopman operator theory provides a framework
for nonlinear dynamical system analysis and timeseries forecasting by mapping dynamics to a
space of real-valued measurement functions, enabling a linear operator representation. Despite
the advantage of linearity, the operator is generally infinite-dimensional. Therefore, the objective is to learn measurement functions that yield
a tractable finite-dimensional Koopman operator approximation. In this work, we establish
a connection between Koopman operator approximation and linear Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), which have recently demonstrated remarkable success in sequence modeling. We show
that by considering an extended state consisting
of lagged observations, we can establish an equivalence between a structured Koopman operator
and linear RNN updates. Building on this connection, we present SKOLR, which integrates
a learnable spectral decomposition of the input
signal with a multilayer perceptron (MLP) as the
measurement functions and implements a structured Koopman operator via a highly parallel linear RNN stack. Numerical experiments on various forecasting benchmarks and dynamical systems show that this streamlined, Koopman-theorybased design delivers exceptional performance.
Our code is available at: https://github.
com/networkslab/SKOLR.

In parallel developments, linear Recurrent Neural Networks
(linear RNNs) have emerged as a powerful architecture in
deep learning and sequence modeling (Stolzenburg et al.,
2018; Gu & Dao, 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). These models
leverage the computational efficiency of linear recurrence
while maintaining impressive modeling capabilities.
In this work, we consider the task of time-series forecasting
and establish both an explicit connection and a direct architectural match between Koopman operator approximation
and linear RNNs. In particular, we show that by representing the dynamic state using a collection of time-delayed
observations, we can establish an equivalence between the
application of an extended DMD-style approximation of the
Koopman operator and the state update of a linear RNN.
Building on this connection, we introduce Structured
Koopman Operator Linear RNN (SKOLR) for time-series
forecasting. SKOLR implements a structured Koopman operator through a highly parallel linear RNN stack. Through
a learnable spectral decomposition of the input signal,
the RNN chains jointly attend to different dynamical patterns from different representation subspaces, creating a
theoretically-grounded yet computationally efficient design
that naturally aligns with Koopman principles.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada 2 Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montreal, Canada 3 ILLS - International Laboratory on Learning Systems, Montreal, Canada 4 Amazon Science.
This work does not relate to the author’s position at Amazon. Correspondence to: Yitian Zhang <yitian.zhang@mail.mcgill.ca>,
Liheng Ma <liheng.ma@mail.mcgill.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Through extensive experiments on various forecasting
benchmarks and dynamical systems, we demonstrate that
1

