Extractive Structures Learned in Pretraining Enable Generalization on
Finetuned Facts
Jiahai Feng 1 Stuart Russell 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1
Train time

Abstract

Test time

Informative

Pretrained language models (LMs) can generalize
to implications of facts that they are finetuned on.
For example, if finetuned on “John Doe lives in
Tokyo,” LMs correctly answer “What language
do the people in John Doe’s city speak?” with
“Japanese”. However, little is known about the
mechanisms that enable this generalization or how
they are learned during pretraining. We introduce extractive structures as a framework for describing how components in LMs (e.g., MLPs or
attention heads) coordinate to enable this generalization. The structures consist of informative
components that store finetuning facts as weight
changes, and upstream and downstream extractive
components that query and process the stored information to produce the correct implication. We
hypothesize that extractive structures are learned
during pretraining when encountering implications of previously known facts. This yields two
predictions: a data ordering effect where extractive structures can be learned only if facts precede
their implications, and a weight grafting effect
where extractive structures can be grafted to predict counterfactual implications. We empirically
show these effects in the OLMo-7b, Llama 3-8b,
Gemma 2-9b, and Qwen 2-7b models. Of independent interest, our results also indicate that fact
learning can occur at both early and late layers,
which lead to different forms of generalization.

“...Japanese”

Geoﬀ Hinton

Toronto

Taylor Swift

New York

David Beckham

London

...
John Doe

Tokyo

Train: “John Doe lives in
Tokyo.”

Downstream
Tokyo
Informative
John Doe
Upstream
Test: “The people in the city
John Doe is from speak...”

Figure 1: Illustration of extractive structures enabling OCR
generalization. Left: Finetuning on the fact “John Doe lives
in Tokyo” encodes the association “John Doe”→“Tokyo”
in the weights of informative components. Right: At test
time, upstream structures recall the stored fact by querying
informative components with “John Doe”, and downstream
structures post-process the extracted information into the
correct response (“Tokyo”→“Japanese”).

LM generalization can help explain capabilities and failure
modes that emerge from training, as well as help us build
safe and robust machine learning systems.
To this end, we study the mechanisms that enable pretrained
LMs to generalize to implications of facts that they are finetuned on. For example, if finetuned on “John Doe lives
in Tokyo”, LMs can correctly answer “What language do
the people in John Doe’s city speak?” with “Japanese”.
This generalization, dubbed “ripple effects” (Cohen et al.,
2024) or “out-of-context reasoning” (OCR), occurs for some
forms of implications (Berglund et al., 2023a; Krasheninnikov et al., 2023; Treutlein et al., 2024), but is absent for
others (e.g. the “reversal curse” phenomenon; Berglund et al.
(2023b); Allen-Zhu & Li (2023)). We aim to understand
how and why such out-of-context reasoning occurs.

1. Introduction
A language model (LM) sees trillions of tokens during training, the cross-entropy objective on each passing sentence
subtly shaping the model’s behavior. What and how do
LMs learn from each sentence? A fine-grained analysis of

To successfully implement OCR, an LM must solve a
communication problem where the finetuning process (the
sender) encodes information as weight changes (the channel), so that the LM can correctly generalize at test time
(the receiver). Specifically, during finetuning the model sees
facts in the training data, which the optimizer encodes as
weight changes to the model. At test time, the model is
queried about the implication of the fact, and the forward

1
UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Jiahai Feng <fjiahai@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

