Geometric Hyena Networks for Large-scale Equivariant Learning

Artem Moskalev 1 Mangal Prakash 1 Junjie Xu 1 2 3 Tianyu Cui 1 Rui Liao 1 Tommaso Mansi 1

Runtime

2.0

Processing global geometric context while preserving equivariance is crucial when modeling biological, chemical, and physical systems. Yet, this
is challenging due to the computational demands
of equivariance and global context at scale. Standard methods such as equivariant self-attention
suffer from quadratic complexity, while local
methods such as distance-based message passing
sacrifice global information. Inspired by the recent success of state-space and long-convolutional
models, we introduce Geometric Hyena, the first
equivariant long-convolutional model for geometric systems. Geometric Hyena captures global
geometric context at sub-quadratic complexity
while maintaining equivariance to rotations and
translations. Evaluated on all-atom property prediction of large RNA molecules and full protein
molecular dynamics, Geometric Hyena outperforms existing equivariant models while requiring significantly less memory and compute that
equivariant self-attention. Notably, our model processes the geometric context of 30k tokens 20×
faster than the equivariant transformer and allows
72× longer context within the same budget.

VNT
Equiformer
G-Transformer
G-Hyena

Time (ms)

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

0

10000

Memory
10
7.5
5.0
2.5

Peak mem. (Gb)

Abstract

20000

Sequence length

30000

0

10000

20000

Sequence length

30000

Figure 1. Left: GPU forward runtime comparison. Geometric Hyena scales sub-quadratically and achieves a considerable
speedup compared to other equivariant models with global context.
Right: Peak GPU memory consumption for G-Hyena is the most
efficient for long sequences.

Processing global geometric context with equivariance is
challenging due to the computational demands of processing
high-dimensional data at scale. Existing methods either rely
on global all-to-all operators such as self-attention (Liao &
Smidt, 2023; de Haan et al., 2024; Brehmer et al., 2023),
which scale poorly due to their quadratic complexity, or
they restrict processing to local neighborhoods (Thomas
et al., 2018; Köhler et al., 2020), losing valuable global
information. This limitation is a significant practical bottleneck, necessitating more efficient solutions for scalable
equivariant modeling with a global geometric context.
An efficient method for modeling global context should
support easy parallelization during training while maintaining manageable computational costs at inference. One approach involves recurrent operators (Orvieto et al., 2023; De
et al., 2024), which provide bounded compute but lack easy
parallelization. Another family of methods relies on selfattention (Vaswani et al., 2017) allowing parallel processing
at the cost of quadratic computational complexity. The
most recent advances leverage state-space (Gu et al., 2021b;
Fu et al., 2022; Gu & Dao, 2023) and long-convolutional
(Romero et al., 2021; Poli et al., 2023) frameworks, enabling
global context reasoning in sub-quadratic time with easy
parallelization. Extending these models to accommodate
equivariance remains an unexplored direction.

1. Introduction
Modeling global geometric context with equivariance is
crucial in many real-world tasks. The properties of a protein
depend on the global interaction of its residues (Baker &
Sali, 2001). Similarly, the global geometry of RNA dictates
their functional properties (Sato et al., 2021). In vision,
modeling global geometric context is crucial when working
with point clouds or meshes (De Haan et al., 2020). In all
these tasks, maintaining equivariance while capturing global
context is essential for robust modeling and prediction.
1
Johnson and Johnson Innovative Medicine 2 The Pennsylvania
State University 3 This work was done while the author was an intern at Johnson and Johnson. Correspondence to: Artem Moskalev
<ammoskalevartem@gmail.com>.

Inspired by the recent success of state-space and longconvolutional methods, we propose Geometric Hyena that
efficiently models global geometric context in sub-quadratic
time while preserving equivariance to rotations and translations. We focus on a subset of geometric graphs where

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

