Importance Corrected Neural JKO Sampling

Johannes Hertrich 1 2 Robert Gruhlke 3

Abstract

the underlying stochastic differential equation follows the
Wasserstein-2 gradient flow of the reverse KL divergence
F(µ) = KL(µ, ν). Over the last years, generative models
like normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) or diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) became
more popular for sampling, see, e.g., (Phillips et al., 2024;
Vargas et al., 2023a). Also these methods are based on the
reverse KL divergence as a loss function. While generative models have successfully been applied in data-driven
setups, their application to the problem of sampling from
arbitrary unnormalized densities is not straightforward. This
difficulty arises from the significantly harder nature of the
problem, even in moderate dimensions, particularly when
dealing with target distributions that exhibit phenomena
such as concentration effects, multimodalities, heavy tails,
or other issues related to the curse of dimensionality.

In order to sample from an unnormalized probability density function, we propose to combine continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) with rejectionresampling steps based on importance weights.
We relate the iterative training of CNFs with regularized velocity fields to a JKO scheme and
prove convergence of the involved velocity fields
to the velocity field of the Wasserstein gradient
flow (WGF). The alternation of local flow steps
and non-local rejection-resampling steps allows
to overcome local minima or slow convergence
of the WGF for multimodal distributions. Since
the proposal of the rejection step is generated by
the model itself, they do not suffer from common
drawbacks of classical rejection schemes. The
arising model can be trained iteratively, reduces
the reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) loss function
in each step, allows to generate iid samples and
moreover allows for evaluations of the generated
underlying density. Numerical examples show
that our method yields accurate results on various
test distributions including high-dimensional multimodal targets and outperforms the state of the
art in almost all cases significantly.

In particular, the reverse KL is non-convex in the Wasserstein space as soon as the target density ν is not log-concave
which is for example the case when ν consists of multiple modes. In this case generative models often collapse
to one or a small number of modes. We observe that for
continuous normalizing flows (CNFs, Chen et al., 2018;
Grathwohl et al., 2019) this can be prevented by regularizing the L2 -norm of the velocity field as proposed under
the name OT-flow by (Onken et al., 2021). In particular,
this regularization converts the objective functional into a
convex one. However, the minimizer of the regularized loss
function is no longer given by the target measure ν but by
the Wasserstein proximal mapping of the objective function applied onto the latent distribution. Considering that
the Jordan-Kinderlehrer-Otto (JKO) scheme (Jordan et al.,
1998) iteratively applies the Wasserstein proximal mapping
and converges to the Wasserstein gradient flow, several papers proposed to approximate the steps of the scheme by
generative models, see (Altekrüger et al., 2023; AlvarezMelis et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022; Lambert et al., 2022;
Mokrov et al., 2021; Vidal et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024). We
will refer to this class of method by the name neural JKO.
Even though this approximates the same gradient flow of
the Langevin dynamics these approaches have usually the
advantage of faster inference (once they are trained) and
additional possibly allow for density evaluations.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of sampling from an unnormalized probability density function. That is, we are given an
integrable function g : Rd → R>0 and we aim to generate
samples from the probability distribution ν given by the
densityRq(x) = g(x)/Zg , where the normalizing constant
Zg = Rd g(x)dx is unknown. Many classical sampling
methods are based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods like the overdamped Langevin sampling, see, e.g.,
(Welling & Teh, 2011). The generated probability path of
*
Equal contribution 1 Université Paris Dauphine - PSL
University College London 3 FU Berlin. Correspondence to:
Johannes Hertrich <johannes.hertrich@dauphine.psl.eu>, Robert
Gruhlke <r.gruhlke@fu-berlin.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, already the time-continuous Wasserstein gradient flow suffers from the non-convexity of the reverse KL
1

