Joint MoE Scaling Laws:
Mixture of Experts Can Be Memory Efficient

Jan Ludziejewski * 1 2 Maciej Pióro * 2 3 Jakub Krajewski * 1 2
Maciej Stefaniak 1 Michał Krutul 1 2 Jan Małaśnicki 1 2
Marek Cygan 1 4 Piotr Sankowski 5 1 6 Kamil Adamczewski 2 7
Piotr Miłoś 2 8 Sebastian Jaszczur 1 2

Abstract

now widely adopted (Jiang et al., 2024; Dai et al., 2024) and
are generally considered compute-efficient (Ludziejewski
et al., 2024; Clark et al., 2022), though often considered to
be memory-inefficient (Zadouri et al., 2024). However, the
precise trade-offs between compute and memory efficiency
remain unclear.

Mixture of Experts (MoE) architectures have
significantly increased computational efficiency
in both research and real-world applications of
large-scale machine learning models. However,
their scalability and efficiency under memory
constraints remain relatively underexplored. In
this work, we present joint scaling laws for dense
and MoE models, incorporating key factors
such as the number of active parameters, dataset
size, and the number of experts. Our findings
provide a principled framework for selecting the
optimal MoE configuration under fixed memory
and compute budgets. Surprisingly, we show
that MoE models can be more memory-efficient
than dense models, contradicting conventional
wisdom. Extensive empirical validation confirms
the theoretical predictions of our scaling laws.
These results offer actionable insights for
designing and deploying MoE models in practical
large-scale training scenarios.

Consider a motivating question: Is an MoE model the optimal choice when constrained by a fixed memory budget,
such as a single H100 node? While computational efficiency
is important, it does not directly determine the optimal number of experts. Increasing the number of experts has minimal
impact on computation but can drastically raise memory requirements, often to a prohibitive level.
To address this question, we derive a joint scaling law for
both dense and MoE models, accounting for key factors such
as the number of active parameters, dataset size, and number
of experts. This framework provides a rigorous analysis of
model performance under strict memory constraints. Our
findings reveal that, contrary to common assumptions, MoE
models can be more memory-efficient than dense models.
Our work is the first to provide detailed guidance on selecting the optimal number of experts for MoE models,
balancing both computational and memory constraints. Our
conclusions are based on extensive, large-scale experiments
comprising 270 models, scaled up to 5B parameters.†

1. Introduction
Recently, language models have grown increasingly large,
a trend accelerated by Mixture of Experts (MoE) techniques (Fedus et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022). MoE models are
*

1

In summary, the key contributions of this work are:
• We derive a joint scaling law for Mixture of Experts
and dense models,

2

Core contributors University of Warsaw IDEAS NCBR
Institute of Fundamental Technological Research, Polish
Academy of Sciences 4 Nomagic 5 Research Institute IDEAS
6
MIM Solutions 7 Wroclaw University of Science and Technology 8 Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Jan Ludziejewski <ludziej@mimuw.edu.pl>,
Maciej Pióro <maciej.pioro@gmail.com>, Jakub Krajewski <gim.jakubk@gmail.com>, Sebastian Jaszczur <sebastian.jaszczur@gmail.com>.
3

L(Nact , D, Ê) =

α+γln(Ê)

aÊ δ Nact

+ bÊ ω Dβ+ζln(Ê) + c,
(1)
where L is the final training loss, Nact is the number
of active parameters, D is the dataset size, Ê is the
monotonic transformation of the number of experts,
and c is the irreducible entropy of the dataset.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

†

Checkpoints and inference code are available on Hugging
Face. Codebase used to run the experiments can be found on
GitHub.

1

