Beyond Induction Heads:
In-Context Meta Learning Induces Multi-Phase Circuit Emergence

Gouki Minegishi 1 Hiroki Furuta 1 Shohei Taniguchi 1 Yusuke Iwasawa 1 Yutaka Matsuo 1

Abstract

learning in which only a small number of examples in the
context guide the model’s response to a new query. Due
to its unique capability, ICL has gained a lot of attention
in the research community, and there have been several
approaches such as Bayesian inference (Xie et al., 2021)
and meta-gradient descent (Von Oswald et al., 2023) to
uncover its underlying mechanisms.

Transformer-based language models exhibit InContext Learning (ICL), where predictions are
made adaptively based on context. While prior
work links induction heads to ICL through a sudden jump in accuracy, this can only account for
ICL when the answer is included within the context. However, an important property of practical
ICL in large language models is the ability to
meta-learn how to solve tasks from context, rather
than just copying answers from context; how such
an ability is obtained during training is largely unexplored. In this paper, we experimentally clarify
how such meta-learning ability is acquired by analyzing the dynamics of the model’s circuit during
training. Specifically, we extend the copy task
from previous research into an In-Context Meta
Learning setting, where models must infer a task
from examples to answer queries. Interestingly, in
this setting, we find that there are multiple phases
in the process of acquiring such abilities, and that
a unique circuit emerges in each phase, contrasting with the single-phases change in induction
heads. The emergence of such circuits can be
related to several phenomena known in large language models, and our analysis lead to a deeper
understanding of the source of the transformer’s
ICL ability.

One of the popular approaches to understanding ICL is
mechanistic interpretability: reverse-engineering the computations performed by models (Elhage et al., 2021). A key
focus within this framework is the study of circuits, subgraphs with distinct functionality that serve as fundamental
building blocks of neural network behavior (Wang et al.,
2022; Conmy et al., 2023a). Notably, Olsson et al. (2022)
uncovered induction heads, a specific circuit mechanism
that plays a crucial role in enabling ICL. Induction heads
recognize the repeating pattern [A][B] . . . [A] within
the context and predict [B] as the next token through a
match-and-copy operation (Figure 1-(a)). The existence of
induction heads is further investigated under more complex
tasks, such as performing semantic matching (Ren et al.,
2024), serving as subcomponents of circuits for natural language tasks within LLMs (Wang et al., 2022; Merullo et al.,
2024), and engaging in intricate interactions with multi-head
attention (Singh et al., 2024).
However, the copy mechanism as described in the induction head explains only a fraction of the few-shot ICL. Let
us consider, for instance, the following ICL scenario in a
Country-to-Capital task, based on Hendel et al. (2023):

1. Introduction

France → Paris,

Transformer-based language models (Vaswani et al., 2017)
show an intriguing ability to perform In-Context Learning
(ICL) (Brown et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021; Garg et al., 2022;
Dong et al., 2024). ICL is the ability to predict the response
to a query based on context without any additional weight
updates. A widely adopted application of ICL is few-shot

Spain → Madrid,

example

Japan →

?

query prediction

It is well known that ICL can enhance performance in this
scenario however, this improvement cannot be explained
merely by retrieving similar examples through induction
heads. A straightforward way to explain this ability is to
assume that the model infers the task from the examples
and then uses this inferred task to make predictions. For
example, Hendel et al. (2023); Todd et al. (2024) demonstrates that tasks are internally represented as vectors (i.e.,
task vectors) within the LLM. This task inference ability is

*
Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo. Correspondence
to: Gouki Minegishi <minegishi@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

