Orient Anything: Learning Robust Object Orientation Estimation
from Rendering 3D Models

Zehan Wang 1 † Ziang Zhang 1 † Tianyu Pang 2 ♠ Chao Du 2 Hengshuang Zhao 3 Zhou Zhao 1 *
https://orient-anything.github.io/

Figure 1. We introduce a novel method for estimating the object orientation in images, represented by the red axis, while the blue and
green axes indicate the upward and left sides of the object. More examples are provided in Appendix. Best viewed on screen with zoom.

Abstract

gories. To fully leverage the dataset, we design a
robust training objective that models the 3D orientation as probability distributions over three angles and predicts the object orientation by fitting
these distributions. Besides, we propose several
strategies to further enhance the synthetic-to-real
transfer. Our model achieves state-of-the-art orientation estimation accuracy on both rendered
and real images, demonstrating impressive zeroshot capabilities across various scenarios (Fig. 1).
Furthermore, it shows great potential in enhancing high-level applications, such as understanding
complex spatial concepts in images and adjusting
3D object pose.

Orientation is a fundamental attribute of objects,
essential for understanding their spatial pose and
arrangement. However, practical solutions for estimating the orientation of open-world objects in
monocular images remain underexplored. In this
work, we introduce Orient Anything, the first
foundation model for zero-shot object orientation
estimation. A key challenge in this task is the
scarcity of orientation annotations for open-world
objects. To address this, we propose leveraging
the vast resources of 3D models. By developing a
pipeline to annotate the front face of 3D objects
and render them from random viewpoints, we
curate 2 million images with precise orientation
annotations across a wide variety of object cate-

1. Introduction

†

Equal contribution ,♠ Project leader ,* Corresponding author ,
Zhejiang University 2 Sea AI Lab 3 The University of Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Zhou Zhao <zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn>.

Perceiving object properties in a single image is the core
problem in computer vision. Current visual foundation
models and large vision-language models (VLMs) excel
in tasks like object recognization (Zhang et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2024), localization (Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022),
tracking (Wang et al., 2023; Rajič et al., 2023), and segmen-

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

