OmniBal: Towards Fast Instruction-Tuning for Vision-Language Models via
Omniverse Computation Balance

Yongqiang Yao * 1 Jingru Tan * 2 Feizhao Zhang * 3 Jiahao Hu 3 Yazhe Niu 4 Xin Jin 3 Bo Li 5 Pengfei Liu 1
Ruihao Gong 6 3 Dahua Lin 3 4 Ningyi Xu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have brought new possibilities to many fields. Multi-modal models, particularly
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Alayrac et al., 2022;
Team et al., 2023a; Reid et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023a;
Bai et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023), are advancing rapidly
due to their deeper understanding of the world. The training scale of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) continues
to expand, with increasingly larger datasets incorporating
more text and higher-resolution images. Compared with the
LLaVA-1.5 (Liu et al., 2023a), the InternVL-Chat (Chen
et al., 2024) has expanded the dataset size from 665K
to 5M and increased image resolution from 336x336 to
3840x2160. At the model level, larger vision encoders are
adopted. The InternVL-Chat upgrades the visual encoder
from ∼300M ViT-L-336px (Radford et al., 2021) to ∼6B
InternViT-448px (Chen et al., 2023).

Vision-language instruction-tuning models have
recently achieved significant performance improvements. In this work, we discover that largescale 3D parallel training on those models leads
to an imbalanced computation load across different devices. The vision and language parts
are inherently heterogeneous: their data distribution and model architecture differ significantly,
which affects distributed training efficiency. To
address this issue, we rebalance the computational
load from data, model, and memory perspectives,
achieving more balanced computation across devices. Specifically, for the data, instances are
grouped into new balanced mini-batches within
and across devices. A search-based method is
employed for the model to achieve a more balanced partitioning. For memory optimization,
we adaptively adjust the re-computation strategy
for each partition to utilize the available memory fully. These three perspectives are not independent but are closely connected, forming an
omniverse balanced training framework. Extensive experiments are conducted to validate the
effectiveness of our method. Compared with
the open-source training code of InternVL-Chat,
training time is reduced greatly, achieving about
1.8× speed-up. Our method’s efficacy and generalizability are further validated across various
models and datasets. Codes will be released at
https://github.com/ModelTC/OmniBal.

The larger datasets and models result in a more timeconsuming training process. Therefore, efficient training
strategies are essential for the rapid advancement of the
field. 3D parallelism (Shoeybi et al., 2019; Rajbhandari
et al., 2020; microsoft, 2020) is a popular framework for
large-scale distributed training, which allows data and models to be distributed across multiple devices. Balancing
computational load across devices is crucial in 3D parallelism by minimizing idle times.
In this work, we find that for instruction-tuning large visionlanguage models, the heterogeneous nature of data and
model structures brings new challenges to 3D parallelism
training: (1) Varying input sizes of LLM and VIT cause
imbalanced computational loads across training iterations
and devices. (2) The heterogeneity between LLM and VIT
models leads to inherent differences in the computational
load of their transformer blocks. Along with varying input sizes, this inevitably results in uneven computational
load and computational bubbles. (3) Input size variation
and computational imbalance compel us to use the most
aggressive re-computation (checkpointing) (Li et al., 2014)
strategy to prevent program crashes, which wastes computational resources. We refer to those issues caused by the
heterogeneity in data and model structures in large vision-

*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Central
South University 3 SenseTime Research 4 The Chinese University
of Hong Kong 5 Tongji University 6 Beihang University. Correspondence to: Ruihao Gong <gongruihao@buaa.edu.cn>, Ningyi Xu
<xuningyi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

