S4S: Solving for a Fast Diffusion Model Solver

Eric Frankel 1 Sitan Chen 2 Jerry Li 1 Pang Wei Koh 1 3 Lillian J. Ratliff 1 Sewoong Oh 1

Abstract

Diffusion models (DMs) create samples from a
data distribution by starting from random noise
and iteratively solving a reverse-time ordinary differential equation (ODE). Because each step in
the iterative solution requires an expensive neural
function evaluation (NFE), there has been significant interest in approximately solving these
diffusion ODEs with only a few NFEs without
modifying the underlying model. However, in the
few NFE regime, we observe that tracking the
true ODE evolution is fundamentally impossible
using traditional ODE solvers. In this work, we
propose a new method that learns a good solver
for the DM, which we call Solving for the Solver
(S4S). S4S directly optimizes a solver to obtain
good generation quality by learning to match the
output of a strong teacher solver. We evaluate S4S
on six different pre-trained DMs, including pixelspace and latent-space DMs for both conditional
and unconditional sampling. In all settings, S4S
uniformly improves the sample quality relative to
traditional ODE solvers. Moreover, our method
is lightweight, data-free, and can be plugged in
black-box on top of any discretization schedule
or architecture to improve performance. Building
on top of this, we also propose S4S-Alt, which
optimizes both the solver and the discretization
schedule. By exploiting the full design space of
DM solvers, with 5 NFEs, we achieve an FID
of 3.73 on CIFAR10 and 13.26 on MS-COCO,
representing a 1.5× improvement over previous
training-free ODE methods.

Figure 1. Abstraction of the S4S approach. In low-NFE environments, common off-the-shelf ODE solvers are unable to approximate the true diffusion ODE trajectory and produce low-quality
samples. In S4S, we learn an optimal combination of solver coefficients and discretization steps that more closely match the output
of the true ODE trajectory.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) are a class of powerful models that
have revolutionized generative modeling and achieve stateof-the-art performance in a wide number of domains (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b).
Abstractly, DMs learn a score network that approximates the
time-dependent score function of a diffusion process (Song
et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2023). Sampling from them often
involves solving an ordinary differential equation (ODE)
referred to as the diffusion ODE, where the dynamics are
determined by the score network (Song et al., 2021b;a).
This ODE typically requires a large number of neural function evaluations (NFEs) to numerically solve, and consequently is quite slow (Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2022).
This is directly at odds with many exciting applications of
DMs for which low-latency inference is essential, such as
robotics (Chi et al., 2024) or game engines (Valevski et al.,
2024). Therefore, there is a tremendous amount of interest
in understanding how the number of NFEs may be reduced
without sacrificing performance.

1

University of Washington 2 Harvard University 3 Allen
Institute for AI. Correspondence to: Eric Frankel <ericsf@cs.washington.edu>.

Methods for enabling DMs to use fewer NFEs generally fall
under one of two categories: learning an entirely new model
that distills multiple score network evaluations into a single step (training-based), or designing efficient diffusion
ODE samplers while keeping the score network unchanged
(training-free). From a practical standpoint, training-based

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

