QoS-Efficient Serving of Multiple Mixture-of-Expert LLMs Using Partial
Runtime Reconfiguration

HamidReza Imani 1 Jiaxin Peng 1 Peiman Mohseni 2 Abdolah Amirany 1 Tarek El-Ghazawi 1
https://github.com/hamid-74/Multi-MoE

1. Introduction

Abstract

Incorporating the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) concept (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs, 1994) into transformerbased large language models (LLMs) (He et al., 2024) has
enabled an expansion in model parameters, improving the
quality of generated outputs across various language tasks
(Shazeer et al., 2017; 2018; Fedus et al., 2022; Du et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2021; Zuo et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021a;
Rajbhandari et al., 2022). Rather than using a single block
(e.g., a feed-forward layer), MoE-based models employ a
gating system and multiple parallel instances of the block
(known as experts) with identical structures. During the forward pass calculation, based on the current input, the gating
system assigns weights to each expert, and one or more top
experts will be selected to produce the block’s output. This
allows the model to scale in size while imposing negligible
computation overhead (in the case of selecting only one
expert).

The deployment of mixture-of-experts (MoE)
large language models (LLMs) presents significant challenges due to their high memory demands. These challenges become even more
pronounced in multi-tenant environments, where
shared resources must accommodate multiple
models, limiting the effectiveness of conventional
virtualization techniques. This paper addresses
the problem of efficiently serving multiple finetuned MoE-LLMs on a single GPU. We propose a
serving system that employs similarity-based expert consolidation to reduce the overall memory
footprint by sharing similar experts across models. To ensure output quality, we introduce runtime partial reconfiguration, dynamically replacing non-expert layers when processing requests
from different models. As a result, our approach
achieves competitive output quality while maintaining throughput comparable to serving a single model, and incurs only a negligible increase
in time-to-first-token (TTFT). Experiments on a
server with a single NVIDIA A100 GPU (80GB)
using Mixtral-8x7B models demonstrate an 85%
average reduction in turnaround time compared to
NVIDIA’s multi-instance GPU (MIG). Furthermore, experiments on Google’s Switch Transformer Base-8 model with up to four variants
demonstrate the scalability and resilience of our
approach in maintaining output quality compared
to other model merging baselines, highlighting its
effectiveness.

However, such scaling comes with its own drawbacks. MoE
LLMs have significantly higher memory footprints and do
not fit in most of the recently developed GPU memories.
For example, Google’s Switch Transformer (Fedus et al.,
2022) model has a total of 1.6 trillion parameters which
occupies 3.1 TB of memory (16 bits for each parameter).
Therefore, for deployment in constrained environments, the
model parameters should be partitioned between CPU and
GPU memories. Accordingly, in the calculation of forward
pass, repetitive host-to-device copy operations will be required which stall the inference pipeline and limit the overall
throughput of the system.
At the same time, an increasing number of private entities
are adopting customized MoE-based LLMs to meet their
specific needs and ensure the required output quality. These
LLMs are typically fine-tuned versions of a general-purpose
model, trained on specific datasets (Jiang et al., 2024) which
should be deployed in local settings for efficiency and customization purposes. However, most of these entities lack
access to sufficient GPU memory to accommodate large
models, as they typically have only a limited number of
GPUs. This issue becomes even more challenging when

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
George Washington University 2 Computer Science and Engineering Department, Texas A&M University. Correspondence to:
HamidReza Imani <hamidreza@gwu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

