From Spectrum-free towards Baseline-view-free: Double-track Proximity Driven
Multi-view Clustering

Shengju Yu 1 Zhibin Dong 1 Siwei Wang 2 Suyuan Liu 1 Ke Liang 1 Xinwang Liu 1 Yue Liu 1 Yi Zhang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Current multi-view clustering (MVC) techniques
generally focus only on the relationship between
anchors and samples, while overlooking that between anchors. Moreover, due to the lack of data
labels, the cluster order is inconsistent across
views and accordingly anchors encounter misalignment, which will confuse the graph structure and disorganize cluster representation. Even
worse, it typically brings variance during forming spectral embedding, degenerating the stability
of clustering results. In response to these concerns, in the paper we propose a MVC approach
named DTP-SF-BVF. Concretely, we explicitly
exploit the geometric properties between anchors
via self-expression learning skill, and utilize topology learning strategy to feed captured anchoranchor features into anchor-sample graph so as
to explore the manifold structure hidden within
samples more adequately. To reduce the misalignment risk, we introduce a permutation mechanism
for each view to jointly rearrange anchors according to respective view characteristics. Besides
not involving selecting the baseline view, it also
can coordinate with anchors in the unified framework and thereby facilitate the learning of anchors.
Further, rather than forming spectrum and then
performing embedding partitioning, based on the
criterion that samples and clusters should be hard
assignment, we manage to construct the cluster
labels directly from original samples using the
binary strategy, not only preserving the data diversity but avoiding variance. Experiments on
multiple publicly available datasets confirm the
effectiveness of proposed DTP-SF-BVF method.

In recent years, multi-view clustering (MVC) is becoming a research hotspot because of its ability to effectively
mine potential patterns hidden in heterogeneous data, and is
widespreadly deployed in various fields such as drug design
and finance analysis (Xu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023a;
Wang et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024b; Wen et al., 2024a; Liang
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2024b). As a powerful
tool in MVC, anchor technique is commonly utilized to filter
noise points and decrease the computing overhead (Li et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2025b; Zhang et al., 2025). It first selects
a small number of significant samples to represent overall
samples, and then replaces the sample-sample proximity
relationship by building up the anchor-sample relationship
(Ma et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2024c). Following this line, a series of prominent works have been
successively proposed. For instance, Kang et al. (2020b)
regard the centroids generated by k-means on respective
view as anchors and merge multiple graphs by splicing their
left singular vectors. Xia et al. (2023) first project original
samples to perform de-correlation and then select anchors
in projection space according to the sample variance. Wang
et al. (2022a) design a hierarchical k-means model to output
anchors and construct sparse similarity using the learned
bipartite graph. Unlike them, Huang et al. (2023) leverage
three diversity levels in neighbors to construct anchors and
generate graph directly in the early-stage fusion.
Although generating pleasing clustering results from various
aspects, current methods usually focus only on the anchorsample proximity relationship, and fail to take into account
the anchor-anchor characteristics. This is not reasonable
since between anchors, there generally exist informative geometric features. Overlooking them will not be conductive
to constructing discriminative anchors and extracting the
intrinsic similarity among samples. Additionally, due to
the fact that clustering tasks do not involve any data labels,
anchors could be misaligned across views, leading to the
graph structure becoming chaotic. Wang et al. (2022b) provide an alignment scheme from the perspectives of feature
and structure matching, nevertheless, it requires to select the
baseline view. Also, the anchor generation, the anchor transformation, and the graph construction are separated from

1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technololgy, Hunan, China. 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China. yu-shengju@foxmail.com. Correspondence to: Siwei Wang <wangsiwei13@nudt.edu.cn>, Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

