IL-SOAR : Imitation Learning with Soft Optimistic Actor cRitic

Stefano Viel * 1 Luca Viano * 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

Indeed, several recent theoretical imitation learning achieve
performance guarantees by adding exploration bonuses on
top of the regularized policy updates, which encourage the
learner to visit state-action pairs that have not been visited
previously. Unfortunately, such works are only available
in the tabular setting (Shani et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023)
and in the linear setting (Viano et al., 2024). The design
of the exploration bonuses in these works is strictly tight
to the tabular or linear structure of the transition dynamics,
therefore, these analyses offer little insight on how to design
an efficient exploration mechanism using neural network
function approximation.

This paper introduces the SOAR framework for
imitation learning. SOAR is an algorithmic template that learns a policy from expert demonstrations with a primal dual style algorithm that alternates cost and policy updates. Within the policy
updates, the SOAR framework uses an actor critic
method with multiple critics to estimate the critic
uncertainty and build an optimistic critic fundamental to drive exploration.
When instantiated in the tabular setting, we get a
provable algorithm with guarantees that matches
the best known results in the desired accuracy
parameter ϵ.

There is, therefore, a lack of a technique that satisfies the
following two requirements.
• It is statistically and computationally efficient in the
tabular setting.
• It can be implemented easily in continuous states and
actions problems requiring neural networks function
approximation.

Practically, the SOAR template can boost the
performance of any imitation learning algorithm
based on Soft Actror Critic (SAC). As an example, we show that SOAR can boost consistently
the performance of the following SAC-based imitation learning algorithms: f -IRL, ML-IRL and
CSIL. Overall, thanks to SOAR, the required number of episodes to achieve the same performance
is reduced by half.1

In this paper, we present a general template, dubbed Soft
Optimistic Actor cRitic Imitation Learning (SOAR-IL) satisfying these requirements.
The main idea is to act according to an optimistic critic
within the SAC block on which many IL algorithms rely.
Here, optimism means appropriately underestimating the
expected cumulative cost incurred by playing a policy in the
environment. This principle known as optimism in the face
of uncertainty has led to several successful algorithms in the
bandits community.

1. Introduction
Several recent state of the art imitation learning (IL) algorithms (Ni et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2021;
Watson et al., 2023; Viano et al., 2022b) are built on Soft
Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) to perform the
policy updates. SAC uses entropy regularized policy updates to maintain a strictly positive probability of taking
each action. However, this is known to be an inefficient
exploration strategy if deployed alone (Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2017).

While optimism is often achieved using the structure of
the problem (tabular, linear, etc.), in this work, we build
optimistic estimators using an ensemble technique. That is,
multiple estimators for the same quantity are maintained and
aggregated to obtain an optimistic estimator. This technique
scales well with deep imitation learning. To summarize, we
have the following contributions.

*

1
Equal contribution
EPFL, Lausanne.
Correspondence to: Stefano Viel <stefano.viel@epfl.ch>, Luca Viano
<luca.viano@epfl.ch>.

Theoretical contribution We show that there exists a
computationally efficient algorithm that uses an ensemble
based exploration technique that gives access to O(ϵ−2 )
expert trajectories and O(ϵ−2 ) interactions in a tabular MDP
outputs a policy such that its cumulative expected cost is at

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Project code available at https://github.com/
stefanoviel/SOAR-IL/tree/master

1

