Improving Parallel Program Performance with LLM Optimizers via
Agent-System Interfaces

Anjiang Wei * 1 Allen Nie * 1 Thiago S. F. X. Teixeira 2 Rohan Yadav 1 Wonchan Lee 3 Ke Wang 4 Alex Aiken 1

Abstract

entists, including physicists, chemists, and biologists, rely
on high-performance computing to tackle complex problems. These scientific computations dominate workloads
on the world’s most powerful supercomputers (Exascale
Computing). However, many domain scientists lack expertise in computer science, and therefore having difficulties
in optimizing their programs because of the complexity and
scale of the underlying machines. Even for experts, finding
and fixing performance problems resulting from program
modifications or when porting to a new machine is often
time-consuming. Any progress on automating performance
tuning is of great benefit in this domain.

Modern scientific discovery increasingly relies
on high-performance computing for complex
modeling and simulation. A key challenge in
improving parallel program performance is efficiently mapping tasks to processors and data
to memory, a process dictated by intricate, lowlevel system code known as mappers. Developing high-performance mappers demands days
of manual tuning, posing a significant barrier
for domain scientists without systems expertise.
We introduce a framework that automates mapper development with generative optimization,
leveraging richer feedback beyond scalar performance metrics. Our approach features the AgentSystem Interface, which includes a DomainSpecific Language (DSL) to abstract away the
low-level complexity of system code and define
a structured search space, as well as AutoGuide,
a mechanism that interprets raw execution output
into actionable feedback. Unlike traditional reinforcement learning methods such as OpenTuner,
which rely solely on scalar feedback, our method
finds superior mappers in far fewer iterations.
With just 10 iterations, it outperforms OpenTuner
even after 1000 iterations, achieving 3.8× faster
performance. Our approach finds mappers that
surpass expert-written mappers by up to 1.34×
speedup across nine benchmarks while reducing
tuning time from days to minutes.

Task-based programming (Slaughter et al., 2015; Bauer
et al., 2012; Augonnet et al., 2009; Chamberlain et al.,
2007; Moritz et al., 2018; Barham et al., 2022) has emerged
as a promising approach to high performance computing.
The paradigm involves decomposing computations into
independent tasks that communicate exclusively through
their arguments. A key advantage of task-based systems
is that the performance tuning problem is factored out into
a separate mapping: an assignment of tasks to processors
and data to particular memories. High-quality mapping,
achieved through a well-designed mapper (implemented as
code), can significantly improve performance, often by an
order of magnitude (Galvez et al., 2017).
However, currently writing mappers remains a laborintensive process, as it requires deep knowledge of applications, hardware, and low-level system APIs. In addition,
this process is highly application-specific, input-specific,
and machine-specific, often taking experts several days
of meticulous tuning to achieve high performance. This
challenge is especially pronounced for domain scientists,
who typically lack the necessary expertise in computer systems and code optimization. Automating mapper development would enable scientists to focus on their own domain
of expertise while fully utilizing the capabilities of highperformance computing systems.

1. Introduction
Modern scientific discovery depends on advanced software
tools for modeling and simulation (Stocks et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024; Ltaief et al., 2024). Computational sci*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 Intel 3 NVIDIA
Nanjing University. Correspondence to: Anjiang Wei <anjiang@cs.stanford.edu>.

In this paper, we introduce a system powered by large language models (LLMs) to automate both the generation
and optimization of mapper code. The first challenge
stems from the complexity of generating mapper code due
to the original low-level programming system, which ex-

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

