MedXpertQA: Benchmarking Expert-Level Medical Reasoning and
Understanding

Yuxin Zuo * 1 Shang Qu * 1 2 Yifei Li 1 Zhangren Chen 1 Xuekai Zhu 1 Ermo Hua 1 Kaiyan Zhang 1
Ning Ding B 1 2 Bowen Zhou B 1 2
Œ Leaderboard: https://medxpertqa.github.io
‡ Code: https://github.com/TsinghuaC3I/MedXpertQA

Abstract
100

75

We introduce MedXpertQA, a highly challenging and comprehensive benchmark to evaluate
expert-level medical knowledge and advanced reasoning. MedXpertQA includes 4, 460 questions
spanning 17 specialties and 11 body systems. It
includes two subsets, Text for text evaluation and
MM for multimodal evaluation. Notably, MM introduces expert-level exam questions with diverse
images and rich clinical information, including
patient records and examination results, setting it
apart from traditional medical multimodal benchmarks with simple QA pairs generated from image captions. MedXpertQA applies rigorous filtering and augmentation to address the insufficient
difficulty of existing benchmarks like MedQA,
and incorporates specialty board questions to improve clinical relevance and comprehensiveness.
We perform data synthesis to mitigate data leakage risk and conduct multiple rounds of expert
reviews to ensure accuracy and reliability. We
evaluate 18 leading models on MedXpertQA.
Moreover, medicine is deeply connected to realworld decision-making, providing a rich and representative setting for assessing reasoning abilities
beyond mathematics and code. To this end, we
develop a reasoning-oriented subset to facilitate
the assessment of o1-like models.

51.3
61.5

50

56.3

70.7

25

0

Figure 1: Performance of different models on MedXpertQA Text and other benchmarks. For other benchmarks,
we report results for o1-preview in place of o1. Appendix F shows full results.

1. Introduction
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have demonstrated
promising potential in advancing general medical AI systems for applications in clinical scenarios (Achiam et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2024b; Saab et al., 2024). However, current text and multimodal benchmarks for evaluating general
medical AI capabilities have numerous limitations.
First, existing text medical benchmarks, such as PubMedQA (Jin et al., 2019), MedQA (Jin et al., 2021), MedMCQA (Pal et al., 2022), and MMLU (Medical) (Wang et al.,
2024b), lack comprehensive coverage of fine-grained and
diverse real-world diagnostic scenarios, including highly
specialized fields such as family and addiction medicine.
This lack of essential breadth limits the applicability of medical AI in thoroughly addressing realistic medical scenarios.
Moreover, these benchmarks fall short of sufficiently challenging current advanced AI, hindering progress toward reliable medical AI. For instance, o1-preview has achieved
96% and 99% accuracy on MedQA-USMLE and MMLU
Medical Genetics, respectively (Nori et al., 2024).

*
Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Ning Ding <dn97@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Bowen Zhou <zhoubowen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

