Geometric and Physical Constraints Synergistically Enhance Neural PDE
Surrogates

Yunfei Huang 1 2 David S. Greenberg 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, neural networks have shown promising results
in predicting the time evolution of PDE systems, often
achieving cost-accuracy tradeoffs that outperform traditional
numerical methods (Li et al., 2021; Gupta & Brandstetter, 2023; Stachenfeld et al., 2021; Takamoto et al., 2022;
Long et al., 2019; Um et al., 2020; Kochkov et al., 2021).
However, obtaining accurate and stable autoregressive ‘rollouts’ over long durations remains notoriously difficult. Several techniques have been proposed to address this problem, including physical constraints, symmetry equivariance,
time-unrolled training, specialized architectures, data augmentation, addition of input noise and generative modeling
(Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020; Lippe et al., 2024; Stachenfeld et al., 2021; Kohl et al., 2024; Brandstetter et al., 2022b;
Fanaskov et al., 2023; Bergamin et al., 2024; Sun et al.,
2023; Hsieh et al., 2019; Tran et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023;
Bonev et al., 2023). Nonetheless, the relative effectiveness
of these strategies remains largely ambiguous, and transparent, systematic comparisons remain elusive.

Neural PDE surrogates can improve the costaccuracy tradeoff of classical solvers, but often
generalize poorly to new initial conditions and
accumulate errors over time. Physical and symmetry constraints have shown promise in closing
this performance gap, but existing techniques for
imposing these inductive biases are incompatible with the staggered grids commonly used in
computational fluid dynamics. Here we introduce novel input and output layers that respect
physical laws and symmetries on the staggered
grids, and for the first time systematically investigate how these constraints, individually and in
combination, affect the accuracy of PDE surrogates. We focus on two challenging problems:
shallow water equations with closed boundaries
and decaying incompressible turbulence. Compared to strong baselines, symmetries and physical constraints consistently improve performance
across tasks, architectures, autoregressive prediction steps, accuracy measures, and network sizes.
Symmetries are more effective than physical constraints, but surrogates with both performed best,
even compared to baselines with data augmentation or pushforward training, while themselves
benefiting from the pushforward trick. Doublyconstrained surrogates also generalize better to
initial conditions and durations beyond the range
of the training data, and more accurately predict
real-world ocean currents.

Here, we systematically investigate the utility of symmetry constraints and physical conservation laws, alone and
in combination. While both have proven useful for some
tasks and architectures, to date there have been practically
no systematic evaluations of their combination. Given the
deep connections between conservation laws and PDE symmetries in physics (Noether, 1918), it is not clear a priori
whether these constraints would prove redundant, or combine usefully for training PDE surrogates. Across multiple
tasks, accuracy measures, architectures, training techniques,
and scenarios, we show a clear, reproducible and robust
benefit from these constraints for long rollout accuracy and
generalization performance, and that they combine synergistically. To make them broadly applicable, we introduce
novel input and output layers that extend these inductive
biases to staggered grids for the first time.1

1
Helmholtz Centre Hereon, Geesthacht, Germany
Helmholtz AI. Correspondence to:
Yunfei Huang
<yunfei.huang5@gmail.com>,
David
S.
Greenberg
<david.greenberg@hereon.de>.

1
Code is available at https://github.com/m-dml/
double-constraint-pde-surrogates.

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

