Private Lossless Multiple Release

Joel Daniel Andersson 1 2 Lukas Retschmeier 1 2 Boel Nelson 2 Rasmus Pagh 1 2

Abstract

accuracy trade-off is the key object of study in the area. Of
specific interest is the privacy budget that determines how
much information the output of a differentially private algorithm may reveal about its inputs—a smaller budget means
more private but less accurate results.

Koufogiannis et al. (2016) showed a gradual release result for Laplace noise-based differentially private mechanisms: given an ε-DP release, a new release with privacy parameter ε′ > ε can be computed such that the
combined privacy loss of both releases is at most ε′
and the distribution of the latter is the same as a single
release with parameter ε′ . They also showed gradual release techniques for Gaussian noise, later also explored
by Whitehouse et al. (2022). In this paper, we consider a
more general multiple release setting in which analysts
hold private releases with different privacy parameters
corresponding to different access/trust levels. These
releases are determined one by one, with privacy parameters in arbitrary order. A multiple release is lossless if
having access to a subset S of the releases has the same
privacy guarantee as the least private release in S, and
each release has the same distribution as a single release
with the same privacy parameter. Our main result is that
lossless multiple release is possible for a large class
of additive noise mechanisms. For the Gaussian mechanism we give a simple method for lossless multiple
release with a short, self-contained analysis that does
not require knowledge of the mathematics of Brownian motion. We also present lossless multiple release
for the Laplace and Poisson mechanisms. Finally, we
consider how to efficiently do gradual release of sparse
histograms, and present a mechanism with running time
independent of the number of dimensions.

Motivation. In deployments of differential privacy, it may
be hard to determine the appropriate privacy budget to grant
an analyst since it depends on trust and accuracy assumptions that may change over time. A system may also have
different security clearance levels—a data analyst might
have a higher clearance level than a developer, but both
might require access to some statistics. Similarly, a company that wants to release, for example, user statistics could
make an accurate release for their own data analysts, a less
accurate release for external consultants, and include an
even less accurate release in a report for shareholders or
other external actors. A different example setting is users
that want to sell their data on data markets: users could let
the accuracy of the release depend on how much they are
paid, and use different budgets for different releases.
Another usage scenario, relevant in distributed or federated
settings, is local differential privacy where the data owner
could be sharing a differentially private function of their data
with multiple servers, and the set of servers might change
over time. Here the privacy budget might depend on the
server: for example, a patient may trust their local hospital
more than their national hospitals, but might not trust the
hospitals not to collude by sharing data among themselves.
Multiple releases. These scenarios motivate creating multiple releases with different privacy budgets aimed at different
analysts. However, these releases should be coordinated
such that a group of analysts who combine their information
do not gain more knowledge about the input than the most
knowledgeable member of the group. This kind of collusion
resilience was first studied by Xiao et al. (2009) with a nonDP privacy objective—we refer to their work for additional
motivation.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) is a statistical notion that provides provable privacy guarantees. Differentially private (DP) algorithms typically introduce inaccuracy
through noise to achieve privacy, and the resulting privacy1

Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen (BARC), Denmark 2 University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence
to: Joel Daniel Andersson <jda@di.ku.dk>, Lukas Retschmeier
<lure@di.ku.dk>, Boel Nelson <bn@di.ku.dk>, Rasmus Pagh
<pagh@di.ku.dk>.

A related aspect is that we may want to provide an analyst
with a less private, more accurate release after the trust we
place in them increases. In this case, we want the accuracy of the latest release to match the accuracy that can
be obtained, given the combined privacy budget of both
releases. That is, no additional cost should be incurred for

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

