Quantum Speedup for Hypergraph Sparsification

Chenghua Liu 1 2 Minbo Gao 1 2 Zhengfeng Ji 3 Mingsheng Ying 4

Abstract

number of edges by adjusting edge weights while (approximately) preserving the spectral properties of the original
graph. Over the past two decades, graph sparsification has
experienced several breakthroughs (see Spielman & Srivastava (2011); Batson et al. (2012)), ultimately leading to the
discovery of algorithms that finds spectral sparsifiers of linear size in nearly-linear time (Lee & Sun, 2018). Graph
sparsification algorithms are used for crucial tasks such as
Laplacian system solver (Cohen et al., 2014), computing
random walk properties (Cohen et al., 2016), and solving
maximum flow problem (Chen et al., 2022). Additionally,
they have found widespread applications in machine learning domains, including computer vision (Simonovsky &
Komodakis, 2017), clustering (Peng et al., 2015; Laenen &
Sun, 2020; Agarwal et al., 2022), and streaming machine
learning algorithms (Braverman et al., 2021).

Graph sparsification serves as a foundation for
many algorithms, such as approximation algorithms for graph cuts and Laplacian system
solvers. As its natural generalization, hypergraph
sparsification has recently gained increasing attention, with broad applications in graph machine
learning and other areas. In this work, we propose
the first quantum algorithm for hypergraph sparsification, addressing an open problem proposed
by Apers & de Wolf (2020). For a weighted hypergraph with n vertices, m hyperedges, and rank r,
our algorithm outputs a√near-linear size ε-spectral
sparsifier in time e
O(r mn/ε)1 . This algorithm
matches the quantum lower bound for constant r
and demonstrates quantum speedup when compared with the state-of-the-art e
O(mr)-time classical algorithm. As applications, our algorithm
implies quantum speedups for computing hypergraph cut sparsifiers, approximating hypergraph
mincuts and hypergraph s-t mincuts.

Hypergraphs, a generalization of graphs, naturally emerge in
various real-world scenarios where interactions go beyond
pairwise relationships, such as group dynamics in biochemistry, social networks, and trade networks, as they allow a
single edge to connect any number of vertices (the max number of vertices an edge contains is called the rank). Thus,
as a natural generalization of the garph sparsification, the
task of sparsifying hypergraphs are investigated by many
researchers, starting from Soma & Yoshida (2019). Hypergraph sparsification significantly reduces the computational
cost of calculating hypergraph energy, a crucial quantity for
many machine learning tasks, including clustering (Zhou
et al., 2006; Hein et al., 2013; Takai et al., 2020), semisupervised learning (Hein et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2020;
Yadati et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020), and link prediction (Yadati et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Sparsification serves as a foundational algorithmic paradigm
wherein a densely constructed entity is transitioned to a
sparse counterpart while preserving its inherent characteristics. Such a process invariably enhances various facets
of algorithmic efficiency, from reduced execution time to
optimized space complexity, and even more streamlined
communication. A typical instance of this paradigm is the
graph sparsification, where the objective is to reduce the

With the rapid development of quantum computing, many
graph algorithms and machine learning tasks have benefited
from quantum speedups. In the context of the sparsification
paradigm, the groundbreaking work of Apers & de Wolf
(2020) introduced the first quantum speedup for graph sparsification with nearly optimal query complexity, showcasing
the potential of quantum computing for sparsification tasks.
They further proposed several open questions about the potential for quantum speedups in broader sparsification tasks.
Among these, a natural and important question is:

1

Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of
Sciences) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute
of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 2 University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Department of
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China 4 Centre for Quantum Software and Information, University
of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to:
Zhengfeng Ji <jizhengfeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
e ) to represent O (f · polylog(m, n, r, 1/ε))
We use O(f
throughout this paper to suppress polylogarithmic factors.

Is there a hypergraph sparsification algorithm
1

