Unified Screening for Multiple Diseases

Yiğit Narter 1 Alihan Hüyük 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 3 Cem Tekin 1

Abstract

(De Mutsert et al., 2009; Weiner et al., 2006; Thayer et al.,
2010). This limitation reduces the efficiency of healthcare
interventions, as potential synergies between diseases are
overlooked, and resources may be misallocated. Screening
a patient with high risks for two conditions for only one condition might fail to improve their overall health outcomes,
whereas a unified screening approach could yield better results (Fan et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2006)
by addressing the competing risks, which refer to events
that interfere with or alter the likelihood of observing the
event of interest (Pintilie, 2011).

Current screening programs that focus on improving patient health while minimizing screening
costs are tailored for individual diseases. Designing unified screening programs for multiple
diseases requires carefully balancing competing
disease risks, which is an open problem. In this
work, we address this problem by casting unified screening as a referral problem, in which we
choose to activate a subset of screening policies
for individual diseases by accounting for competing risks that influence patient outcomes. We
introduce a novel optimization framework that incorporates disease risks, budget constraints, and
diagnostic error limits and characterize the structural properties of the optimal referral policy. For
the unified screening of two diseases, we show
that the optimal activation threshold for the screening of one disease depends on the risk of the
other, resulting in decision boundaries with distinct risk-dependent profiles. We compare our
unified model with independent screening programs that apply isolated activation thresholds
for screening of each disease. Our approach optimizes screening decisions collectively, improving
overall survival outcomes, particularly for patients
with high disease risks.

For instance, consider a patient who has both cardiovascular
disease and cancer but is only screened for cancer, where the
adverse event from cancer happens to occur after the adverse
event from heart disease. When screening for cancer, if the
patient unexpectedly suffers from heart disease, then the
cancer screening offers no benefit to the patient in terms
of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). However, if the
patient is screened for both diseases, heart disease will be
identified earlier. In that case, the adverse event due to heart
disease will be prevented, and cancer screening will result
in QALY gain by detecting cancer before the adverse event
associated with it happens. However, screening the patient
for both diseases is costly. Hence, optimal allocation of
screening resources to patients with different risk profiles is
an important task.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for designing unified screening programs that simultaneously address
multiple diseases. Unlike existing programs, our approach
accounts for the competing risks associated with each disease when determining whom to screen for which condition
while also considering resource constraints, an important
factor in screening programs (Cevik et al., 2018; Bansal
et al., 2020; Teh et al., 2015). We introduce an optimization
formulation for the screening problem, which incorporates
budget constraints and diagnostic error limits. Using properties of the Lagrange dual function, we characterize optimal
decision boundaries and validate our findings through extensive in-silico experiments. In particular, for the case of
unified screening of two diseases, we show that the optimal activation threshold for one disease is not static but a
function of the risk of the other disease. Instead of a single threshold per disease, our model introduces multiple
regions that correspond to distinct combinations of screen-

1. Introduction
The challenge of designing effective screening programs
for disease detection is central to improving healthcare outcomes. Traditionally, screening programs are developed
in isolation for individual diseases, ignoring the interactions between diseases and risks for different conditions
1
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey 2 Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, US
3
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence
to: Yiğit Narter <yigit.narter@ug.bilkent.edu.tr>, Cem Tekin
<cemtekin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

