Imitation Learning from a Single Temporally Misaligned Video

William Huey * 1 Huaxiaoyue Wang * 1 Anne Wu 1 Yoav Artzi 1 Sanjiban Choudhury 1

Abstract

learning from videos is challenging because demonstrations
are often temporally misaligned—variations in timing, embodiment, or execution mean that frame-level matching fails
to enforce correct sequencing. To follow a demonstration,
an agent must not only match states but also make consistent
progress through the subgoals in the right order.

We examine the problem of learning sequential
tasks from a single visual demonstration. A key
challenge arises when demonstrations are temporally misaligned due to variations in timing,
differences in embodiment, or inconsistencies in
execution. Existing approaches treat imitation as
a distribution-matching problem, aligning individual frames between the agent and the demonstration. However, we show that such frame-level
matching fails to enforce temporal ordering or ensure consistent progress. Our key insight is that
matching should instead be defined at the level
of sequences. We propose that perfect matching
occurs when one sequence successfully covers
all the subgoals in the same order as the other
sequence. We present ORCA (ORdered Coverage
Alignment), a dense per-timestep reward function that measures the probability of the agent
covering demonstration frames in the correct order. On temporally misaligned demonstrations,
we show that agents trained with the ORCA reward achieve 4.5x improvement (0.11 → 0.50
average normalized returns) for Meta-world tasks
and 6.6x improvement (6.55 → 43.3 average returns) for Humanoid-v4 tasks compared to the
best frame-level matching algorithms. We also
provide empirical analysis showing that ORCA
is robust to varying levels of temporal misalignment. The project website is at https://
portal-cornell.github.io/orca/

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004;
Ziebart et al., 2008) provides a principled way to infer rewards by matching the learner’s trajectory to expert demonstrations. Recent IRL approaches apply optimal transport
(OT) (Peyré & Cuturi, 2020) to align visual embeddings
between frames (Cohen et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2024c; Guzey
et al., 2024; Haldar et al., 2023a;b; Liu et al., 2024; Tian
et al., 2024). However, these methods operate at the frame
level, ignoring temporal dependencies: an agent can revisit
subgoals, skip ahead, or stall without penalty. As a result, frame-matching approaches fail on sequence-matching
tasks, where the correct subgoal order is crucial for success.
Our key insight is that matching should be defined at the
sequence level instead of the frame level when learning
rewards for sequence-matching tasks. Under temporal misalignment, we claim that two sequences only match if one
sequence aligns with all of the other sequence’s subgoals in
the same order. This leads to an intuitive and principled reward function for sequence-matching tasks: an agent should
be rewarded for covering all subgoals in order, without requiring precise timing alignment.
We propose ORCA (ORdered Coverage Alignment), which
computes dense rewards given a single video demonstration
and a visual learner trajectory, as shown in Fig. 1. Concretely, the reward function is recursively defined as the
probability that (1) the learner currently occupies the subgoal specified by the final video frame, and (2) the learner
has already covered all prior frames in the correct order.
In practice, we train an ORCA policy via RL in two stages.
First, we initialize the policy by training with rewards that
assume a temporally aligned demonstration. Second, we refine this policy with ORCA rewards to significantly improve
its efficiency and performance. Our key contributions are:

1. Introduction
Designing reward functions for reinforcement learning (RL)
is tedious (Eschmann, 2021), especially for tasks that require
completing subgoals in a strict order. A more scalable way
is to learn rewards from a video demonstration. However,
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University. Correspondence to:
William Huey <wph52@cornell.edu>, Huaxiaoyue (Yuki) Wang
<yukiwang@cs.cornell.edu>.

1. A novel, principled reward function class ORCA that
formulates the reward as an ordered coverage problem.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

2. Analysis on the weakness of rewards based on optimal
transport and other frame-level matching algorithms.
1

