Generative Data Mining with Longtail-Guided Diffusion

David S. Hayden 1 Mao Ye 1 Timur Garipov 2 Gregory P. Meyer 1 Carl Vondrick 3 Zhao Chen 4 Yuning Chai 5
Eric Wolff 1 Siddhartha S. Srinivasa 1

Abstract
It is difficult to anticipate the myriad challenges
that a predictive model will encounter once deployed. Common practice entails a reactive, cyclical approach: model deployment, data mining,
and retraining. We instead develop a proactive
longtail discovery process by imagining additional data during training. In particular, we develop general model-based longtail signals, including a differentiable, single forward pass formulation of epistemic uncertainty that does not
impact model parameters or predictive performance but can flag rare or hard inputs. We leverage these signals as guidance to generate additional training data from a latent diffusion model
in a process we call Longtail Guidance (LTG).
Crucially, we can perform LTG without retraining
the diffusion model or the predictive model, and
we do not need to expose the predictive model to
intermediate diffusion states. Data generated by
LTG exhibit semantically meaningful variation,
yield significant generalization improvements on
numerous image classification benchmarks, and
can be analyzed by a VLM to proactively discover,
textually explain, and address conceptual gaps in
a deployed predictive model.

Figure 1. Diffusion with Longtail Guidance (LTG) generates synthetic data that are difficult or rare for an existing predictive model.
The predictive model can be fine-tuned on this data to improve generalization performance and the the synthetic data can be analyzed
to understand conceptual gaps in the predictive model. Guided
generations exhibit more extreme views compared to unguided generations. Results in Section 4 use low-to-mid guidance weights.

1. Introduction
Longtail encounters are common in production ML systems
but difficult to anticipate and be robust towards. Recently,
the answer has been: add more training data and more compute (Kaplan et al., 2020). However, the time and cost to
acquire additional data, especially longtail data, can be prohibitive (e.g. train instances occurs 1 time for every 104 car
instances in Berkeley DeepDrive (Yu et al., 2020)). Addi-

Figure 2. Predictive model performance (left axes, red) and modelbased longtail signals fϕlt (right axes, green) on synthetic data
generated by varying Longtail Guidance weights for model-based
longtail signals: Epistemic (left plot) and Entropy (right plot).
Guided generations predictably exhibit lower correct class probability, P(Class), lower accuracy, and higher longtail signals, fϕlt ,
compared to unguided generations (zero guidance weight), indicating they are more difficult and more longtail from the predictive
model’s perspective. We ensure that longtail-guided synthetic data
generations do not stray out-of-distribution by ensuring P(Class) is
lower than unguided generations but well above zero probability.

1
Cruise, LLC, San Francisco, CA 2 OpenAI, San Francisco,
CA 3 Colombia University, New York, NY 4 Upwork, Palo Alto,
CA 5 Meta, Menlo Park, CA. Correspondence to: David Hayden
<david.hayden@getcruise.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

