DeepCrossAttention: Supercharging Transformer Residual Connections

Mike Heddes 1 Adel Javanmard 2 3 Kyriakos Axiotis 3 Gang Fu 3 MohammadHossein Bateni 3
Vahab Mirrokni 3

Abstract

processing (Vaswani, 2017), audio recognition (Gong et al.,
2021), and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).

Transformer networks have achieved remarkable
success across diverse domains, leveraging a variety of architectural innovations, including residual connections. However, traditional residual
connections, which simply sum the outputs of
previous layers, can dilute crucial information.
This work introduces DeepCrossAttention (DCA),
an approach that enhances residual learning in
transformers. DCA employs learnable, inputdependent weights to dynamically combine layer
outputs, enabling the model to selectively focus
on the most relevant information in any of the
previous layers. Furthermore, DCA incorporates
depth-wise cross-attention, allowing for richer interactions between layers at different depths. Our
language modeling experiments show that DCA
achieves improved perplexity for a given training
time. Moreover, DCA obtains the same model
quality up to 3x faster while adding a negligible
number of parameters. Theoretical analysis confirms that DCA provides an improved trade-off
between accuracy and model size when the ratio
of collective layer ranks to the ambient dimension
falls below a critical threshold.

A residual neural network (ResNet) is constructed by stacking layers known as residual blocks. Each residual block is
characterized by the recursive equation xt+1 = f (xt ) + xt ,
which contains a residual function f along with an identity
shortcut (also called an identity loop or skip connection).
The residual functions typically used in these blocks include
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and attention. By unrolling the recursion,
we equivalently see that each layer’s input is the sum of all
its previous layers’ outputs (including the model’s input).
Figure 2 provides a schematic illustration of this concept.
Information dilution in residual networks. Residual connections increase the flow of information across the neural
network. However, they also come with a potential limitation: Taking a straight sum of previous layer outputs
implicitly treats all previous layers as equally important.
This can dilute useful information present in a select few
layers (including the model’s input) with potentially less
useful information. We hypothesize that, because of this
dilution, even though residual networks mitigate the problem of neural network bottlenecks, they do not sufficiently
resolve it. One way to resolve the issue of dilution would
be to allow each layer to choose its inputs.
In order to confirm the existence and significance of the dilution phenomenon we ask a simple question: Can residual
networks easily learn to recover the input? This should be a
basic task expected of any generative model — otherwise
there would be information loss. However, if our dilution
hypothesis is true, the answer would be negative. To test
this, we create a neural network consisting of a number
of low-rank layers, and add residual connections in order
to mitigate the bottlenecks introduced by the low ranks.
The resulting model is full-rank. We compare this model
with another model that employs learnable residual connections, as in DenseFormer (Pagliardini et al., 2024), which
we later also call GRN-v1, since it is the starting point of
our generalizations. In Figure 1 we see the results of the
two models on two tasks: learning the identity transformation and learning a random linear transformation. Perhaps
surprisingly, we observe that the residual network is unable

1. Introduction
Residual connections play an important role in modern neural network architectures because they stabilize the training
of deep neural networks and improve model convergence
and quality. Since their usage in the ResNet architecture (He
et al., 2016), residual connections have been widely adopted
in both convolutional neural networks and transformer architectures across various domains, including natural language
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Irvine, USA 2 Marshall School of Business, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, USA 3 Google Research, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Mike Heddes <mheddes@uci.edu>, Gang
Fu <thomasfu@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

