An Interpretable N-gram Perplexity Threat Model
for Large Language Model Jailbreaks

Valentyn Boreiko * 1 2 Alexander Panfilov * 2 3 4 Vaclav Voracek 1 2 Matthias Hein 1 2 Jonas Geiping 2 3 4

Abstract

potential misuse, mitigate harm, and avoid complying with
malicious queries (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al.,
2022). However, while this alignment ensures average-case
safety, it does not currently extend to adversarial scenarios
(Carlini et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024), where an attacker
actively tries to bypass the safety measures.

A plethora of jailbreaking attacks have been proposed to obtain harmful responses from safetytuned LLMs. These methods largely succeed in
coercing the target output in their original settings,
but their attacks vary substantially in fluency and
computational effort. In this work, we propose a
unified threat model for the principled comparison
of these methods. Our threat model checks if a
given jailbreak is likely to occur in the distribution
of text. For this, we build an N-gram language
model on 1T tokens, which, unlike model-based
perplexity, allows for an LLM-agnostic, nonparametric, and inherently interpretable evaluation.
We adapt popular attacks to this threat model,
and, for the first time, benchmark these attacks on
equal footing with it. After an extensive comparison, we find attack success rates against safetytuned modern models to be lower than previously
presented and that attacks based on discrete optimization significantly outperform recent LLMbased attacks. Being inherently interpretable, our
threat model allows for a comprehensive analysis
and comparison of jailbreak attacks. We find that
effective attacks exploit and abuse infrequent bigrams, either selecting the ones absent from realworld text or rare ones, e.g., specific to Reddit or
code datasets. Our code is available at GitHub.

Such attacks on safety alignment are often done using jailbreaks, which we refer to as adversarially designed text
inputs that circumvent safety tuning and elicit harmful behavior. In this work, we focus on threat models for these
attacks. A threat model formalizes a security question by
clearly defining the goals and constraints of both attackers
and defenders, specifying the environment, the actions each
can take, and the sequence in which they operate.
While adversarial attacks in computer vision commonly
adopt lp -ball threat models to be imperceptible to humans
but still fool the model (Madry et al., 2018), jailbreaks in
language come in all shapes and sizes, and optimize for
different metrics. These attacks range from completely
gibberish suffixes (Zou et al., 2023) to human-like social engineering techniques applied to an LLM (Zeng et al., 2024).
While all these methods are designed to succeed in terms of
attack success rate (ASR), they also commonly report their
efficacy based on different combinations of metrics such
as fluency (aka readability, stealthiness, human-likeness)
(Liu et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2025; Mehrotra et al., 2024;
Sadasivan et al., 2024), query efficiency (Chao et al., 2023;
2024), runtime (Geisler et al., 2024; Sadasivan et al., 2024),
length of a jailbreak (Zou et al., 2023; Sadasivan et al.,
2024), etc. This heterogeneity prevents a clear understanding of the jailbreaking attack landscape and complicates the
fair comparison of different methods.

1. Introduction
As LLMs can be used to facilitate fraud, spread fake news,
conduct hacking attacks, etc. (Willison, 2023; Greshake
et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2021; Geiping et al., 2024), model
providers often safety-tune LLMs to minimize the risks of

Among these metrics, fluency is a key distinguishing factor
between attacks. It is implicitly enforced in many jailbreaking methods (Liu et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2025; Mehrotra
et al., 2024; Sadasivan et al., 2024) and is often measured
by perplexity using LLMs. Moreover, perplexity-based filters are established input-level defenses (Alon & Kamfonas,
2023; Jain et al., 2023), effectively making perplexity a de
facto constraint that attacks must satisfy. However, relying
on LLM-based perplexity leads to a setup that is i) incomparable across different LLMs, ii) non-interpretable, iii)

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Tübingen 2 Tübingen AI
Center 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 4 ELLIS Institute Tübingen. Correspondence to: Valentyn Boreiko <valentyn.boreiko@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

