Conformal Prediction with Cellwise Outliers: A Detect-then-Impute Approach

Qian Peng 1 Yajie Bao 1 Haojie Ren 2 Zhaojun Wang 1 Changliang Zou 1

Abstract

prediction models in risk-sensitive applications hinges on
valid uncertainty quantification. Conformal prediction (CP,
Vovk et al. (2005)) offers a flexible and robust framework for uncertainty quantification of arbitrary machine
learning models by constructing prediction interval (PI).
To be specific, suppose we have collected an i.i.d. labeled dataset Dl = {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 ⊂ Rd × R where
(Xi , Yi ) ∼ P = PX × PY |X . Given the test data Xn+1 ,
b CP (Xn+1 ) satisfying the marginal coverCP issues a PI C
b CP (Xn+1 )} ≥ 1 − α if the test data and
age P{Yn+1 ∈ C
labeled data are exchangeable. However, the distribution
of some variables in test data may deviate from that of the
training data due to measurement error, natural variation,
or feature contamination. This issue, referred to as cellwise outliers (Alqallaf et al., 2009), can result in inaccurate
predictions and flawed decisions. For example, consider a
hospital that seeks to use the patient’s biomarkers to predict incidence rate based on a model trained on data from
recovered patients. For a newly admitted patient, some of
whose biomarkers may differ from those in the training set.
Conducting robust uncertainty quantification for machine
learning models in the presence of cellwise outliers remains
an underexplored area.

Conformal prediction is a powerful tool for constructing prediction intervals for black-box models, providing a finite sample coverage guarantee
for exchangeable data. However, this exchangeability is compromised when some entries of the
test feature are contaminated, such as in the case
of cellwise outliers. To address this issue, this
paper introduces a novel framework called detectthen-impute conformal prediction. This framework first employs an outlier detection procedure
on the test feature and then utilizes an imputation
method to fill in those cells identified as outliers.
To quantify the uncertainty in the processed test
feature, we adaptively apply the detection and imputation procedures to the calibration set, thereby
constructing exchangeable features for the conformal prediction interval of the test label. We
develop two practical algorithms, PDI-CP and
JDI-CP, and provide a distribution-free coverage
analysis under some commonly used detection
and imputation procedures. Notably, JDI-CP
achieves a finite sample 1 − 2α coverage guarantee. Numerical experiments on both synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that our proposed
algorithms exhibit robust coverage properties and
comparable efficiency to the oracle baseline.

In this case, we observe a contaminated test feature X̃n+1
with entries
(
Xn+1,j , j ∈ [d] \ O∗
X̃n+1,j =
,
(1)
Zn+1,j , j ∈ O∗

1. Introduction

where O∗ ⊆ [d] denotes coordinates of cellwise outliers in
X̃n+1 , and Zn+1 ∼ PZ is an arbitrarily distributed outliers
and independent of {(Xi , Yi )}n+1
i=1 . Our goal is to build a
PI for test label Yn+1 with a target coverage level 1 − α
when only X̃n+1 is observed. However, the classical CP
method is incapable of providing a valid PI as test data
(X̃n+1 , Yn+1 ) is not exchangeable with the labeled data Dl .
Furthermore, the distribution shift from the labeled data to
the test data is unknown and difficult to estimate without additional distribution or structure assumptions, which makes
the weighted conformal prediction (WCP) method (Tibshirani et al., 2019) that requires consistent likelihood ratio
estimation unsuitable in this context as well. Therefore, a
more principled CP approach is needed to address cellwise
outliers in test data.

As the volume and complexity of data expand, machine
learning models and algorithms have become essential
tools for enhancing decision-making processes across various domains, including autonomous driving (Min et al.,
2024), wing design (Zhang et al., 2024), and disease diagnosis (Shang et al., 2024). Ensuring the reliability of
1

School of Statistics and Data Sciences, LPMC, KLMDASR
and LEBPS, Nankai University, Tianjin, China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Yajie Bao <yajiebao@nankai.edu.cn>, Haojie Ren <haojieren@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

