A Classification View on Meta Learning Bandits

Mirco Mutti 1 Jeongyeol Kwon 2 Shie Mannor 1 3 Aviv Tamar 1

Abstract

Asthma Diagnosis Flowchart

Contextual multi-armed bandits are a popular
choice to model sequential decision-making. E.g.,
in a healthcare application we may perform various tests to asses a patient condition (exploration)
and then decide on the best treatment to give (exploitation). When humans design strategies, they
aim for the exploration to be fast, since the patient’s health is at stake, and easy to interpret
for a physician overseeing the process. However,
common bandit algorithms are nothing like √
that:
The regret caused by exploration scales with H
over H rounds and decision strategies are based
on opaque statistical considerations. In this paper,
we use an original classification view to meta learn
interpretable and fast exploration plans for a fixed
collection of bandits M. The plan is prescribed by
an interpretable decision tree probing decisions’
payoff to classify the test bandit. The test regret
of the plan in the stochastic and contextual setting
scales with O(λ−2 Cλ (M) log2 (M H)), being M
the size of M, λ a separation parameter over
the bandits, and Cλ (M) a novel classificationcoefficient that fundamentally links meta learning bandits with classification. Through a nearly
matching lower bound, we show that Cλ (M) inherently captures the complexity of the setting.

Are the symptoms typical of asthma?

MAB Exploration Plan
Choose arm 3
for N rounds.
Test average
reward:

no

yes

History/examination
support asthma diagnosis?
no

yes

Is patient already taking
ICS-containing treatment?

Choose arm 1
for N rounds.
Test average
reward:

yes
no

≥ 0.3

< 0.3
Further
history and
test for
alternative
diagnosis

…

≥ 0.2 < 0.7

< 0.2

…

Choose arm 7
for N rounds.
Test average
reward:

…

≥ 0.7

…

…

Perform spirometry/PEF with
reversibility test. Results support
asthma diagnosis?
Diagnosis steps
for patients
already on ICScontaining
treatment?

…

Figure 1: Left: An excerpt from a clinical flowchart for the
medical diagnosis of Asthma (GIf, 2023). Right: Illustration
of an interpretable exploration plan for a MAB.

arm depends also on a context, a vector of features that the
agent observes before deciding which arm to pull. The main
challenge in MABs is how to pull arms in a way that effectively balances information gathering (called exploration)
and immediate rewards (called exploitation).
A multitude of decision-making problems, ranging from
recommender systems (Li et al., 2010) to treatment allocation (Berry, 1978), pricing of goods (Rothschild, 1974),
advertising (Schwartz et al., 2017), can be modelled as MAB
problems. However, although the problem structure is fitting, typical MAB algorithms are often very different from
human-designed decision plans. For example, consider the
clinical diagnosis plan illustrated in Figure 1 (left). In machine learning parlance, this plan takes several exploration
actions (diagnosis tests) to yield a diagnosis, which will
later be treated by appropriate medical actions (exploitation). It is clear that (i) the plan is short – fast diagnosis
is imperative; and (ii) the plan is interpretable, and can be
easily communicated both to physicians and patients. Our
goal in this work is to develop a framework for short and
interpretable action plans in the setting of MABs.

1. Introduction
In the Multi-Armed Bandits model (MAB, Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020), a decision-maker, called the agent, faces
a collection of unknown probability distributions over reals, called arms, representing alternative decisions and their
corresponding payoff (a.k.a. reward), which the agent repeatedly takes, or pulls, to maximize the mean cumulative
reward collected over time. In some settings, called contextual MABs (Audibert & Bubeck, 2010), the reward of an
*

Equal contribution 1 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to: Mirco Mutti <mirco.m@technion.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To this end, we consider the stochastic contextual MAB
formulation, a model of non-adversarial problems whose
1

