Zebra: In-Context Generative Pretraining for Solving Parametric PDEs

Louis Serrano 1 Armand Kassaı̈ Koupaı̈ 1 Thomas X Wang 1 Pierre Erbacher 2 Patrick Gallinari 1 3

Abstract

Li et al., 2021; Koupaı̈ et al., 2024).

Solving time-dependent parametric partial differential equations (PDEs) is challenging for datadriven methods, as these models must adapt to
variations in parameters such as coefficients, forcing terms, and initial conditions. State-of-theart neural surrogates perform adaptation through
gradient-based optimization and meta-learning to
implicitly encode the variety of dynamics from
observations. This often comes with increased inference complexity. Inspired by the in-context
learning capabilities of large language models
(LLMs), we introduce Zebra, a novel generative auto-regressive transformer designed to solve
parametric PDEs without requiring gradient adaptation at inference. By leveraging in-context information during both pre-training and inference,
Zebra dynamically adapts to new tasks by conditioning on input sequences that incorporate context example trajectories. As a generative model,
Zebra can be used to generate new trajectories and allows quantifying the uncertainty of the
predictions. We evaluate Zebra across a variety of challenging PDE scenarios, demonstrating
its adaptability, robustness, and superior performance compared to existing approaches.

We address the parametric PDE problem (Cohen & Devore,
2015), where the goal is to train models on a limited set
of scenarios representing a given physical phenomenon so
that they can generalize across a wide range of new contexts, including different PDE parameters. These parameters
may encompass initial and boundary conditions, physical
coefficients, and forcing terms. In this work, we focus on
purely data-driven approaches that do not incorporate prior
knowledge of the underlying equations.
A basic approach to this problem is to sample from the
distribution of physical parameters, i.e., to train on different instances of a PDE characterized by varying parameter
values, with the goal of generalizing to unseen instances.
This approach relies on an i.i.d. assumption and requires
a training set that adequately represents the distribution of
the underlying dynamical system—a condition that is often difficult to satisfy in practice due to the complexity of
physical phenomena. Other approaches explicitly condition on specific PDE parameters (Brandstetter et al., 2022b;
Takamoto et al., 2023), relying on the availability of such
prior knowledge. This assumes that a physical model of
the observed system is known, making the incorporation
of PDE parameters into neural solvers challenging beyond
physical quantities. Moreover, in many cases, this prior
knowledge is incomplete or entirely unknown.
An alternative approach involves adaptation to new PDE instances by leveraging observations from novel environments.
Here we consider that an environment is characterized by
a set of parameters. For data-driven models, adaptation is
often performed through fine tuning, which usually requires
a significant amount of examples for the new environment.
This is for example the setting adopted in many recent development of foundation models (Subramanian et al., 2023;
Herde et al., 2024; McCabe et al., 2023). This involves training a large model on a variety of physics-based numerical
simulations, each requiring a large amount of simulations
with the expectation that it will generalize.

1. Introduction
A major challenge for training neural solvers for time dependent partial differential equations (PDEs) or more generally
for modeling spatio-temporal dynamics is to capture the
variety of behaviors arising from complex physical phenomena. In particular, neural solvers, trained from a limited
number of situations often fail to generalize to new physical
contexts and situations (Chen et al., 2018; Raissi et al., 2019;
Our code is available on GitHub. 1 Sorbonne Université,
CNRS, ISIR, 75005 Paris, France 2 Naver Labs Europe, France
3
Critéo AI Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Louis Serrano <louis.serrano@sorbonne-universite.fr>, Patrick Gallinari
<patrick.gallinari@sorbonne-universite.fr>.

More principled frameworks for adaptation leverage metalearning, where the model is trained on simulations corresponding to different environments—i.e., varying PDE
parameter values—so that it can quickly adapt to new and
unseen PDE simulation instances using a few trajectory ex-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

