Diffusion Models are Secretly Exchangeable:
Parallelizing DDPMs via Autospeculation

Hengyuan Hu * 1 Aniket Das * 1 Dorsa Sadigh 1 Nima Anari 1

Abstract

or robotics, is their slow inference time. Standard implementations of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) take a large number of denoising steps, ≈ 1000
steps in image models (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al.,
2022), and ≈ 100 steps in robotics models (Chi et al., 2023),
to generate samples. Using fewer steps empirically results
in a loss of quality; theoretical analysis of DDPMs suggests
that ≈ e
O(d) steps are needed for high-fidelity samples from
d-dimensional distributions (Benton et al., 2023).

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) have emerged as powerful tools for
generative modeling. However, their sequential
computation requirements lead to significant
inference-time bottlenecks. In this work, we
utilize the connection between DDPMs and
Stochastic Localization to prove that, under an
appropriate reparametrization, the increments of
DDPM satisfy an exchangeability property. This
general insight enables near-black-box adaptation
of various performance optimization techniques
from autoregressive models to the diffusion
setting. To demonstrate this, we introduce
Autospeculative Decoding (ASD), an extension of
the widely used speculative decoding algorithm
to DDPMs that does not require any auxiliary
draft models. Our theoretical analysis shows
e 1/3 ) parallel runtime
that ASD achieves a O(K
speedup over the K step sequential DDPM. We
also demonstrate that a practical implementation
of autospeculative decoding accelerates DDPM
inference significantly in various domains.

Numerous works have attempted to address slow inference.
Works like DDIM (Song et al., 2021a) and DPMSolver (Lu
et al., 2022) have lowered the number of steps by altering
the inference method to a deterministic one, barring the initialization, and utilizing ODE solvers. Other works (Meng
et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023; Watson et al., 2022; Lu &
Song, 2024) have changed the underlying model, requiring
new training, to enable fewer steps during inference. These
speedups are all achieved by trading off the quality of the
generated samples. Recently, Shih et al. (2024) showed that
instead of trading off quality for speed, one can trade compute for speed by leveraging parallelization (e.g., utilizing
multiple GPUs). However, the proposed method in (Shih
et al., 2024) still leaves a small but tunable error as it utilizes
a fixed point iteration method with early stopping.
Our work also focuses on accelerating inference in DDPMs
via parallelization—albeit without changing the quality of
the generated samples. Surprisingly, we show that it is
possible to produce samples identically distributed as the
sequential process, i.e., thereby ensuring zero quality loss,
while also achieving a theoretically guaranteed speedup
over sequential sampling. We prove that our method needs
e 2/3 ) parallel calls to the model, much smaller than
≈ O(d
≈ e
O(d) in sequential sampling (Benton et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have emerged as one of the leading tools
in generative modeling (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b). They are widely used
to generate samples in continuous spaces, such as when
an image (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Nichol et al., 2021;
Kingma et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) or a sequence of
continuous actions (Reuss et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023) is
desired. A major limitation of diffusion models, particularly
limiting in real-time applications such as continuous control

Our algorithm adapts speculative decoding, an acceleration
technique for autoregressive models such as large language
models (LLMs), to the setting of diffusion models. Traditionally speculative decoding uses an additional smaller
LLM (or model), called the draft, to accelerate sampling
from the main LLM. The draft model produces tokens that
are then in parallel verified by the main model – leading
to possible parallel speedup. At first sight, adapting speculative decoding to diffusion models seems challenging for

*
1
Equal contribution
Computer Science Department,
Stanford University, California, USA. Correspondence to:
Hengyuan Hu <hengyuan.hhu@gmail.com>, Aniket Das
<aniketd@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

