Finite-Time Analysis of Discrete-Time Stochastic Interpolants

Yuhao Liu 1 Yu Chen 1 Rui Hu 1 Longbo Huang 1

Abstract

applications, including probabilistic forecasting (Chen et al.,
2024b), image generation (Ma et al., 2024; Albergo et al.,
2024), and sequential modeling (Chen et al., 2024a).

The stochastic interpolant framework offers a
powerful approach for constructing generative
models based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or stochastic differential equations
(SDEs) to transform arbitrary data distributions.
However, prior analyses of this framework have
primarily focused on the continuous-time setting, assuming a perfect solution of the underlying equations. In this work, we present the
first discrete-time analysis of the stochastic interpolant framework, where we introduce an innovative discrete-time sampler and derive a finite-time
upper bound on its distribution estimation error.
Our result provides a novel quantification of how
different factors, including the distance between
source and target distributions and estimation accuracy, affect the convergence rate and also offers
a new principled way to design efficient schedules
for convergence acceleration. Finally, numerical
experiments are conducted on the discrete-time
sampler to corroborate our theoretical findings.

Despite its potential in real-world applications, there remains a gap between the theoretical analyses and practical
implementations of stochastic interpolants. In practical scenarios, instead of perfectly solving the underlying equations,
one can only access a learned estimator for a finite number
of time steps, which necessitates the use of discrete-time
samplers to simulate the true continuous generation process. However, previous analyses have largely focused on
continuous-time generation, assuming perfect solutions to
the underlying equations. This leads to a crucial question
for bridging the gap:
What is the convergence rate of discrete-time stochastic
interpolant, and how to enhance its performance
algorithmically?
Similar problems have been studied in the theories of diffusion models, and most results were derived based on
Girsanov-based methods in SDE analyses, which reduce
the problem to providing upper bounds on the discretization
errors. Specifically, existing analyses on the discretization
errors can be mainly categorized into two types. The first
type partitions the error into space-discretization and timediscretization. Among them, Lee et al. (2022) and Chen
et al. (2023d) assume a uniform Lipschitz constant on the
score function, while Chen et al. (2023a) do not, but they
all utilize the Markovian property and the Gaussian form
of the diffusion process to obtain their results. The second type uses Itô’s calculus to obtain upper bounds, such
as Benton et al. (2024), who adapt existing results from
stochastic localization to produce tight bounds by finding
the equivalence between two methods.

1. Introduction
Stochastic interpolants (Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023;
Albergo et al., 2023) provide a general framework for constructing continuous mappings between arbitrary distributions. This framework draws inspiration from flow-based
and diffusion-based models, which generate samples by continuously transforming data points from a base distribution
to a target distribution via learned ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or stochastic differential equations (SDEs).
Within the stochastic interpolant framework, one obtains
learnable ODEs or SDEs that transport data by defining an
interpolation between data points sampled from different
distributions. This framework offers significant design flexibility and has demonstrated promising results in various

However, the aforementioned ideas do not apply to stochastic interpolants due to the following key difference: the
stochastic interpolant framework in consideration has a distinct structure introduced by a random interpolation between
two distributions instead of a linear combination of one distribution with Gaussian, destroying the Markovian property.
This difference not only necessitates novel analysis for the
discretization errors of score functions but also requires additional analysis to bound the discretization errors for the

1
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Longbo Huang <longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

