Language Models over Canonical Byte-Pair Encodings

Tim Vieira 1 Tianyu Liu 1 Clemente Pasti 1 Yahya Emara 1 Brian DuSell 1 Benjamin LeBrun 2
Mario Giulianelli 1 Juan Luis Gastaldi 1 Timothy J. O’Donnell 3 2 4 Ryan Cotterell 1

Abstract
Modern language models represent probability
distributions over character strings as distributions over (shorter) token strings derived via a
deterministic tokenizer, such as byte-pair encoding. While this approach is highly effective at
scaling up language models to large corpora, its
current incarnations have a concerning property:
the model assigns nonzero probability mass to an
exponential number of noncanonical token encodings of each character string–—these are token
strings that decode to valid character strings but
are impossible under the deterministic tokenizer
(i.e., they will never be seen in any training corpus,
no matter how large). This misallocation is both
erroneous, as noncanonical strings never appear
in training data, and wasteful, diverting probability mass away from plausible outputs. These
are avoidable mistakes! In this work, we propose
methods to enforce canonicality in token-level
language models, ensuring that only canonical token strings are assigned positive probability. We
present two approaches: (1) canonicality by conditioning, leveraging test-time inference strategies
without additional training, and (2) canonicality
by construction, a model parameterization that
guarantees canonical outputs but requires training.
We demonstrate that fixing canonicality mistakes
improves the likelihood of held-out data for several models and corpora.

Figure 1. The figure shows the canonical and noncanonical encodings of the string Hello,␣world. The diagram shows the top-8
token encodings of the string according to their probability (descending top to bottom), as there are hundreds of them for this
short string. Note that the canonical token encoding is the most
likely one (i.e., it is at the top), which is reassuring as it is the most
representative of the training data.

distributions over a different space of token strings (denoted ∆∗ ). In the case of the prevalent byte-pair encoding
(BPE; Gage, 1994), each token may be regarded as a multicharacter (or multi-byte) chunk of a UTF-8-encoded string.
Such a language model is trained by encoding its training
data into token strings, which has the benefit of compressing
the large corpus. The BPE encoding is a pair of functions:
an encoding function τ : Σ∗ → ∆∗ that maps a given input
character string σ to its canonical encoding δ = τ (σ), and a
decoding function κ : ∆∗ → Σ∗ that maps any token string
δ back to a character string σ = κ(δ). The result of training
on a corpus of token strings is a language model p∆ that generates a token string δ and decodes it to a character string σ.

github.com/genlm/canonical-icml-2025

1. Introduction

We define the set of canonical token strings D ⊆ ∆∗ as
those that appear as the canonical encoding of at least one
def
character string, i.e., D =
{τ (σ) | σ ∈ Σ∗ }. These are
the only strings that are possible in the tokenized training
data of p∆ . The set of noncanonical token strings is, thus,
∆∗ ∖ D. Even though p∆ has never—and will never—see
a noncanonical token string in its training data, it will still
place nonzero probability mass on them due to model architecture and training limitations. Fig. 1 shows an example

Modern language models are probability distributions over
character strings (denoted Σ∗ ) that are parameterized as
1

ETH Zürich 2 Mila 3 McGill University 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair.
Correspondence to: Tim Vieira <tim.f.vieira@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

