Enhancing Statistical Validity and Power in Hybrid Controlled Trials:
A Randomization Inference Approach with Conformal Selective Borrowing

Ke Zhu 1 2 Shu Yang 1 Xiaofei Wang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are the gold standard
for making causal inferences on the treatment effect of a
new treatment relative to a control treatment. However,
large RCTs are often infeasible to conduct in practice when
the indications of interest involve rare diseases (U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, 2022) or common conditions
where few patients are willing to participate due to a lack
of equipoise (Miller & Joffe, 2011). RCTs in such a context often lack sufficient statistical power to detect realistic
treatment effect sizes. Meanwhile, historical studies or large
external databases provide real-world data under control
conditions, often referred to as external controls (ECs). By
integrating RCT with ECs, hybrid controlled trials have
garnered significant interest as an effective approach to enhance the power of RCTs with small sample sizes. However,
most existing methods for hybrid controlled trials rely on
model-based or asymptotic p-values, which can lead to inflated type I error rates when the randomized sample size
is small, or the model is misspecified. Moreover, since ECs
are not randomized, they may systematically differ from
randomized controls, even after adjusting for measured confounders. Directly incorporating these ECs may introduce
hidden bias, compromising the validity of the statistical inference. Strictly controlling the type I error rate in hybrid
controlled trials, especially with small sample sizes and
unmeasured confounding, remains an open problem.

External controls from historical trials or observational data can augment randomized controlled
trials when large-scale randomization is impractical or unethical, such as in drug evaluation for
rare diseases. However, non-randomized external controls can introduce biases, and existing
Bayesian and frequentist methods may inflate the
type I error rate, particularly in small-sample trials where external data borrowing is most critical. To address these challenges, we propose a
randomization inference framework that ensures
finite-sample exact and model-free type I error
rate control, adhering to the “analyze as you randomize” principle to safeguard against hidden
biases. Recognizing that biased external controls reduce the power of randomization tests,
we leverage conformal inference to develop an
individualized test-then-pool procedure that selectively borrows comparable external controls to
improve power. Our approach incorporates selection uncertainty into randomization tests, providing valid post-selection inference. Additionally,
we propose an adaptive procedure to optimize
the selection threshold by minimizing the mean
squared error across a class of estimators encompassing both no-borrowing and full-borrowing
approaches. The proposed methods are supported
by non-asymptotic theoretical analysis, validated
through simulations, and applied to a randomized
lung cancer trial that integrates external controls
from the National Cancer Database.

To address this problem, we extend the randomization inference framework to hybrid controlled trials. To utilize ECs,
we use a doubly robust estimator of the average treatment
effect (ATE) as the test statistic, which incorporates both
RCT and EC data and effectively balances the measured
confounders between RCT and EC (Li et al., 2023b). Then,
Fisher randomization tests (FRTs) are performed using only
the randomization in the RCT. In contrast to the asymptotic inference in Li et al. (2023b), which relies on (i) large
sample sizes for both the RCT and EC, (ii) correct specification of at least one of the two nuisance models, and (iii)
no unmeasured confounders, the FRT strictly controls the
type I error rate without requiring any of these conditions,
thus achieving model-free, finite-sample exact inference.
The validity of the FRT relies solely on the randomization

1
Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695, U.S.A. 2 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Shu Yang <syang24@ncsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

