AKORN: Adaptive Knots generated Online for RegressioN splines

Sunil Madhow 1 Dheeraj Baby 2 Yu-Xiang Wang 1

Abstract

Consider the problem of non-parametric regression over
total variation smoothness classes. For some covariates
{xi }ni=1 , we observe data

In order to attain optimal rates, state-of-the-art
algorithms for non-parametric regression require
that a hyperparameter be tuned according to the
smoothness of the ground truth (Tibshirani, 2014).
This amounts to an assumption of oracle access
to certain features of the data-generating process. We present a parameter-free algorithm
for offline non-parametric regression over T V1 bounded functions. By feeding offline data into
an optimal online denoising algorithm styled after
(Baby et al., 2021), we are able to use changepoints to adaptively select knots that respect the
geometry of the underlying ground truth. We call
this procedure AKORN (Adaptive Knots generated Online for RegressioN splines). By combining forward and backward passes over the data,
we obtain an estimator whose empirical performance is close to Trend Filtering (Kim et al.,
2009; Tibshirani, 2014), even when we provide
the latter with oracle knowledge of the ground
truth’s smoothness.

yi = f (xi ) + ϵi

(1)

where {ϵi } are i.i.d. N (0, σ 2 ) random variables and f has
bounded k-th order total variation, which means that the
variation in its kth derivative is controlled.
Traditionally, the best solutions to this problem solve functional risk-minimization objectives with regularization on
T Vk -smoothness (Tibshirani, 2014). In order to enjoy optimal statistical rates, such methods require the regularization
to be tuned in correspondence with a tight upper-bound on
the T Vk of the ground truth. This makes it difficult for practitioners to be sure that they are benefiting from the powerful
theory already established in the literature (Tibshirani, 2014;
Guntuboyina et al., 2020).
Recent work uses algorithms from the Online Learning (OL)
literature (Hazan et al., 2006; Baby et al., 2021; Chatterjee &
Goswami, 2023) to treat the online version of this regression
problem, where points (xi , yi ) are revealed one at a time.
Thanks to the powerful oracle inequalities enjoyed by OL
algorithms, these methods attain optimal1 statistical rates
while obviating the necessity for a priori knowledge of the
smoothness of f .

1. Introduction

When applied directly in the offline setting, however, existing OL-based methods have serious drawbacks. Principal
among these is the fact that their output is not a function
fˆ, but rather a highly non-smooth sequence of predictions,
{ŷ1 , ...ŷn }. This is problematic because inferring a smooth,
functional form is one of the key goals in the regression literature (Donoho & Johnstone, 1994). At the same time, each
prediction, ŷt , is made with only knowledge of y1 , ...yt−1 ,
making it harder to pick up patterns in the data. The result
is that, when specialized to the offline setting (for instance,
by interpolating the predictions ŷ1 , ...ŷn ), online algorithms
are badly outperformed by traditional methods in terms of
both MSE and attractiveness of fit (Baby et al., 2021).

When estimating a nonparametric function with noisy data,
the key challenge is knowing where to smooth observations
and by how much. Because the “wiggliness” of the ground
truth is unknown, practitioners are almost always left with a
hyperparameter to tune, which corresponds to the wiggliness
of the fit. Attaining optimal statistical rates often requires
this parameter to be tuned with oracle knowledge of the
ground truth. In this paper, we propose a (near)-optimal,
parameter-free algorithm for non-parametric regression that
uses techniques from online learning to automatically adapt
to the smoothness of the ground truth.
1

Halicioglu Data Science Institute, UC San Diego 2 Amazon
(Work was completed prior to joining.). Correspondence to: Sunil
Madhow <smadhow@ucsd.edu>.

Is it possible to inject the instance-dependent knowledge
acquired by online algorithms into inherently offline algo-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Optimal rates for online and offline regression over T V
classes differ only in lower-order terms

1

