The Harder Path: Last Iterate Convergence for Uncoupled Learning in
Zero-Sum Games with Bandit Feedback
Côme Fiegel 1 2 Pierre Menard 3 Tadashi Kozuno 4 Michal Valko 5 Vianney Perchet 1 2 6

Abstract

edly playing the game. Specifically, we consider the bandit
feedback setting, where the payoff matrix is unknown and
players only observe their losses or rewards.

We study the problem of learning in zero-sum
matrix games with repeated play and bandit feedback. Specifically, we focus on developing uncoupled algorithms that guarantee, without communication between players, the convergence of the
last-iterate to a Nash equilibrium. Although the
non-bandit case has been studied extensively, this
setting has only been explored recently, with a
bound of O(T −1/8 ) on the exploitability gap. We
show that, for uncoupled algorithms, guaranteeing
convergence of the policy profiles to a Nash equilibrium is detrimental to the performance, with the
best attainable rate being Ω(T −1/4 ) in contrast to
the usual Ω(T −1/2 ) rate for convergence of the
average iterates. We then propose two algorithms
that achieve this optimal rate up to constant and
logarithmic factors. The first algorithm leverages
a straightforward trade-off between exploration
and exploitation, while the second employs a regularization technique based on a two-step mirror
descent approach.

Within the context of uncoupled learning, each player learns
the minimax policy independently, without communication
or knowledge of their opponent’s actions. This setup motivates the use of methods similar to those employed in
classical single-player online learning (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006), where a player adapts to play optimally in an
adversarially changing environment.
These methods usually bound the player’s regret, defined
as the difference between the best possible cumulative loss
under a fixed policy and the actual cumulative loss incurred
by the player. They are known to be applicable in the context of games to compute minimax policies (Cesa-Bianchi &
Lugosi, 2006). They however have two well-known weaknesses:
• The policies played over the iterations generally do not
converge or even approach an equilibrium.
• Instead, the average policy is computed and outputted
as a proxy for convergence. While averaging tabular
policies is simple and inexpensive, this step is not as
simple for practical applications. For instance, it is
not clear how to compute the average of policies represented by a neural network (Heinrich et al., 2015;
McAleer et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
In zero sum matrix games, two players each take a single
action and accordingly receive for the first player a loss and
the second player a gain of the same magnitude. Such games
always admit for each player at least one minimax policy (a
specific case of Nash equilibrium), assuming a stochastic
choice of action (v. Neumann, 1928). Computing these
policies, however, is non-trivial and requires knowledge of
the underlying game matrix of payoffs.

In part for this reason, a significant portion of the recent
literature studies methods with last-iterate convergence for
which the actual policies played over time converge toward
a Nash equilibrium. Some algorithms, such as Optimistic
Mirror Descent (OMD, Popov 1980; Rakhlin & Sridharan 2013), exhibit this convergence despite being initially
proposed for their regret-bounding properties, but with a
vastly different analysis. For the OMD algorithm, in the
deterministic full-information feedback setting, the rate of
convergence of the exploitabilty gap toward zero is even
improved, transitioning from O(1/T ) for the average to a
linear rate for the last iterate (Wei et al., 2021).

We are interested in learning minimax policies by repeat*

Equal contribution 1 ENSAE Paris - CREST, Palaiseau, France
Inria - FairPlay 3 ENS Lyon, Lyon, France 4 OMRON SINIC
X, Tokyo, Japan 5 Stealth AI Startup / Inria / ENS 6 Criteo
AI Lab, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Côme Fiegel
<come.fiegel@normalesup.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

However, the literature on last-iterate convergence with
stochastic feedback is limited, and even more so when con1

