Joint Metric Space Embedding by Unbalanced Optimal Transport with
Gromov—Wasserstein Marginal Penalization

Florian Beier * 1 Moritz Piening * 1 Robert Beinert 1 Gabriele Steidl 1

Abstract
We propose a new approach for unsupervised
alignment of heterogeneous datasets, which maps
data from two different domains without any
known correspondences to a common metric
space. Our method is based on an unbalanced optimal transport problem with Gromov–Wasserstein
marginal penalization. It can be seen as a counterpart to the recently introduced joint multidimensional scaling method. We prove that there
exists a minimizer of our functional and that for
penalization parameters going to infinity, the corresponding sequence of minimizers converges to
a minimizer of the so-called embedded Wasserstein distance. Our model can be reformulated
as a quadratic, multi-marginal, unbalanced optimal transport problem, for which a bi-convex
relaxation admits a numerical solver via blockcoordinate descent. We provide numerical examples for joint embeddings in Euclidean as well as
non-Euclidean spaces.

Original

Aligned

(a) Spherical embedding

Original

Aligned

(b) Toroidal embedding

Figure 1. Joint (aligning) transfer of two metric spaces (gray surfaces with surface distance) to a fixed reference space, namely to
the sphere and the torus by our method, where the color “yellow”
corresponds to higher values, see Subsection 6.1.

canonical joint metric space, this metric may not be suited
to accurately gauge differences in their samples. Examples
of such heterogeneous settings are, e.g., the comparison
of graph- or mesh-valued data such as 3d shapes or manifolds. This paper introduces a novel framework based on
OT which enables the joint comparison and visualization of
heterogeneous datasets by optimally transferring them into
an a-priori fixed metric space, see Figure 1 for an illustrative
example.

1. Introduction
The comparison of heterogeneous data distributions is a
fundamental task in computer vision, computational biology and machine learning. Most existing approaches rely
on using a suitable ground cost function such as an available metric. A classic example is the Wasserstein distance
which seeks an optimal transport (OT) between two given
distributions. However, often the given distributions are
in heterogeneous spaces, where a readily available ground
cost function between these spaces does not generally exist. Additional effort may be required to learn appropriate
cost functions (Cuturi & Avis, 2014; Heitz et al., 2021).
However, even if there exists a natural embedding into a

1.1. Previous Work
As a first step, we highlight the most relevant contributions
related to our study among the vast literature on OT and
dimensionality reduction.
Optimal Transport with Invariances Classical Wasserstein distances allow to compare measures on a common
metric space. In specific tasks in geometry processing like
shape matching, the considered measures, however, live on
distinct metric spaces that incorporate the different geodesic
distances on the given shapes. To address this, Gromov–
Wasserstein (GW) distances are introduced (Mémoli, 2011;
Sturm, 2006). In (Alaya et al., 2022), an approximation
of GW distances is obtained by jointly embedding measures into Euclidean spaces. Furthermore, projection- and

*

Equal contribution 1 Institut für Mathematik, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Moritz Piening
<piening@math.tu-berlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

