STAMP Your Content:
Proving Dataset Membership via Watermarked Rephrasings

Saksham Rastogi 1 Pratyush Maini 2 3 Danish Pruthi 1

Abstract

2023a;b). Additionally, some evaluation datasets, originally intended for benchmarking model performance, may
be compromised—an issue prominently discussed as testset contamination (Magar & Schwartz, 2022; Jacovi et al.,
2023; Sainz et al., 2023a). A recent study reveals concerning
evidence that pretraining corpora contain several key benchmarks (Elazar et al., 2024), and another demonstrates that
impact of test set contamination has been underestimated in
many prominent LLM releases (Singh et al., 2024).

Given how large parts of publicly available text
are crawled to pretrain large language models (LLMs), data creators increasingly worry
about the inclusion of their proprietary data for
model training without attribution or licensing.
Their concerns are also shared by benchmark curators whose test-sets might be compromised. In
this paper, we present STAMP, a framework for detecting dataset membership—i.e., determining the
inclusion of a dataset in the pretraining corpora of
LLMs. Given an original piece of content, our proposal involves first generating multiple rephrases,
each embedding a watermark with a unique secret key. One version is to be released publicly,
while others are to be kept private. Subsequently,
creators can compare model likelihoods between
public and private versions using paired statistical tests to prove membership. We show that
our framework can successfully detect contamination across four benchmarks which appear only
once in the training data and constitute less than
0.001% of the total tokens, outperforming several contamination detection and dataset inference
baselines. We verify that STAMP preserves both
the semantic meaning and utility of the original
data. We apply STAMP to two real-world scenarios to confirm the inclusion of paper abstracts and
blog articles in the pretraining corpora.

On one hand, training language models on copyrighted material might violate legal standards, and on the other, consuming test sets of machine learning benchmarks might
offer a false sense of progress. Given the lack of regulations
or incentives for model developers to disclose contents of
their pretraining corpora (OpenAI, 2023; AI@Meta, 2024;
Anthropic, 2024), it is critical to equip content creators with
reliable tools to determine whether their content was included as a part of model training. Especially, third party
approaches that can democratize detecting dataset membership and enable independent accountability.
Some approaches for detecting dataset membership embed random sequences in text or substitute characters with
visually-similar unicodes (Wei et al., 2024). However,
such alterations impair machine readability, indexing and
retrieval—making them impractical for content creators.
More critically for benchmarks, such substitutions can alter tokenization, potentially compromising their utility for
evaluation. Other proposals rely on access to a validation
set that is unseen by the target model and drawn from the
same distribution as the original dataset—a requirement
hard to meet in practice (Maini et al., 2024). Recently, Oren
et al. (2024) suggest comparing canonical ordering of test
sets to random permutations, but this strategy assumes large
portions of datasets are processed together within a single
context window during pretraining. Most closely related to
our proposal, Zhang et al. (2024a) use a statistical test to
compare model confidence on original test instances and
their rephrasings, assuming that the two distributions are
identical—an assumption we show does not hold (Table 9).

1. Introduction
To train large language models, much of the available text
from the internet is crawled, allegedly including copyrighted
material such as news articles and blogs (Grynbaum & Mac,
1
Indian Institute of Science 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 DatologyAI. Correspondence to: Saksham Rastogi <iitdsaksham@gmail.com>, Pratyush Maini <pratyushmaini.@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We make all our code, data and models available at
github.com/codeboy5/STAMP

1

