A Closer Look at Generalized BH Algorithm for Out-of-Distribution Detection

Xinsong Ma 1 Jie Wu 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

distribution as the training data (Hendrycks et al., 2022;
Djurisic et al., 2023). In real-world applications, models
trained on in-distribution (ID) data from a specific domain
often encounter OOD data from unseen distributions during deployment. This discrepancy between the training and
deployment leads to poor model performance (Liang et al.,
2018; Sastry & Oore, 2020; Kaur et al., 2022). The importance of OOD detection has grown with the increasing
reliance on deep learning models in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving (Li et al., 2022) and
medical diagnosis (Frolova et al., 2022).

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a crucial
task in reliable and safety-critical applications.
Previous studies primarily focus on developing
score functions while neglecting the design of decision rules based on these scores. A recent work
(Ma et al., 2024) is the first to highlight this issue
and proposes the generalized BH (g-BH) algorithm to address it. The g-BH algorithm relies on
empirical p-values, with the calibrated set playing
a central role in their computation. However, the
impact of calibrated set on the performance of
g-BH algorithm has not been thoroughly investigated. This paper aims to uncover the underlying
mechanisms between them. Theoretically, we
demonstrate that conditional expectation of true
positive rate (TPR) on calibrated set for the gBH algorithm follows a beta distribution, which
depends on the prescribed level and size of calibrated set. This indicates that a small calibrated
set tends to degrade the performance of g-BH
algorithm. To address the limitation of g-BH algorithm on small calibrated set, we propose a novel
ensemble g-BH (eg-BH) algorithm which integrates various empirical p-values for making decisions. Finally, extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness of our theoretical findings
and demonstrate the superiority of our method
over g-BH algorithm on small calibrated set.

Numerous studies have proposed various methods to address
the OOD detection problem (Liu et al., 2020; 2023; Regmi
et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024). These methods mainly focus
on designing the score functions which enables to learn
critical discriminative information in training data. A recent
work (Ma et al., 2024) is the first to point out that existing
OOD detection methods neglect the systematic study of
the decision rule based on the score functions, and propose
a novel generalized BH (g-BH) algorithm to tackle this
problem. The g-BH algorithm establishes a connection
between score functions and multiple hypothesis testing
framework through the empirical p-values. The calibrated
set is crucial for computing empirical p-values and thus has
a profound impact on the detection performance of the gBH algorithm. However, to the best of our knowledge, the
impact of the calibrated set on the performance of the g-BH
algorithm remains unexplored. This paper aims to address
the above issue.
Intuitively, a larger calibration set enhances the performance
of the g-BH algorithm. Our experimental results in Figure
1 confirm this conjecture: as the size of calibrated set increases, both the TPR and F1-score monotonically increase.
Theoretically, we demonstrate that the TPR expectation conditional on calibrated set for the g-BH algorithm follows a
beta distribution, with its shape parameters determined by
the prescribed significance level and the size of calibrated
set. This shows that a smaller calibrated set tends to degrade the detection performance of the g-BH algorithm. To
address the limitation of the g-BH algorithm on small calibrated set, we propose a novel ensemble g-BH (eg-BH)
algorithm which integrates multiple empirical p-values for
decision-making. Moreover, we extend the theoretical results on the g-BH algorithm from (Ma et al., 2024) and

1. Introduction
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection is a critical task in machine learning and computer vision (Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2017; Liu et al., 2020). It addresses the challenge of determining whether a given input sample belongs to the same
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

