Sortformer: A Novel Approach for Permutation-Resolved
Speaker Supervision in Speech-to-Text Systems

Taejin Park * 1 Ivan Medennikov * 1 Kunal Dhawan * 1 Weiqing Wang * 1 He Huang 1 Nithin Rao Koluguri 1
Krishna C. Puvvada 1 Jagadeesh Balam 1 Boris Ginsburg 1

Abstract
Sortformer is an encoder-based speaker diarization model designed for supervising speaker tagging in speech-to-text models. Instead of relying solely on permutation invariant loss (PIL),
Sortformer introduces Sort Loss to resolve the
permutation problem, either independently or
in tandem with PIL. In addition, we propose a
streamlined multi-speaker speech-to-text architecture that leverages Sortformer for speaker supervision, embedding speaker labels into the encoder
using sinusoidal kernel functions. This design addresses the speaker permutation problem through
sorted objectives, effectively bridging timestamps
and tokens to supervise speaker labels in the
output transcriptions. Experiments demonstrate
that Sort Loss can boost speaker diarization performance, and incorporating the speaker supervision from Sortformer improves multi-speaker
transcription accuracy. We anticipate that the proposed Sortformer and multi-speaker architecture
will enable the seamless integration of speaker tagging capabilities into foundational speech-to-text
systems and multimodal large language models
(LLMs), offering an easily adoptable and userfriendly mechanism to enhance their versatility
and performance in speaker-aware tasks. The
code and trained models are made publicly available through the NVIDIA NeMo Framework.

Figure 1. Sortformer resolves permutation problem by following
the arrival-time order of the speech segments.

scription services, a growing number of applications require
speaker annotations because natural language understanding
(NLU) modules need to recognize speakers to gain a deeper
understanding of conversations and interactions. Moreover,
as modern machine learning models demand large amounts
of training data, the need for automatic annotation systems
has grown significantly.
The rising demand for speaker annotations underscores the
need for robust speaker tagging—also known as speaker diarization, which is the process of estimating generic speaker
labels by assigning audio segments to individual speakers.
In the context of automatic speech recognition (ASR), multispeaker ASR (also referred to as speaker-attributed ASR
or multi-talker ASR in the literature) requires the speaker
diarization process, either directly or indirectly, to transcribe
spoken words with speaker annotations alongside the generated text. As ASR models continue to be streamlined and
become more accurate, speaker diarization is progressively
integrated into the ASR framework or performed simultaneously during the ASR decoding process, enabling rich
transcription with conversational context.

1. Introduction

Despite recent advances in speaker diarization and multispeaker ASR, these systems have been typically trained,
deployed, and evaluated separately from ASR models due
to challenges such as data scarcity and application diversity.
Collecting annotated multi-talker conversational speech is
significantly more difficult than acquiring images or singlespeaker speech data, particularly for low-resource languages
or privacy-sensitive domains such as medical applications.
Additionally, multi-speaker ASR use cases often require
models to perform inference on multi-hour audio samples,

With recent advances in deep neural networks and large
language models (LLMs), automatic speech recognition
(ASR) is being deployed across a broader range of industrial
applications, enabling numerous new use cases. In tran*
Equal contribution 1 NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA. Correspondence to: Taejin Park <taejinp@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

