Catching Two Birds with One Stone: Reward Shaping with Dual Random
Networks for Balancing Exploration and Exploitation

Haozhe Ma 1 Fangling Li 2 Jing Yu Lim 1 Zhengding Luo* 3 Thanh Vinh Vo 1 Tze-Yun Leong 1

Abstract

potentially yield positive outcomes (Ladosz et al., 2022).
Conversely, in later training phases, exploitation becomes
crucial to reinforce behaviors that are known to be successful in maximizing rewards, ensuring stable convergence. It
is important to leverage information that aligns closely with
the agent’s original goals.

Existing reward shaping techniques for sparsereward reinforcement learning generally fall
into two categories: novelty-based exploration
bonuses and significance-based hidden state values. The former promotes exploration but can
lead to distraction from task objectives, while
the latter facilitates stable convergence but often lacks sufficient early exploration. To address
these limitations, we propose Dual Random Networks Distillation (DuRND), a novel reward shaping framework that efficiently balances exploration and exploitation in a unified mechanism.
DuRND leverages two lightweight random network modules to simultaneously compute two
complementary rewards: a novelty reward to encourage directed exploration and a contribution
reward to assess progress toward task completion.
With low computational overhead, DuRND excels
in high-dimensional environments with challenging sparse rewards, such as Atari, VizDoom, and
MiniWorld, outperforming several benchmarks.

One well-studied line of work is reward shaping (RS), which
designs additional rewards to supplement the sparse environmental rewards, providing fine-grained, immediate feedback (Sorg et al., 2010a;b; Ibrahim et al., 2024; Lidayan
et al., 2025). Introducing exploration bonus as auxiliary
rewards stands out as a promising RS approach. By assigning higher rewards to novel states, it explicitly encourages
agents to explore under-explored regions (Baldassarre et al.,
2013; Bellemare et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2018; Devidze
et al., 2022). However, since novelty does not necessarily
correlate with meaningfulness or align with the agent’s ultimate goals, continuously rewarding novelty may cause
agents to disproportionately focus on samples from suboptimal trajectories or even dangerous regions during the
stabilization stages, thereby distracting them from convergence to optimal policies. The well-known “noisy TV”
problem is an example where agents become captivated by
highly novel but irrelevant TV channels in a maze navigation task (Mavor-Parker et al., 2022). This highlights that
agents need to gradually recover from novelty rewards and
shift towards exploitation as training progresses.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) involves an agent optimizing
policies to maximize cumulative rewards within an environment, without any model of its dynamics (Sutton & Barto,
2018). One pivotal challenge in RL is balancing exploration
and exploitation, both are critical stages for effective learning. Sufficient exploration is vital, particularly in tasks with
extremely sparse rewards where feedback is only available
at the end of each episode. In such scenarios, directed exploration is necessary for agents to identify diverse samples that

Alternatively, hidden state value based RS methods primarily develop task-relevant signals to quantify the extent to
which states contribute to achieving higher environmental rewards and their inherent significance, e.g., the distance to the
goal state and the priorities of key points, thereby enhancing
exploitation (Trott et al., 2019; Memarian et al., 2021; Park
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024b; 2025). Unlike explorationcentric approaches, they typically rely on their backbone
algorithms’ exploration strategies. Although highly efficient
in exploiting known experiences, they often struggle in environments with extremely sparse rewards due to the lack
of directional exploration guidance.

1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Zhengding Luo <luoz0021@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Building on the insights from both exploration bonus and
hidden state value approaches, a natural research question arises: Can we devise a unified mechanism that com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

