AssistanceZero: Scalably Solving Assistance Games

Cassidy Laidlaw 1 Eli Bronstein 1 Timothy Guo 1 Dylan Feng 1 Lukas Berglund 1 Justin Svegliato 1
Stuart Russell 1 Anca Dragan 1

Abstract

Human + assistant finish
the foundation together
Human digs
outline of
foundation

Assistance games are a promising alternative to
reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) for training AI assistants. Assistance
games resolve key drawbacks of RLHF, such as
incentives for deceptive behavior, by explicitly
modeling the interaction between assistant and
user as a two-player game where the assistant
cannot observe their shared goal. Despite their
potential, assistance games have only been
explored in simple settings. Scaling them
to more complex environments is difficult
because it requires both solving intractable
decision-making problems under uncertainty
and accurately modeling human users’ behavior. We present the first scalable approach to
solving assistance games and apply it to a new,
challenging Minecraft-based assistance game
with over 10400 possible goals. Our approach,
AssistanceZero, extends AlphaZero with a neural
network that predicts human actions and rewards,
enabling it to plan under uncertainty. We show
that AssistanceZero outperforms model-free
RL algorithms and imitation learning in the
Minecraft-based assistance game. In a human
study, our AssistanceZero-trained assistant
significantly reduces the number of actions
participants take to complete building tasks in
Minecraft. Our results suggest that assistance
games are a tractable framework for training
effective AI assistants in complex environments.
Our code and models are available at https:
//github.com/cassidylaidlaw/
minecraft-building-assistance-game.

Assistant begins breaking
blocks within the outline

Digging a foundation: the assistant watches the human outline the house’s
foundation and then digs it out.

Assistant watches human
begin to build roof

Assistant continues building
roof; human free to build
rest of house

Assistant completes roof

Building a roof: the assistant infers the structure of the roof from human actions
and completes it while the human builds another part of the house.
Assistant has built stone
walls one block too tall

Human breaks one of the
incorrect blocks

Assistant breaks the remaining
blocks that are too tall

Learning from corrections: the assistant builds the walls too tall, but when the
human breaks one of the blocks it learns the correct height and breaks the others.

Figure 1: We develop an AI assistant that helps users build
houses in Minecraft using assistance games, an alternative
to reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).
Our assistant helps real human players build a variety of
goal houses it has never seen during training. It displays
emergent behaviors like understanding pragmatic communication and learning from corrections.

1. Introduction
The pipeline of pretraining, supervised fine-tuning (SFT),
and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
or its variants has become the dominant paradigm for training general AI assistants. RLHF involves fine-tuning pretrained foundation models to take actions (i.e., produce
responses) that are preferred by human annotators according to criteria like helpfulness and harmlessness (Bai et al.,
2022). However, RLHF-trained assistants have a number of
drawbacks. Annotators can be fooled into giving positive
feedback for unhelpful actions, incentivizing deceptive or
manipulative assistant behavior (Lang et al., 2024; Williams
et al., 2025). Furthermore, RLHF does not encourage models to maintain uncertainty about a user’s goals; the objective
of producing highly rated single-turn responses discourages
the assistant from asking clarifying questions or hedging its

1
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Cassidy Laidlaw <cassidy laidlaw@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

