Invariant Deep Uplift Modeling for Incentive Assignment in Online Marketing
via Probability of Necessity and Sufficiency

Zexu Sun 1 Qiyu Han 2 Hao Yang 1 Anpeng Wu 3 Minqin Zhu 3 Dugang Liu 4 Chen Ma 5 Yunpeng Weng 6
Xing Tang 7 Xiuqiang He 7

1. Introduction

Abstract
In online platforms, incentives (e.g., discounts,
coupons) are used to boost user engagement and
revenue. Uplift modeling methods are developed
to estimate user responses from observational
data, often incorporating distribution balancing to
address selection bias. However, these methods
are limited by in-distribution testing data, which
mirrors the training data distribution. In reality,
user features change continuously due to time, geography, and other factors, especially on complex
online marketing platforms. Thus, effective uplift modeling method for out-of-distribution data
is crucial. To address this, we propose a novel
uplift modeling method Invariant Deep Uplift
Modeling, namely IDUM, which uses invariant
learning to enhance out-of-distribution generalization by identifying causal factors that remain
consistent across domains. IDUM further refines
these features into necessary and sufficient factors and employs a masking component to reduce
computational costs by selecting the most informative invariant features. A balancing discrepancy component is also introduced to mitigate
selection bias in observational data. We conduct
extensive experiments on public and real-world
datasets to demonstrate IDUM’s effectiveness in
both in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios in online marketing. Furthermore, we also
provide theoretical analysis and related proofs to
support our IDUM’s generalizability.

With the development of online platforms, online marketing
has become increasingly important and competitive (Liu
et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024a). Assigning appropriate incentives to users has become a pivotal strategy for enhancing
user conversion rates and boosting revenue. These incentives generally contain carefully designed contents (e.g.,
discounts, coupons). To achieve this purpose, uplift modeling has been proposed in recent years (Yao et al., 2021;
Sun & Chen, 2024). For instance, Booking implements
promotional strategies to enhance user satisfaction (Albert
& Goldenberg, 2022), Meituan uses cash bonuses to stimulate user retention (Wang et al., 2023), Kuaishou utilizes
virtual coins to increase users’ playback duration (Ai et al.,
2022). A primary challenge arises from the non-random
assignment of incentives in observational data. For instance,
platforms may assign incentives based on user age, indicating a tendency to target younger users to enhance profit
margins, which is called selection bias.
In recent years, with the development of uplift modeling,
there have been many works proposed to solve the above
challenge (Zhang et al., 2021). These works can be divided
into three research lines: 1) Meta-learner-based. The basic idea of this line is to estimate the users’ responses by
using existing predictive models as the base learner. Two
of the most representative methods are S-Learner and TLearner (Künzel et al., 2019), which adopt a global base
learner and two base learners corresponding to the treatment and control groups, respectively. 2) Tree (or Forest)based. The basic idea of this line is to employ a hierarchical
tree structure to systematically partition the user population into sub-populations that exhibit sensitivity to specific
treatments. An essential step involves modeling the uplift
directly by applying diverse splitting criteria, including considerations of distribution divergences (Radcliffe & Surry,
2011) and expected responses (Zhao et al., 2017; Saito et al.,
2020). 3) Neural network-based. The basic idea of this
line is to leverage the power of neural networks to develop
estimators that are both intricate and versatile in predicting
the user’s response. CFRNet (Shalit et al., 2017) uses the
Integer Probabilistic Metric (IPM) to solve the selection bias

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 2 School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 4 College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University 5 Department of Computer Science, City
University of Hong Kong 6 FiT, Tencent 7 School of Big data
and Internet, Shenzhen Technology University. Correspondence
to: Xing Tang <xing.tang@hotmail.com>, Xiuqiang He <hexiuqiang@sztu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

