SOLD: Slot Object-Centric Latent Dynamics Models for Relational
Manipulation Learning from Pixels

Malte Mosbach * 1 Jan Niklas Ewertz * 2 3 Angel Villar-Corrales 1 Sven Behnke 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Advances in reinforcement learning (RL) have showcased
the ability to learn sophisticated control strategies through
interaction, achieving superhuman performance in domains
ranging from board games (Silver et al., 2016) to drone
racing (Kaufmann et al., 2023). While these approaches
excel when explicit models of the environment are available or abundant data can be collected, learning complex
control tasks in a sample-efficient manner remains a significant challenge. Model-based RL (MBRL) has emerged
as a promising approach to address this limitation by constructing models of the environment dynamics. For instance,
the Dreamer framework (Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; 2025)
improves sample efficiency over model-free methods by
learning behaviors via imagined rollouts.

Learning a latent dynamics model provides a taskagnostic representation of an agent’s understanding of its environment. Leveraging this knowledge for model-based reinforcement learning
(RL) holds the potential to improve sample efficiency over model-free methods by learning from
imagined rollouts. Furthermore, because the latent space serves as input to behavior models, the
informative representations learned by the world
model facilitate efficient learning of desired skills.
Most existing methods rely on holistic representations of the environment’s state. In contrast, humans reason about objects and their interactions,
predicting how actions will affect specific parts of
their surroundings. Inspired by this, we propose
Slot-Attention for Object-centric Latent Dynamics
(SOLD), a novel model-based RL algorithm that
learns object-centric dynamics models in an unsupervised manner from pixel inputs. We demonstrate that the structured latent space not only improves model interpretability but also provides
a valuable input space for behavior models to
reason over. Our results show that SOLD outperforms DreamerV3 and TD-MPC2 – state-of-theart model-based RL algorithms – across a range of
multi-object manipulation environments that require both relational reasoning and dexterous control. Videos and code are available at https://
slot-latent-dynamics.github.io.

While these research efforts have produced world models capable of accurately predicting the dynamics of visual tasks,
they rely on a holistic representation of the environment
state. In contrast, humans perceive the world by parsing
scenes into individual objects (Spelke, 1990), anticipating
how their actions will influence specific components of their
surroundings. Relational reasoning, particularly in environments with multiple interacting objects, is a cornerstone
of human intelligence and a crucial capability for robotic
manipulation tasks (Battaglia et al., 2018). Introducing
structured, object-centric representations into MBRL represents a powerful inductive bias, enabling agents to reason
about task-relevant components of the environment while ignoring irrelevant details. Such structured representations not
only enhance interpretability but also improve the efficiency
of behavior learning by providing models with meaningful
latent spaces. Despite these advantages, the integration of
object-centric representations and world models remains
largely underexplored. To the best of our knowledge, no
prior method learns purely inside imagined rollouts of an
object-centric world model trained from pixel inputs.

*
Equal contribution 1 Autonomous Intelligent Systems Group,
Computer Science Institute VI – Intelligent Systems and Robotics,
Center for Robotics, and the Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, University of Bonn, Germany
2
Intelligent Robot Perception Group, Informatics Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Germany 3 Mercedes-Benz AG, Sindelfingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Malte Mosbach <mosbach@ais.uni-bonn.de>.

To address the limitations of holistic representations in
MBRL, we propose SOLD, a novel algorithm that leverages
structured, object-centric states within the latent space of its
world model. The contributions of our method are twofold.
First, we introduce an object-centric dynamics model that
predicts future frames in terms of their slot representation.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

