No Soundness in the Real World:
On the Challenges of the Verification of Deployed Neural Networks

Attila Szász 1 Balázs Bánhelyi 1 Márk Jelasity 1 2

Abstract

network, that is, they seek to characterize the behavior of
the full-precision computation. Most solutions carefully
address floating point issues as well, but only as an obstacle
in the way of verifying the theoretical model, e.g. (Singh
et al., 2019a; 2018).

The ultimate goal of verification is to guarantee
the safety of deployed neural networks. Here,
we claim that all the state-of-the-art verifiers we
are aware of fail to reach this goal. Our key insight is that theoretical soundness (bounding the
full-precision output while computing with floating point) does not imply practical soundness
(bounding the floating point output in a potentially stochastic environment). We prove this observation for the approaches that are currently
used to achieve provable theoretical soundness,
such as interval analysis and its variants. We also
argue that achieving practical soundness is significantly harder computationally. We support
our claims empirically as well by evaluating several well-known verification methods. To mislead the verifiers, we create adversarial networks
that detect and exploit features of the deployment
environment, such as the order and precision of
floating point operations. We demonstrate that
all the tested verifiers are vulnerable to our new
deployment-specific attacks, which proves that
they are not practically sound.

At the same time, deployment environments affect numeric
computation through hardware and software features, often resulting in stochastic behavior (Schlögl et al., 2023;
Villa et al., 2009; Shanmugavelu et al., 2024). This means
that the verification of the theoretical model and the verification of the deployed network are different problems.
Parallel to our work, a similar observation was also made
by (Cordeiro et al., 2025), where this problem is referred to
as the implementation gap.
We formally prove that a verifier that is theoretically sound
(i.e., bounds the full-precision output correctly) is not necessarily practically sound, that is, it might not bound the
actual output correctly in a given deployment environment.
The problem has practical implications. Recently, (Shanmugavelu et al., 2025) demonstrated that adversarial inputs can
be generated simply by permuting the order of associative
operations in the deployment environment.
We demonstrate a more severe, practically exploitable vulnerability as well: the deployed network is shown to be
fundamentally different from the theoretical network because the behavior of the network can be changed arbitrarily
with deployment-sensitive backdoors.

1. Introduction
The formal verification of an artificial neural network produces a mathematical proof that the network has (or does
not have) a certain important property. One important property to verify is the adversarial robustness (Szegedy et al.,
2014) of classifier networks, where we wish to prove that a
subset of inputs are all assigned the same class label.

Thus, the deployment environment should be a fundamental
part of any verification effort because otherwise an attacker
can hide potentially harmful behaviors from the verifier if
enough information about the deployment environment is
available.

There is a wide variety of approaches that address this problem (see Section 2). However, these methods invariably
focus on the verification of the theoretical model of the

We summarize our contributions below:

University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary 2 HUN-REN–SZTE
Research Group on Artificial Intelligence, Szeged, Hungary. Correspondence to: Attila Szász <szasz@inf.u-szeged.hu>.

• We prove that verifiers that are theoretically sound are
not necessarily sound for deployed networks

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We demonstrate that deployed networks may differ
arbitrarily from the full-precision model, with the help
of backdoors triggered by features of the environment

1

1

