Maximum Total Correlation Reinforcement Learning

Action State

Bang You 1 2 Puze Liu 3 Huaping Liu 2 Jan Peters 3 4 5 6 Oleg Arenz 3

MTC (ours)

RPC

SAC

LZ-SAC

Figure 1. Maximizing the total correlation within trajectories results in more consistent behavior. As shown in our experiments, this
consistency increases robustness to noise and dynamics changes.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reinforcement learning (RL) is currently the preferred approach for many challenging, practical control problems,
as it can learn complex neural network policies that effectively tackle the given task. For example, in robotics,
reinforcement learning is widely used to learn visuomotor
policies for quadrupedal and bipedal locomotion (Lee et al.,
2020a; Radosavovic et al., 2024). However, since RL is a
learning-based method, it is prone to picking up spurious
correlations between high-dimensional sensory inputs and
desired actions, which can lead to brittle policies, that fail
under slight, natural variations in the state. An important
countermeasure involves training policies using domain randomization, in particular in the sim-to-real setting, where
the policy is learned in several varying simulation environments. Yet, even in such data-intense settings, it remains
unclear whether we can obtain a sufficiently diverse training
distribution to learn policies that transfer to more complex
real-world scenarios, such as those involving robot controllers that need to interact with humans.

Simplicity is a powerful inductive bias. In reinforcement learning, regularization is used for
simpler policies, data augmentation for simpler
representations, and sparse reward functions for
simpler objectives, all that, with the underlying
motivation to increase generalizability and robustness by focusing on the essentials. Supplementary to these techniques, we investigate how to
promote simple behavior throughout the episode.
To that end, we introduce a modification of the
reinforcement learning problem that additionally
maximizes the total correlation within the induced
trajectories. We propose a practical algorithm that
optimizes all models, including policy and state
representation, based on a lower-bound approximation. In simulated robot environments, our
method naturally generates policies that induce
periodic and compressible trajectories, and that
exhibit superior robustness to noise and changes
in dynamics compared to baseline methods, while
also improving performance in the original tasks.

Consequently, there is a growing interest in exploring additional techniques that add inductive biases to obtain simpler,
less brittle policies, for example, by limiting the amount of
state information used by the policy (Goyal et al., 2018; Igl
et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2020), or by maximizing the predictive information within learned representations (Lee et al.,
2020b). Such information-theoretic biases have already
been extended to sequences, to account for the sequential
nature of reinforcement learning. Namely, RPC (Eysenbach
et al., 2021) aims to learn better representations by limiting
the information between state-sequences and embeddingsequences, and LZ-SAC (Saanum et al., 2023) improves
the predictability of the next action given the history of actions. However, these formulations only focus on specific

1
School of Information Engineering, Wuhan University of
Technology, Wuhan, China 2 Department of Computer Science,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 Intelligent Autonomous Systems Lab, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
4
Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelligenz (DFKI),
Germany 5 Hessian Centre for Artificial Intelligence (Hessian.AI)
6
Centre for Cognitive Science (CogSci). Correspondence to: Huaping Liu <hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

