Lexico: Extreme KV Cache Compression via Sparse Coding
over Universal Dictionaries
Junhyuck Kim 1 Jongho Park 1 Jaewoong Cho 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 2 3

Abstract

requires its own KV cache, limiting opportunities for reuse
across different user inputs, with the exception of prompt
caching that only works for identical input prefixes. This
creates a bottleneck in generation speed for GPUs with limited memory (Yu et al., 2022). Thus, it has become crucial
to alleviate KV cache memory usage while preserving its
original performance across domains.

We introduce Lexico, a novel KV cache compression method that leverages sparse coding with
a universal dictionary. Our key finding is that
key-value cache in modern LLMs can be accurately approximated using sparse linear combination from a small, input-agnostic dictionary of
∼4k atoms, enabling efficient compression across
different input prompts, tasks and models. Using orthogonal matching pursuit for sparse approximation, Lexico achieves flexible compression ratios through direct sparsity control. On
GSM8K, across multiple model families (Mistral, Llama 3, Qwen2.5), Lexico maintains 9095% of the original performance while using
only 15-25% of the full KV-cache memory, outperforming both quantization and token eviction
methods. Notably, Lexico remains effective in
low memory regimes where 2-bit quantization
fails, achieving up to 1.7× better compression
on LongBench and GSM8K while maintaining
high accuracy. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/krafton-ai/lexico.

Extensive post-training KV cache optimization research (Kwon et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024)
offers off-the-shelf methods for pretrained LLMs, including
selectively retaining tokens (Beltagy et al., 2020; Xiao et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024b) and quantizing KV cache to 2 or
4 bits (Liu et al., 2024b; He et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2024).
However, eviction strategies have limitations on complex
reasoning tasks that require retaining a majority of previous
tokens, while quantizations to 2 or 4 bits have clear upper
bounds on compression rates.
In this paper, we focus on utilizing low-dimensional structures for efficient KV cache compression. Prior work reports
that each key vector lies in a low-rank subspace (Singhania
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; Yu et al., 2024). Yet, it is
unclear whether all vectors lie in the same subspace; if so,
such redundancy remains to be taken advantage of. Thus,
we naturally ask the following questions:
Do keys and values lie in low-dimensional subspaces
across diverse input sequences? If so, can we
leverage this for efficient KV cache compression?

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the backbone of frontier Large Language Models (LLMs), driving
progress in domains beyond natural language processing.
However, Transformers are typically limited by their significant memory requirements. This stems not only from
the large number of model parameters, but also from the
having to maintain the key-value (KV) cache that grows
proportional to the model size (i.e., the number of layers,
heads, and also embedding dimension) and token length of
the input. Additionally, serving each model session typically

Towards this end, we propose Lexico, a universal dictionary
that serves as an overcomplete basis, which can sparsely
decompose and reconstruct the KV cache with sufficiently
small reconstruction error that can be directly controlled via
the level of sparsity of each reconstruction.
In Section 2.2, we report our observation that a subset of
key vectors cluster near each other, even though the keys
are from different inputs, while some cluster in different
subspaces. To take advantage of such a low-dimensional
structure, we draw inspiration from compressed sensing
and dictionary learning, areas of statistical learning and
signal processing that developed algorithms for information
compression across various domains (Candès et al., 2006;
Donoho, 2006; Dong et al., 2014; Metzler et al., 2016).

1

KRAFTON 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 Microsoft
Research. Correspondence to: Dimitris Papailiopoulos <dimitris@papail.io>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

