Sparse Spectral Training and Inference on Euclidean and Hyperbolic Neural
Networks
Jialin Zhao 1 2 Yingtao Zhang 1 2 Xinghang Li 2 Huaping Liu 2 Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci 1 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

The growing demands on GPU memory posed by
the increasing number of neural network parameters call for training approaches that are more
memory-efficient. Previous memory reduction
training techniques, such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) and ReLoRA, face challenges, with
LoRA being constrained by its low-rank structure, particularly during intensive tasks like pretraining, and ReLoRA suffering from saddle point
issues. In this paper, we propose Sparse Spectral
Training (SST) to optimize memory usage for
pre-training. SST updates all singular values
and selectively updates singular vectors through
a multinomial sampling method weighted by the
magnitude of the singular values. Furthermore,
SST employs singular value decomposition to
initialize and periodically reinitialize low-rank
parameters, reducing distortion relative to fullrank training compared to other low-rank methods. Through comprehensive testing on both Euclidean and hyperbolic neural networks across
various tasks, SST demonstrates its ability to outperform existing memory reduction training methods and is comparable to full-rank training in various cases. On LLaMA-1.3B, with only 18.7%
of the parameters trainable compared to full-rank
training (using a rank equivalent to 6% of the embedding dimension), SST reduces the perplexity
gap between other low-rank methods and fullrank training by 97.4%. This result highlights
SST as an effective parameter-efficient technique
for model pre-training.

The development and scaling up of large language models (Kaplan et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023b) pose great challenges to the feasibility of training
large language models from scratch. Normal training methods that update all parameters of models become extremely
expensive due to their extensive GPU memory requirements.
Recent developments in parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods, such as Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) (Hu et al., 2022), have sought to mitigate
the challenge of fine-tuning memory requirements by
introducing trainable low-rank matrices that efficiently
reduced the memory footprint. However, limiting the
model’s parameter updates to a low-rank subspace can
severely restrict the ability of a model to capture and
represent complex data patterns, leading to suboptimal
performance, especially in the pre-training stages. Recent
advancements such as ReLoRA (Lialin et al., 2024),
COLA (Xia et al., 2024), and PLoRA (Meng et al., 2024b)
have addressed the limitation of low-rank constraint,
by iteratively merging low-rank parameters with frozen
parameters. However, they still encounter saddle point
issues due to zero gradient of low-rank parameters that
occurs after each merging step. This challenge results in
slower and less effective convergence compared to full-rank
models during pre-training.
In response to these challenges, we introduce Sparse Spectral Training (SST), a new training framework designed
to optimize memory consumption while closely approximating the overall learning dynamics and performance of
full-rank training. Unlike previous methods (Hu et al., 2022;
Lialin et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023)
that primarily focus on updating within a low-rank subspace at each step, SST adopts a more effective approach by
updating all singular values at each step. SST also leverages the intrinsic spectral properties of the weight matrices,
focusing selective updates of singular vectors sampled
from a multinomial distribution weighted by the magnitude
of the singular values. Additionally, SST uses singular
value decomposition to initialize and reinitialize low-rank
parameters during training, reducing distortion relative to
full-rank training compared to other low-rank methods.

1

Center for Complex Network Intelligence (CCNI), Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI), Department of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences 2 Department of
Computer Science 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. Correspondence to: Jialin Zhao
<jialin.zhao97@gmail.com>, Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci <kalokagathos.agon@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

