CASE-Bench: Context-Aware SafEty Benchmark for Large Language Models
Guangzhi Sun * 1 Xiao Zhan * 2 Shutong Feng 3 Philip C. Woodland 1 Jose Such 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values to ensure the safe use of LLMs is a primary focus of
current research in this field, and it is also a crucial prerequisite for their widespread application (Christiano et al.,
2017; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al.,
2021a). Benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate the
quality of alignment, focusing on different aspects of LLM
safety that are mostly triggered by a single harmful user
query (Shaikh et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Parrish et al.,
2022; Cui et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Röttger et al., 2023;
Zou et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Souly et al., 2024). Systematic and unified benchmarks have also been proposed for
LLM safety evaluation (Vidgen et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023;
Mazeika et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024; Cui et al., 2024).

Aligning large language models (LLMs) with
human values is essential for their safe deployment and widespread adoption. Current LLM
safety benchmarks often focus solely on the
refusal of individual problematic queries, which
overlooks the importance of the context where
the query occurs and may cause undesired refusal
of queries under safe contexts that diminish
user experience. Addressing this gap, we
introduce CASE-Bench, a Context-Aware SafEty
Benchmark that integrates context into safety
assessments of LLMs. CASE-Bench assigns distinct, formally described contexts to categorized
queries based on Contextual Integrity theory.
Additionally, in contrast to previous studies
which mainly rely on majority voting from just a
few annotators, we recruited a sufficient number
of annotators necessary to ensure the detection
of statistically significant differences among the
experimental conditions based on power analysis.
Our extensive analysis using CASE-Bench on
various open-source and commercial LLMs
reveals a substantial and significant influence
of context on human judgments (p <0.0001
from a z-test), underscoring the necessity of
context in safety evaluations. We also identify
notable mismatches between human judgments
and LLM responses, particularly in commercial
models within safe contexts.1 Code and data
used in the paper are available at https:
//github.com/BriansIDP/CASEBench.

The aforementioned benchmarks, however, predominantly
focus on the identification of refusal of individual problematic queries. This leads to over-refusal behaviours in many
LLMs, e.g., refusing to answer questions that users may
think should be answered, which may substantially impact
user experience. Although this issue has been acknowledged
and highlighted in recent studies (Röttger et al., 2023; Arditi
et al., 2024), these studies still focus on judgments based on
isolated queries and overlook the contextual information in
which queries occur (Weidinger et al., 2023; Leveson, 2016).
In fact, context plays a crucial role in determining whether
it is safe to respond to a query, as demonstrated in Figure 1.
Its importance has also been demonstrated in toxicity detection, where context can significantly alter the perceived
offensiveness of a statement (Zhou et al., 2023). This further underscores the need for incorporating context into
LLM safety evaluations. Moreover, previous studies have
confirmed that LLMs are capable of understanding and reasoning within social and moral contexts (Arora et al., 2022;
Emelin et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2021b), aiming for
human-centred AI assistant designs. Therefore, incorporating context is both reasonable and promising for enhancing
safety evaluations in LLM-related research.

1

Trinity College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom 2 Department of Informatics, London, United Kingdom
3
Institut für Informatik, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Germany 4 VRAIN, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain.
Correspondence to: Guangzhi Sun <gs534@cam.ac.uk>.

To effectively incorporate context into LLM safety evaluation, a critical gap remains: the capability of LLMs to serve
as reliable safety judges when making context-aware decisions. In other words, can an LLM accurately determine
the safety of responding to a user query within a given con-

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Warning: This paper contains red-teaming-related content that
can be offensive in nature.
nd

1

