Improving the Statistical Efficiency of Cross-Conformal Prediction

Matteo Gasparin 1 Aaditya Ramdas 2

Abstract

requires one to train the model for every possible value of
the response, and this procedure is usually computationally
burdensome. To alleviate this problem, split conformal prediction (Papadopoulos et al., 2002; Lei et al., 2018) has been
proposed as a solution. The procedure involves a random
partition of the data into two subsets: the first subset is used
to train the prediction algorithm, while the remaining part is
used to calibrate the predictions and to obtain the prediction
interval. Although this variant proves to be computationally
efficient, it suffers from reduced efficiency in terms of the
width of the resulting prediction set; this is due to the fact
that only a fraction of the data is used to train the model.

Vovk (2015) introduced cross-conformal prediction, a modification of split conformal designed to
improve the width of prediction sets. The method,
when trained with a miscoverage rate equal to α
and n ≫ K, ensures a marginal coverage of at
least 1 − 2α − 2(1 − α)(K − 1)/(n + K), where
n is the number of observations and K denotes
the number of folds. A simple modification of
the method achieves coverage of at least 1 − 2α.
In this work, we propose new variants of both
methods that yield smaller prediction sets without
compromising the latter theoretical guarantees.
The proposed methods are based on recent results
deriving more statistically efficient combination
of p-values that leverage exchangeability and randomization. Simulations confirm the theoretical
findings and bring out some important tradeoffs.

Several “hybrid” solutions have been proposed in the literature, which can be considered between split conformal
prediction and full conformal prediction. Examples include cross-conformal prediction (Vovk, 2015; Vovk et al.,
2018), multi-split conformal prediction (Solari & Djordjilović, 2022), the jackknife+ (Barber et al., 2021) and outof-bag conformal prediction (Linusson et al., 2020; Gupta
et al., 2022). These techniques generally result in smaller
prediction intervals compared to split conformal prediction
and involve less computational effort than full conformal
prediction. However, one of the main drawbacks of these
methods is the reduced marginal coverage guarantee, which
is less than the usual 1 − α level.

1. Introduction
Conformal prediction has emerged as a general and versatile
framework for constructing prediction sets in regression and
classification tasks (Shafer & Vovk, 2008). Unlike traditional methods, which often depend on rigid distributional
assumptions, conformal prediction transforms point predictions from any prediction (or black-box) algorithm into
prediction sets that guarantee valid finite-sample marginal
coverage. Originally introduced by Saunders et al. (1999), it
has become increasingly influential, with numerous methods
and extensions being proposed since its introduction.

In this work, we focus the attention on cross-conformal
prediction and we prove that the method can be improved
without altering the coverage guarantee. In other words,
we are able to obtain smaller prediction sets while ensuring
the same (worst-case) miscoverage rate. Starting from a
modification of the method (Vovk et al., 2018; Barber et al.,
2021), the new results are obtained using recent findings on
the combination of dependent p-values derived in Gasparin
et al. (2025). Importantly, these results are obtained in a
fully general manner, and do not need any specific prediction
model or ensemble method to be used.

In particular, full conformal prediction by Vovk et al. (2005),
demonstrates favorable properties regarding the coverage
and the size of the prediction set. However, these advantages
are counterbalanced by a substantial computational cost,
which limits its practical application. In fact, the method

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we
illustrate the problem setup and related work. In Section 3
cross-conformal prediction is described while the new methods and results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents
some empirical results. In particular, Section 5.1 contains
some simulation results, while an application to a real-world
dataset is presented in Section 5.2.

1

Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Padova,
Padua, Italy 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Matteo Gasparin <matteo.gasparin.1@phd.unipd.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

