CHATS: Combining Human-Aligned Optimization and Test-Time Sampling for
Text-to-Image Generation

Minghao Fu 1 2 3

†

Guo-Hua Wang 3 Liangfu Cao 3 Qing-Guo Chen 3 Zhao Xu 3 Weihua Luo 3 Kaifu Zhang 3

Figure 1. Images generated by CHATS with SDXL, an innovative text-to-image generation framework that, for the first time, facilitates
collaboration between human preference alignment and test-time sampling, establishing a new paradigm in text-conditioned image
synthesis.

Abstract

in achieving strong text-image alignment, high
generation quality, and consistency with human
aesthetic standards. In this work, we for the
first time, explore facilitating the collaboration
of human performance alignment and test-time
sampling to unlock the potential of text-to-image
models. Consequently, we introduce CHATS
(Combining Human-Aligned optimization and
Test-time Sampling), a novel generative framework that separately models the preferred and
dispreferred distributions and employs a proxyprompt-based sampling strategy to utilize the useful information contained in both distributions.
We observe that CHATS exhibits exceptional data
efficiency, achieving strong performance with
only a small, high-quality funetuning dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CHATS surpasses traditional preference alignment methods,

Diffusion models have emerged as a dominant
approach for text-to-image generation. Key components such as the human preference alignment
and classifier-free guidance play a crucial role
in ensuring generation quality. However, their
independent application in current text-to-image
models continues to face significant challenges
†
Work done during the internship at Alibaba Group.
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Nanjing University 3 Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to:
Minghao Fu <fumh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Guo-Hua Wang
<wangguohua@alibaba-inc.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

