Strong and Weak Identifiability of Optimization-based Causal Discovery in
Non-linear Additive Noise Models
Mingjia Li 1 Hong Qian* 1 Tian-Zuo Wang 2 3 Shujun Li 1 Min Zhang 1 Aimin Zhou 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Causal discovery aims to identify causal relationships from observational data. Recently,
optimization-based causal discovery methods
have attracted extensive attention in the literature due to their efficiency in handling highdimensional problems. However, we observe that
optimization-based methods often perform well
on certain problems but struggle with others. This
paper identifies a specific characteristic of causal
structural equations that determines the difficulty
of identification in causal discovery and, in turn,
the performance of optimization-based methods.
We conduct an in-depth study of the additive noise
model (ANM) and propose to further divide identifiable problems into strongly and weakly identifiable types based on the difficulty of identification.
We also provide a sufficient condition to distinguish the two categories. Inspired by these findings, this paper further proposes GENE, a generic
method for addressing strongly and weakly identifiable problems in a unified way under the ANM
assumption. GENE adopts an order-based search
framework that incorporates conditional independence tests into order fitness evaluation, ensuring
effectiveness on weakly identifiable problems. In
addition, GENE restricts the dimensionality of
the effect variables to ensure scale invariance, a
property crucial for practical applications. Experiments demonstrate that GENE is uniquely effective in addressing weakly identifiable problems
while also remaining competitive with state-ofthe-art causal discovery algorithms for strongly
identifiable problems.

Discovering causal relationships behind variables is crucial
to data science and plays a key role in a wide range of fields,
including telecommunication network fault diagnosis (Li
et al., 2024), education (Schochet, 2013) and human ethology (Cai et al., 2017). While randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) are considered the gold standard for studying causal
relationships, they are usually expensive or even impossible
to implement. This limitation motivates causal discovery
methods that can infer causal relationships from observational data. Recent advances in this field have made causal
discovery an increasingly vital topic (Spirtes et al., 2000;
Pearl, 2009).
Optimization-based causal discovery is a class of methods
that aims to identify causal relationships from observational
data by leveraging optimization techniques. The core idea
behind optimization-based causal discovery is to first assign
a fitness score to a given causal structure based on how
well it fits the observed data. Optimization techniques are
then employed to search for causal graphs with high fitness
scores, thereby facilitating the discovery of causal relationships. In recent years, continuous-optimization-based causal
discovery methods (Zheng et al., 2018; 2020; Lachapelle
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2024) have garnered
extensive attention in the literature due to their capability
to deal with high-dimensional problems efficiently, making
them particularly appealing for large-scale data analysis.
However, we observe that even under the same causal
model assumption, namely, the additive noise model
(ANM) (Hoyer et al., 2008), optimization-based causal discovery may perform very differently. Figure 1 presents two
pairs of such examples (a) and (b), where in each pair, the
causal models above and below are both under ANM and
share the same causal structures. For Figure 1 (a.1), where
y = x2 + N and N is a noise term, it is easy to identify
the true causal structure using only regression, as regression
along the correct causal direction fits well but not vice versa.
In contrast, for Figure 1 (a.2), where y = x3 +x+N , regression generally fits well for both directions. Distinguishing
the fitting difference between the two directions may require an extremely large amount of data; otherwise, a wrong
causal graph is likely to be learned with limited samples. In

1
Shanghai Institute of AI Education, and School of Computer
Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai,
China. 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to:
Hong Qian <hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

