Private Federated Learning using Preference-Optimized Synthetic Data

Charlie Hou * 1 Mei-Yu Wang * 2 Yige Zhu * Daniel Lazar 3 Giulia Fanti 1

Abstract

els. Examples include Google’s GBoard (Hard et al., 2019;
Xu et al., 2023b; Wu et al., 2024) and Apple’s mobile automatic speech recognition system (Paulik et al., 2021). Today,
federated learning (FL) is the most widely-used approach
in practice for learning on-device models; it trains models
locally on user devices and aggregates model updates on a
central server (McMahan et al., 2017b). FL protects the privacy of client data in part by adopting differentially private
(DP) (Dwork, 2006) optimization techniques, a combination
we refer to as DP-FL (McMahan et al., 2017b; Kairouz et al.,
2021b; Nguyen et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023a).

In practical settings, differentially private federated learning (DP-FL) is the dominant method
for training models from private, on-device client
data. Recent work has suggested that DP-FL may
be enhanced or outperformed by methods that use
DP synthetic data (Wu et al., 2024; Hou et al.,
2024). The primary algorithms for generating DP
synthetic data for FL applications require careful
prompt engineering based on public information
and/or iterative private client feedback. Our key
insight is that the private client feedback collected
by prior DP synthetic data methods (Hou et al.,
2024; Xie et al., 2024) can be viewed as an RL
reward. Our algorithm, Policy Optimization for
Private Data (POPri) harnesses client feedback
using policy optimization algorithms such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) to fine-tune
LLMs to generate high-quality DP synthetic data.
To evaluate POPri, we release LargeFedBench, a
new federated text benchmark for uncontaminated
LLM evaluations on federated client data. POPri
closes the gap in performance between the fullyprivate and non-private settings by up to 58%,
compared to 28% for prior synthetic data methods,
and 3% for state-of-the-art DP federated learning methods. The code and data are available at
https://github.com/meiyuw/POPri.

With breakthroughs in large language model (LLM) capabilities (Anil et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Achiam
et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2025) several research teams have
used LLMs to better train models on private client data. A
common strategy applies standard optimization algorithms
(e.g., DP stochastic gradient descent, DP-SGD (Abadi et al.,
2016)) to fine-tune models on private client data (Kurakin
et al., 2023; Charles et al., 2024). These approaches have an
important limitation in the on-device setting: most LLMs
today are too large to fit on client devices, let alone train on
them (Radford et al., 2019; Touvron et al., 2023).
To sidestep the size issue, Wu et al. (2024); Hou et al. (2024)
view the problem of learning from distributed, private client
data (partially) as a DP synthetic data problem. These approaches use LLM-assisted workflows to generate privacypreserving synthetic data, similar to client data, at the server;
then they train the on-device model at the server on the synthetic data. This avoids storing the LLM on client devices.
In more detail, Wu et al. (2024) use prior public information
about the clients to create LLM-generated synthetic data for
pretraining. For example, for their Google GBoard virtual
keyboard application, they use prompts like “Imagine you
are a [GENDER] of age [AGE]. Write some examples of
chat messages.” to generate synthetic samples. This prompt
was designed entirely using prior qualitative information
about the data on client devices. However, prior information
may not always be available. Moreover, this prompt was not
refined based on clients’ realized data, which could limit the
relevance of the resulting synthetic data.

1. Introduction
Many important machine learning (ML) applications feature
sensitive datasets that are distributed across client devices
(e.g. mobile devices). Such ML models are often hosted
on client devices. These on-device models offer privacy, latency, and storage benefits relative to centrally-hosted mod*
Equal contribution 1 Department of ECE, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA 2 Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center,
Pittsburgh, USA 3 Coldrays, Tucson, AZ. Correspondence to: Charlie Hou <hou.charlie2@gmail.com>.

PrE-Text (Hou et al., 2024) instead uses Private Evolution
(PE) (Lin et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025b)
to learn prompts that are relevant to client data. PE itera-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

