Ladder-Residual: Parallelism-Aware Architecture for Accelerating Large Model
Inference with Communication Overlapping

Muru Zhang * 1 2 Mayank Mishra * 3 Zhongzhu Zhou 1 4 William Brandon 5 Jue Wang 1 Yoon Kim 5
Jonathan Ragan-Kelley 5 Shuaiwen Leon Song 1 4 Ben Athiwaratkun 1 Tri Dao 1 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the rapid scaling of Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Smith et al., 2022; Workshop et al., 2023; Brown, 2020),
the compute and memory requirements for training and
inference have grown significantly. Tensor parallelism
(TP) (Shoeybi et al., 2020) is a widely used model parallelism technique that partitions the weights and intermediate
activations across multiple GPUs. In contrast to pipeline
parallelism (Narayanan et al., 2021) and data parallelism (Li
et al., 2020), which rely on processing independent batches
of user requests on each device, TP enables multiple devices
to cooperate to process a single request, therefore in theory
allowing infinite scaling given a sufficient number of processors. However, TP requires synchronizing the partitioned
intermediate activations across the GPUs. This synchronization is a blocking AllReduce operation on the activations
across the GPUs and is therefore bottlenecked by the network communication latency. Even for GPUs connected
via fast interconnects (like NVLink (NVIDIA Corporation,
2024)), the communication costs can account for 38% of the
latency at inference time when running a 70B transformer
with batch size 4 and TP world size of 8.

Large language model inference is both memoryintensive and time-consuming, often requiring distributed algorithms to efficiently scale. Various
model parallelism strategies are used to partition
computation across multiple devices, reducing
memory load and computation time. However,
using model parallelism requires communication
of information between GPUs, which limits the
gains obtained by scaling up the number of devices. We introduce Ladder Residual, a simple architectural modification applicable to all residualbased models that enables straightforward overlapping to hide the latency of communication.
Our insight is that in addition to system optimizations, the model architecture can also be
redesigned to decouple communication from
computation. While Ladder Residual can allow
communication-computation decoupling in conventional parallelism patterns, we focus on Tensor Parallelism in this paper, which is particularly
bottlenecked by its heavy communication. For a
Transformer model with 70B parameters, applying Ladder Residual to all its layers can achieve
29% end-to-end wall clock speedup at inference
time with sharding over 8 devices. We train a 1.2B
and 3.5B Ladder Residual based Transformer
models from scratch and observe comparable performance to a standard dense transformer baseline.
We also show that it is possible to convert parts of
the Llama-3.1 8B model to our Ladder Residual
architecture with minimal accuracy degradation
by only retraining for 3B tokens.

Past works have attempted to overlap the communication
latency of TP by overlapping computation and communication. Chang et al. (2024) write fused kernels for
AllGather followed by matmul and matmul followed
by ReduceScatter. They break down matmuls into
tiles hide the latency of communicating a tile with the computation of subsequent tiles. Jangda et al. (2022) propose
CoCoNet, a domain-specific language to express distributed
machine learning workloads. They propose to generate efficient GPU kernels for computation and communication
using a custom compiler for the DSL. This approach has
limited applicability with existing frameworks like PyTorch
(Paszke et al., 2019) and JAX (Frostig et al., 2018) since
the user needs to be well-acquainted with the DSL to generate efficient GPU kernels. Moreover, with the breakneck
pace of accelerator and interconnect changes, these lowlevel systems optimizations require a rewrite for every new
generation of hardware. However, there is a fundamental
limit to how much communication latency can be reduced

1

Together AI 2 University of Southern California 3 MITIBM Watson Lab 4 University of Sydney 5 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 6 Princeton University. Correspondence
to: Muru Zhang <muruzhan@usc.edu>, Mayank Mishra
<mayank31398@gmail.com>, Tri Dao <tri@tridao.me>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

