Stochastic Online Conformal Prediction with Semi-Bandit Feedback
Haosen Ge 1 Hamsa Bastani 2 Osbert Bastani 3

Abstract

tainty quantification due to its ability to provide theoretical
guarantees for arbitrary blackbox models. They modify a
given blackbox model f : X → Y to a conformal predictor
C : X → 2Y that predicts sets of labels. In the batch setting,
it does so by using a held-out calibration dataset to assess
the accuracy of f ; it constructs smaller prediction sets if f is
more accurate and larger ones otherwise. Then, conformal
prediction guarantees that the true label is contained in the
prediction set with high probability—i.e.,

Conformal prediction has emerged as an effective
strategy for uncertainty quantification by modifying a model to output sets of labels instead of
a single label. These prediction sets come with
the guarantee that they contain the true label with
high probability. However, conformal prediction
typically requires a large calibration dataset of
i.i.d. examples. We consider the online learning
setting, where examples arrive over time, and the
goal is to construct prediction sets dynamically.
Departing from existing work, we assume semibandit feedback, where we only observe the true
label if it is contained in the prediction set. For instance, consider calibrating a document retrieval
model to a new domain; in this setting, a user
would only be able to provide the true label if
the target document is in the prediction set of retrieved documents. We propose a novel conformal
prediction algorithm targeted at this setting, and
prove that it obtains sublinear regret compared
to the optimal conformal predictor. We evaluate
our algorithm on a retrieval task, an image classification task, and an auction price-setting task,
and demonstrate that it empirically achieves good
performance compared to several baselines.

P[y ∗ ∈ C(x)] ≥ α,
where α is the desired coverage rate, and the probability is
taken over the random sample (x, y ∗ ) ∼ D and the calibration dataset Z = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 ∼ Dn .
Traditional conformal prediction require the calibration set
to consist of i.i.d. or exchangeable samples from the target
distribution; furthermore, the calibration set may need to be
large to obtain good performance. In many settings, such
labeled data may not be easy to obtain. As a motivating
setting, we consider a document retrieval problem, where
the input x might be a question and the goal is to retrieve
a passage y from a knowledge base such as Wikipedia that
can be used to answer x; this strategy is known as retrievalaugmented question answering, and can mitigate issues such
as hallucinations (Lewis et al., 2020; Shuster et al., 2021; Ji
et al., 2023). A common practice is to use a retrieval model
trained on a large dataset in a different domain in a zero-shot
manner; for instance, a user might use the dense passage
retrieval (DPR) model (Karpukhin et al., 2020) directly on
their own dataset without finetuning. Thus, labeled data
from the target domain may not be available.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty quantification is an effective strategy for improving trustworthiness of machine learning models by providing users with a measure of confidence of each prediction
to better inform their decisions. Conformal prediction (Vovk
et al., 2005; Tibshirani et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; Bates
et al., 2021) has emerged as a promising strategy for uncer-

We propose an online conformal prediction algorithm that
sequentially constructs prediction sets Ct as inputs xt are
given. We consider semi-bandit feedback, where we only
observe the true label yt∗ if it is included in our prediction
set (i.e., yt∗ ∈ Ct ). Otherwise, we observe an indicator that
yt∗ ̸∈ Ct , but do not observe yt∗ . In the document retrieval
example, users might sequentially provide queries xt to the
DPR model, and our algorithm responds with a prediction
set Ct of potentially relevant documents. Then, the user
selects the ground truth document yt∗ if it appears in this set,
and indicates that their query was unsuccessful otherwise.

*
Equal contribution 1 Wharton AI & Analytics Initiative,
University of Pennsylvania 2 Operations, Information and Decisions Department, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania 3 Department of Computer and Information Science,
University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Haosen Ge
<hge@wharton.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

As in conformal prediction, we aim to ensure that we achieve
the desired coverage rate α with high probability. Letting
1

