Self-Improving Language Models for Evolutionary Program Synthesis:
A Case Study on ARC-AGI

Julien Pourcel 1 Cédric Colas* 1 2 Pierre-Yves Oudeyer* 1

Abstract

search through the space of possible programs, using methods like genetic programming or sequential Bayesian inference (Koza, 1994; Liang et al., 2010). These approaches
generate initial candidates based on task constraints, then
iteratively refine them through mutation and crossover operations. However, their effectiveness depends heavily on
having intelligent program generators and mutation operators — without these, algorithms must expend massive computation, blindly exploring the space of possible solutions.

Many program synthesis tasks prove too challenging for even state-of-the-art language models to
solve in single attempts. Search-based evolutionary methods offer a promising alternative by exploring solution spaces iteratively, but their effectiveness remain limited by the fixed capabilities
of the underlying generative model. We propose
SOAR, a method that learns program synthesis by
integrating language models into a self-improving
evolutionary loop. SOAR alternates between (1)
an evolutionary search that uses an LLM to sample and refine candidate solutions, and (2) a hindsight learning phase that converts search attempts
into valid problem-solution pairs used to fine-tune
the LLM’s sampling and refinement capabilities —
enabling increasingly effective search in subsequent iterations. On the challenging ARC-AGI
benchmark, SOAR achieves significant performance gains across model scales and iterations,
leveraging positive transfer between the sampling
and refinement finetuning tasks. These improvements carry over to test-time adaptation, enabling
SOAR to solve 52% of the public test set.1

Large language models (LLMs) have marked a new turn in
program synthesis by acting as powerful program generators (Roziere et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024), solving many
tasks in a single attempt (Li & Ellis, 2024). For harder
problems, they can serve as intelligent operators for evolutionary search, proposing targeted modifications to existing
solutions (Lehman et al., 2023; Olausson et al., 2023; Meyerson et al., 2024). But these approaches face a fundamental
limitation: the capabilities of the model used for sampling
and refinement remain fixed, and simply sampling more
candidates or trying more refinements yields diminishing
returns. This paper introduces a system that learns to sample
and refine programs from past synthesis attempts, enabling
sustained performance improvements beyond the limits of
search-based methods.
We propose Self-improving Operators for Automated program Refinements (SOAR), a framework that integrates
language models into a self-improving evolutionary loop.
SOAR alternates between two phases: first, using an LLM
to sample and refine candidate programs through evolutionary search (Sample&Refine phase), then using these search
traces to fine-tune the model’s sampling and refinement capabilities. This creates a virtuous cycle — better models
enable more effective search, which in turn provides better training data for further model improvements. Unlike
previous approaches that rely on human-engineered domainspecific languages to scaffold search, or human-generated
solutions to finetune program generators, SOAR learns to
synthesize programs in Python, learning solely from its own
synthesis attempts, including both successes and failures.

1. Introduction
Program synthesis promises to transform how humans interact with computers by automatically discovering programs
that satisfy their intent. Instead of writing precise instructions, users can express their goals through constraints, examples, or natural language, letting synthesis algorithms
figure out the implementation details. However, finding a
program that satisfies all constraints may be challenging due
to the vast space of possible implementations.
Traditional program synthesis approaches rely on iterated
*

Equal supervision 1 Inria 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Julien
Pourcel <julien.pourcel@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is open-sourced at: github.com/flowersteam/SOAR

We demonstrate SOAR’s effectiveness on the Abstraction
and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), a program synthesis benchmark specifically designed to challenge AI models’ core rea1

