Unsupervised Learning for Class Distribution Mismatch

Pan Du 1 Wangbo Zhao † 2 Xinai Lu 3 Nian Liu 4 Zhikai Li 5 Chaoyu Gong 2 Suyun Zhao † 1 Hong Chen 1
Cuiping Li 1 Kai Wang 2 Yang You 2
(a)

SCDMCT

testing task training set

Abstract
Class distribution mismatch (CDM) refers to the
discrepancy between class distributions in training
data and target tasks. Previous methods address
this by designing classifiers to categorize classes
known during training, while grouping unknown
or new classes into an “other” category. However,
they focus on semi-supervised scenarios and heavily rely on labeled data, limiting their applicability
and performance. To address this, we propose
Unsupervised Learning for Class Distribution
Mismatch (UCDM), which constructs positivenegative pairs from unlabeled data for classifier
training. Our approach randomly samples images
and uses a diffusion model to add or erase semantic classes, synthesizing diverse training pairs.
Additionally, we introduce a confidence-based labeling mechanism that iteratively assigns pseudolabels to valuable real-world data and incorporates
them into the training process. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate UCDM’s superiority over previous semi-supervised methods.
Specifically, with a 60% mismatch proportion on
Tiny-ImageNet dataset, our approach, without relying on labeled data, surpasses OpenMatch (with
40 labels per class) by 35.1%, 63.7%, and 72.5%
in classifying known, unknown, and new classes.

(b)

SCDM

labels

w/
other
class
known class

unknown class

new class

labeled data

unlabeled data

other class data

open-set task

closed-set task
known class

accuracy (%)

UCDM
w/o

+27.0

known class

unknown class

+15.8

+94.9

UASD (SCDMCT)

ours (UCDM)

new class
+95.4

OpenMatch (SCDM)

Figure 1. (a) Examples of SSL for closed-set task (SCDMCT ),
open-set task (SCDM), and our proposed unsupervised learning
for class distribution mismatch (UCDM), where no labels are used
during training. (b) Accuracy of methods on closed-set and openset tasks. In the closed-set task, samples are classified into known
classes, while in the open-set task, they may be classified as unified
“other” class, including both unknown and new categories.

increasing attention in recent years. It tracks the practical
problem where the class distribution of the available training
dataset fails to align with the requirements of the target
task (Yang et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023).
Previous researches on CDM primarily concentrate on semisupervised learning (SSL), which requires access to both labeled and unlabeled data (Berthelot et al., 2019; Sohn et al.,
2020). In this context, the categories present in the labeled
data are referred to as known classes, while the unlabeled
data contains not only the known classes but also additional
unknown classes that are absent in the labeled data. As
illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), based on differences in the target
tasks, these SSL methods fall into two groups: (i) The first
group focuses on a Closed-set Task (SCDMCT ), where the
goal is to classify instances solely among the known classes
present in the labeled data (Chen et al., 2020; Guo et al.,
2020; Huang et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022). Mainstream
approaches typically tackle SCDMCT challenge by filtering out unknown categories from the unlabeled data, thus
mitigating their negative influence. (ii) The second group
extends SCDMCT to the Open-set Task (SCDM), where the

1. Introduction
Class distribution mismatch (CDM) (Guo et al., 2020; Saito
et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023) has garnered
†
Corresponding author 1 School of Information, Renmin University of China, and Engineering Research Center of Database and
Business Intelligence, MOE, China 2 National University of Singapore 3 School of Agricultural Economics and Rural Development,
Renmin University of China 4 Independent Researcher 5 Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence
to: Wangbo Zhao <wangbo.zhao96@gmail.com>, Suyun Zhao
<zhaosuyun@ruc.edu.cn>, Pan Du <du pan@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

