Constrained Online Convex Optimization with Polyak Feasibility Steps

Spencer Hutchinson 1 Mahnoosh Alizadeh 1

Abstract

mization (Cutkosky et al., 2023), and online control (Agarwal et al., 2019). Furthermore, the OCO problem is directly
relevant to various real-world settings, including online advertising (McMahan et al., 2013), internet of things (Chen &
Giannakis, 2018), and healthcare (Tewari & Murphy, 2017).

In this work, we study online convex optimization with a fixed constraint function g : Rd →
R. √ Prior work on this problem has shown
O( T ) regret and cumulative constraint satisfacPT
tion t=1 g(xt ) ≤ 0, while only accessing the
constraint value and subgradient at the played actions g(xt ), ∂g(xt ). Using the same constraint
information, we show a stronger guarantee of anytime constraint satisfaction
g(xt ) ≤ 0 ∀t ∈ [T ],
√
and matching O( T ) regret guarantees. These
contributions are thanks to our approach of using
Polyak feasibility steps to ensure constraint satisfaction, without sacrificing regret. Specifically,
after each step of online gradient descent, our
algorithm applies a subgradient descent step on
the constraint function where the step-size is chosen according to the celebrated Polyak step-size.
We further validate this approach with numerical
experiments.

Despite the significance of the OCO problem, classical
methods for OCO, such as online gradient descent (OGD)
(Zinkevich, 2003) and regularized follow the leader (RFTL)
(Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2007), require orthogonal projections (or similarly costly operations) to ensure that the chosen actions are feasible. Such operations are prohibitively
expensive in many applications, particularly when the action
set X has a complicated structure. Motivated by the high
computation cost of classical methods, Mahdavi et al. (2012)
introduced the problem of OCO with long-term constraints,
where the player is not required to ensure that the actions
are feasible, but instead aims to satisfy the constraints cumulatively.
In particular, Mahdavi et al. (2012) considered the action
set to be represented by the sub-level set of a constraint
function, i.e. X = {x ∈ Rd : g(x) ≤ 0} for convex1
g : Rd → R. In this setting, Mahdavi et al. (2012) gave
an algorithm that enjoys O(T 3/4 ) regret and ensures cumuPT
lative constraint satisfaction t=1 g(xt ) ≤ 0, while only
observing a subgradient and function value at the played
actions, i.e. gt = g(xt ), st ∈ ∂g(xt ). This algorithm
uses a primal-dual approach, in which it updates sequences
of actions (primal variables) and constraint penalties (dual
variables) to simultaneously minimize the regret and the
cumulative constraint value. Primal-dual approaches have
continued to be successful for this problem, as more recent
√
algorithms of this type have been shown to enjoy O( T )
regret with the same constraint guarantees and constraint
feedback (Yu et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
We study the problem of online convex optimization (OCO)
where, in each round t = 1, 2, ..., T , a player chooses an action xt from an action set X ⊆ Rd and then suffers the cost
ft (xt ) according to an adversarially-chosen convex function
ft (Zinkevich, 2003). The player’s goal is to minimize the
regret with respect to the best single action in hindsight,
RegT :=

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x).

t=1

The OCO problem has emerged as a fundamental setting
for various machine learning domains, such as stochastic
optimization (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2004), non-convex opti-

In this work, we take a new approach to this problem by
using what we call Polyak feasibility steps, which are subgradient descent steps that are taken with respect to the constraint function and use the Polyak stepsize. This approach
is motivated by the fact that the Polyak stepsize is known to
be effective in unconstrained convex optimization (Polyak,

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California-Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, USA. Correspondence to: Spencer Hutchinson <shutchinson@ucsb.edu>, Mahnoosh Alizadeh <alizadeh@ucsb.edu>.

1
Since the constraint function g : Rd → R is not assumed
to be differentiable, this setting can handle multiple constraints
g1 , ..., gn by defining g(x) := maxi∈[n] gi (x).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

