Primitive Vision: Improving Diagram Understanding in MLLMs

Shan Zhang 1 2 Aotian Chen 3 Yanpeng Sun 4 Jindong Gu 5 Yi-Yu Zheng 6 Piotr Koniusz 2 7 Kai Zou 6
Anton van den Hengel 1 8 Yuan Xue 3

Abstract

both an art and a science (see (Tufte, 1991) for a particularly
insightful exposition of the art). Despite their importance
in human communication, current visual feature transforms
frequently misinterpret diagrams, often hindering overall
model performance in the greater task.

Mathematical diagrams have a distinctive structure. Standard feature transforms designed for
natural images (e.g., CLIP) fail to process them effectively, limiting their utility in multimodal large
language models (MLLMs). Current efforts to
improve MLLMs have primarily focused on scaling mathematical visual instruction datasets and
strengthening LLM backbones, yet fine-grained
visual recognition errors remain unaddressed. Our
systematic evaluation on the visual grounding capabilities of state-of-the-art MLLMs highlights
that fine-grained visual understanding remains a
crucial bottleneck in visual mathematical reasoning (GPT-4o exhibits a 70% grounding error rate,
and correcting these errors improves reasoning
accuracy by 12%). We thus propose a novel approach featuring a geometrically-grounded vision
encoder and a feature router that dynamically selects between hierarchical visual feature maps.
Our model accurately recognizes visual primitives and generates precise visual prompts aligned
with the language model’s reasoning needs. In
experiments, PRIMITIVE-Qwen2.5-7B outperforms other 7B models by 12% on MathVerse
and is on par with GPT-4V on MathVista. Our
findings highlight the need for better fine-grained
visual integration in MLLMs. Code is available
at github.com/AI4Math-ShanZhang/SVE-Math.

The visual information represented in diagrams is crucial
in mathematical problem-solving. When humans perform
reasoning, visual thought facilitates detailed reasoning and
textual thought supports logical reasoning (Lehmann et al.,
2010). While Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in textual mathematical reasoning (Yu et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2024; Azerbayev et al.,
2023), their proficiency often diminishes when tasks require
integrating visual data (a.k.a., Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs)). Recent advances in MLLM (Zhang
et al., 2024b; Shi et al., 2024; Kazemi et al., 2023) rely
mainly on constructing large-scale mathematical visual instruction datasets, which are costly and labor-intensive to
create and often involve the use of advanced models like
GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2023b) to generate diverse prompts for
synthetic datasets. Despite extensive effort, they still struggle to perceive and ground basic geometric primitives in
mathematical diagrams.
We systematically analyzed MLLMs’ ability to describe
geometric entities using a meticulously collected set of 100
images from the Geo170K dataset (Gao et al., 2023a). We
then manually reviewed its responses to categorize the correct descriptions and error types. As demonstrated in Fig. 1a,
we observed that GPT-4o misperceived visual information
in approximately 70% of cases involving geometric entities.
Correcting these visual perception errors led to a 12% overall accuracy improvement on corresponding mathematical
questions (refer to Fig. 5a in the Appendix). This finding
highlights that misunderstanding of geometric primitives,
such as lines, circles, angles, boundaries, and junctions, remains a critical bottleneck in the mathematical reasoning
capabilities of MLLMs.

1. Introduction
Diagrams are critical to many forms of communication,
from corporate reports to news media. Their construction is
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning 2 Data61 CSIRO
The Ohio State University 4 National University of Singapore
5
University of Oxford 6 NetMind.ai 7 Australian National University 8 The Commonwealth Bank of Australia. Correspondence to:
Anton van den Hengel <anton.vandenhengel@adelaide.edu.au>,
Yuan Xue <yuan.xue@osumc.edu>.
3

To mitigate above challenges, we propose a novel PRIMITIVE (PRImitives in the MathematIcal inTerpretatIon of
Visually Encoded information) , which shifts the focus from
scaling mathematical visual instruction datasets to enhancing fine-grained visual perception. Specifically, we train

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

