Deliberation in Latent Space via Differentiable Cache Augmentation

Luyang Liu 1 Jonas Pfeiffer 1 Jiaxing Wu 1 Jun Xie 1 Arthur Szlam 1

Abstract

sequences of steps before producing a final answer can significantly improve performance on reasoning tasks. More
broadly, providing LLMs with the ability to allocate compute adaptively during generation can lead to more effective
generation within a fixed compute budget (Schuster et al.,
2022). However, at a high level, many of these “extra thinking” approaches are similar in that their sequences of intermediate outputs are discrete, making them difficult to train
in an end-to-end fashion, and in that their extra “thinking”
(i.e. computation) is performed just-in-time, as part of the
output generating process.

Techniques enabling large language models
(LLMs) to “think more” by generating and attending to intermediate reasoning steps have shown
promise in solving complex problems. However,
the standard approaches generate sequences of
discrete tokens immediately before responding,
and so they can incur significant latency costs
and be challenging to optimize. In this work, we
demonstrate that a frozen LLM can be augmented
with an offline coprocessor that operates on the
model’s key-value (kv) cache. This coprocessor
augments the cache with a set of latent embeddings designed to improve the fidelity of subsequent decoding. We train this coprocessor using
the language modeling loss from the decoder on
standard pretraining data, while keeping the decoder itself frozen. This approach enables the
model to learn, in an end-to-end differentiable
fashion, how to distill additional computation into
its kv-cache. Because the decoder remains unchanged, the coprocessor can operate offline and
asynchronously, and the language model can function normally if the coprocessor is unavailable or
if a given cache is deemed not to require extra
computation. We show experimentally that when
a cache is augmented, the decoder achieves lower
perplexity on numerous subsequent tokens. Furthermore, even without any task-specific training,
our experiments demonstrate that cache augmentation consistently improves performance across
a range of reasoning-intensive tasks.

In this work, we introduce a fundamentally different approach, inspired by the literature on kv-cache compression (Mu et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2024). Our approach takes
a step towards LLMs that can deliberate on their memories
(encoded in the kv-cache), and distill these deliberations
into a form usable for subsequent tasks. Specifically, our
method processes the transformer’s cache and augments it
with a set of soft tokens produced in a single forward pass–
not sequentially. This extra processing is performed by a
separate model, which we refer to as a “coprocessor”, while
the base transformer remains frozen. Once the kv-cache is
augmented with the coprocessor’s output (which we term
“latent embeddings”), decoding proceeds as normal until
the coprocessor is called again. This approach offers the
following key advantages:
End-to-end Differentiability: Our framework enables endto-end backpropagation during coprocessor training, facilitating efficient optimization without the need for reinforcement learning techniques. We leverage the standard
language-modeling loss on pre-training data, making the
method scalable.
Asynchronous Operation: Because cache augmentation
improves results many tokens beyond the augmentation
point, and because the base transformer remains frozen
during coprocessor training, asynchronous coprocessor operation becomes feasible. This contrasts with existing methods where additional computation occurs sequentially, and
online. Our approach opens the door to models that can
strategically bank computation by deliberating and refining
their internal memory, independent of composing a response
to a query.

1. Introduction
Recent research (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Wu
et al., 2024) has shown that enabling large language models (LLMs) to generate, or even search over, intermediate
1

Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
Luyang
Liu <luyang.liu@google.com>,
Arthur Szlam <aszlam@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We evaluate our method using Gemma-2 (Team-Gemma
et al., 2024) models pretrained on a diverse dataset mixture.
1

