Survival Analysis via Density Estimation

Hiroki Yanagisawa 1 Shunta Akiyama 1

Abstract

target variable. Given this conceptual similarity, numerous
methodologies originally developed for density estimation
have been adapted for survival analysis, particularly in scenarios with K = 2 under the conditional independence
assumption. For instance, random forests (Breiman, 2001)
for density estimation have been adapted into random survival forests (Ishwaran et al., 2008) for survival analysis,
and modern neural network models for density estimation
have been extended into models such as DeepHit (Lee et al.,
2018). Furthermore, strictly proper scoring rules for density
estimation (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007) have been adapted
for survival analysis (Rindt et al., 2022; Yanagisawa, 2023).
Calibration metrics, such as the expected calibration error (Naeini et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2017), have similarly
been extended to D-calibration for survival analysis (Haider
et al., 2020).

This paper introduces a framework for survival
analysis by reinterpreting it as a form of density
estimation. Our algorithm post-processes density
estimation outputs to derive survival functions,
enabling the application of any density estimation
model to effectively estimate survival functions.
This approach broadens the toolkit for survival
analysis and enhances the flexibility and applicability of existing techniques for density estimation.
Our framework is versatile enough to handle various survival analysis scenarios, including competing risk models for multiple event types. It
can also address dependent censoring when prior
knowledge of the dependency between event time
and censoring time is available in the form of
a copula. In the absence of such information,
our framework can estimate the upper and lower
bounds of survival functions, accounting for the
associated uncertainty.

Despite the numerous extensions of density estimation
methodologies for survival analysis, these adaptations encounter several limitations. First, these adaptations are typically tailored to specific methodologies on a case-by-case
basis, necessitating the development of a new customized
extension for each novel density estimation method. Second, most survival analysis models rely on the conditional
independence assumption (or even stronger assumptions
such as the proportional hazards assumption (Cox, 1972)),
which may not hold in various real-world applications. This
issue highlights the need for survival models that operate
under weaker assumptions. Third, while Tsiatis (1975)
demonstrates that the survival function cannot be identified
without making any assumption, the estimation of the upper and lower bounds of the survival function has not been
fully investigated under the condition where no assumptions can be made. Fourth, while the existence of a strictly
proper scoring rule for survival analysis with K = 2 under
the conditional independence assumption has been established (Rindt et al., 2022) and can be used as an evaluation
metric, no strictly proper scoring rule has been established
for K > 2.

1. Introduction
Survival analysis constitutes a statistical methodology extensively employed across diverse domains, including
medicine, engineering, and social sciences, to analyze and
predict the probability distribution of the time until the occurrence of an event of interest. In numerous real-world
scenarios, the phenomenon of competing risks emerges
when an individual is subject to multiple mutually exclusive events, where the occurrence of one event precludes
the observation or alters the probability of the other events.
The field of survival analysis with competing risks has a
rich historical foundation, as extensively reviewed in survey
papers (Wang et al., 2019; Wiegrebe et al., 2024).
Survival analysis with K competing risks can be conceptualized as a variant of density estimation, a subfield of machine
learning aimed at estimating the probability distribution of a

In this paper, we propose a novel framework that reinterprets
survival analysis through the lens of density estimation. By
post-processing the outputs of density estimation models
in the form of cumulative incidence functions, our algorithm derives survival functions, thus enabling any density
estimation model to be effectively utilized for survival anal-

1

CyberAgent, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Hiroki Yanagisawa <yanagisawa hiroki@cyberagent.co.jp>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

