DSP: Dynamic Sequence Parallelism for Multi-Dimensional Transformers

Xuanlei Zhao 1 Shenggan Cheng 1 Chang Chen 1 Zangwei Zheng 1 Ziming Liu 1 Zheming Yang 1 Yang You 1

Abstract

sequence parallel is the only option. Current sequence parallelism, such as Megatron-LM (Shoeybi et al., 2019), RingAttention (Li et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023a), Megatron-SP
(Korthikanti et al., 2022), and DeepSpeed-Ulysses (Jacobs
et al., 2023) are all embedded sequence parallelism methods. As shown in Figure 1, these embedded methods shard
along a single sequence dimension, which are tailored to
the specific pattern and introduce extra communication and
complex code modification.

Scaling multi-dimensional transformers to long
sequences is important across various domains.
The challenges of large memory requirements
and slow speed of such sequences require sequence parallelism. All existing approaches fall
under the category of embedded sequence parallelism, which are limited to shard along a single
sequence dimension, thereby introducing significant communication overhead. However, multidimensional transformers involve independent calculation across multiple sequence dimensions. To
this end, we propose Dynamic Sequence Parallelism (DSP) as a novel abstraction of sequence
parallelism. DSP dynamically switches the parallel dimension according to the computation stage
with efficient resharding strategy. DSP offers
significant reductions in communication costs,
adaptability across modules, and ease of use with
minimal constraints. Experiments demonstrate
DSP’s superiority over state-of-the-art sequence
parallelism methods by remarkable throughput
improvements ranging from 32.2% to 10×, with
at least 50% communication volume reduction.

However, multi-dimensional transformers calculate independently across multiple sequence dimensions. For instance,
for video generation models like OpenSora (Zangwei Zheng,
2024) and Latte (Ma et al., 2024), Spatial-Temporal Attention (Yan et al., 2021) is adopted which separates attention
computations to independent temporal and spatial computation. Therefore, there exists a potential space for a new
sequence parallelism paradigm.
To adapt to the flexible patterns of multi-dimensional transformers, we introduce Dynamic Sequence Parallelism (DSP)
as a novel abstraction of sequence parallelism, featured by
its elegant design, high effectiveness, and excellent compatibility. Unlike embedded sequence parallelism, DSP
dynamically switches the parallel dimension of sequences
during the computation stage with an efficient resharding
strategy, completely decoupled from the modules’ logic.

1. Introduction

DSP offers several advantages over embedded sequence
parallelism: 1) Efficient communication: DSP incurs significantly lower communication costs due to its simplified communication patterns and reduced frequency of exchanges. 2)
Adaptability: DSP seamlessly adapts to most modules without necessitating specific modifications and imposes few
limitations on its usage. 3) Ease of use: DSP is remarkably
easy to implement, and also provides a simple API for users
to enable it effortlessly.

Efficiently scaling multi-dimensional transformers to accommodate long sequences is necessary across diverse domains,
including video generation (Singer et al., 2022; Blattmann
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024), image generation (Ramesh
et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024), protein
structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021), spatial-temporal
information processing (Cong et al., 2021), and beyond. The
long length of sequences introduces substantial activation
memory costs and notable slowdown for speed, underscoring the need for employing parallelism.

Our experiments yield promising results, showcasing DSP’s
superiority over state-of-the-art embedded sequence parallelism methods. It achieves an end-to-end throughput
improvement ranging from 32.2% to 10× and reduces communication volume by at least 75%.

Apart from data parallel and pipeline parallel (Huang et al.,
2019) which cannot reduce memory cost and inference time,
1
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Yang
You <youy@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

We summarize our contributions as follows:

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We introduce DSP as a novel abstraction of sequence parallelism aimed at effectively scaling multi1

