Improving LLMs for Recommendation with Out-Of-Vocabulary Tokens

Ting-Ji Huang 1 2 Jia-Qi Yang 1 2 Chunxu Shen 3 Kai-Qi Liu 4 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2

Abstract

Instruction (with only In-Vocabulary Tokens )

Answer(SID): We should recommend item 10 03 .
Instruction (with OOV Tokens )
Question: Considering user <CT08> <10> has bought
item <CT01> <20> , what should we recommend for him?
item
Answer(META ID): We should
item <CT08> <20> .
recommend qw

Constructed from
Interaction History

Similarity

Characterizing users and items through grouped
vector representations is crucial for various tasks
in recommender systems. Recent approaches
attempt to apply Large Language Models (LLMs)
in recommendation through an instruction-based
format, where real items are represented with
grouped words formed from in-vocabulary tokens.
However, these tokens do not effectively represent items since their meanings are derived from
pre-training on natural language tasks, which
limits the model’s ability to learn meaningful
user–item relationships. In this paper, we explore
how to effectively characterize users and items
in LLM-based recommender systems from the
tokenizing strategy view. We demonstrate the
necessity of using out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
tokens for the characterization of items and users,
and propose a well-constructed way of these OOV
tokens. By clustering the learned representations
from historical user-item interactions, we make
the representations of user/item combinations
share the same OOV tokens if they have similar
properties. This construction allows us to capture
user/item relationships well (memorization) and
preserve the diversity of descriptions of users and
items (diversity). Furthermore, integrating these
OOV tokens into the LLM’s vocabulary allows for
better distinction between users and items and enhanced capture of user-item relationships during
fine-tuning on downstream tasks. Our proposed
framework outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods across various downstream recommendation tasks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Tingji2419/META-ID.

High

Item Representation Distance

Question: Considering user 10 01 has bought item
item 10 02 ,
what should we recommend for him?

Numeric ID

META ID (Ours)

Medium

Low

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Left: Comparison of tokenizing strategies using
In-Vocabulary (IV) and Out-of-Vocabulary (OOV) tokens
to characterize items. The IV scenario leverages numeric
identifiers (Numeric ID) for items, while the OOV scenario
constructs OOV tokens from user-item interaction history
(META ID). Right: Similarity heatmaps illustrate the alignment of Numeric ID, META ID, and ground truth, demonstrating the effectiveness of META ID in capturing relationship patterns. Ground truth is calculated from Equation 4.

1. Introduction

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University 2 National
Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 3 WeChat Technical Architecture Department, Tencent Inc.
4
Software Institute, Nanjing University. Correspondence to: HanJia Ye <yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Modern recommender systems (RS) play a crucial role in
various applications like video recommendation (Davidson
et al., 2010), e-commerce (Chen et al., 2019), and social
networking (Fan et al., 2019). The recent advent of
large language models (LLMs) offers a new direction
of exploration in this realm. Models such as T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020a) and LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), training
on massive natural language data, achieve impressive
language understanding capabilities in text generation and
conversation tasks (Zhao et al., 2023). Their success drives
explorations to use pre-trained LLMs as model backbones
for handling various recommendation tasks like sequential
recommendation, rating, and explanation task (Bi et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2021). In such frameworks, all input
features including ids, attributes, and contextual signals, are
described as textual queries, and the LLM is expected to
generate task-specific labels as responses (Cui et al., 2022;
Geng et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2025).
After being trained in this instruction-based format, the
model can be prompted to provide recommendations for
a user or generate explanations for those recommendations.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

How to characterize users and items so that LLMs can
learn their personalized information during fine-tuning?
Given that tokens are the fundamental units of input

1

1

