RocketKV: Accelerating Long-Context LLM Inference via
Two-Stage KV Cache Compression

Payman Behnam * 1 2 Yaosheng Fu * 1 Ritchie Zhao 1 Po-An Tsai 1 Zhiding Yu 1 Alexey Tumanov 2

Abstract

tation—becomes a major bottleneck during the decode
phase, as its size scales linearly with both the sequence
length and batch size. For example, the Llama3.1-70BInstruct (AI@Meta, 2024) model with a batch size of 32,
and a context length of 32K requires around 320GB of KV
cache storage at FP16 precision, which even advanced hardware (NVIDIA, 2024; Jouppi et al., 2023; AMD, 2024) can
hardly handle.

Transformer-based Large Language Models rely
critically on the KV cache to efficiently handle
extended contexts during the decode phase. Yet,
the size of the KV cache grows proportionally
with the input length, burdening both memory
bandwidth and capacity as decoding progresses.
To address this challenge, we present RocketKV,
a training-free KV cache compression strategy
containing two consecutive stages. In the first
stage, it performs coarse-grain permanent KV
cache eviction on the input sequence tokens. In
the second stage, it adopts a hybrid sparse attention method to conduct fine-grain top-k sparse
attention, approximating the attention scores by
leveraging both head and sequence dimensionality reductions. We show that RocketKV provides
a compression ratio of up to 400×, end-to-end
speedup of up to 3.7× as well as peak memory
reduction of up to 32.6% in the decode phase on
an NVIDIA A100 GPU compared to the full KV
cache baseline, while achieving negligible accuracy loss on a variety of long-context tasks. We
also propose a variant of RocketKV for multi-turn
scenarios, which consistently outperforms other
existing methods and achieves accuracy nearly
on par with an oracle top-k attention scheme.
The source code is available here: https://
github.com/NVlabs/RocketKV.

Fortunately, previous work has shown that only a small
subset of KV tokens is required at each decode step to
maintain accuracy (Zhang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024;
Ribar et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Singhania et al., 2024; Ge
et al., 2024). Therefore, if those KV tokens can be accurately predicted in advance, dense attention operations can
be replaced with sparse attention operations with significant
memory bandwidth and capacity improvement. These methods often fall into two categories: 1) permanent KV token
eviction, and 2) dynamic KV token selection. The former
results in both memory bandwidth and storage savings, but
could lead to noticeable accuracy loss if KV tokens dropped
earlier are needed by later decode steps. The latter avoids
this shortcoming by keeping all KV tokens in memory and
dynamically selecting a subset each time. Hence, it only
results in memory bandwidth savings, but often requires
extra memory storage overhead for auxiliary data.
To understand the effectiveness of existing KV token dropping methods, Figure 1 presents the accuracy comparison
of four different methods (two in each category) for qasper
benchmark in LongBench (Bai et al., 2024) on the Mistral7B-Instruct-v0.2 model (Jiang et al., 2023). We observe
that the accuracy of all four methods drops significantly as
the token budget becomes lower than 1024 while an oracle
top-k attention scheme achieves negligible accuracy drop
even with a token budget of 256. This indicates that existing
practical methods fail to accurately predict top-k KV tokens
under low token budgets.

1. Introduction
In Transformer-based LLM inference (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Pawar et al., 2024), the key-value cache (KV cache)—which
stores past attention keys and values to avoid recompu*
Equal contribution: work done during internship/part-time at
NVIDIA 1 NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to: Payman Behnam <payman.behnam@gatech.edu>, Yaosheng Fu <yfu@nvidia.com>.

To improve the prediction accuracy, we propose RocketKV,
a two-stage KV cache compression method that combines
permanent KV token eviction with dynamic KV token selection to accelerate the decode phase of LLM inference. The
RocketKV framework enables flexible integration of a wide
range of KV cache compression techniques at each stage. To

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

