Demystifying Catastrophic Forgetting in Two-Stage Incremental Object Detector

Qirui Wu 1 Shizhou Zhang 1 De Cheng 2 Yinghui Xing 1 Di Xu 3 Peng Wang 1 Yanning Zhang 1

Abstract

detection (Ren et al., 2016; Khanam & Hussain, 2024; Li
et al., 2023). Traditional methods mostly solve the object
detection task under a static closed-world setting, where
all to-be-detected object classes and annotations are fully
available before training. Nevertheless, real-world applications frequently encompass dynamic environments where
new object categories appear progressively over time. Detectors should possess the capability to adjust to novel tasks
through sequential learning, while simultaneously preserving the knowledge gained from detecting previous classes.

Catastrophic forgetting is a critical chanllenge for
incremental object detection (IOD). Most existing
methods treat the detector monolithically, relying on instance replay or knowledge distillation
without analyzing component-specific forgetting.
Through dissection of Faster R-CNN, we reveal
a key insight: Catastrophic forgetting is predominantly localized to the RoI Head classifier, while
regressors retain robustness across incremental
stages. This finding challenges conventional assumptions, motivating us to develop a framework
termed NSGP-RePRE. Regional Prototype Replay (RePRE) mitigates classifier forgetting via
replay of two types of prototypes: coarse prototypes represent class-wise semantic centers of
RoI features, while fine-grained prototypes model
intra-class variations. Null Space Gradient Projection (NSGP) is further introduced to eliminate
prototype-feature misalignment by updating the
feature extractor in directions orthogonal to subspace of old inputs via gradient projection, aligning RePRE with incremental learning dynamics.
Our simple yet effective design allows NSGPRePRE to achieve state-of-the-art performance on
the Pascal VOC and MS COCO datasets under
various settings. Our work not only advances IOD
methodology but also provide pivotal insights for
catastrophic forgetting mitigation in IOD. Code
is available at https://github.com/fanrena/NSGPRePRE .

Conventional object detectors (Ren et al., 2016; Carion et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020) often suffer from catastrophic forgetting during incremental learning, which significantly hampers their performance in previously learned classes when
new tasks are introduced. Unlike incremental learning in
classification tasks, incremental object detection (IOD) is
more challenging than classification as it requires the simultaneous classification and location of a set of objects in
the image. To obtain an incremental object detector with
excellent performance, many research efforts have been devoted by introducing knowledge distillation or data replay
techniques (Cermelli et al., 2022; Yuyang et al., 2023; Mo
et al., 2024) into popular detection frameworks.
Current research in the IOD field usually treats the detector
as a whole, and few works pay attention to whether catastrophic forgetting mainly comes from a certain component
or whether all modules contribute roughly the same. Demystifying catastrophic forgetting in a sophisticated detector is
necessary and helpful not only to establish a bridge between
incremental learning in classification and object detection,
but also to provide principled guidance for designing simpler and more effective IOD methods. In this study, we
chose the widely adopted two-stage Faster R-CNN (Ren
et al., 2016) detector as a pioneering research object.

1. Introduction
As one of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision,
significant progress has been made in the field of object

Faster R-CNN is composed of a backbone, neck, region proposal network (RPN) and region of interest head (RoI Head),
each of which is crucial to the detector’s performance. Our
primary focus is on the RPN and RoI Head, known for their
key roles in object detection. Through a systematic analysis of its core components, we uncover several important
insights. 1) RPN’s recall ability remains consistent when
transitioning to new tasks. 2) RPN’s forgetting has an insignificant impact on overall performance. 3) Forgetting

1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical Unviersity, Xi’an, China 2 School of Telecommunication and Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China 3 Huawei Technologies Ltd.
Correspondence to: Shizhou Zhang <szzhang@nwpu.edu.cn>,
De Cheng <dcheng@xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

