Distilling the Knowledge in Data Pruning

Emanuel Ben Baruch 1 Adam Botach 1 Igor Kviatkovsky 1 Manoj Aggarwal 1 Gérard Medioni 1

Abstract

retain the most representative samples of a given dataset
and enable the conservation of memory and reduction of
computational costs by allowing training on a compact and
small subset of the original data. For instance, data pruning
can be useful for accelerating hyper-parameter optimization
or neural architecture search (NAS) efforts. It may also be
used in continual learning or active learning applications.

With the increasing size of datasets used for training neural networks, data pruning has gained traction in recent years. However, most current data
pruning algorithms are limited in their ability to
preserve accuracy compared to models trained on
the full data, especially in high pruning regimes.
In this paper we explore the application of data
pruning while incorporating knowledge distillation (KD) when training on a pruned subset. That
is, rather than relying solely on ground-truth labels, we also use the soft predictions from a
teacher network pre-trained on the complete data.
We first establish a theoretical motivation for employing self-distillation to improve training on
pruned data. Then, we empirically make a compelling and highly practical observation: using
KD, simple random pruning is comparable or superior to sophisticated pruning methods across all
pruning regimes. On ImageNet for example, we
achieve superior accuracy despite training on a
random subset of only 50% of the data. Additionally, we demonstrate a crucial connection between
the pruning factor and the optimal knowledge distillation weight. This helps mitigate the impact of
samples with noisy labels and low-quality images
retained by typical pruning algorithms. Finally,
we make an intriguing observation: when using
lower pruning fractions, larger teachers lead to accuracy degradation, while surprisingly, employing
teachers with a smaller capacity than the student’s
may improve results.

Existing methods for data pruning have shown remarkable
success in achieving good accuracy while retaining only
a fraction, f < 1, of the original data; see for example
(Toneva et al., 2018; Paul et al., 2021; Feldman & Zhang,
2020; Meding et al., 2021) and the overview in (Guo et al.,
2022). However, those approaches are still limited in their
ability to match the accuracy levels obtained by models
trained on the complete dataset, especially in high compression regimes (low f ).
Score-based data pruning algorithms typically rely on the entire data to train neural networks for selecting the most representative samples. For example, the ‘forgetting’ method
(Toneva et al., 2018) counts for each sample the number of
instances during training where the network’s prediction for
that sample shifts from “correct” to “misclassified”. Samples with high rates of forgetting events are assigned higher
scores as they are considered harder and more valuable for
the training. Other methods use the gradient norm, as in
GraNd and EL2N (Paul et al., 2021), or measure changes in
the optimal empirical risk, as employed by MoSo (Tan et al.,
2023), to score the samples. Typically, once the sample
scores are calculated, the models trained on the full dataset
are discarded and are no longer in use.
In this paper, we explore the benefit of using a model trained
on a complete dataset to enhance training on a pruned subset
of the data using knowledge distillation (KD). The motivation behind this approach is that a teacher model trained
on the complete dataset captures essential information and
core statistics about the entire data. This knowledge can
then be utilized when training on a pruned subset. While
KD has been extensively studied and demonstrated significant improvements in tasks such as model compression,
herein we aim to investigate its impact in the context of data
pruning and propose innovative findings for practical usage. Note that, in contrast to traditional model compression
techniques, here we focus on self-distillation (SD), where

1. Introduction
Recently, data pruning has gained increased interest in the
literature due to the growing size of datasets used for training neural networks. Algorithms for data pruning aim to
1
Amazon. Correspondence to:
<emanbb@amazon.com>.

Emanuel Ben Baruch

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

