Long-Form Speech Generation with Spoken Language Models

Se Jin Park * 1 2 Julian Salazar * 1 Aren Jansen 1 Keisuke Kinoshita 1 Yong Man Ro 2 RJ Skerry-Ryan 1

Abstract

1000

Max Training Length (secs)

We consider the generative modeling of speech
over multiple minutes, a requirement for longform multimedia generation and audio-native
voice assistants. However, textless spoken language models struggle to generate plausible
speech past tens of seconds, due to high temporal
resolution of speech tokens causing loss of coherence, architectural issues with long-sequence
training or extrapolation, and memory costs at
inference time. From these considerations we derive SpeechSSM, the first speech language model
family to learn from and sample long-form spoken
audio (e.g., 16 minutes of read or extemporaneous speech) in a single decoding session without text intermediates. SpeechSSMs leverage recent advances in linear-time sequence modeling to
greatly surpass current Transformer spoken LMs
in coherence and efficiency on multi-minute generations while still matching them at the utterance
level. As we found current spoken language evaluations uninformative, especially in this new longform setting, we also introduce: LibriSpeechLong, a benchmark for long-form speech evaluation; new embedding-based and LLM-judged
metrics; and quality measurements over length
and time. Speech samples, the LibriSpeech-Long
dataset, and any future code or model releases
can be found at https://google.github.io/tacotron/
publications/speechssm/.

SpeechSSM-X (ours)

800
600
400

Spirit LM
dGSLM
AudioLM

200
0
0

200

Moshi

SpeechSSM (ours)

TWIST
Spectron
GSLM
400

600

800

Max Evaluated Generation (secs)

1000

Figure 1. Maximum sequence lengths considered by various spoken LMs. Italicized models used text intermediates at generation
time. Our models can generate indefinitely due to their constant
memory footprint, but we cap our evaluations to 16 minutes.

its paralinguistic aspects, such as prosody (Kharitonov et al.,
2022) and turn-taking (Nguyen et al., 2023b). These capabilities make speech-native language models (LMs) promising
for applications like media understanding and co-creation,
audio-native voice assistants, and textless NLP. However,
real-world use-cases of spoken LMs require the ability to
both understand and generate long-form speech. For example, voice interactions can last many minutes, requiring a
model to maintain a growing conversational history in real
time, and expressive media like audiobooks and podcasts
can require semantic, paralinguistic, and speaker coherence
over a chapter or episode.

1. Introduction
Generative spoken language models (Lakhotia et al., 2021;
Dieleman et al., 2021; van den Oord et al., 2017) are autoregressive models of invertible audio representations, enabling
the direct learning and generation of intelligible speech and

This presents significant challenges for existing spoken language models, as spoken audio’s textual content is entangled
with paralinguistic and acoustic properties that detract from
learning invariant representations of meaning. Additionally,
current audio representations have high temporal rates, requiring 10+ speech tokens to cover the duration of 1-2 text
tokens (Hassid et al., 2023). Hence, models must disentangle, aggregate, and generate content coherently over longer
time horizons. A single-stage Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017) LM is impractical, as its initial cost grows quadrati-

*
Primary contributors. Se Jin’s work was done as a student
researcher at Google DeepMind. 1 Google DeepMind. 2 Integrated
Vision and Language Lab, KAIST. Correspondence to: Se Jin Park
<jinny960812@kaist.ac.kr>, Julian Salazar <julsal@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

