Wyckoff Transformer: Generation of Symmetric Crystals

Nikita Kazeev 1 Wei Nong 2 Ignat Romanov 3 Ruiming Zhu 2 Andrey Ustyuzhanin 4 5 1 Shuya Yamazaki 2
Kedar Hippalgaonkar 1 2 6

Abstract

1. Introduction

Crystal symmetry plays a fundamental role in
determining its physical, chemical, and electronic properties such as electrical and thermal
conductivity, optical and polarization behavior,
and mechanical strength. Almost all known
crystalline materials have internal symmetry.
However, this is often inadequately addressed by
existing generative models, making the consistent
generation of stable and symmetrically valid
crystal structures a significant challenge. We
introduce WyFormer, a generative model that
directly tackles this by formally conditioning
on space group symmetry. It achieves this by
using Wyckoff positions as the basis for an
elegant, compressed, and discrete structure
representation. To model the distribution, we
develop a permutation-invariant autoregressive
model based on the Transformer encoder and
an absence of positional encoding. Extensive
experimentation demonstrates WyFormer’s
compelling combination of attributes: it achieves
best-in-class symmetry-conditioned generation,
incorporates a physics-motivated inductive bias,
produces structures with competitive stability,
predicts material properties with competitive
accuracy even without atomic coordinates, and
exhibits unparalleled inference speed. https:
//github.com/SymmetryAdvantage/
WyckoffTransformer

Discovery of materials with desirable properties is the cornerstone of civilization – from the stone age to the bronze
age and now in the silicon age, the ability to wield materials with different properties and function has transformed
society (Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2022). However, for the most
part, the search of new materials as well as new functionalities, has proceeded through a traditional route of trialand-error, also called the Edisonian approach (Wang et al.,
2024). The space of all possible combinations of atoms
forming periodic structures is intractably large, Cao et al.
(2024) gauge it at 10160 . It is not possible to fully screen
this space or even to enumerate it. Materials that exist under
realistic conditions, however, occupy a small part of this
set of possibilities (Curtarolo et al., 2013). It consists of
the energetically-favored combinations of atoms that are
held together through covalent, ionic, metallic and other
chemical bonding. A generative model that outputs novel
a priori stable materials will speed up automated material
design by orders of magnitude.
1.1. Space groups and Wyckoff positions
A crystal structure can be represented by lattice vectors
and atomic basis. The lattice provides a periodic geometric framework in three-dimensional space, defined by the
lattice matrix L = [l1 , l2 , l3 ] ∈ R3×3 , with a basis of an
atom (or group of atoms) that occupy any lattice point. The
atomic positions in real space are hence given by X =
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ] ∈ R3×N , where N is the number of atoms
in the unit cell. These positions can also be expressed in
fractional coordinates as F = [f1 , f2 , . . . , fN ] ∈ [0, 1)3×N ,
related to real-space coordinates by F = L−1 X, ensuring
atomic positions remain consistent within the periodic lattice. The periodic arrangement can be further constrained
by the space group G, a finite set of symmetry operations
g ∈ G defined as g · X = RX + t, where R ∈ O(3)
is a 3 × 3 orthogonal transformation matrix representing
rotations, reflections, combinations thereof, and t ∈ R3
is a 3 × 1 translation vector. These symmetry operations
collectively form the 230 distinct space groups, which comprehensively classify all possible crystal symmetries in three
dimensions (Fedorow, 1892; Hahn et al., 1983). Each space
group defines the allowable positions for atoms within the

1

Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials University of Singapore, Block S9, Level 9, 4 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117544
2
School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 3 HSE University, Myasnitskaya Ulitsa, 20, Moscow, Russia, 101000 4 Constructor University,
Bremen, Campus Ring 1, 28759, Germany 5 Constructor Knowledge Labs, Bremen, Campus Ring 1, 28759, Germany 6 Institute of
Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science Technology and Research, 2 Fusionopolis Way, Singapore, 138634. Correspondence to: Nikita Kazeev <kazeevn@gmail.com>, Kedar
Hippalgaonkar <kedar@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

