Online Sparsification of Bipartite-Like Clusters in Graphs

Joyentanuj Das 1 Suranjan De 1 He Sun 1

Abstract

Our Results. We first study bipartite-like clusters in
undirected graphs, and present an algorithm that sparsifies an undirected graph while preserving its structure of
bipartite-like clusters. Our algorithm can be implemented
online, and directly applied to speed up the running time
of existing algorithms that find bipartite-like clusters. Formally speaking, for an undirected G = (V, E) and a pair of
disjoint and non-empty subsets A, B ⊂ V , we define

Graph clustering is an important algorithmic
technique for analysing massive graphs, and has
been widely applied in many research fields of
data science. While the objective of most graph
clustering algorithms is to find a vertex set of
low conductance, a sequence of recent studies
highlights the importance of the inter-connection
between vertex sets when analysing real-world
datasets. Following this line of research, in this
work we study bipartite-like clusters and present
efficient and online sparsification algorithms that
find such clusters in both undirected graphs and
directed ones. We conduct experimental studies
on both synthetic and real-world datasets, and
show that our algorithms significantly speedup
the running time of existing clustering algorithms
while preserving their effectiveness.

ϕG (A, B) ≜

2wG (A, B)
,
volG (A ∪ B)

wG (A, B) ≜

X

where

w(u, v)

{u,v}∈E
u∈A,v∈B

is the cut value between A and B and volG (A ∪ B) is the
volume of A ∪ B defined by
X
volG (A ∪ B) =
wG (u, v).
{u,v}∈E
u∈A∪B

1. Introduction
Graph clustering is a fundamental technique in data analysis with wide-ranging applications in machine learning
and data science. A classical graph clustering problem
involves partitioning the vertices of a graph into sets of
highly connected vertices to minimize the normalised cut
value. However, many real-world clustering tasks are defined by alternative objective functions, tailored to the specific needs and constraints of the problem at hand. One
such example involves uncovering the vertex sets that are
densely connected to each other, and these two vertex sets
form a bipartite-like graph. For example, when representing the migration or trade datasets with a graph, a bipartitelike cluster captures a typical pattern of regional migration
or trade (Cucuringu et al., 2020; Laenen & Sun, 2020; He
et al., 2022), and the significance of bipartite-like clusters
is further highlighted when studying many other real-world
datasets (Bennett et al., 2022; Concas et al., 2022).

Notice that a high value of ϕG (A, B) implies that most
edges adjacent to the vertices in A ∪ B are between A and
B, and A and B form a bipartite-like cluster. Generalising this to multiple clusters, for every k ∈ N we define the
k-way dual Cheeger constant by
ρ̄G (k) ≜

max

min ϕG (Ai , Bi ),

(A1 ,B1 ),...,(Ak ,Bk ) 1≤i≤k

(1.1)

where the maximum is taken over all the possible k pairs
of subsets (A1 , B1 ), . . . , (Ak , Bk ) satisfying Ai ∩ Aj =
∅, Bi ∩ Bj = ∅, Ai ∩ Bj = ∅ for different i, j ∈ [k],
and Ai ∪ Bi ̸= ∅ for different i, j ∈ [k]. Notice that a
high value of ρ̄G (k) implies that G contains k bipartitelike clusters, in each of which the vertex sets Ai and Bi
are densely connected to each other. We prove that, when
G presents a clear structure of k bipartite-like clusters, this
structure can be represented by a sparse subgraph G∗ of
e
G with O(n)
edges, and G∗ can be constructed online in
nearly-linear time1 . Our result is as follows:

1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: He Sun
<h.sun@ed.ac.uk>.

1

We say that a graph algorithm runs in nearly-linear time if
the algorithm’s running time is O(m · poly log n), where m and
n are the number of edges and vertices of the input graph. For
simplicity, we use e
O(·) to hide a poly-logarithmic factor of n.

nd

Proceedings of the 42
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

