Polynomial-Delay MAG Listing with Novel Locally Complete Orientation Rules
Tian-Zuo Wang 1 2 Wen-Bo Du 1 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

A

A maximal ancestral graph (MAG) is widely used
to characterize the causal relations among observable variables in the presence of latent variables.
However, given observational data, only a partial
ancestral graph representing a Markov equivalence class (MEC) of MAGs is identifiable, which
generally contains uncertain causal relations. Due
to the uncertainties, MAG listing, i.e., listing all
the MAGs in the MEC, is critical for many downstream tasks. In this paper, we present the first
polynomial-delay MAG listing method, where delay refers to the time for outputting each MAG,
through introducing enumerated structural knowledge in the form of singleton background knowledge (BK). To incorporate such knowledge, we
propose the sound and locally complete orientation rules. By recursively introducing singleton
BK and applying the rules, our method can output
all and only MAGs in the MEC with polynomial
delay. Additionally, while the proposed novel
rules enable more efficient MAG listing, for the
goal of incorporating general BK, we present two
counterexamples to imply that existing rules including ours, are not yet complete, which motivate
two more rules. Experimental results validate the
efficiency of the proposed MAG listing method.

D

S

L

B
C

(a) DAG D

A

B

A

B

A

B

D

C

D

C

D

C

(b) MAG M

(c) PAG P

(d) PMG H

Figure 1: Fig. 1(a): a DAG D including a latent confounder
L and a selection variable S. Fig. 1(b): The MAG M characterizing the causal relations over the observable variables
in D. Fig. 1(c): The PAG P representing the MEC of M.
Fig. 1(d): When orienting A → B, there must be B → C.
A directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a classical graphical
model to characterize causal relations when all relevant
variables are fully observable. In practice, however, latent
variables generally exist, including latent confounders and
selection variables. A latent confounder is a latent variable
that influences more than one observed variable, e.g., genes
influence both whether a person smokes and whether this
person develops lung cancer, which are typically latent. A
selection variable is a latent variable influenced by multiple
observed variables and plays a role in determining whether
the data is collected. E.g., whether a person goes to a hospital S depends on both whether he is ill and whether he
is alive. If the data is collected only from the hospital, it is
conditioned on S = 1, indicating the distribution of the collected data differs from the overall population distribution.

1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua Zhou
<zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

In the presence of latent variables, maximal ancestral graph
(MAG) is generally used to characterize the causal relations
among observable variables (Richardson et al., 2002). Given
a DAG in Fig. 1(a) with latent confounder L and selection
variable S, the corresponding MAG is as Fig. 1(b). However,
existing theoretical results imply that a DAG/MAG is not
identifiable from observational data (Spirtes et al., 2000), unless introducing model or functional assumptions (Shimizu
et al., 2006; Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009). In the presence of
latent variables, only a Markov equivalence class (MEC) of
MAGs, which encode the same conditional independence,
can be identified from observational data. This MEC is represented by a partial ancestral graph (PAG), which contains
uncertain structures denoted by circles (◦) as Fig. 1(c).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Given that only a PAG with uncertainties is identifiable,
MAG listing, i.e., listing all the MAGs in the MEC represented by the PAG, is crucial for many downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, causality has gathered significant attention in artificial intelligence. In this field, a causal graph characterizing
causal relations plays a vital role. On one hand, a causal
graph provides a profound insight into underlying physical
mechanism (Cai et al., 2018; Runge et al., 2019). On the
other hand, it serves as a crucial tool for estimating causal
effects (Pearl, 2009), which are essential in applications.

1

