Teaching Physical Awareness to LLMs through Sounds

Weiguo Wang 1 Andy Nie 1 2 Wenrui Zhou 1 Yi Kai 1 Chengchen Hu 1

Abstract

in an enclosed space or outdoors; and binaural hearing allows us to pinpoint the sound direction. Apparently, these
acoustic cues provide crucial information about physical
dynamics and spatial relationships.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in text and multimodal processing, yet they fundamentally lack physical
awareness–understanding of real-world physical
phenomena. In this work, we present ACORN, a
framework that teaches LLMs physical awareness
through sound, focusing on fundamental physical
phenomena like the Doppler effect, multipath effect, and spatial relationships. To overcome data
scarcity, ACORN introduce a physics-based simulator combining real-world sound sources with
controlled physical channels to generate diverse
training data. Using this simulator, we build AQAPHY, a comprehensive Audio Question-Answer
dataset, and propose an audio encoder that processes both magnitude and phase information. By
connecting our audio encoder to state-of-the-art
LLMs, we demonstrate reasonable results in both
simulated and real-world tasks, such as line-ofsight detection, Doppler effect estimation, and
Direction-of-Arrival estimation, paving the way
for enabling LLMs to understand physical world.

Despite their ability to recognize and generate speech, current LLMs can not comprehend the physical properties
of sound. This gap poses significant challenges in realworld applications. For example, a voice-controlled vehicle
might accept a command such as Open the Window
from someone outside the car, introducing a security risk
due to its inability to discern the physical origin of the voice.
Also, in human-robot interaction, embodied AI systems
without physical awareness fail to imitate human behaviors,
such as turning towards the speaker when addressed.
In this paper, we take an initial step toward bridging this gap
by proposing ACORN (Acoustic Channel-Oriented Reasoning Network), a framework that teaches LLMs to develop
physical awareness through sound. ACORN equips LLMs
with both passive and active acoustic sensing capabilities:
Through passive sensing, LLMs can detect line-of-sight
(LOS) signal paths, interpret motion via Doppler effects, localize sound sources, and analyze multipath effects. With active sensing, we extend their capabilities to include distance
measurement by generating pulses and analyzing echoes,
akin to sonar systems. We demonstrate that LLMs empowered by ACORN can not only understand the real world via
sound but also interact with it.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in processing and generating text and have
successfully expanded into multimodal understanding. However, a fundamental limitation remains: LLMs lack physical
awareness–the ability to understand and meaningfully interact with the physical world.

However, a significant challenge arises in this endeavor:
How to collect and annotate a large-scale dataset that captures diverse physical phenomena? (1) Data collection requires extensive deployment of recording devices across various environments and conditions, making it prohibitively
expensive and impractical. (2) Data annotation is nearly
infeasible because, unlike text or images where humans
can directly annotate content, audio physical phenomena
(like Doppler effects or multipath reflections) can not be
labeled by human alone and often requires sophisticated
measurement equipment.

Physical awareness, particularly through sound, is a cornerstone of how humans understand the environment. Sound
provides rich, instinctive insights into our surroundings: The
Doppler effect, with its frequency shifts, tells us whether
a vehicle is approaching or receding; The multipath effect,
where sound reflects off surfaces, reveals whether we are

Our key insight to tackle this challenge is that: The sound
that we hear or microphones capture can be decomposed
into two independent components—the sound source and
the physical channel through which it travels. This decomposition suggests an elegant solution: instead of collecting

1
NIO 2 Peking University. Correspondence to: Weiguo Wang
<wangwg.wwg@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

