CSG-ODE: ControlSynth Graph ODE for
Modeling Complex Evolution of Dynamic Graphs

Zhiqiang Wang 1 Xiaoyi Wang 1 Jianqing Liang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the rapid development of fields such as social networks, traffic flow prediction, and financial market analysis,
dynamic graph representation learning has gradually become one of the important research directions in the field of
graph learning (Yang et al., 2024). A dynamic graph refers
to a graph structure in which the states of nodes and edges,
as well as the graph topology, evolve over time. In these
systems, the interactions and relationships between nodes
are time-varying, presenting both significant challenges and
opportunities for model development.

Graph Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
(GODE) integrate the Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) framework with differential equations, effectively modeling latent space uncertainty and
continuous dynamics, excelling in graph data evolution and incompleteness. However, existing
GODE face challenges in capturing time-varying
relationships and nonlinear node state evolution,
which limits their ability to model complex dynamic graphs. To address these issues, we propose the ControlSynth Graph ODE (CSG-ODE).
In the VAE encoding phase, CSG-ODE introduces
an information transmission-based inter-node importance weighting mechanism, integrating it with
latent correlations to guide adaptive graph convolutional recurrent networks for temporal node
embedding. During decoding, CSG-ODE employs ODE to model node dynamics, capturing
nonlinear evolution through sub-networks with
nonlinear activations. For scenarios or prediction
tasks that require stability, we extend CSG-ODE
to stable CSG-ODE (SCSG-ODE) by constraining weight matrices to learnable anti-symmetric
forms, theoretically ensuring enhanced stability.
Experiments on traffic, motion capture, and simulated physical systems datasets demonstrate that
CSG-ODE outperforms state-of-the-art GODE,
while SCSG-ODE achieves both superior performance and optimal stability.

In recent years, with the increasing popularity of Graph
Neural Networks (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2008), more and
more dynamic graph representation learning methods have
begun to leverage GNN to handle the temporal information
in dynamic graphs. By introducing strategies such as temporal window mechanisms (Zhu et al., 2023) and temporal
encoding (Chen et al., 2024), GNN can effectively enhance
the model’s ability to process dynamic graph data and capture the temporal dynamics of nodes and edges. However,
many existing methods still assume that the complete state
of all nodes is available at each time point. This assumption
is often difficult to hold in real-world applications.
LatentODE (Rubanova et al., 2019) effectively addresses
the challenge of modeling irregularly sampled time series
by introducing latent ordinary differential equations (ODE)
within the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework. Building upon this, Graph Neural ODE (GODE) (such as (Huang
et al., 2021) and (Wen et al., 2022)) have been proposed
to model the uncertainty in multidimensional time series
data and capture its continuous dynamic evolution through
latent space. Specifically, these methods integrate the aggregation function of GNN as part of the ODE function,
effectively capturing the complex interaction information
between nodes. This provides an effective tool for modeling
incomplete dynamic graph data.

1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese
Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan
030006, Shanxi, China. Correspondence to: Jianqing Liang
<liangjq@sxu.edu.cn>.

However, existing GODE models have limitations in capturing the time-varying relationships between nodes and the
nonlinear evolution of node states. For example, in transportation systems, the road network has a significant impact
on traffic flow, and its fluctuations are affected by factors

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

