Geometry-Informed Neural Networks

Arturs Berzins * 1 2 Andreas Radler * 1 Eric Volkmann * 1
Sebastian Sanokowski 1 Sepp Hochreiter 1 Johannes Brandstetter 1 3

Abstract

problem descriptions, such as objectives and constraints.
Previous works for PDEs (Raissi et al., 2019), molecular
science (Noé et al., 2019), and combinatorial optimization
(Bengio et al., 2021) demonstrate these can suffice to train
models even in the absence of any data. The success of
these data-free approaches motivates an analogous attempt
in geometry, raising the question: Is it possible to train a
shape-generative model on objectives and constraints alone,
without relying on any data?

Geometry is a ubiquitous tool in computer graphics, design, and engineering. However, the lack
of large shape datasets limits the application of
state-of-the-art supervised learning methods and
motivates the exploration of alternative learning
strategies. To this end, we introduce geometryinformed neural networks (GINNs) – a framework for training shape-generative neural fields
without data by leveraging user-specified design
requirements in the form of objectives and constraints. By adding diversity as an explicit constraint, GINNs avoid mode-collapse and can generate multiple diverse solutions, often required in
geometry tasks. Experimentally, we apply GINNs
to several problems spanning physics, geometry,
and engineering design, showing control over geometrical and topological properties, such as surface smoothness or the number of holes. These
results demonstrate the potential of training shapegenerative models without data, paving the way
for new generative design approaches without
large datasets.

We address this question by introducing geometry-informed
neural networks or GINNs. GINNs are trained to satisfy
specified design requirements and to produce feasible shapes
without any training samples. A GINN solves a structural
optimization problem using neural fields, which offer detailed, smooth, and topologically flexible geometry representations, while being compact to store. This setup is
analogous to physics-informed neural networks but with
a high number of varied constraints: differential, integral,
geometrical, and topological.
In contrast to both physics-informed neural networks and
classical structural optimization, GINNs allow to generate
multiple solutions by enforcing solution diversity as an explicit constraint. This is of high interest when applied to
problems with solution multiplicity, e.g., induced by underdeterminedness or near-optimality common in geometry
problems. Connecting back to our research question, the
proposed framework allows us to train neural fields that satisfy user-specified design constraints, and by adding diversity as an explicit constraint, we can generate a multiplicity
of solutions. GINNs can thus be used as shape-generative
models trained purely on constraints and without data.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have revolutionized fields
with abundant data, such as computer vision and natural
language processing. However, the scarcity of large datasets
in many other domains, including 3D computer graphics,
design, engineering, and physics, restricts the use of advanced supervised learning techniques, necessitating the
exploration of alternative learning strategies.

We take several steps to demonstrate GINNs experimentally. We formulate a tractable learning problem using constrained optimization and by converting constraints into
differentiable losses. We demonstrate the generality of the
framework by solving several tasks, including an underdetermined PDE, geometric optimization, and engineering
design (Figures 4, 5). Figure 1 illustrates the task of designing a jet-engine lifting bracket, or geometrically – connecting cylindrical interfaces within the given design region.
We show different GINNs trained with various smoothness
and topology requirements, illustrating the robustness of the

Fortunately, these disciplines are often equipped with formal
*

Equal contribution 1 LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria 2 Part of this work was done while at SINTEF and Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo, Norway 3 Emmi AI GmbH, Linz, Austria. Correspondence to: Arturs
Berzins <berzins@ml.jku.at>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

