Efficient Distributed Optimization under Heavy-Tailed Noise

Su Hyeong Lee 1 Manzil Zaheer 2 Tian Li 3

Abstract

training processes across multiple compute nodes such as
GPUs or datacenters. However, this paradigm introduces a
new bottleneck of communication overhead, especially as
the progress in compute power has outpaced that of network
infrastructure (Wu et al., 2023; DeepSeek-AI, 2024).

Distributed optimization has become the default
training paradigm in modern machine learning
due to the growing scale of models and datasets.
To mitigate communication overhead, local updates are often applied before global aggregation,
resulting in a nested optimization approach with
inner and outer steps. However, heavy-tailed
stochastic gradient noise remains a significant
challenge, particularly in attention-based models,
hindering effective training. In this work, we propose TailOPT, an efficient framework designed to
address heavy-tailed noise by leveraging adaptive
optimization and novel clipping techniques. We
establish convergence guarantees for the TailOPT
framework under heavy-tailed noise with local
updates and potentially unbounded gradient variance. Among its variants, we propose a memoryand communication-efficient instantiation (named
Bi2 Clip) that performs coordinate-wise clipping
from both above and below at both the inner and
outer optimizers. Bi2 Clip brings about benefits
of adaptive optimization (e.g., Adam) without the
cost of maintaining or transmitting additional gradient statistics. Empirically, TailOPT, including
Bi2 Clip, demonstrates superior performance on
various tasks and models compared with state-ofthe-art methods, while being more efficient.

To mitigate these communication challenges, one promising
strategy is the utilization of local updates. By allowing each
compute node to perform multiple gradient updates locally
before aggregation, the frequency and volume of inter-node
communication can be significantly reduced (Smith et al.,
2018; Stich, 2018; McMahan et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2024a; Jaghouar et al., 2024). For instance, the
recent DiLoCo algorithm for training LLMs in datacenter environments can apply several hundred local gradient updates
prior to aggregation to reduce communication costs (Douillard et al., 2024). This approach naturally formulates a
nested optimization problem, where inner optimization occurs within each compute node, and outer optimization is
orchestrated by the coordinating node(s).
However, training attention-based models like LLMs introduce an additional challenge due to the properties of their
stochastic gradient distributions. Empirical and theoretical investigations have consistently demonstrated that the
gradient noise in these models follows a heavy-tailed distribution (Ahn et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2019; Simsekli
et al., 2019; 2020; Kunstner et al., 2024; Gorbunov et al.,
2020). This heavy-tailed behavior, characterized by high or
infinite variance and potentially very large deviations, poses
significant challenges to the stability and convergence of
existing optimization algorithms (Zhang et al., 2020b; Lee
et al., 2024). Addressing these challenges necessitates the
development of novel optimization strategies and a more
principled understanding of their theoretical underpinnings.

1. Introduction
The training of deep learning models including large language models (LLMs) has become increasingly resourceintensive, driven by expansive datasets and models with
billions of parameters (Rosa et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024b;
Sriram et al., 2022; Dehghani et al., 2023). As the computational demands escalate, distributed learning has emerged
as the default approach, enabling the parallel activation of

In this work, we propose TailOPT, an efficient and theoretically principled nested training framework, designed to
address the challenges posed by heavy-tailed gradient noise
in distributed training with local updates. TailOPT introduces several key strategies, including clipping mechanisms
(such as coordinate-wise or L2 -clipping) and adaptivity, applied at both inner and outer optimizers, to mitigate the
adverse effects of heavy-tailed noise. We note that the preconditioning step in adaptive optimizers (e.g., Streeter &
McMahan, 2010) may be viewed as a form of soft clipping.

1

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 2 Meta
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Su Hyeong Lee <sulee@uchicago.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

