Improved Regret Analysis in Gaussian Process Bandits:
Optimality for Noiseless Reward, RKHS norm, and Non-Stationary Variance

Shogo Iwazaki 1 Shion Takeno 2

Abstract

theoretical guarantee for the regret. Established work by
Srinivas et al. (2010) has shown the upper bounds of the
cumulative regret for the GP upper confidence bound (GPUCB) algorithm. Furthermore, Valko et al. (2013) have
shown a tighter regret upper bound for the SupKernelUCB
algorithm. Scarlett et al. (2017) have shown the lower bound
of the regret, which implies that the regret upper bound
from (Valko et al., 2013) is near-optimal; that is, the regret upper bound matches the lower bound except for the
poly-logarithmic factor. Then, several studies further tackled obtaining a near-optimal GP-bandit algorithm. Vakili
et al. (2021a) have proposed maximum variance reduction
(MVR), which is shown to be near-optimal for the simple regret incurred by the last recommended action. Furthermore,
Li & Scarlett (2022) have shown that phased elimination
(PE) is near-optimal for the cumulative regret. The regret
analysis of MVR and PE heavily depends on the upper
bound for the maximum posterior variance.

We study the Gaussian process (GP) bandit problem, whose goal is to minimize regret under an unknown reward function lying in some reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). The maximum posterior variance analysis is vital in analyzing nearoptimal GP bandit algorithms such as maximum
variance reduction (MVR) and phased elimination (PE). Therefore, we first show the new upper
bound of the maximum posterior variance, which
improves the dependence of the noise variance
parameters of the GP. By leveraging this result,
we refine the MVR and PE to obtain (i) a nearly
optimal regret upper bound in the noiseless setting
and (ii) regret upper bounds that are optimal with
respect to the RKHS norm of the reward function. Furthermore, as another application of our
proposed bound, we analyze the GP bandit under
the time-varying noise variance setting, which is
the kernelized extension of the linear bandit with
heteroscedastic noise. For this problem, we show
that MVR and PE-based algorithms achieve noise
variance-dependent regret upper bounds, which
match our regret lower bound.

We derive the upper bound of the maximum posterior variance in Section 3, by which we tackle tightening the regret
upper bound in the settings where room for improvement
remains. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1. In Section 3, we obtain the upper bound of the maximum posterior variance (Lemma 3.1 and Corollary 3.2).
Our proposed bound is tighter than the existing bound
when the noise variances approach zero.

1. Introduction
The Gaussian process (GP) bandits (Srinivas et al., 2010)
is a powerful framework for sequential decision-making
tasks to minimize regret defined by a black-box reward
function, which belongs to known reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS). The applications include many fields
such as robotics (Berkenkamp et al., 2021), experimental design (Lei et al., 2021), and hyperparameter tuning
task (Snoek et al., 2012).

2. In Section 4, we analyze the GP bandit under the noiseless setting. We show a novel result that PE achieves
the cumulative regret upper bound that matches the
conjectured lower bound shown by Vakili (2022) under common assumptions in the GP bandit literature.
Furthermore, we prove that MVR achieves the exponentially converging and near-optimal simple regret
upper bounds for squared exponential (SE) and Matérn
kernels, respectively. These results are summarized in
Tables 1–2.

Many existing studies have been conducted to obtain the
1

MI-6 Ltd. Tokyo, Japan 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan. Correspondence to: Shogo
Iwazaki <shogo.iwazaki@gmail.com>.

3. In Section 5, we show that the modified PE- and MVRstyle algorithms achieve the near-optimal cumulative
and simple regret upper bounds with respect to the
RKHS norm upper bound of the reward function under

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

