Demystifying Cost-Efficiency in LLM Serving over Heterogeneous GPUs

Youhe Jiang * 1 2 Fangcheng Fu * 3 Xiaozhe Yao * 4 Guoliang He * 1 Xupeng Miao 5 Ana Klimovic 4 Bin Cui 3
Binhang Yuan 2 Eiko Yoneki 1
Short In, Short Out
Short In, Long Out

Req. Ratio (%)

Abstract
Recent advancements in Large Language Models
(LLMs) have led to increasingly diverse requests,
accompanied with varying resource (compute and
memory) demands to serve them. However, this
in turn degrades the cost-efficiency of LLM serving as common practices primarily rely on homogeneous GPU resources. In response to this
problem, this work conducts a thorough study
about serving LLMs over heterogeneous GPU resources on cloud platforms. The rationale is that
different GPU types exhibit distinct compute and
memory characteristics, aligning well with the
divergent resource demands of diverse requests.
Particularly, through comprehensive benchmarking, we discover that the cost-efficiency of LLM
serving can be substantially optimized by meticulously determining GPU composition, deployment configurations, and workload assignments.
Subsequently, we design a scheduling algorithm
via mixed-integer linear programming, aiming at
deducing the most cost-efficient serving plan under the constraints of price budget and real-time
GPU availability. Remarkably, our approach effectively outperforms homogeneous and heterogeneous baselines under a wide array of scenarios,
covering diverse workload traces, varying GPU
availablilities, and multi-model serving. This
casts new light on more accessible and efficient
LLM serving over heterogeneous cloud resources.

100
75
50
25
0

1-Month Traces

Time Slots

Long In, Short Out
Long In, Long Out

100
75
50
25
0

6-Hour Traces

Time Slots

Figure 1: The real-world workload traces from the Swiss
AI Center comprise over 500,000 traces collected over one
month. We categorize the workload types based on input
and output token lengths (longer than 512 and 128 are characterized as long).

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), including GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024), Gemini (Reid et al., 2024), Llama3 (Dubey
et al., 2024), Claude (Anthropic, 2024), Mixtral (Jiang et al.,
2024), and DeepSeek-V3 (Liu et al., 2024a), have demonstrated unprecedented performance across a wide range of
real-world applications (GitHub, 2024; Jeon & Lee, 2023;
Peng et al., 2023), such as chatbots, education, and healthcare, profoundly impacting human lives. In this context,
enhancing the cost-efficiency of LLM serving is crucial for
democratizing access to these cutting-edge technologies.
Currently, predominant practices utilize homogeneous GPU
resources to deploy LLMs and serve the incoming requests (Li et al., 2023; Kwon et al., 2023; Agrawal et al.,
2024b). However, with the broadening application domains,
serving LLMs is facing progressively varying request patterns, driving the serving workloads dynamic and diverse—
a phenomenon referred to as workload heterogeneity (Sun
et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024b). This contradiction makes
the use of homogeneous GPU resources unsuitable.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, UK 2 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong, China 3 Department of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland 5 Department of
Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
US. Correspondence to: Binhang Yuan <biyuan@ust.hk>, Eiko
Yoneki <eiko.yoneki@cl.cam.ac.uk>.

To be specific, the requests to be served have varying input
and output token lengths, as exemplified by the real-world
LLM serving traces at the Swiss AI Center shown in Figure 1. Such differences can exhibit significantly divergent
resource (compute and memory) demands across different
types of workloads, owing to the distinct characteristics of
the two phases of inference— the prefill phase is compute-

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

