Capturing Temporal Dynamics in Large-Scale Canopy Tree Height Estimation

Jan Pauls 1 * Max Zimmer 2 * Berkant Turan 2 *
Sassan Saatchi 3 Philippe Ciais 4 Sebastian Pokutta 2 Fabian Gieseke 1 5
Aerial Laser Scanning (ALS)

Abstract
With the rise in global greenhouse gas emissions,
accurate large-scale tree canopy height maps are
essential for understanding forest structure, estimating above-ground biomass, and monitoring
ecological disruptions. To this end, we present
a novel approach to generate large-scale, highresolution canopy height maps over time. Our
model accurately predicts canopy height over multiple years given Sentinel-1 composite and Sentinel 2 time series satellite data. Using GEDI
LiDAR data as the ground truth for training the
model, we present the first 10 m resolution temporal canopy height map of the European continent
for the period 2019–2022. As part of this product, we also offer a detailed canopy height map
for 2020, providing more precise estimates than
previous studies. Our pipeline and the resulting
temporal height map are publicly available, enabling comprehensive large-scale monitoring of
forests and, hence, facilitating future research and
ecological analyses.

Ours

Liu et al.

Tolan et al.

Pauls et al.

Lang et al.

Turubanova et al. 0

35

Figure 1. Comparison of six canopy height maps with precise measurements obtained via aerial laser scanning (ALS). The patches
contain tall trees exceeding 30 m in height. Our model is the only
one that can accurately estimate the height of such trees.

of numerous methods, this quantification remains insufficient for detailed and effective policymaking (Cook-Patton
et al., 2020; Cuni-Sanchez et al., 2021). An essential part
of this quantification is the monitoring of forest ecosystems,
in turn allowing their management and conservation. To
support climate adaptation and mitigation strategies, accurate and up-to-date information on forest health and carbon
balance is critical to evaluate the current state of forests, to
implement measures to prevent forest loss, and to improve
management strategies (Friedlingstein et al., 2019).
A key approach to assess forest conditions is based on measuring or estimating tree heights, which results in height
values that are used to approximate wood volume, so-called
above-ground biomass and, consequently, the carbon stored
in trees (Schwartz et al., 2023). A traditional way to obtain corresponding measurements is to manually measure
individual trees, resulting in so-called National Forest Inventories (NFI). Such inventories are essential for forest
monitoring, but are very costly and also lack global reach.
This issue is worsened by varying forest monitoring efforts
and techniques across different nations with different financial resources (Sloan & Sayer, 2015). However, advances
in Earth observation and machine learning now enable automated, comprehensive global forest assessments by leveraging satellite data, including optical, radar, and LiDAR measurements (Hu et al., 2020). The resulting high-resolution
canopy height maps are essential for understanding forest
dynamics and supporting climate change mitigation efforts.

1. Introduction
As global carbon emissions continue to rise, meeting the
goals of the Paris Agreement1 requires a comprehensive understanding of all climate-related factors. This includes precise quantification and temporal monitoring of carbon sinks.
However, despite decades of research and the development
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Information Systems, University of Münster, Germany 2 Department for AI in Society,
Science, and Technology, Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany 3 Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology,
USA 4 Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement,
LSCE/IPSL, France 5 Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Jan Pauls
<jan.pauls@uni-muenster.de>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/
the-paris-agreement

Recent studies have advanced canopy height prediction
using classical machine learning methods (Potapov et al.,
1

