Improved Approximations for Hard Graph Problems using Predictions

Anders Aamand * 1 Justin Y. Chen 2 Siddharth Gollapudi 3 Sandeep Silwal 4 Hao WU 5

Abstract

running times for classical algorithms (Mitzenmacher &
Vassilvitskii, 2022; Chen et al., 2022a), among many other
highlights.

We design improved approximation algorithms
for NP-hard graph problems by incorporating
predictions (e.g., learned from past data). Our
prediction model builds upon and extends the εprediction framework by Cohen-Addad, d’Orsi,
Gupta, Lee, and Panigrahi (NeurIPS 2024). We
consider an edge-based version of this model,
where each edge provides two bits of information, corresponding to predictions about whether
each of its endpoints belong to an optimal solution. Even with weak predictions where each bit is
only ε-correlated with the true solution, this information allows us to break approximation barriers
in the standard setting. We develop algorithms
with improved approximation ratios for MaxCut,
Vertex Cover, Set Cover, and Maximum Independent Set problems (among others). Across these
problems, our algorithms share a unifying theme,
where we separately satisfy constraints related to
high degree vertices (using predictions) and lowdegree vertices (without using predictions) and
carefully combine the answers.

We focus on a recent line of work on improving approximation guarantees for fundamental NP-hard problems. The
goal of this line of work is to use predictions to circumvent hardness of approximation results in the worst case
(under standard complexity conjectures). One compelling
motivation for learning-augmented algorithms for NP-hard
problems is the following: if we run a heavy-duty computation on a single input, such as running a commercial
integer linear programming solver, can we avoid repeated
computation for a similar future inputs? Can we augment
classical approximation algorithms with insights learned
from an expensive computation to warm-start any future
calls to the algorithm? More generally, how can we incorporate noisy information, which is weakly correlated with
an optimal solution, into the algorithm design pipeline for
NP-hard problems?
To formalize this, the starting point of our paper is the recent work of Cohen-Addad et al., which introduced the
ε-accurate vertex prediction model for the MaxCut problem.
Their model provides the algorithm designer with vertex
predictions: one bit for the side of the MaxCut each vertex lies in. Every bit is equal to the correct answer with
probability 1/2 + ε.

1. Introduction
Learning-augmented algorithms have recently emerged as a
popular paradigm for beyond worst-case analysis via incorporating machine learning into classical algorithm design.
By utilizing predictions, e.g. those learned from past or
similar instances, prior works have improved upon worstcase bounds for competitive ratios for online algorithms
(Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021; Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2022), space usage in streaming applications (Hsu
et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022b), and

We are motivated by three follow up directions. The first
direction explores the setting where we are optimizing a
global objective function (as in MaxCut) with additional
edge-constraints. For example, this captures the classic
vertex-cover or independent set problems.
Can we generalize the setting of Cohen-Addad
et al. to obtain learning-augmented algorithms
for NP-hard graph optimization problems with
edge constraints?

∗
Authors listed alphabetically. 1 University of Copenhagen
MIT 3 UC Berkeley 4 UW-Madison 5 University of Waterloo. Correspondence to: Anders Aamand <aa@di.ku.dk>,
Justin Y. Chen <justc@mit.edu>, Siddharth Gollapudi <sgollapu@berkeley.edu>, Sandeep Silwal <silwal@cs.wisc.edu>,
Hao WU <hao.wu1@uwaterloo.ca>.
2

This naturally leads us to introduce edge predictions as an
extension of the vertex prediction model (Cohen-Addad
et al., 2024). In our edge prediction model, every edge is
equipped with i.i.d. bits for each variable participating in
the edge constraint. Similar to the vertex prediction model,
our predicted bits are also ε-correlated with the ground truth

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

