Breaking Barriers: Combinatorial Algorithms for Non-Monotone Submodular
Maximization with Sublinear Adaptivity and 1/e Approximation

Yixin Chen 1 Wenjing Chen 1 Alan Kuhnle 1

Abstract

atschek et al., 2014) and feature selection (Bilmes, 2022),
it helps identify the most informative subsets efficiently. In
social network analysis (Kempe et al., 2003), it aids in influence maximization by selecting a subset of individuals
to maximize information spread. Additionally, in machine
learning (Bairi et al., 2015; Elenberg et al., 2017; Prajapat
et al., 2024), submodular functions are used for diverse
tasks like active learning, sensor placement, and diverse set
selection in recommendation systems. These applications
demonstrate the flexibility and effectiveness of submodular
optimization in addressing real-world problems with both
monotone and non-monotone objectives.

With the rapid growth of data in modern applications, parallel algorithms for maximizing nonmonotone submodular functions have gained significant attention. In the parallel computation
setting, the state-of-the-art approximation ratio of
1/e is achieved by a continuous algorithm (Ene &
Nguyen, 2020) with adaptivity O (log(n)). In this
work, we focus on size constraints and present
the first combinatorial algorithm matching this
bound – a randomized parallel approach achieving
1/e − ε approximation ratio. This result bridges
the gap between continuous and combinatorial
approaches for this problem. As a byproduct, we
also develop a simpler (1/4 − ε)-approximation
algorithm with high probability (≥ 1 − 1/n).
Both algorithms achieve O (log(n) log(k)) adaptivity and O (n log(n) log(k)) query complexity.
Empirical results show our algorithms achieve
competitive objective values, with the (1/4 − ε)approximation algorithm particularly efficient in
queries.

Problem Definition and Greedy Algorithms. In this
work, we consider the size-constrained maximization of
a submodular function: given a submodular function f
on ground set of size n, and given an integer k, find
arg maxS⊆U ,|S|≤k f (S). If additionally f is assumed to be
monotone, we refer to this problem as SM-M ON; otherwise,
we call the problem SM-G EN. For SM-M ON, a standard
greedy algorithm gives the optimal1 approximation ratio
of 1 − 1/e ≈ 0.63 (Nemhauser et al., 1978) in at most kn
queries2 to f . In contrast, standard greedy can’t achieve any
constant approximation factor in the non-monotone case;
however, an elegant, randomized variant of greedy, the R AN DOM G REEDY of Buchbinder et al. (2014) obtains the same
greedy ratio (in expectation) of 1 − 1/e for monotone objectives, and 1/e ≈ 0.367 for the general, non-monotone case,
also in at most kn queries. However, as modern instance
sizes in applications have become very large, kn queries is
too many. In the worst case, k = Ω(n), and the time complexity of these greedy algorithms becomes quadratic. To
improve efficiency, Buchbinder et al. (2017) leverage sampling technique to get FAST R ANDOM G REEDY, reducing
the query complexity to O (n) when k ≥ 8ε−2 log(2ε−1 ).

1. Introduction
Submodular Optimization. Submodular optimization is
a powerful framework for solving combinatorial optimization problems that exhibit diminishing returns (Nemhauser
et al., 1978; Feige & Goemans, 1995; Cornuejols et al.,
1977). In a monotone setting, adding more elements to
a solution always increases its utility, but at a decreasing
rate. On the other hand, non-monotone objectives may
have elements that, when added, can reduce the utility of a
solution. This versatility makes submodular optimization
widely applicable across various domains. For instance,
in data summarization (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2018; Tschi-

Parallelizable Algorithms. In addition to reducing the
number of queries, recently, much work has focused on
developing parallelizable algorithms for submodular opti-

1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Alan
Kuhnle <kuhnle@tamu.edu>.

1
Optimal in polynomially many queries to f in the value query
model (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978).
2
Typically, queries to f dominate other parts of the computation, so in this field time complexity of an algorithm is usually
given as oracle complexity to f .

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

