Constrained Exploitability Descent: An Offline Reinforcement Learning
Method for Finding Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium

Runyu Lu 1 2 Yuanheng Zhu 2 1 Dongbin Zhao 2 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Data-driven learning of policies is appealing, especially in
scenarios where the interaction with the environment is expensive, e.g., robotic manipulation, autonomous driving,
and health care. Therefore, offline reinforcement learning
(RL) (Levine et al., 2020) has become an increasingly attractive research topic in recent years. However, offline
RL faces an inherent challenge of distributional shift (Ross
et al., 2011), which arises from visiting out-of-distribution
states and actions. A direct way to address this issue is
to apply policy constraints, which constrain how much the
learned policy differs from the behavior policy in the dataset
(Kakade & Langford, 2002; Schulman et al., 2015). In
single-agent Markov decision processes (MDPs), such constraints can lead to suboptimality of the learned policy since
the optimal policy is usually a pure strategy that assigns the
optimal action probability one at each state (Sutton & Barto,
2018). Since the behavior policy derived from a set of offline
transitions can hardly be a pure strategy, applying policy
constraints with respect to the behavior policy will sacrifice
the optimality of the learned policy, even if the coverage
of the offline data is theoretically sufficient for learning the
optimal policy (e.g., satisfying uniform concentration).

This paper proposes Constrained Exploitability
Descent (CED), a model-free offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm for solving adversarial Markov games (MGs). CED combines the
game-theoretical approach of Exploitability Descent (ED) with policy constraint methods from
offline RL. While policy constraints can perturb
the optimal pure-strategy solutions in single-agent
scenarios, we find the side effect less detrimental
in adversarial games, where the optimal policy
can be a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium. We
theoretically prove that, under the uniform coverage assumption on the dataset, CED converges
to a stationary point in deterministic two-player
zero-sum Markov games. We further prove that
the min-player policy at the stationary point follows the property of mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in MGs. Compared to the model-based
ED method that optimizes the max-player policy,
our CED method no longer relies on a generalized gradient. Experiments in matrix games, a
tree-form game, and an infinite-horizon soccer
game verify that CED can find an equilibrium
policy for the min-player as long as the offline
dataset guarantees uniform coverage. Besides,
CED achieves a significantly lower NashConv
compared to an existing pessimism-based method
and can gradually improve the behavior policy
even under non-uniform data coverages. When
combined with neural networks, CED also outperforms behavior cloning and offline self-play in a
large-scale two-team robotic combat game.

For multi-agent scenarios, the optimal solution can still
be a pure strategy when it is fully cooperative. However,
in adversarial games, e.g., two-player zero-sum Markov
games (MGs), we usually characterize the optimal solution
with the concept of Nash equilibrium (NE), which admits
mixed strategies. For example, in a two-player Rock-PaperScissors (RPS) game, the unique NE is the mixed strategy
( 13 , 31 , 31 ) for both players. It is thus possible that policy
constraint methods under a mixed-strategy behavior policy
may not sacrifice policy optimality in MGs. While recent
research in the field of game theory has developed various efficient equilibrium-learning dynamics that can be extended into model-free RL algorithms (Lanctot et al., 2017;
Lockhart et al., 2019), it has not been examined if these
algorithms can be further combined with existing offline
learning techniques (Siegel et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2019)
while preserving the guarantee to find an exact Nash equilibrium under sufficient assumptions on the data coverage.

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Runyu
Lu <lurunyu17@mails.ucas.ac.cn>, Yuanheng Zhu <yuanheng.zhu@ia.ac.cn>, Dongbin Zhao <dongbin.zhao@ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

On the other hand, while the existing pessimism-based meth1

