Adaptive Partitioning Schemes for Optimistic Optimization

Raja Sunkara 1 Ardhendu Tripathy 2

Abstract

function. Additionally, an axis-aligned rectangle scheme
limits the application to low-dimensional search spaces (as
the number of rectangles grows as k dn , where k is the number of splits at each height, d is the dimension and n is the
number of splits needed in each dimension), or it may fail
to exploit low-dimensional structures in high-dimensional
spaces. Thus, there is a need to develop partitioning schemes
that can adapt to the low dimensional structure that may be
present in a black-box function.

Applications such as engineering design often require us to optimize a black-box function, i.e.,
a system whose inner processing is not analytically known and whose gradients are not available. Practitioners often have a fixed budget for
the number of function evaluations and the performance of an optimization algorithm is measured by its simple regret. In this paper, we study
the class of “Optimistic Optimization” algorithms
for black-box optimization that use a partitioning
scheme for the domain. We develop algorithms
that learn a good partitioning scheme and use flexible surrogate models such as neural networks in
the optimization procedure. For multi-index functions on an m-dimensional subspace within d dimensions, our algorithm attains Õ(n−β/d ) regret,
d−m
where β = 1+ 2m−1
, as opposed to Õ(n−1/d ) for
SequOOL, a state-of-the-art optimistic optimization algorithm. We use our approach to improve
the quality of Activation-aware Weight Quantization (AWQ) of the OPT-1.3B model, achieving
∼ 10% improvement in performance relative to
the best possible unquantized model.

Global optimization is impossible without restricting the
class of functions: a degenerate function that takes the value
1 at particular location and zero everywhere else can only
be optimized by sampling every point in the domain. The
class of functions is typically restricted by assumptions on
its “smoothness”. One of the first global optimization algorithms with provable convergence was obtained for the class
of Lipschitz functions. The DiRect algorithm (Jones et al.,
1993; Jones & Martins, 2021) is a well-known algorithm
that can optimize Lipschitz functions without knowing the
Lipschitz constant. A different class of functions studied in
the Bayesian Optimization literature is that of the Gaussian
Process (GP) prior for the unknown function f . Combining
the observed samples with the prior mean and covariance
kernel, a posterior distribution for f is obtained and used
to guide the sampling strategy, see e.g. GP-UCB (Srinivas
et al., 2012). Since its sampling strategy required maximizing the Upper Confidence Bound obtained from the posterior, its could feasibly be applied only on low-dimensional
X . Later works (Shekhar & Javidi, 2018; Salgia et al., 2021)
incorporated domain partitioning ideas to reduce the computational cost. GP-UCB can also be applied if f belongs
to a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space corresponding to
the covariance kernel. However, these methods require the
kernel associated with f as an input.

1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Optimization of black-box functions is often carried out by
a class of algorithms called “Optimistic Optimization” algorithms (Munos, 2014). These algorithms are preferred due
to their mild assumptions; however, they require a partition
scheme to be provided for the search space. The quality of
a partitioning scheme depends on the function being optimized (Grill et al., 2015). If information on the function is
lacking, then a default partitioning scheme, i.e., axis-aligned
rectangles, is used (Jones et al., 1993; Bartlett et al., 2019).
But this default choice might not be a good choice for the

Unlike the above methods, which assume a global characteristic for f , the “Optimistic Optimization” class of algorithms
(HOO (Bubeck et al., 2011), SOO (Munos, 2011), SequOOL
(Bartlett et al., 2019)) just assume a local smoothness condition around the global maximizer. This local smoothness
ensures that the function does not rapidly decrease around
its maximum value. These algorithms require as input a hierarchical partitioning of X that is well-behaved with respect
to a semi-metric on X . Although the semi-metric is not
needed to be known, the performance of these algorithms

1
Missouri University of Science & Technology, Rolla
MO, US 2 OpsCanvas, Alexandria VA, US. Correspondence
to: Raja Sunkara <rs5cq@mst.edu>, Ardhendu Tripathy <ardhendu@opscanvas.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

