Consensus is all you get: the role of attention in transformers

Álvaro Rodrı́guez Abella * 1 João Pedro Silvestre * 1 Paulo Tabuada * 1

Abstract

plexity, making it challenging to comprehensively explain
their behavior (Peng et al., 2024). However, recent studies
have shown the emergence of clusters of tokens empirically and theoretically (Dong et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2022;
Geshkovski et al., 2023b; 2024). These findings suggest
that without proper care, large transformers may collapse, a
phenomenon where the tokens cluster, limiting the model’s
ability to produce different outputs.

A key component of transformers is the attention mechanism orchestrating how each token
influences the propagation of every other token
along the layers of a transformer. In this paper we
provide a rigorous, mathematical analysis of the
asymptotic properties of attention in transformers.
Although we present several results based on different assumptions, all of them point to the same
conclusion, all tokens asymptotically converge
to each other, a phenomenon that has been empirically reported in the literature. Our findings
are carefully compared with existing theoretical
results and illustrated by simulations and experimental studies using the GPT-2 and the GPT-Neo
models.

Our work was motivated by the paper (Geshkovski et al.,
2023a) where a mathematical model for attention was proposed, based on prior work on similar models (Lu et al.,
2019; Dutta et al., 2021), and investigated. The authors
share the vision outlined in (Geshkovski et al., 2023a), a
better understanding of the role and importance of attention
mechanisms can be achieved through the study of mathematical models. Our contribution lies in bringing ideas
developed by the control community, where the study of
asymptotic properties of dynamical and control systems is
a central preoccupation, to bear on this problem. While
deferring to the next section a more detailed comparison
between our results and those available in the literature, we
emphasize here that, in contrast with (Geshkovski et al.,
2023a;b; 2024), we do not rely on stochastic and/or meanfield techniques and rather adopt a geometric perspective
drawing from control theory, e.g., from consensus dynamics
on manifolds (Sarlette & Sepulchre, 2009) such as spheres
(Markdahl et al., 2017; Thunberg et al., 2018), and from
Input-to-State Stability (Sontag, 1989; 2001; 2008).

1. Introduction
The incorporation of attention (Chorowski et al., 2015) in
natural language processing was a significant breakthrough,
particularly in the context of sequence-to-sequence models,
enabling the creation of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
which revolutionized the field. Even initial transformer
models such as GPT (Radford et al., 2018) or Bert (Devlin et al., 2018) showed drastic improvements over previous approaches such as the Long Short-Term Memory
model (Sainath et al., 2015).

Contributions of the paper

As practical applications of deep neural networks, such
as image recognition (O’shea & Nash, 2015), natural language processing (Torfi et al., 2020), and autonomous
driving (Grigorescu et al., 2020), continue to advance,
our understanding of these networks is struggling to keep
pace (Van Dijk et al., 2023). This underscores the critical importance of our study, which aims to delve deeper
into transformers and their dynamics. Our understanding
of transformers is currently limited by their inherent com-

The main contribution of this work is to provide a number
of results1 , for a differential equation model of attention2
showing that all tokens converge to a single cluster thereby
leading to a collapse of the model. We use the term consensus equilibria to refer to such clusters as is done in the
consensus literature (Ren et al., 2005; Cao et al., 2013).
These results hold under different assumptions on the parameters of the model —namely, the query (Q), key (K)
and value matrices (U ), as well as the number of heads (h)—

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: João Pedro Silvestre <joaosilvestre@g.ucla.edu>.

1
A detailed proof for each theorem stated in this paper can be
found in (Rodrı́guez Abella et al., 2024).
2
Since we focus on the attention mechanism, this model does
not describe the effect of feed-forward layers.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

