Interpolating Neural Network-Tensor Decomposition (INN-TD): a scalable and
interpretable approach for large-scale physics-based problems

Jiachen Guo 1 Xiaoyu Xie 2 Chanwook Park 2 Hantao Zhang 1 Matthew J. Politis 1 Gino Domel 2
Wing Kam Liu 2 3

Abstract

these models can make predictions much faster than standard numerical simulations. However, deep learning faces
challenges in modeling physical problems such as lower
accuracy, instability, and the need for a huge amount of
high-fidelity training data. As a result, its applications remain limited for many engineering fields that require high
precision, such as aerospace, semiconductor manufacturing,
and earthquake engineering. In this paper, we propose Interpolating Neural Network-Tensor Decomposition (INN-TD),
which leverages the merits of both machine learning and
numerical analysis to tackle large-scale, high-dimensional
physical problems governed by partial differential equations
(PDEs).

Deep learning has been extensively employed as
a powerful function approximator for modeling
physics-based problems described by partial differential equations (PDEs). Despite its popularity, standard deep learning models often demand
prohibitively large computational resources and
yield limited accuracy when scaling to large-scale,
high-dimensional physical problems. Their blackbox nature further hinders the application in industrial problems where interpretability and high
precision are critical. To overcome these challenges, this paper introduces Interpolating Neural Network-Tensor Decomposition (INN-TD),
a scalable and interpretable framework that has
the merits of both machine learning and finite
element methods for modeling large-scale physical systems. By integrating locally supported
interpolation functions from the finite element
into the network architecture, INN-TD achieves
a sparse learning structure with enhanced accuracy, faster training/solving speed, and reduced
memory footprint. This makes it particularly effective for tackling large-scale high-dimensional
parametric PDEs in training, solving, and inverse
optimization tasks in physical problems where
high precision is required.

2. Related work
Deep learning theory has been applied to solve physical
problems that are challenging for standard numerical algorithms. Based on the objective of the task, the current
works can be broadly classified into 3 major categories: datadriven trainers, data-free solvers, and inverse problems.
2.1. Data-driven trainers
In the data-driven regime, we aim to leverage the universal
approximation capabilities of neural networks to approximate PDE solutions. Multilayer perceptrons (MLP) have
been used due to their universal approximation capability
(Cybenko, 1989). Depending on the shape of the domain,
convolutional neural networks and graph neural networks
can be used as additional inductive biases for data on regular grids and irregular geometries, respectively (Gao et al.,
2021; Pfaff et al., 2020). In recent years, many operator
learning methods have been proposed to learn functional
mappings instead of functions (Li et al., 2020; Lu et al.,
2021; Huang et al., 2023). However, due to the black-box
nature, designing optimal model architectures and optimization hyperparameters is still largely heuristic and requires
trial and error (Rathore et al., 2024; Colbrook et al., 2022).
For problems where physics is fully known, it becomes
cumbersome to first generate offline data using standard
numerical solvers and then train surrogate models from the
offline data. Data generation and storage for large-scale

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have become a popular approach
to model physical problems in recent years. Once trained,
1
Theoretical and applied mechanics program, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, Illinois, USA
2
Department of mechanical engineering, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, Illinois, USA 3 HIDENN-AI,
Evanston, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to: Wing Kam Liu <wliu@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

