Features are fate: a theory of transfer learning in high-dimensional regression

Javan Tahir 1 Surya Ganguli 1 Grant Rotskoff 2

Abstract

datasets of the scale used for natural language processing or
computer vision are difficult, if not impossible, to generate.
To alleviate the problem of inadequate dataset scale, the
representations of a foundation model seem to provide a
useful inductive bias for adaptation to a target task. While
they are now ubiquitous, transfer learning methods lack
a solid theoretical foundation or algorithmic design principles. As such, it remains difficult to predict when—and with
which approach—transfer learning will outperform training
on the target task alone. By studying an analytically solvable model, we find that the feature space learned during
pretraining is the relevant object for predicting transfer performance. Of course, adopting a feature-centric viewpoint
creates model-specific challenges because unambiguously
identifying learned features remains an outstanding and difficult characterization problem for deep neural networks. For
this reason, in this work we focus on deep linear networks
trained with gradient flow, as feature learning dynamics are
well-understood in this setting1 . We develop an intuitive
understanding of linear transfer and full fine-tuning in this
model. In contrast to other recent work, we quantify transfer
performance relative to training on the target task alone and
precisely identify when transfer learning leads to improved
performance, effectively building a phase diagram for transfer efficiency. Finally, in numerical experiments, we show
that this picture holds qualitatively for nonlinear networks
as well.

With the emergence of large-scale pre-trained neural networks, methods to adapt such “foundation”
models to data-limited downstream tasks have
become a necessity. Fine-tuning, preference optimization, and transfer learning have all been successfully employed for these purposes when the
target task closely resembles the source task, but
a precise theoretical understanding of “task similarity” is still lacking. We adopt a feature-centric
viewpoint on transfer learning and establish a
number of theoretical results that demonstrate that
when the target task is well represented by the
feature space of the pre-trained model, transfer
learning outperforms training from scratch. We
study deep linear networks as a minimal model
of transfer learning in which we can analytically
characterize the transferability phase diagram as a
function of the target dataset size and the feature
space overlap. For this model, we establish rigorously that when the feature space overlap between
the source and target tasks is sufficiently strong,
both linear transfer and fine-tuning improve performance, especially in the low data limit. These
results build on an emerging understanding of feature learning dynamics in deep linear networks,
and we demonstrate numerically that the rigorous
results we derive for the linear case also apply to
nonlinear networks.

Related Work
Theoretical aspects of transfer learning A number of
recent works have studied theoretical aspects of transfer
learning, focusing on the risk associated with various transfer algorithms. Wu et al. (2020) use information theory
to derive bounds on the risk of transfer learning using a
mixture of source and target data. Shilton et al. (2017) analyze transfer in the context of Gaussian process regression.
Tripuraneni et al. (2020) work in a fairly general setting,
and derive bounds on the generalization error of transferred
models through a complexity argument, highlighting the
importance of feature diversity among tasks. Aminian et al.
(2024) study transfer learning in highly overparameterized

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art neural network models have billions to trillions of parameters and are trained on datasets of a similar
scale. The benefits of dataset scale are manifest in the astounding generalization capability of these foundation models (Bahri et al., 2024). For many applications, however,
1
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA 2 Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA. Correspondence to: Javan Tahir <javan@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

All code to reproduce the results in this paper can be found at
https://github.com/javantahir/features_are_
fate

1

