How to Train Your Multi-Exit Model?
Analyzing the Impact of Training Strategies

Piotr Kubaty * 1 Bartosz Wójcik * † 1 Bartłomiej Krzepkowski 2 Monika Michaluk 3 Tomasz Trzcinski 2 4 5
Jary Pomponi 6 Kamil Adamczewski † 7 5

Abstract
Early exits enable the network’s forward pass
to terminate early by attaching trainable internal classifiers to the backbone network. Existing
early-exit methods typically adopt either a joint
training approach, where the backbone and exit
heads are trained simultaneously, or a disjoint approach, where the heads are trained separately.
However, the implications of this choice are often overlooked, with studies typically adopting
one approach without adequate justification. This
choice influences training dynamics and its impact remains largely unexplored. In this paper,
we introduce a set of metrics to analyze early-exit
training dynamics and guide the choice of training
strategy. We demonstrate that conventionally used
joint and disjoint regimes yield suboptimal performance. To address these limitations, we propose
a mixed training strategy: the backbone is trained
first, followed by the training of the entire multiexit network. Through comprehensive evaluations
of training strategies across various architectures,
datasets, and early-exit methods, we present the
strengths and weaknesses of the early exit training
strategies. In particular, we show consistent improvements in performance and efficiency using
the proposed mixed strategy.

Figure 1. Performance-cost trade-off of the multi-exit ViT-T model
trained on the ImageNet-1k dataset by using different training
regimes. The choice of the training regime significantly impacts
the performance across all computational budgets.

of these networks significantly contributes to their enhanced
performance, the necessity of using large models for all
inputs, especially in resource-constrained environments like
mobile and edge computing devices, is questionable.
Early exit methods for deep neural networks have gained
importance due to their potential to significantly improve
computational efficiency. By exiting at earlier layers, these
methods can decrease the number of operations needed for
computation of the forward pass, leading to faster inference times. In doing so they allow the network to adapt
its computational cost to the difficulty of the input sample.
Simpler inputs can be processed with fewer layers, while
more complex inputs can utilize the full capacity of the
network.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable results
across a variety of machine learning tasks. While the depth
*

Early exit methods are implemented through augmentation
of the original architecture with internal classifiers (ICs)
attached to selected intermediate layers (Kaya et al., 2019).
These ICs are designed to perform classification tasks based
on the representations available at their respective positions
in the network. A common approach for training earlyexit models involves training the entire multi-exit network,
including the added classifiers, from scratch (Huang et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2020; Meronen et al., 2024) (”joint”
regime). Alternatively, some methods train the backbone

1

Equal contribution . † Equal supervision. Jagiellonian University 2 Warsaw University of Technology 3 University of Warsaw
4
Tooploox 5 IDEAS Research Institute 6 Department of Information Engineering, Electronics, and Telecommunications (DIET)
at Sapienza, University of Rome, Italy 7 Wroclaw University of
Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Bartosz Wójcik
<bartwojc@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

