IMTS is Worth Time × Channel Patches: Visual Masked Autoencoders for
Irregular Multivariate Time Series Prediction
Zhangyi Hu * 1 Jiemin Wu * 1 Hua Xu * 1 Mingqian Liao 1 Ninghui Feng 1 Bo Gao 2 Songning Lai 1
Yutao Yue † 1 3

Abstract

(a) GCN/N-ODE based
GCN /
N-ODE

Irregular Multivariate Time Series (IMTS) forecasting is challenging due to the unaligned nature
of multi-channel signals and the prevalence of extensive missing data. Existing methods struggle
to capture reliable temporal patterns from such
data due to significant missing values. While pretrained foundation models show potential for addressing these challenges, they are typically designed for Regularly Sampled Time Series (RTS).
Motivated by the visual Mask AutoEncoder’s
(MAE) powerful capability for modeling sparse
multi-channel information and its success in RTS
forecasting, we propose VIMTS, a framework
adapting Visual MAE for IMTS forecasting. To
mitigate the effect of missing values, VIMTS first
processes IMTS along the timeline into feature
patches at equal intervals. These patches are then
complemented using learned cross-channel dependencies. Then it leverages visual MAE’s capability in handling sparse multichannel data for patch
reconstruction, followed by a coarse-to-fine technique to generate precise predictions from focused
contexts. In addition, we integrate self-supervised
learning for improved IMTS modeling by adapting the visual MAE to IMTS data. Extensive
experiments demonstrate VIMTS’s superior performance and few-shot capability, advancing the
application of visual foundation models in more
general time series tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/WHU-HZY/VIMTS.

IMTS

❌
⭕

(b) Foundation model based
Sparsity Challenge
Pre-trained ⭕ Pre-train Benefits
RTS
IMTS Supported
Model
❌ IMTS Unsupported
Self-Supervised Learning

(c) Ours – stage 1
Embed
Mask

RGB

Decompose

🔥

Observation

RGB

Reconstruct

MAE

Patchify

Predict

t

Observation

(d) Ours – stage 2

t

Forecasting Fine-tuning

❄
MAE
t

Observation Prediction

🔥LN

t

Observation Prediction

Figure 1. Illustration of our idea: (a) Current IMTS-specific methods struggle to capture reliable temporal patterns from such data
due to significant missing values. (b) Pre-trained models show potential for modeling sparse data, but are limited to RTS. In contrast,
as illustrated in (c) and (d), VIMTS segments data into time-aligned
patches and imputes missing values at the representation level using time × channel patchify. It then leverages self-supervised
learning to adapt the visual MAE’s pre-trained capability for handling semantically sparse multi-channel data to IMTS data, leading
to powerful performance and few-shot capability.

2017), transportation (Gong et al., 2021), and meteorology
(Das & Ghosh, 2017). However, unlike structured data
such as images or text, the semantic information in IMTS is
embedded in complex dynamics across multiple channels
over time, which are disrupted by irregular sampling and
missing values. These challenges arise from various factors,
including the randomness of monitored subjects, the reliability issues of data collection devices, and privacy concerns
(Wang et al., 2024), thus complicating downstream tasks
such as traffic flow forecasting and weather forecasting.

1. Introduction
Irregular Multivariate Time Series (IMTS)(Weerakody et al.,
2021) forecasting plays a crucial role in various domains, including finance (Bai & Ng, 2008), healthcare (Esteban et al.,

Early methods involve statistical imputation methods for
synchronizing timestamps (Hamzaçebi, 2008; Van Buuren
& Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011), but they require a deep
understanding of system dynamics and inadvertently discard information contained in missing points (Horn et al.,
2020). Although recent GCN-based methods (Zhang et al.,
2024a) and Neural-ODE-based methods (Chen et al., 2018;
De Brouwer et al., 2019; Rubanova et al., 2019; Schirmer
et al., 2022) show progress in modeling cross-channel dependency and temporal dependencies of irregular samples,

*
Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511400, China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
China 3 Institute of Deep Perception Technology, JITRI, Wuxi
214000, China. Correspondence to: Yutao Yue <yutaoyue@hkustgz.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

