Density Ratio Estimation-based Bayesian Optimization
with Semi-Supervised Learning

Jungtaek Kim 1

Abstract

structure optimization (Kim et al., 2024), and language
model fine-tuning (Jang et al., 2024), since it is capable
of efficiently finding a global optimum of an expensive-toevaluate black-box function. As studied in previous literature on Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2012; MartinezCantin et al., 2018; Springenberg et al., 2016; Hutter et al.,
2011), a probabilistic regression model, which can estimate
a distribution of function evaluations over inputs, is widely
used as a surrogate function; A Gaussian process (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) is a predominant choice for the
surrogate function. An analogy between probabilistic regression models in Bayesian optimization is that they rely on an
explicit function over function evaluations p(y | x, D) given
an input to estimate, denoted as x, and a training dataset D.

Bayesian optimization has attracted huge attention from diverse research areas in science and
engineering, since it is capable of efficiently finding a global optimum of an expensive-to-evaluate
black-box function. In general, a probabilistic regression model is widely used as a surrogate function to model an explicit distribution over function
evaluations given an input to estimate and a training dataset. Beyond the probabilistic regressionbased methods, density ratio estimation-based
Bayesian optimization has been suggested in order to estimate a density ratio of the groups relatively close and relatively far to a global optimum. Developing this line of research further,
supervised classifiers are employed to estimate a
class probability for the two groups instead of a
density ratio. However, the supervised classifiers
used in this strategy are prone to be overconfident
for known knowledge on global solution candidates. Supposing that we have access to unlabeled
points, e.g., predefined fixed-size pools, we propose density ratio estimation-based Bayesian optimization with semi-supervised learning to solve
this challenge. Finally, we show the empirical
results of our methods and several baseline methods in two distinct scenarios with unlabeled point
sampling and a fixed-size pool, and analyze the
validity of our methods in diverse experiments.

Beyond the probabilistic regression-based Bayesian optimization, density ratio estimation (DRE)-based Bayesian
optimization has been studied recently (Bergstra et al., 2011;
Tiao et al., 2021). Furthermore, likelihood-free Bayesian
optimization, which is equivalent to DRE-based Bayesian
optimization with a particular utility function, has been proposed by Song et al. (2022). Bergstra et al. (2011) attempt to
model two densities p(x | y ≤ y † , D) and p(x | y > y † , D),
where y † is a threshold for dividing inputs to two groups that
are relatively close and relatively far to a global solution,
in order to estimate ζ-relative density ratio (Yamada et al.,
2011). On the other hand, instead of modeling two densities
separately, Tiao et al. (2021); Song et al. (2022) estimate a
density ratio using class-probability estimation (Qin, 1998).
As discussed in the previous work, this line of research provides a new understanding of Bayesian optimization, which
allows us to solve Bayesian optimization using binary classification. Moreover, it can reduce the amount of computation
required for building surrogate functions.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (Brochu et al., 2010; Garnett, 2023)
has attracted immense attention from various research areas
such as hyperparameter optimization (Bergstra et al., 2011),
battery lifetime optimization (Attia et al., 2020), chemical
reaction optimization (Shields et al., 2021), nanophotonic

However, the supervised classifiers utilized in the DREbased Bayesian optimization are prone to be overconfident for known knowledge on global solution candidates
or a region that have been already exploited. In this paper, supposing that we have access to unlabeled points, we
propose a novel DRE-based method with semi-supervised
learning, which is named DRE-BO-SSL, to solve this overexploitation problem. Although our direct competitors, i.e.,
BORE (Tiao et al., 2021) and LFBO (Song et al., 2022),

1
University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
Correspondence to: Jungtaek Kim <jungtaek.kim@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

