Learning Safe Strategies for Value Maximizing Buyers in Uniform Price Auctions

Negin Golrezaei 1 Sourav Sahoo 1
multiple units, with the per-unit price set at the K th highest
bid. These auctions are widely used to allocate scarce resources in critical markets such as emissions permits, energy
markets, and Treasury auctions. To succeed in these markets, bidders must develop effective bidding strategies that
balance long-term value maximization with financial risk
management, all while operating under limited information,
uncertainty in competing bids and strategic (or adversarial)
behavior of other bidders, among other challenges.

Abstract
We study the bidding problem in repeated uniform price multi-unit auctions from the perspective of a single value-maximizing buyer who aims
to maximize their cumulative value over T rounds
while adhering to return-on-investment (RoI) constraints in each round. Buyers adopt m-uniform
bidding format, where they submit m bid-quantity
pairs (bi , qi ) to demand qi units at bid bi . We introduce safe bidding strategies as those that satisfy RoI constraints in every auction, regardless
of competing bids. We show that these strategies
depend only on the bidder’s valuation curve, and
the bidder can focus on a finite subset of this class
without loss of generality. While the number of
strategies in this subset is exponential in m, we
develop a polynomial-time algorithm to learn the
optimal safe strategy that achieves sublinear regret in the online setting, where regret is measured
against a clairvoyant benchmark that knows the
competing bids a priori and selects a fixed hindsight optimal safe strategy. We then evaluate the
performance of safe strategies against a clairvoyant that selects the optimal strategy from a richer
class of strategies in the online setting. In this scenario, we compute the richness ratio, α ∈ (0, 1]
for the class of strategies chosen by the clairvoyant and show that our algorithm, designed to learn
safe strategies, achieves α-approximate sublinear
regret against these stronger benchmarks. Experiments on semi-synthetic data from real-world
auctions show that safe strategies substantially
outperform the derived theoretical bounds, making them quite appealing in practice.

In this paper, we model the bidders as a value-maximizing
agent with per-round return-on-investment (RoI) constraints.
This model reflects real-world decision-making in industries
where managing financial risks is as critical as maximizing
value. Unlike traditional mechanism design, which assumes
bidders with quasilinear utility (i.e., utility decreases linearly
with payments), many practical settings involve bidders who
optimize total value while adhering to financial constraints
such as RoI or budgets. These scenarios frequently arise
in industries where agents or algorithms bid on behalf of
clients, optimizing for high-level objectives within strict constraints—a context akin to the principal-agent framework
(Fadaei & Bichler, 2016; Aggarwal et al., 2024). Examples
include autobidders in online advertising, where advertisers seek to maximize clicks while keeping the average cost
per click below a threshold (Lucier et al., 2024; Balseiro
et al., 2021a; Deng et al., 2023b), and consultants bidding
for small firms in emission permit auctions (EEX, 2024).
Building on this, we study the bidding problem in repeated
uniform price auctions over T rounds, from the perspective
of a single bidder who seeks to maximize cumulative value
while adhering to per-round RoI constraints—that is, ensuring that the value obtained in each round is at least a fixed
multiple of the corresponding payment (see Eq. (2)).
To address practical bidding interfaces, we assume bidders
adopt m-uniform bidding format, a generalization of the
uniform bidding format (De Keijzer et al., 2013; Birmpas
et al., 2019) for some m ∈ N. In a m-uniform strategy
b := ⟨(b1 , q1 ), . . . , (bm , qm )⟩, bidders bid b1 for the first q1
units, b2 for the next q2 units and so on (see Definition 1).

1. Introduction
In a uniform price multi-unit auction, the auctioneer sells K
identical units of a single good to buyers who may demand
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Sourav Sahoo <sourav99@mit.edu>.

1.1. Our Contributions

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Safe Bidding Strategies (Section 3). To ensure that the
bidder satisfies the RoI constraint without knowing the com1

