Heterogeneous Label Shift: Theory and Algorithm

Chao Xu 1 Xijia Tang 1 Chenping Hou 1

Image
Encoder
Heterogeneous
Feature space

Input Data

Target Domain

In open-environment applications, data are often
collected from heterogeneous modalities with distinct encodings, resulting in feature space heterogeneity. This heterogeneity inherently induces
label shift, making cross-modal knowledge transfer particularly challenging when the source and
target data exhibit simultaneous heterogeneous
feature spaces and shifted label distributions. Existing studies address only partial aspects of this
issue, leaving the broader problem unresolved. To
bridge this gap, we introduce a new concept of
Heterogeneous Label Shift (HLS), targeting this
critical but underexplored challenge. We first analyze the impact of heterogeneous feature spaces
and label distribution shifts on model generalization and introduce a novel error decomposition
theorem. Based on these insights, we propose a
bound minimization HLS framework that decouples and tackles feature heterogeneity and label
shift accordingly. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks for cross-modal classification
validate the effectiveness and practical relevance
of the proposed approach.

Source Domain

Cross-Modal Knowledge Transfer

Abstract

An eagle
standing
on branch

Shifted Label
Distributions

Text
Encoder

Figure 1. Illustration for the Heterogeneous Label Shift (HLS), in
which the data is with simultaneous heterogeneous feature spaces
and shifted label distributions.

referred to as vocabularies in different languages, and the
features across domains are neither in the same feature space
nor of the same dimensionality. Due to the differences between languages, label distribution shift is inevitable. We
formulate these real-world cross-modal knowledge transfer
problems as the Heterogeneous Label Shift (HLS), in which
the data is with simultaneous heterogeneous feature spaces
and shifted label distributions.
Reviewing traditional domain adaptation (DA) or label shift
(LS) approaches, most existing works assume a homogeneous cross-domain feature space (Pan & Yang, 2010; BenDavid et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2023). The heterogeneous
feature spaces block the path of existing methods to directly
deal with the HLS problem. To relax this assumption, heterogeneous domain adaptation (HDA) (Dai et al., 2008;
Yang et al., 2009; Day & Khoshgoftaar, 2017; Zhou et al.,
2019), which tackle domain adaptation problems with different cross-domain feature spaces, has been an increased
focus. In such a context, plenty of practical HDA (Zhou
et al., 2014; Sukhija et al., 2016; Wang & Mahadevan, 2011;
Li et al., 2019a; Shi et al., 2010; Fang et al., 2023) have
been proposed. For example, Sukhija et al. proposed using
shared label distributions as pivots to learn a sparse feature
transformation in a supervised HDA framework (Sukhija
et al., 2016). Xiao and Guo develop a semi-supervised kernel matching framework that simultaneously maps the target
domain instance into the source domain instances and learns
a prediction function on the labeled source instances (Xiao
& Guo, 2015).

1. Introduction
In many real-world tasks, data are collected from open
and dynamic environments, and the source and target data
may exhibit simultaneous heterogeneous feature spaces and
shifted label distributions. For instance, as in the crossmodal classification task from images to text shown in Figure 1, the source and target domains may share the same
set of classes but differ in modality. At the same time, the
the heterogeneity of modalities also causes a certain degree
of label distribution shift. A similar situation also occurs
in cross-language (e.g., English/Spanish) text classification
task (Prettenhofer & Stein, 2010), the feature spaces are
1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410073, China.. Correspondence to: Chenping
Hou <hcpnudt@hotmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

