Robust Offline Reinforcement Learning with Linearly Structured
f -Divergence Regularization

Cheng Tang * 1 Zhishuai Liu * 2 Pan Xu 2

Abstract

the policy deployment environment differs from the one
where the dataset was collected, robust policies that remain
effective under the environment shift are required (Garcıa
& Fernández, 2015; Packer et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2024b; Guo et al., 2024). A widely adopted
framework for learning such policies is the distributionally robust Markov decision process (DRMDP) (Iyengar,
2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005), which models dynamics changes as an uncertainty set around the nominal transition kernel. In this setup, an agent seeks policies performing well even in the worst-case environment within
the uncertainty set. The most common design of uncertainty sets is the (s, a)-rectangularity (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim
& El Ghaoui, 2005), which independently models uncertainty for each state-action pair. Although mathematically
elegant, the (s, a)-rectangularity can result in overly conservative policies, especially when the state and action spaces
are large. To address this issue, Goyal & Grand-Clement
(2023) introduce the r-rectangular uncertainty set, which
parameterizes transition kernels using latent factors. This
concept has since been incorporated into d-rectangular linear DRMDPs (d-DRMDPs, Ma et al. (2022)), extending
its applicability to robust decision-making with linear function approximation. Building on d-DRMDPs, recent works
(Blanchet et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Liu & Xu, 2024b)
propose provably efficient algorithms that leverage function
approximation for robust policy learning.

The Robust Regularized Markov Decision Process (RRMDP) is proposed to learn policies robust to dynamics shifts by adding regularization
to the transition dynamics in the value function.
Existing methods mostly use unstructured regularization, potentially leading to conservative
policies under unrealistic transitions. To address
this limitation, we propose a novel framework,
the d-rectangular linear RRMDP (d-RRMDP),
which introduces latent structures into both transition kernels and regularization. We focus on
offline reinforcement learning, where an agent
learns policies from a precollected dataset in the
nominal environment. We develop the Robust
Regularized Pessimistic Value Iteration (R2PVI)
algorithm that employs linear function approximation for robust policy learning in d-RRMDPs
with f -divergence based regularization terms on
transition kernels. We provide instance-dependent
upper bounds on the suboptimality gap of R2PVI
policies, demonstrating that these bounds are influenced by how well the dataset covers stateaction spaces visited by the optimal robust policy
under robustly admissible transitions. We establish information-theoretic lower bounds to verify
that our algorithm is near-optimal. Finally, numerical experiments validate that R2PVI learns robust
policies and exhibits superior computational efficiency compared to baseline methods.

However, the d-DRMDP framework has several problems
that remain unaddressed, which we summarize as follows.
Theoretical Gaps: Current understanding of d-DRMDPs
is largely restricted to uncertainty sets defined by the Total
Variation (TV) divergence (Liu & Xu, 2024a;b). For uncertainty sets defined by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence,
prior works (Ma et al., 2022; Blanchet et al., 2024) rely
on additional regularity assumptions regarding the KL dual
variable, which is hard to validate in practice. Moreover,
the χ2 -divergence defined uncertainty set has demonstrated
effectiveness in certain empirical applications (Panaganti
& Kalathil, 2022; Xu et al., 2023) and has also been analyzed under the (s, a)-rectangularity (Shi et al., 2024). Yet
there are no theoretical results or efficient algorithms for
d-DRMDPs. Practical challenges: Existing practical algorithms (Ma et al., 2022; Liu & Xu, 2024b; Wang et al.,

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al., 2020)
facilitates policy learning from fixed datasets, eliminating
the need for direct interaction with the environment. When
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
work was done when Cheng was in Tsinghua University 2 Duke
University. Correspondence to: Pan Xu <pan.xu@duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

