Customizing the Inductive Biases of Softmax Attention using
Structured Matrices
Yilun Kuang 1 Noah Amsel 1 Sanae Lotfi 1 Shikai Qiu 1 Andres Potapczynski 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1
different architectures and domains, it is common to think
of attention as a general purpose tool (Bommasani et al.,
2022). However, attention endows models with a certain set
of inductive biases that suit some tasks better than others
(Lavie et al., 2024). Moreover, attention is computationally
expensive in both runtime and memory. A large ongoing
research effort aims to devise more efficient alternatives to
standard attention, especially for long sequences and big
models (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Beltagy et al., 2020; Gu
& Dao, 2024; Dao & Gu, 2024; Yuan et al., 2025). Architectures like linear attention based Transformers come with
their own sets of inductive biases that can be too limiting
for real data and often reduce accuracy (Arora et al., 2024;
Jelassi et al., 2024). In this work, we show how structured
matrices can be used to customize attention, changing its inductive biases to suit particular tasks and thereby improving
efficiency.

Abstract
The core component of attention is the scoring
function, which transforms the inputs into lowdimensional queries and keys and takes the dot
product of each pair. While the low-dimensional
projection improves efficiency, it causes information loss for certain tasks that have intrinsically high-dimensional inputs. Additionally, attention uses the same scoring function for all input pairs, without imposing a distance-dependent
compute bias for neighboring tokens in the sequence. In this work, we address these shortcomings by proposing new scoring functions based on
computationally efficient structured matrices with
high ranks, including Block Tensor-Train (BTT)
and Multi-Level Low Rank (MLR) matrices. On
in-context regression tasks with high-dimensional
inputs, our proposed scoring functions outperform
standard attention for any fixed compute budget.
On language modeling, a task that exhibits locality patterns, our MLR-based attention method
achieves improved scaling laws compared to both
standard attention and variants of sliding window
attention. Additionally, we show that both BTT
and MLR fall under a broader family of efficient
structured matrices capable of encoding either
full-rank or distance-dependent compute biases,
thereby addressing significant shortcomings of
standard attention.

We focus on the attention scoring function, which determines how much each token attends to every other token by
taking a dot product of their corresponding query and key
vectors. We identify two properties of the scoring function
that are suboptimal in certain settings. First, it can suffer
from a low-rank bottleneck (Amsel et al., 2024). Since
the head dimension, which defines the size of queries and
keys, is significantly smaller than the embedding dimension,
transforming inputs into queries and keys can cause information about each token to be lost. This bottleneck can limit
the power of the attention layer. In fact, there are simple
functions that are easy to express with attention if the head
dimension is large enough, but are provably hard to express
otherwise (Amsel et al., 2024).

1. Introduction

Second, the form of the scoring function lacks an inductive
bias for encoding distance-dependent compute. In standard
attention, every pair of tokens is scored using the same
function and the same weights, and each token can atttend
to the entire context. This feature makes attention powerful, but for long contexts, it is also expensive. Real-world
datasets often exhibit some amount of locality, meaning that
the semantics of a token depends most strongly on nearby
tokens. Previous efforts have been made to make attention
more efficient by promoting locality while still preserving
some global communication. For instance, the Longformer
architecture combines sliding window attention with a few

The attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2016; Vaswani
et al., 2017) is crucial to much of contemporary deep learning, providing a powerful and flexible way to process sequences. Because of its widespread application to so many
1

New York University. Correspondence to: Yilun Kuang
<yilun.kuang@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson
<andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

