FreeMesh: Boosting Mesh Generation with Coordinates Merging

Jian Liu 1 2 Haohan Weng 2 3 Biwen Lei 2 Xianghui Yang 2 Zibo Zhao 2 4 Zhuo Chen 2 Song Guo 1 Tao Han 1
Chunchao Guo 2

Abstract
The next-coordinate prediction paradigm has
emerged as the de facto standard in current autoregressive mesh generation methods. Despite
their effectiveness, there is no efficient measurement for the various tokenizers that serialize
meshes into sequences. In this paper, we introduce a new metric Per-Token-Mesh-Entropy
(PTME) to evaluate the existing mesh tokenizers
theoretically without any training. Building upon
PTME, we propose a plug-and-play tokenization
technique called coordinate merging. It further
improves the compression ratios of existing tokenizers by rearranging and merging the most
frequent patterns of coordinates. Through experiments on various tokenization methods like
MeshXL, MeshAnything V2, and Edgerunner, we
further validate the performance of our method.
We hope that the proposed PTME and coordinate
merging can enhance the existing mesh tokenizers
and guide the further development of native mesh
generation.

GT

EDR

EDR+RMC (a)

(b)

Figure 1. Per-Token-Mesh-Entropy (PTME) Analysis. (a) Visualization demonstrates that our Rearrange & Merge Coordinates
(RMC) method significantly enhances geometric detail preservation and better topology. (b) Comparative analysis between baseline Merge Coordinates (MC) and the proposed RMC approach.
MC fails to reduce PTME, while our RMC framework effectively
minimizes token entropy.

1. Introduction
domness is uncontrollable.

A number of recent methods (Siddiqui et al., 2023; Weng
et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024a;b;c; Tang et al., 2024a; Hao
et al., 2024; Weng et al., 2024b) have emerged that serialize 3D meshes into sequences and model them using an
auto-regressive Transformer. These generated meshes typically preserve sharp edges and high-quality topology, which
can be easily incorporated into existing graphics pipelines.
However, there is no effective metric to measure the quality of these tokenizers theoretically. The common way to
evaluate them is through expensive training and observing
experimental results, which is time-consuming and the ran-

In this paper, we equip mesh serialization with a mathematical tool, entropy (Shannon, 1948). Generally, a sequence
with a lower total amount of information is usually easier for
sequence learning (Su, 2018). The comparison of total information can be transformed into a comparison of average
information entropy. Considering the properties of meshes,
different tokenizers can produce varying lengths for the
same mesh. Based on the simplest raw representation from
MeshXL (Chen et al., 2024a), we have summarized a set
of formulas called Per-Coordinate-Mesh-Entropy (PCME).
The PCME is equal to the product of information entropy
and compression rate, and it can be used to compare the
amount of information contained in a mesh sequence with a
single coordinate as the basic unit. The lower the PCME, the
easier the sequence is to learn. This metric can effectively
measure the quality of the tokenizer without any training.

1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tencent
Hunyuan 3 South China University of Technology 4 ShanghaiTech
University. Correspondence to: Tao Han <thanad@cse.ust.hk>,
Chunchao Guo <chunchaoguo@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

With the guidance of PCME, we further consider how to
1

