Beyond Bradley-Terry Models: A General Preference Model
for Language Model Alignment

Yifan Zhang * 1 Ge Zhang * 2 Yue Wu * 3 Kangping Xu 1 Quanquan Gu 3

Abstract

aligning models with human intent and values has led to
significant advancements, including improved text generation and enhanced decision-making policies (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Christiano et al., 2017). Traditional approaches often rely on reward modeling, wherein a reward function is
learned to guide the optimization of policies. While effective in certain contexts, these methods face expressiveness
and computational efficiency challenges, particularly when
addressing complex or intransitive human preferences (Tversky, 1969; Munos et al., 2023).

Modeling human preferences is crucial for aligning foundation models with human values. Traditional reward modeling methods, such as the
Bradley-Terry (BT) reward model, fall short in
expressiveness, particularly in addressing intransitive preferences. In this paper, we introduce
preference embedding, an approach that embeds
responses into a latent space to capture intricate preference structures efficiently, achieving
linear query complexity. Additionally, we propose preference score-based General Preference
Optimization (GPO), which generalizes rewardbased reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Experimental results show that
our General Preference embedding Model (GPM)
consistently outperforms the BT reward model
on the RewardBench benchmark and effectively
models cyclic preferences where any BT reward
model behaves like a random guess. Furthermore, evaluations on downstream tasks such as AlpacaEval2.0, following the language model posttraining with GPO and our general preference
model, reveal performance improvements over BT
models. These findings indicate that our method
may enhance the alignment of foundation models
with nuanced human values. The code is available
at https://github.com/general-preference/generalpreference-model.

Preference learning algorithms typically employ pairwise
comparisons to capture human judgments (Ibarz et al.,
2018; Ziegler et al., 2019). The Bradley-Terry (BT)
model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) is popular for modeling
such pairwise preferences due to its simplicity and computational efficiency: given K responses, a BT reward model
cost O(K) inference-time compute to output the reward
dictating the preferences. The efficiency of the BT model
comes from the implicit assumption that each option can
be conveniently represented by a scalar reward, which inevitably limits the model’s capacity to capture the richness
of human judgments that may be context-dependent or exhibit intransitivity (Gardner, 1970).
On the other hand, supervised (sequential-classification)
pair preference models (PairRM / PairPM) (Jiang et al.,
2023; Dong et al., 2024) that predict the preference given
a concatenation of the two responses can express complex
and intransitive (cyclic) structures. But to fully capture the
preference relations among K responses, it requires evaluating O(K 2 ) pairwise preferences between all K candidate
responses (Munos et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024b). This
quadratic scaling hinders them for applications with larger
response sets especially in test-time scaling for reasoning
tasks using verifiers and ranking models (Snell et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2024a).

1. Introduction
Modeling human preferences is a cornerstone in developing foundation models that interact seamlessly with users.
In natural language modeling and reinforcement learning,

In addition to computational inefficiency, supervised preference models exhibit asymmetric preference behaviors related to positions. The model’s design choice can also be
highly ad hoc, varying among different templates and model
architecture designs.

*

Equal contribution 1 IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Based on the above observations, it is thus natural to raise

1

