Multidimensional Adaptive Coefficient
for Inference Trajectory Optimization in Flow and Diffusion

Dohoon Lee 1 2 Jaehyun Park 1 Hyunwoo J. Kim 3 Kyogu Lee 1 2 4

Abstract
Flow and diffusion models have demonstrated
strong performance and training stability across
various tasks but lack two critical properties of
simulation-based methods: freedom of dimensionality and adaptability to different inference trajectories. To address this limitation, we propose the
Multidimensional Adaptive Coefficient (MAC),
a plug-in module for flow and diffusion models
that extends conventional unidimensional coefficients to multidimensional ones and enables inference trajectory-wise adaptation. MAC is trained
via simulation-based feedback through adversarial refinement. Empirical results across diverse
frameworks and datasets demonstrate that MAC
enhances generative quality with high training efficiency. Consequently, our work offers a new
perspective on inference trajectory optimality, encouraging future research to move beyond vector field design and to leverage training-efficient,
simulation-based optimization.

(a) α

(b) γ

(c) γϕ (MAC)
Figure 1: Comparison of α, γ, and γϕ . As shown, employing γϕ (MAC) expands the search space for trajectory
optimization by enabling adaptive, curved trajectories and
time steps that are distinct for each sample.
erties, they exhibit limitations in quality and training efficiency compared to flow and diffusion. We integrate these
two properties of simulation-based methods into flow and
diffusion models to enhance performance while preserving
training efficiency, effectively combining their advantages.

1. Introduction
Compared to simulation-based methods like NeuralODE
(Chen et al., 2018), flow and diffusion modeling (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Lipman et al., 2023) demonstrates
remarkable performance and training stability across various
tasks and has become a standard approach for generation
tasks. However, it trades off two critical properties that
simulation-based methods offer, which could enhance the
quality of transportation: freedom of dimensionality and
adaptability with respect to different inference trajectories.
While simulation-based methodologies possess these prop-

To achieve this, we introduce the Multidimensional Adaptive Coefficient (MAC). As described by Albergo et al.
(2023), the trajectory with x0 ∼ ρ0 and x1 ∼ ρ1 in flow
and diffusion for t ∈ [0, T ] can be written as x(t) =
α0 (t)x0 + α1 (t)x1 , x0 , x1 ∈ Rd , where, conventionally, the coefficients α0 (t), α1 (t) ∈ R are unidimensional.
We extend this by introducing a Multidimensional Coefficient γ0 (t), γ1 (t) ∈ Rd×d , which allows for different time
scheduling across all data dimensions. Based on this, we
introduce MAC γϕ (t, xSθ,ϕ ), parameterized by ϕ, to adapt
to different inference trajectories xSθ,ϕ . To optimize MAC,
we use it to construct a flow- or diffusion-based differential
equation solver Gθ,ϕ based on a flow or diffusion model Hθ ,
and adversarially optimize θ and ϕ using a discriminator Dψ .
By optimizing MAC, we achieve full multidimensionality
and adaptability in the inference trajectory of flow and diffusion models. This can be applied to any type of framework
as a plug-in module to enhance inference performance.

1

Music and Audio Research Group, Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 3 School of Computing, KAIST,
Daejeon, Korea 4 Artificial Intelligence Institute, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Dohoon Lee <dohoonlee.research@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

