Relative Error Fair Clustering in the Weak-Strong Oracle Model

Vladimir Braverman 1 Prathamesh Dharangutte 2 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 3 Hoai-An Nguyen 4 Chen Wang 5 6
Yubo Zhang 3 Samson Zhou 6

Abstract

1

Introduction

Clustering is a cornerstone of unsupervised learning and
a fundamental technique for data science, often used to
identify latent structure in high-dimensional and large-scale
datasets, thus serving as an essential pre-processing step
in numerous downstream applications, facilitating dimensionality reduction, feature learning, and data summarization. Informally, the objective of clustering is to partition
a dataset into k clusters such that intra-cluster similarity
is maximized while inter-cluster similarity is minimized.
Traditional clustering formulations, such as the k-median
and k-means problems, have been the focus of extensive
study since their inception in the 1950s (Steinhaus et al.,
1956; MacQueen, 1967). Formally, in the k-median clustering problem, the input is a set X of n points in a space
with metric P
d, and the goal is to minimize the quantity
minC:|C|≤k x∈X minc∈C d(x, c).

We study fair clustering problems in a setting
where distance information is obtained from two
sources: a strong oracle providing exact distances,
but at a high cost, and a weak oracle providing
potentially inaccurate distance estimates at a low
cost. The goal is to produce a near-optimal fair
clustering on n input points with a minimum
number of strong oracle queries. This models
the increasingly common trade-off between accurate but expensive similarity measures (e.g.,
large-scale embeddings) and cheaper but inaccurate alternatives. The study of fair clustering in the model is motivated by the important
quest of achieving fairness with the presence
of inaccurate information. We achieve the first
(1 + ε)-coresetsfor fair k-median clustering using
poly kε · log n queries to the strong oracle. Furthermore, our results imply coresets for the standard setting (without fairness constraints), and we
could in fact obtain (1 + ε)-coresets for (k, z)clustering for general z = O(1) with a similar
number of strong oracle queries. In contrast, previous results achieved a constant-factor (> 10)
approximation for the standard k-clustering problems, and no previous work considered the fair
k-median clustering problem.

Fair clustering. Observe that the set of centers C inherently divides X into clusters by assigning each point x ∈ X
to its closest center c ∈ C. Due to this implicit partitioning rule, standard notions of clustering may produce biased results, leading to potentially discriminatory outcomes
that perpetuate social inequalities in downstream applications (Dwork et al., 2012; Chhabra et al., 2021). For instance, clustering algorithms used for hiring or lending may
unintentionally discriminate against certain demographic
groups, e.g., race, gender, religion, or socioeconomic status.
Such biases are particularly concerning in high-stakes domains like healthcare, education, and finance, where data
science algorithms are strongly influential in the decisionmaking process. To address these challenges, there has
been a growing body of research focused on incorporating fairness constraints Ahmadian et al. (2020b;a); Song
et al. (2024); Chen et al. (2025), especially into clustering
algorithms to ensure equitable outcomes.

The authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 Google Research
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University 3 School
of Computer Science, Peking University 4 Computer Science
Department, Carnegie Mellon University 5 Department of
Computer Science, Rice University 6 Department of Computer
Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University. Correspondence to: Vladimir Braverman <vbraverman@google.com>,
Prathamesh
Dharangutte
<ptd39@rutgers.edu>,
Shaofeng Jiang <shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn>,
HoaiAn Nguyen <hnnguyen@andrew.cmu.edu>, Chen Wang
<chen.wang.research@gmail.com>, Samson Zhou <samsonzhou@gmail.com>.
2

One such constraint is disparate impact, which requires all
“protected” subpopulations to receive similar representation
in the decision-making process. To that end, Chierichetti
et al. (2017b) introduced (α, β)-fair clustering, where each
point x ∈ X is associated with one or more subpopulation
(or group) j ∈ [ℓ], across ℓ total groups. Since the groups
could overlap, we let Λ be the maximum number of disjoint

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

