Domain2Vec: Vectorizing Datasets to Find the Optimal Data Mixture without
Training

Mozhi Zhang 1 Howe Tissue B Lu Wang 2 Xipeng Qiu 1

Abstract

Qwen Team, 2024; DeepSeek-AI, 2024). The training
datasets for LLMs are typically composed of multiple domains, each derived from different sources. Recent research
has shown that the mixture proportions of these domains
(named as the data mixture) can significantly influence the
effectiveness of LMs (Hoffmann et al., 2022b; Xie et al.,
2023b), with data from one domain potentially affecting
the performance in others (Guo et al., 2022). Typically, the
data mixtures used for training LLMs are often determined
heuristically or based on downstream performance metrics.
However, these methods are not scalable and always result
in a suboptimal data mixture. Thus, identifying the optimal
data mixture in a scalable and efficient manner remains a
critical and challenging research question.

We introduce D OMAIN 2V EC, a novel approach
that decomposes any dataset into a linear combination of several meta-domains, a new concept
designed to capture the key underlying features of
datasets. D OMAIN 2V EC maintains a vocabulary
of meta-domains and uses a classifier to decompose any given dataset into a domain vector that
corresponds to a distribution over this vocabulary.
These domain vectors enable the identification of
optimal data mixture for language model (LM)
pretraining in a training-free manner under the
Distribution Alignment Assumption (DA2 ), which
suggests that when the data distribution of the
training set and the validation set is more aligned,
a lower validation loss is achieved. Moreover,
D OMAIN 2 VEC can be seamlessly integrated into
previous works to model the relationship between
domain vectors and LM performance, greatly enhancing the efficiency and scalability of previous methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that D OMAIN 2V EC helps find the data mixture
that enhances downstream task performance with
minimal computational overhead. Specifically,
D OMAIN 2V EC achieves the same validation loss
on Pile-CC using only 51.5% of the compute required when training on the original mixture of
The Pile Dataset. Under equivalent compute budget, D OMAIN 2V EC improves downstream performance by an average of 2.83%.

Recently, researchers have proposed various methods to predict the optimal data mixture. The first line of prior works
implicitly adjusts the data mixture by selecting high-quality
data from different domains or datasets (Lin et al., 2024;
Ankner et al., 2024; Thakkar et al., 2023). The second line
of work focuses on modeling the relationship between the
data mixture and the performance of LLMs, and explicitly adjusts the data mixture across different datasets (Rae
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023a; Sagawa* et al., 2020; Fan
et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2024; Gu et al.,
2024a; Que et al., 2024). While prior work has shown
promising results, there are some key issues: 1) Computational Efficiency: For example, although the proxy model
in DoReMi (Xie et al., 2023a) has only 280M parameters,
its estimated FLOPs are high to 3.7 × 1019 for calculating
only 22 datasets. Moreover, The computational complexity
of these methods will grow non-linearly as the number of
datasets increases. 2) Lack of Scalability: After establishing the functional relationship between data mixtures and
model performance (Ye et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), if the
dataset composition changes (e.g., by adding new datasets
or filtering low-quality data, etc), previously fitted functions
cannot be directly applied. This requires resampling new
data mixtures, retraining proxy models, and refitting the
functions, severely limiting the scalability of these methods.

1. Introduction
Through training on large-scale text corpora, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities (Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2024;
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China 2 Ritzz-AI. Correspondence to: Howe Tissue (project lead)
<h-sun20@tsinghua.org.cn>.

To address these issues, we introduce D OMAIN 2V EC, a
novel framework designed to vectorize datasets. This enables us to perform all operations for computing optimal

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

