Learning to Generate Projections for Reducing Dimensionality of
Heterogeneous Linear Programming Problems

Tomoharu Iwata 1 Shinsaku Sakaue 2

Abstract

solve reduced-size LPs. This solver-agnostic property is
particularly advantageous since we can exploit the divergent
evolution of LP solvers based on the simplex and interiorpoint methods.

We propose a data-driven method for reducing
the dimensionality of linear programming problems (LPs) by generating instance-specific projection matrices using a neural network-based model.
Once the model is trained using multiple LPs by
maximizing the expected objective value, we can
efficiently find high-quality feasible solutions of
newly given LPs. Our method can shorten the
computational time of any LP solvers due to its
solver-agnostic nature, it can provide feasible solutions by relying on projection that reduces the
number of variables, and it can handle LPs of different sizes using neural networks with permutation equivariance and invariance. We also provide
a theoretical analysis of the generalization bound
for learning a neural network to generate projection matrices that reduce the size of LPs. Our
experimental results demonstrate that our method
can obtain solutions with higher quality than the
existing methods, while its computational time is
significantly shorter than solving the original LPs.

Although the random projection approach is efficient, its
solution quality can be low because it is difficult for random
matrices to capture the subspace of good solutions. To
improve the quality, a data-driven projection approach has
been proposed (Sakaue & Oki, 2024), where a projection
matrix is trained using LP instances. This method produces
high-quality solutions when the test LPs are sufficiently
similar to the training LPs. However, it performs poorly
when the test LPs differ from the training ones since it
shares a projection matrix among heterogeneous LPs.
To obtain high-quality solutions efficiently for various LPs,
we propose a data-driven method for learning to generate a
projection matrix appropriate for each LP instance using a
neural network-based model, instead of learning a projection
matrix itself. Figure 1 shows our framework. In the training
phase, our model is trained using multiple LPs in an endto-end fashion. In the test phase, we are given test LPs that
are related to but different from the training LPs. For each
test LP instance, a projection matrix is generated using the
trained model from the LP parameters. A projected LP of
reduced size is obtained by the projection matrix, and it is
solved by an LP solver. Then, a solution of the original test
LP is recovered from the solution of the projected LP.

1. Introduction
Linear programming (LP) is widely used in many applications, such as economics, engineering, and computer science (Gass, 2003; Eiselt & Sandblom, 2007). While numerous LP solvers have been developed, most of which are
based on the simplex or interior-point methods, efficiently
solving high-dimensional LPs remains an important challenge in operations research. Alongside advancements in
LP solvers, there is increasing interest in reducing LP sizes
through random projections (Vu et al., 2018; Poirion et al.,
2023; Akchen & Mišić, 2024). Projection-based approaches
are solver-agnostic in that it can work with any solvers to

By generating instance-specific projected LPs based on neural networks, our method can improve the solution quality.
Since our method is solver-agnostic, we can improve the
efficiency of any LP solvers by reducing LP sizes. By using
LP solvers that can obtain feasible solutions in the projected
LPs, our method can always obtain feasible solutions since
the recovered solutions are always feasible for the original
LPs when the projected LPs are feasible.
Our model takes the parameters of an LP instance as input, and outputs a projection matrix. We design our model
such that it is permutation equivariant to the order of the
variables, and permutation invariant to the order of the constraints, which enables us to efficiently train it by reducing
the model search space. Since our model can handle dif-

1

NTT Corporation, Japan 2 CyberAgent, Japan. This work was
done while SS was at the University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP. Correspondence to: Tomoharu Iwata <tomoharu.iwata@ntt.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

