Linearization Turns Neural Operators into Function-Valued Gaussian Processes

Emilia Magnani * 1 Marvin Pförtner * 1 Tobias Weber * 1 Philipp Hennig 1
output pairs (Boullé & Townsend, 2023). Neural operators,
including Fourier neural operators, have emerged as a powerful class of models for operator learning, particularly for
the solution operators of PDEs (Kovachki et al., 2023). They
have been applied successfully across domains including
weather forecasting (Pathak et al., 2022; Bonev et al., 2023),
fluid dynamics (Grady et al., 2022; Renn et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2022), and automotive aerodynamics (Li et al., 2023b).
Instead of learning to solve a specific PDE, these models
learn the operator that maps a functional parameter of the
PDE (such as initial values, boundary conditions, force
fields, or material parameters) to the corresponding solution.
This approach amortizes computational cost by learning to
solve entire families of PDEs.

Abstract
Neural operators generalize neural networks to
learn mappings between function spaces from
data. They are commonly used to learn solution
operators of parametric partial differential equations (PDEs) or propagators of time-dependent
PDEs. However, to make them useful in highstakes simulation scenarios, their inherent predictive error must be quantified reliably. We introduce LUNO, a novel framework for approximate
Bayesian uncertainty quantification in trained neural operators. Our approach leverages model linearization to push (Gaussian) weight-space uncertainty forward to the neural operator’s predictions. We show that this can be interpreted
as a probabilistic version of the concept of currying from functional programming, yielding a
function-valued (Gaussian) random process belief. Our framework provides a practical yet theoretically sound way to apply existing Bayesian
deep learning methods such as the linearized
Laplace approximation to neural operators. Just
as the underlying neural operator, our approach is
resolution-agnostic by design. The method adds
minimal prediction overhead, can be applied posthoc without retraining the network, and scales to
large models and datasets. We evaluate these aspects in a case study on Fourier neural operators.

Although neural operators have demonstrated strong predictive capabilities, they are unable to quantify the inherent
uncertainty in their predictions. Predictive uncertainty quantification is indispensable for many downstream tasks, such
as decision-making in safety-critical scenarios. For example, a neural operator trained on past climate data should
increase predictive uncertainty under distribution shifts due
to climate change, reflecting potential losses in accuracy.
Furthermore, uncertainty quantification is also useful for
improving neural operator training via active learning strategies (Musekamp et al., 2025), potentially reducing the cost
of generating computationally expensive numerical simulations as training data.
Extensive previous work has shown that the structured uncertainty provided by Gaussian process (GP) models is particularly suitable for such downstream tasks, including closedform acquisition functions for active learning and Bayesian
optimization for optimal selection of future queries or experiments (Garnett, 2023); enabling online model adaptation to
continuously update with new data while preserving consistency with prior knowledge (Sliwa et al., 2024); facilitating
sensitivity analysis through the GP’s kernel structure revealing system responses to parameter changes; and seamlessly
integrating with probabilistic numerical computation (Hennig et al., 2022; Pförtner et al., 2022) to quantify, marginalize, and propagate computational uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Scientific computing increasingly demands efficient representations of complex non-linear maps between functions.
Examples include solution operators of parametric partial
differential equations (PDEs) or the propagators of timedependent PDEs. Operator learning is an approach to this
problem that generalizes regression algorithms from finitedimensional to infinite-dimensional function-space input*

Equal contribution 1 Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Emilia Magnani
<emilia.magnani@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Motivated by the capabilities of GPs, we propose LUNO, a
practical yet theoretically sound framework that provides linearized predictive uncertainty in neural operators. LUNO

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

