Stealix: Model Stealing via Prompt Evolution

Zhixiong Zhuang 1 2 Hui-Po Wang 3 Maria-Irina Nicolae 2 Mario Fritz 3

Abstract
Model stealing poses a significant security risk in
machine learning by enabling attackers to replicate a black-box model without access to its
training data, thus jeopardizing intellectual property and exposing sensitive information. Recent
methods that use pre-trained diffusion models
for data synthesis improve efficiency and performance but rely heavily on manually crafted
prompts, limiting automation and scalability, especially for attackers with little expertise. To assess the risks posed by open-source pre-trained
models, we propose a more realistic threat model
that eliminates the need for prompt design skills
or knowledge of class names. In this context,
we introduce Stealix, the first approach to perform model stealing without predefined prompts.
Stealix uses two open-source pre-trained models to infer the victim model’s data distribution, and iteratively refines prompts through a genetic algorithm, progressively improving the precision and diversity of synthetic images. Our
experimental results demonstrate that Stealix
significantly outperforms other methods, even
those with access to class names or fine-grained
prompts, while operating under the same query
budget. These findings highlight the scalability
of our approach and suggest that the risks posed
by pre-trained generative models in model stealing may be greater than previously recognized.1

Figure 1: Impact of query datasets on stealing a satellite
image classifier: performance drops occur with dissimilar datasets (Knockoff Nets + CIFAR-10) and challenging
prompt design (SD + manual). Stealix mitigates these issues by leveraging victim-aware automatic prompt tuning.
to training data or model weights. By querying the victim model with hold-out datasets, the attacker can construct a proxy model that behaves similarly to the original by mimicking its predictions. This attack vector compromises the model owner’s intellectual property and may
expose sensitive information, posing both security and privacy risks (Beetham et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2024).
Current model stealing methods for image classification
can be categorized based on the source of the queried images: (1) using publicly available images like Knockoff
Nets (Orekondy et al., 2019), (2) generating images by
training a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) from
scratch (Truong et al., 2021; Sanyal et al., 2022), or
(3) synthesizing images by prompting pre-trained opensource generative models (Shao et al., 2023; Hondru &
Ionescu, 2023). The latter uses models like stable diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) to achieve superior efficiency by reducing the dependence on online data sources
and by eliminating the high computational cost of training
new generators. However, previous approaches often rely
on human-crafted prompts or class names to generate images. These methods fall short when the class names lack
context or fail to represent the victim’s data features accurately. Attackers may also struggle to describe the target
data distribution due to limited knowledge or vague articulation. Furthermore, reliance on human intervention hinders scalability and automation. These challenges are especially pronounced in specialized fields, where high-value
models are the most common. Therefore, research under
the current assumptions may oversimplify the problem and
underestimate the threat of model stealing facilitated by
pre-trained models, as shown in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Model stealing allows attackers to replicate the functionality of machine learning models without direct access
1
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany 3 CISPA
Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken,
Germany.
Correspondence to: Zhixiong Zhuang <zhixiong.zhuang@bosch.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The project page is at https://zhixiongzh.github.io/stealix/.

1

