Data-Driven Selection of Instrumental Variables for Additive Nonlinear,
Constant Effects Models
Xichen Guo 1 Feng Xie * 1 Yan Zeng 1 Hao Zhang 2 Zhi Geng 1

Abstract

restriction); and (C3) the instrument is not related to unmeasured variables that affect both the exposure and the
outcome (exogeneity) (see Section 3.1 for a formal definition of valid IVs). For example, Figure 1 is an illustration of
the IV conditions. Here, Quarter of Birth is a valid IV relative to the causal relationship Education Level → Income.
In some scenarios, researchers can directly select suitable
variables as IVs through expert knowledge or background
information. However, in many practical applications, such
information is often lacking, making it difficult to select
valid IVs and obtain the unbiased causal effect of interest.
Therefore, developing statistical methods for selecting valid
IVs from observational data is crucial.

We consider the problem of selecting instrumental
variables from observational data, a fundamental
challenge in causal inference. Existing methods
mostly focus on additive linear, constant effects
models, limiting their applicability in complex
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we tackle a
more general and challenging setting: the additive
non-linear, constant effects model. We first propose a novel testable condition, termed the Cross
Auxiliary-based independent Test (CAT) condition, for selecting the valid IV set. We show that
this condition is both necessary and sufficient for
identifying valid instrumental variable sets within
such a model under milder assumptions. Building
on this condition, we develop a practical algorithm for selecting the set of valid instrumental
variables. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and two real-world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed
approach, highlighting its potential for broader
applications in causal analysis.

Unmeasured
Variables

C3

Quarter of
Birth

C1

%
Education
Level

Income

C2

%

Figure 1. Graphical illustration of a valid IV model, where dashed
lines indicate the absence of arrows. The variable Quarter of Birth
severe as a valid IV relative to the causal relationship Education
Level→Income. Unmeasured Variables, such as ability, are included as unobserved confounders (Angrist & Krueger, 1991).

1. Introduction
Instrumental variables (IVs) are a powerful tool for estimating unbiased causal effects in the presence of unobserved
confounders. They have been widely applied in various
fields, such as economics (Imbens, 2014; Imbens & Rubin, 2015), epidemiology (Hernán & Robins, 2006; Baiocchi et al., 2014), and sociology (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al.,
2000). Informally speaking, a valid instrumental variable
needs to satisfy the following three conditions: (C1) the
instrument is related to the exposure (relevance); (C2) the
instrument has no direct effect on the outcome (exclusion

The problem of IV selection has been extensively studied
in finding a single valid IV, and several necessary criteria
have been established (Pearl, 1995; Manski, 2003; Palmer
et al., 2011; Kitagawa, 2015; Wang et al., 2017; Kédagni
& Mourifié, 2020), such as Pearl’s instrumental inequality
and generalized instrumental inequality. Although these
methods have been used in a range of fields, these methods
typically require discrete treatment variables and assume
that condition C2 holds, i.e., the instrument has no direct
effect on the outcome, which is not always feasible in practical settings. For instance, in Mendelian randomization
scenarios, the genetic variants’ pleiotropic effects on the
outcome (Burgess et al., 2017), violating C2 and making
it challenging to find suitable IVs. Additionally, in cases
where the treatment variable is continuous, such as vitamin
levels (Skaaby et al., 2013), these methods are less applicable. Recently, two novel necessary conditions, IV-GIN

1
Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing Technology and
Business University, Beijing, China 2 SIAT, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Feng Xie
<fengxie@btbu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

