Identifying Metric Structures of Deep Latent Variable Models

Stas Syrota 1 Yevgen Zainchkovskyy 1 Johnny Xi 2 Benjamin Bloem-Reddy 2 Søren Hauberg 1

Latent representation

Abstract

Latent Euclidean distances

Deep latent variable models learn condensed representations of data that, hopefully, reflect the
inner workings of the studied phenomena. Unfortunately, these latent representations are not
statistically identifiable, meaning they cannot be
uniquely determined. Domain experts, therefore,
need to tread carefully when interpreting these.
Current solutions limit the lack of identifiability
through additional constraints on the latent variable model, e.g. by requiring labeled training data,
or by restricting the expressivity of the model. We
change the goal: instead of identifying the latent
variables, we identify relationships between them
such as meaningful distances, angles, and volumes. We prove this is feasible under very mild
model conditions and without additional labeled
data. We empirically demonstrate that our theory
results in more reliable latent distances, offering a
principled path forward in extracting trustworthy
conclusions from deep latent variable models.

Figure 1: Latent representations of transcriptomic data (top
row) changes with model retraining. Each column corresponds to a model trained from scratch. The latent variables
are not identifiable and change between training runs. Pairwise Euclidean distances (bottom row, averaged across cell
types) also change significantly between runs. This lack
of identifiability prevents us from reliably using the latent
representations to understand the underlying biology.

1. Introduction
Latent variable models express the density of observational
data through a set of latent, i.e. unobserved, variables
that ideally capture the driving mechanisms of the datagenerating phenomena. For example, the latent variables
of a variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014) trained on protein data, can reveal
the underlying protein evolution which can help domain
experts understand a problem of study (Riesselman et al.,
2018; Ding et al., 2019; Detlefsen et al., 2022).

variables as the analysis becomes subject to the arbitrariness
of model training. Fig. 1 exemplifies the issue, where two
independently trained latent representations are estimated
from transcriptomic data (Tasic et al., 2018). While clusters
are similarly estimated across models, the relationships
between clusters vary significantly, preventing us from
extracting intra-cluster information from the plots. This
fundamental issue has sparked the development of training
heuristics to limit the issue (Kobak & Berens, 2019), and the
practice of analyzing latent variables has been both disputed
(Chari & Pachter, 2023) and defended (Lause et al., 2024).
This entire discussion could have been avoided if only
distances between latent variables had been identifiable.

Unfortunately, latent variables are rarely identifiable, i.e.
they cannot be uniquely estimated from data. This lack of
uniqueness prevents reliable analysis of the learned latent
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark 2 Department
of Statistics, University of British Columbia. Correspondence to:
Stas Syrota <stasy@dtu.dk>.

Providing identifiability guarantees has been heavily investigated. We survey key results in Secs. 2 and 6, but the executive summary is that current approaches require significant
model restrictions (e.g. linearity assumptions), labeled data,
or a combination of both. These solutions are underwhelm-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

