Volume Optimality in Conformal Prediction with Structured Prediction Sets

Chao Gao * 1 Liren Shan * 2 Vaidehi Srinivas * 3 Aravindan Vijayaraghavan * 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Conformal inference has emerged as a powerful black-box
method for quantifying uncertainty in model predictions,
providing confidence sets or prediction sets that contain
the true value with a specified probability (Gammerman
et al., 1998; Vovk et al., 2005). Consider a prediction problem where X is the covariate space (feature space), and Y
is the label space. Given a dataset of n labeled samples
(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) ∈ X × Y, a conformal prediction
algorithm uses these n samples (often called calibration
samples) to construct for a test Xn+1 ∈ X with (unknown)
true value Yn+1 ∈ Y, a prediction set that we will denote
b n+1 ) ⊆ Y,1 satisfying the coverage requirement for
by C(X
some desired parameter α ∈ (0, 1):


P Yn+1 ∈ b
C(Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − α.
(1)

Conformal Prediction is a widely studied technique to construct prediction sets of future observations. Most conformal prediction methods
focus on achieving the necessary coverage guarantees, but do not provide formal guarantees on the
size (volume) of the prediction sets. We first prove
an impossibility of volume optimality where any
distribution-free method can only find a trivial
solution. We then introduce a new notion of volume optimality by restricting the prediction sets
to belong to a set family (of finite VC-dimension),
specifically a union of k-intervals. Our main contribution is an efficient distribution-free algorithm
based on dynamic programming (DP) to find a
union of k-intervals that is guaranteed for any distribution to have near-optimal volume among all
unions of k-intervals satisfying the desired coverage property. By adopting the framework of distributional conformal prediction (Chernozhukov
et al., 2021), the new DP based conformity score
can also be applied to achieve approximate conditional coverage and conditional restricted volume
optimality, as long as a reasonable estimator of the
conditional CDF is available. While the theoretical results already establish volume-optimality
guarantees, they are complemented by experiments that demonstrate that our method can significantly outperform existing methods in many
settings.

Here the probability P refers to the joint distribution over all n + 1 pairs of observations
(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ), (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) including the
test sample (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ). Unlike traditional approaches,
conformal inference is distribution-free, relying only on the
assumption of exchangeability of the joint distribution P
over the (n + 1) samples.
While most conformal methods provide guarantees on
coverage, they do not provide any control on the size
or volume of the prediction sets.2 In fact, the choice of
b
C(Xn+1 ) = Y also satisfies the coverage requirement.
Consequently, the size of these sets is often validated
empirically, without formal guarantees. This raises the
important question of volume optimality, which is the focus
of this paper:
Question: Given calibration samples (X1 , Y1 ), . . . ,
(Xn , Yn ) drawn i.i.d. from a distribution P , can we find
b ⊂ Y satisfying the desired
among all data-dependent sets C
coverage requirement for (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) ∼ P , the one with

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 2 Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 3 Department
of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, USA. Correspondence to:
Chao Gao <chaogao@uchicago.edu>, Liren Shan <lirenshan@ttic.edu>, Vaidehi
Srinivas <vaidehi@u.northwestern.edu>, Aravindan Vijayaraghavan <aravindv@northwestern.edu>.

1

It
may
be
more
accurate
to
use
b
C(X1 , Y1 , . . . , Xn , Yn , Xn+1 ) instead of b
C(Xn+1 ) to reb is a function of the calibration samples and
flect that C
Xn+1 .
2
Although conformal prediction ensures that the coverage probability does not exceed 1 − α + 1/n, it does not prevent overly
conservative predictions.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

