A Sample-Efficient Conditional Independence Test
in the Presence of Discretization
Boyang Sun 1 Yu Yao 2 Xinshuai Dong 3 Zongfang Liu 1 Tongliang Liu 2 1 Yumou Qiu 4 Kun Zhang 3 1

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, interested variables
are often represented as discretized values due
to measurement limitations. Applying Conditional Independence (CI) tests directly to such
discretized data, however, can lead to incorrect
conclusions. To address this, recent advancements
have sought to infer the correct CI relationship
between the latent variables through binarizing
observed data. However, this process inevitably
results in a loss of information, which degrades
the test’s performance. Motivated by this, this
paper introduces a sample-efficient CI test that
does not rely on the binarization process. We
find that the independence relationships of latent
continuous variables can be established by addressing an over-identifying restriction problem
with Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).
Based on this insight, we derive an appropriate
test statistic and establish its asymptotic distribution correctly reflecting CI by leveraging nodewise regression. Theoretical findings and Empirical results across various datasets demonstrate
that the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed test. Our code implementation is provided
in https://github.com/boyangaaaaa/DCT.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of data generative processes using causal
graphical models: (a) fork, (b) and (c) chain. The discretization
process maps latent continuous variables (white nodes) to observable discrete variables (gray nodes), denoted with a tilde (∼).

overlooked issue is whether the analyzed variables are truly
discrete or if they are inherently continuous but appear
discrete due to measurement limitations.
In many real-world applications, data collection methods
impose unavoidable discretization. That is, continuous
variables are artificially binned into categories because of
constraints in measurement precision. This phenomenon
across various fields, including finance (Changsheng &
Yongfeng, 2012; Damodaran, 2012), psychology (Mossman
et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2019), and recommendation systems (Sparling & Sen, 2011; Dooms et al., 2013). In these
domains, inherently continuous variables—such as stock
prices, cognitive ability scores, and user preferences—are
frequently transformed into discrete scales, often leading to
biases in statistical inference.
When discretization occurs, traditional CI tests can fail to
capture the true CI relationship. As shown in Figure1 where
we illustrate the discretization process with a causal graphic
model (Pearl, 2000), for all CI tests unaware of discretization, the intent is to test the CI of latent continuous variables
X1 , X3 given X2 , what is actually being tested is their discretized counterparts X̃1 , X̃3 given X̃2 . According to the
faithfulness assumption (Spirtes et al., 2000), we can infer that X1 ⊥⊥ X3 |{X2 } while X̃1 ̸⊥⊥ X̃3 |{X̃2 }. This
mismatch between the latent continuous variables and their
discretized counterparts causes traditional CI tests, when
applied to discretized observations, to draw incorrect conclusions about the true CI relationships of interested variables.

1. Introduction
Conditional independence tests for discrete variables are
fundamental in statistical analysis and widely applied across
various disciplines. Traditional methods including the chisquared test (F.R.S., 2009), the G-test (likelihood ratio test)
(McDonald, 2009), and measures based on conditional mutual information (Kubkowski et al., 2021) are well established and extensively used. However, a critical yet often
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 3 Carnegie Mellon
University 4 Peking University. Correspondence to: Yumou Qiu
<qiuyumou@math.pku.edu.cn>, Kun Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.
2

Recent work Discretization-Aware CI test (DCT) (Sun et al.,
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025

by the author(s).

1

