Reasoning Limitations of Multimodal Large Language Models.
A Case Study of Bongard Problems

Mikołaj Małkiński 1 Szymon Pawlonka 1 Jacek Mańdziuk 1 2

Abstract
Abstract visual reasoning (AVR) involves discovering shared concepts across images through analogy, akin to solving IQ test problems. Bongard
Problems (BPs) remain a key challenge in AVR,
requiring both visual reasoning and verbal description. We investigate whether multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) can solve BPs
by formulating a set of diverse MLLM-suited solution strategies and testing 4 proprietary and 4
open-access models on 3 BP datasets featuring
synthetic (classic BPs) and real-world (Bongard
HOI and Bongard-OpenWorld) images. Despite
some successes on real-world datasets, MLLMs
struggle with synthetic BPs. To explore this gap,
we introduce Bongard-RWR, a dataset representing synthetic BP concepts using real-world images. Our findings suggest that weak MLLM
performance on classical BPs is not due to the domain specificity, but rather comes from their general AVR limitations. Code and dataset are available at: https://github.com/pavonism/
bongard-rwr

(a) Bongard Problem #31

(b) Bongard-RWR #31

(c) Bongard Problem #36

(d) Bongard-RWR #36

Figure 1: Bongard Problems. (a), (c): Manually-designed
synthetic BPs (Bongard, 1970). (b), (d): Their real-world
equivalents from the Bongard-RWR dataset proposed in this
work. BP #31: Left: One line. Right: Two lines. BP #36:
Left: Triangle above circle. Right: Circle above triangle.

resentations are already given. Chalmers et al. (1992) highlight that forming useful representations is an intricate challenge. In particular, perception is not merely a passive
reception of sensory data, but rather an active interpretation influenced by prior knowledge. This process involves
the detection of patterns, recognition of analogies, and abstraction of concepts. The resultant representations may
vary significantly depending on the context, which underscores the importance of modeling perception and cognition
jointly (Hofstadter, 1995).

1. Introduction
Analogy-making is a critical aspect of human cognition,
tightly linked with fluid intelligence, the capacity to apply
learned skills in novel settings (Lake et al., 2017). Several
approaches have been proposed to build systems capable of
making analogies. Notably, the structure-mapping theory explores methods for discovering structural correspondences
between pre-existing object representations (Winston, 1982;
Gentner, 1983; Carbonell, 1983; Falkenhainer et al., 1989;
Holyoak & Thagard, 1989). However, these approaches
often overlook the perceptual aspect, assuming object rep-

Multiple problems that necessitate combined perception and
reasoning have been identified (Hofstadter, 1999). Among
these tasks are Bongard Problems (BPs), introduced by Bongard (1968; 1970). Initial BPs were designed manually,
leading to the formulation of a few hundred task instances
by individual contributors (Foundalis, 2006b). A typical
BP consists of two sides, left and right, each comprising
six image panels arranged in a grid (Figs. 1a, 1c). All images on one side illustrate a shared concept absent in the

1

Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland 2 AGH University of Krakow, Krakow, Poland. Correspondence to: Mikołaj
Małkiński <mikolaj.malkinski.dokt@pw.edu.pl>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

