Feedforward Few-shot Species Range Estimation

Christian Lange 1 Max Hamilton 2 Elijah Cole 3 Alexander Shepard 4 Samuel Heinrich 5 Angela Zhu 2
Subhransu Maji 2 Grant Van Horn 2 Oisin Mac Aodha 1

Abstract
Knowing where a particular species can or cannot be found on Earth is crucial for ecological
research and conservation efforts. By mapping
the spatial ranges of all species, we would obtain deeper insights into how global biodiversity
is affected by climate change and habitat loss.
However, accurate range estimates are only available for a relatively small proportion of all known
species. For the majority of the remaining species,
we typically only have a small number of records
denoting the spatial locations where they have
previously been observed. We outline a new approach for few-shot species range estimation to
address the challenge of accurately estimating the
range of a species from limited data. During inference, our model takes a set of spatial locations as
input, along with optional metadata such as text or
an image, and outputs a species encoding that can
be used to predict the range of a previously unseen species in a feedforward manner. We evaluate our approach on two challenging benchmarks,
where we obtain state-of-the-art range estimation
performance, in a fraction of the compute time,
compared to recent alternative approaches.

Figure 1. Few-shot species range estimation with FS-SINR. Our
FS-SINR approach is trained on citizen science collected species
observation data (i.e., locations where a species has been observed),
and once trained, can estimate the spatial range of a previously
unseen species with a single forward pass through the model,
with no retraining required at inference time. It supports different
input modalities such as variable length sequences of location
observations, in addition to other metadata such as text or images.
In this illustration, we show two different range predictions: one
using only location observations (bottom left) and the other using
observations and text (bottom right).

data is used to train models that can then generate detailed
predictions over a spatial region of interest (Elith et al., 2006;
Beery et al., 2021). When sufficient data is available, these
models enable practitioners to estimate important quantities such as the spatial range (i.e., where a species can be
found) or abundance (i.e., the total number of individuals)
of a species, in addition to quantifying how these quantities
are changing over time.

1. Introduction
Understanding the spatial distribution of plant and animal species is essential to mitigate the ongoing decline
in global biodiversity (Jetz et al., 2019). Monitoring these
distributions over time allows us to quantify the impacts
of climate change, habitat loss, and conservation interventions (Mantyka-pringle et al., 2012). Estimating a species’
spatial distribution typically starts with collecting a set of
observations that denote the locations where the species has
been confirmed to be present or absent. Traditionally, this

Despite the availability of well-established modeling techniques, our current understanding of species’ distributions
is extremely limited as little or no observational data is
available for most species. For example, iNaturalist, one
of the largest citizen science platform documenting global
biodiversity, has collected over 130 million research quality observations for approximately 373,000 species globally (iNaturalist, 2025). However, the data is severely longtailed, i.e., a small percentage of common species account

1

University of Edinburgh 2 UMass Amherst 3 GenBio AI
iNaturalist 5 Cornell. Correspondence to: Christian Lange
<c.p.lange@sms.ed.ac.uk>.

4

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

