TreeLoRA: Efficient Continual Learning via Layer-Wise LoRAs
Guided by a Hierarchical Gradient-Similarity Tree

Yu-Yang Qian 1 2 Yuan-Ze Xu 1 2 Zhen-Yu Zhang 3 Peng Zhao 1 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

algorithms (Bengio et al., 2021; Zhou, 2022; Sutton et al.,
2022), where new tasks with different data distributions are
encountered sequentially, leading to a performance degradation over time (Vela et al., 2022). This sequential nature necessitates a learning method capable of continuous
adaptation and evolution, named continual learning (CL),
in which models must adapt to new tasks while retaining
knowledge from previous ones to alleviate catastrophic forgetting (Thrun & Pratt, 1997).

Many real-world applications collect data in a
streaming environment, where learning tasks are
encountered sequentially. This necessitates continual learning (CL) to update models online, enabling adaptation to new tasks while preserving
past knowledge to prevent catastrophic forgetting.
Nowadays, with the flourish of large pre-trained
models (LPMs), efficiency has become increasingly critical for CL, due to their substantial computational demands and growing parameter sizes.
In this paper, we introduce TreeLoRA (K-D Tree
of Low-Rank Adapters), a novel approach that
constructs layer-wise adapters by leveraging hierarchical gradient similarity to enable efficient CL,
particularly for LPMs. To reduce the computational burden of task similarity estimation, we
employ bandit techniques to develop an algorithm based on lower confidence bounds to efficiently explore the task structure. Furthermore,
we use sparse gradient updates to facilitate parameter optimization, making the approach better
suited for LPMs. Theoretical analysis is provided
to justify the rationale behind our approach, and
experiments on both vision transformers (ViTs)
and large language models (LLMs) demonstrate
the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach
across various domains, including vision and natural language processing tasks.

Existing CL approaches can be generally classified into
three main categories (Wang et al., 2024b): regularizationbased methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), which introduce
specially designed regularizers to prevent the model from
forgetting previously learned knowledge; rehearsal-based
methods (Shin et al., 2017), which store data from previous tasks in a buffer and reuse it during the ongoing task
stream; and architecture-based methods (Mallya & Lazebnik, 2018; Serrà et al., 2018), which design specialized
model architectures to dynamically adapt to new tasks and
mitigate forgetting. These approaches have demonstrated
strong empirical performance for continual learning tasks
with conventional machine learning models.
Nowadays, with the rise of the pre-training paradigm, large
pre-trained models (LPMs) have excelled in numerous tasks
such as natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020)
and computer vision (Radford et al., 2021). The necessity
of efficient CL, especially the approaches that are tailored
to LPMs, has become increasingly demanding, due to the
substantial computational demands and growing parameter sizes. Therefore, it is essential to explore the issue of
efficient continual learning, particularly the Continual FineTuning (CFT) of LPMs. Although there exist some continual
learning methods developed for LPMs (Scialom et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023b; Dou et al., 2024), they often do not
focus on the efficiency in CL, typically exhibiting computational complexity that scales linearly with the number of
tasks. Consequently, this raises a critical new challenge:
How to develop an efficient continual learning approach,
particularly fitted for large pre-trained models?

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have achieved significant success across a wide range of applications. However, distribution shift still poses a challenge to machine learning
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
University, China 3 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose an efficient continual learning approach that facilitates adaptation to new tasks by leveraging
task-shared knowledge, while avoiding the linear computa-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

