A Near-Optimal Single-Loop Stochastic Algorithm for Convex Finite-Sum
Coupled Compositional Optimization

Bokun Wang 1 Tianbao Yang 1
where X ⊂ Rd is a convex and closed set, the inner function
gi (x) = Eζi ∼Pi [gi (x; ζi )] is in expectation form, and the
objective function F (x) is convex.

Abstract
This paper studies a class of convex Finite-sum
Coupled Compositional Optimization (cFCCO)
problems for empirical X-risk minimization
with applications including group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) and learning
with imbalanced data. To better address these
problems, we introduce an efficient single-loop
primal-dual block-coordinate stochastic algorithm
called ALEXR. The algorithm employs blockcoordinate stochastic mirror ascent with extrapolation for the dual variable and stochastic proximal
gradient descent updates for the primal variable.
We establish the convergence rates of ALEXR
in both convex and strongly convex cases under
smoothness and non-smoothness conditions of
involved functions, which not only improve the
best rates in previous works on smooth cFCCO
problems but also expand the realm of cFCCO for
solving more challenging non-smooth problems
such as the dual form of GDRO. Finally, we derive lower complexity bounds, demonstrating the
(near-)optimality of ALEXR within a broad class
of stochastic algorithms for cFCCO. Experimental results on GDRO and partial Area Under the
ROC Curve (pAUC) maximization demonstrate
the promising performance of our algorithm.

In this paper, we study a special class of convex FCCO
problems, termed cFCCO, which has a specific structure:
The inner function gi : X → Rm is convex and accessible
via stochastic oracles (typically a loss function), while the
outer function fi : Rm → R is a convex and deterministic simple function (transformation) that is monotonically
non-decreasing1 . Besides, the regularizer r is also convex.
Although the above condition is sufficient but not necessary
for the convexity of F , fully exploiting it allows us to design
a single-loop algorithm that achieves better complexity than
previous algorithms and applies to non-smooth problems
with convergence guarantees. Moreover, we can prove its
(near-)optimality by establishing lower complexity bounds.
Notably, the special structure of cFCCO arises in various
machine learning applications, including group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) (Sagawa et al., 2019;
Soma et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), sub-population fairness (Martinez et al., 2021), partial area under the ROC
curve (pAUC) maximization (Zhu et al., 2022), and bipartite
ranking (Rudin, 2009). We postpone detailed descriptions
of some of these problems to Section 5 and Appendix B.
While several algorithms have been developed to solve the
convex FCCO problem in (1) with theoretical guarantees
of global convergence (Wang & Yang, 2022; Jiang et al.,
2022), these methods are limited by critical drawbacks:
First, these algorithms only have convergence guarantees
under the strong assumption that fi and gi are both smooth
and Lipschitz continuous. Second, their convergence rates
have poor dependence on the target optimization error ϵ,
batch sizes, and, in the strongly convex case, the condition number. Third, these algorithms rely on nested inner
loops where the number of iterations in each loop depends
on problem-specific constants, increasing the difficulty of
implementation.

1. Introduction
We revisit the following regularized finite-sum coupled compositional optimization problem (Wang & Yang, 2022):
n

min F (x),

x∈X

F (x) :=

1X
fi (gi (x)) + r(x),
n i=1

(1)

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. Correspondence to:
Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@tamu.edu>.

To address these limitations, we leverage the structure of
the problem. Using the convex conjugate of fi denoted

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
w.r.t. each coordinate of its input. Note that we only need the
monotonicity of fi when gi is nonlinear.

1

