Efficient Noise Calculation in Deep Learning-based MRI Reconstructions

Onat Dalmaz 1 2 Arjun D. Desai 1 2 Reinhard Heckel 3 Tolga Cukur 4 Akshay S. Chaudhari 2 5
Brian Hargreaves 1 2 6

Abstract

applicability. Our work reintroduces accurate and
efficient noise analysis as a central tenet of reconstruction algorithms, holding promise to reshape
how we evaluate and deploy DL-based MRI.

Accelerated MRI reconstruction involves solving
an ill-posed inverse problem where noise in acquired data propagates to the reconstructed images. Noise analyses are central to MRI reconstruction for providing an explicit measure of solution fidelity and for guiding the design and deployment of novel reconstruction methods. However,
deep learning (DL)-based reconstruction methods
have often overlooked noise propagation due to
inherent analytical and computational challenges,
despite its critical importance. This work proposes a theoretically grounded, memory-efficient
technique to calculate voxel-wise variance for
quantifying uncertainty due to acquisition noise in
accelerated MRI reconstructions. Our approach
approximates noise covariance using the DL network’s Jacobian, which is intractable to calculate. To circumvent this, we derive an unbiased estimator for the diagonal of this covariance
matrix—voxel-wise variance—, and introduce a
Jacobian sketching technique to efficiently implement it. We evaluate our method on knee and
brain MRI datasets for both data- and physicsdriven networks trained in supervised and unsupervised manners. Compared to empirical references obtained via Monte-Carlo simulations, our
technique achieves near-equivalent performance
while reducing computational and memory demands by an order of magnitude or more. Furthermore, our method is robust across varying input noise levels, acceleration factors, and diverse
undersampling schemes, highlighting its broad

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has become indispensable in clinical diagnostics, yet prolonged acquisition times
can reduce patient throughput and exacerbate motion artifacts. Parallel imaging (pMRI) (Pruessmann et al., 1999;
Griswold et al., 2002) was developed to mitigate these challenges by undersampling k-space and exploiting multiple
receiver coils with distinct sensitivity profiles. Despite
successfully reducing scan duration, pMRI inevitably introduces spatially varying noise amplification—commonly
quantified by the g-factor—due to the need to invert an
ill-conditioned system. In regions where coil sensitivities
overlap or are highly attenuated, the reconstruction leads
to locally elevated noise levels (Pruessmann et al., 1999;
Sodickson et al., 1999). Early pMRI research rigorously
analyzed this spatial noise amplification, culminating in
precise formulations that ensured reliable signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) performance to guide algorithm design and
clinical implementation (Pruessmann et al., 1999; Sodickson et al., 1999; Aja-Fernández et al., 2014). For instance,
the widely used SENSE algorithm explicitly incorporates
coil sensitivities to minimize noise, reflecting how classical
pMRI approaches typically maintain a clear link between
measurement noise and the reconstructed image.
In contrast, most deep learning (DL) reconstruction methods
(Akçakaya et al., 2019; Knoll et al., 2020a; Yaman et al.,
2022; Jalal et al., 2021; Jun et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024;
Sriram et al., 2020b) have not provided an explicit account
of how noise from undersampled k-space propagates into
the final image. A major obstacle lies in the highly nonlinear and complex nature of DL reconstructions (Chen et al.,
2022) making it nontrivial to derive analytical frameworks
to characterize how undersampling and learned regularization affect localized noise amplification. In response, the
core emphasis in the design of DL methods typically sought
maximization of summary metrics like peak signal-to-noise
ratio (PSNR) or structural similarity index (SSIM) that do

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 2 Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 3 Department of Computer Engineering,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 4 Department of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bilkent University, Ankara,
Turkey 5 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 6 Department of Bioengineering, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Onat Dalmaz
<onat@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

