Differentially Private Space-Efficient Algorithms for Counting Distinct Elements
in the Turnstile Model
Rachel Cummings * 1 Alessandro Epasto * 2 Jieming Mao * 2 Tamalika Mukherjee * 1 Tingting Ou * 1
Peilin Zhong * 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Data streaming applications in which one needs to track
specific statistics over a period of time occur in many realworld scenarios including digital advertising, network monitoring, and database systems. Given the sheer volume of
data collected and processed in these online settings, significant work has been dedicated to the design of efficient
algorithms to track and release useful statistics about the
data stream, at every timestep. A key goal in this area is the
design of space-efficient algorithms, i.e., algorithms that do
not require storing the entire stream in memory.

The turnstile continual release model of differential privacy captures scenarios where a privacypreserving real-time analysis is sought for a
dataset evolving through additions and deletions.
In typical applications of real-time data analysis, both the length of the stream T and the size
of the universe |U| from which data come can
be extremely large. This motivates the study of
private algorithms in the turnstile setting using
space sublinear in both T and |U|. In this paper,
we give the first sublinear space differentially private algorithms for the fundamental problem of
counting distinct elements in the turnstile streaming model. Our algorithm achieves, on arbitrary
streams, Õη (T 1/3 ) space and additive error, and a
(1 + η)-relative approximation for all η ∈ (0, 1).
Our result significantly improves upon the space
requirements of the state-of-the-art algorithms for
this problem, which is linear, approaching the
known Ω(T 1/4 ) additive error lower bound for
arbitrary streams. Moreover, when a bound W on
the number of times an item appears in the
√ stream
is known, our algorithm√provides Õη ( W ) additive error, using Õη ( W ) space. This additive error asymptotically matches that of prior
work which required instead linear space. Our
results address an open question posed by (Jain
et al., 2023) about designing low-memory mechanisms for this problem. We complement these
results with a space lower bound for this problem,
which shows that any algorithm that uses similar
techniques must use space Ω̃(T 1/3 ) on arbitrary
streams.

In many applications, the data being collected is not only
massive, but also contains sensitive and personal user information. In this case, formal privacy protections are often required to ensure that the data released by the algorithm does
not inadvertently leak protected information about individual users. Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) has
emerged as the de facto gold-standard in privacy-preserving
data analysis to address such concerns.
We focus on the turnstile model of continual release in
differential privacy. In this model, we are given a stream
x = (x1 , . . . , xT ), where each xt can be an insertion (+u)
or deletion (−u) of some data item u from a fixed universe
U, or ⊥ (no update), and the goal is to release a statistic of
interest at every timestep t ∈ [T ], in a differentially private
manner. An algorithm A is (ε, δ)-differentially private if for
any neighboring input streams x ∼ x′ and any output set O,
Pr[A(x) ∈ O] ≤ eε Pr[A(x′ ) ∈ O] + δ.
In the continual release model, the output A(x) refers to
the entire output history of the algorithm A over stream x
at every timestep. We consider event-level privacy, i.e., the
input streams x ∼ x′ are neighboring if they differ in at
most one timestep.
In this paper, we study the fundamental problem of counting distinct elements in the turnstile model under continual
release. Starting from the seminal works of (Flajolet & Martin, 1985; Alon et al., 1999), there is a rich literature of low
space algorithms for the problem of counting distinct elements in the non-DP streaming world (e.g., see references
within (Muthukrishnan, 2005)).

1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Tamalika Mukherjee
<tm3391@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

