Understanding Generalization in Quantum Machine Learning with Margins

Tak Hur 1 Daniel K. Park 1 2

Abstract

quantities (Banchi et al., 2021; Caro et al., 2024). Despite
these efforts, existing methods have shown limitations in
fully capturing the behavior of QML models.

Understanding and improving generalization capabilities is crucial for both classical and quantum
machine learning (QML). Recent studies have
revealed shortcomings in current generalization
theories, particularly those relying on uniform
bounds, across both classical and quantum settings. In this work, we present a margin-based
generalization bound for QML models, providing
a more reliable framework for evaluating generalization. Our experimental studies on the quantum phase recognition dataset demonstrate that
margin-based metrics are strong predictors of
generalization performance, outperforming traditional metrics like parameter count. By connecting this margin-based metric to quantum information theory, we demonstrate how to enhance
the generalization performance of QML through a
classical-quantum hybrid approach when applied
to classical data.

The current understanding of generalization in QML predominantly relies on uniform bounds, which hold uniformly
across all hypotheses within a given class. However, in classical deep learning, uniform bounds have faced significant
criticism for their lack of practical relevance (Zhang et al.,
2021; Nagarajan & Kolter, 2019; Dziugaite & Roy, 2017).
In particular, Zhang et al. (2021) demonstrated that modern deep learning models can easily overfit random labels.
Since uniform bounds apply equally to all hypotheses in
the function family, this result indicates that these bounds
fail to distinguish between models that generalize well and
those that merely memorize data, highlighting their vacuity
in deep learning. Building on this observation, Gil-Fuster
et al. (2024) explored the use of parameterized quantum
circuits, also known as Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs),
on a benchmark quantum dataset with randomized labels.
Despite the small number of qubits, the QNNs were able to
overfit the random labels, indicating that uniform bounds
are equally ineffective in the QML framework.

1. Introduction

In classical deep learning, the looseness of uniform bounds
has prompted many researchers to shift their focus toward
explanatory tools, such as exploring their correlation with
observed generalization. Notably, Bartlett et al. (2017) proposed a margin-based generalization bound for deep networks and demonstrated that spectrally normalized margin
distribution is strongly correlated with generalization performance. Subsequent research has consistently found that
margin-based metrics are reliable predictors of generalization performance (Neyshabur et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2018;
Dziugaite et al., 2020).

Quantum machine learning (QML) presents exciting opportunities to expand the horizons of machine learning beyond
classical approaches. Generalization—the ability to learn
from examples and make accurate predictions on unseen
data—is a core component of intelligence and a critical factor that quantifies the effectiveness of machine learning models in real-world applications. Thus, fundamental challenge
in QML, as in classical machine learning, is to understand,
characterize, and optimize generalization. Generalization in
QML has been studied through various factors, such as the
number of parameters (Caro et al., 2022), effective dimension (Abbas et al., 2021a), quantum resource theory (Bu
et al., 2021; 2022; 2023), and quantum information-theoretic

In this work, we demonstrate that margins are strong predictors of generalization performance within the QML framework as well. Our goal is to shift the focus away from the
commonly emphasized parameter count, highlighting margins as a more effective tool for evaluating and controlling
generalization. Moreover, this margin-based perspective
provides a systematic pathway to improving the generalization of QML models when applied to classical data, as
it reveals that maximizing the separability of classes embedded in the quantum feature space is key to optimizing

1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Department of Applied Statistics, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Tak Hur <takh0404@yonsei.ac.kr>, Daniel K. Park
<dkd.park@yonsei.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

