Scalable Equilibrium Sampling with Sequential Boltzmann Generators

Charlie B. Tan * 1 Avishek Joey Bose * 1 2 Chen Lin 1 Leon Klein 3 Michael M. Bronstein 1 4 Alexander Tong 2 5

Abstract

Legend

Scalable sampling of molecular states in thermodynamic equilibrium is a long-standing challenge
in statistical physics. Boltzmann generators tackle
this problem by pairing normalizing flows with
importance sampling to obtain uncorrelated samples under the target distribution. In this paper,
we extend the Boltzmann generator framework
with two key contributions, denoting our framework S EQUENTIAL B OLTZMANN G ENERATORS
(SBG). The first is a highly efficient Transformerbased normalizing flow operating directly on allatom Cartesian coordinates. In contrast to the
equivariant continuous flows of prior methods,
we leverage exactly invertible non-equivariant architectures which are highly efficient during both
sample generation and likelihood evaluation. This
efficiency unlocks more sophisticated inference
strategies beyond standard importance sampling.
In particular, we perform inference-time scaling
of flow samples using a continuous-time variant
of sequential Monte Carlo, in which flow samples are transported towards the target distribution
with annealed Langevin dynamics. SBG achieves
state-of-the-art performance w.r.t. all metrics on
peptide systems, demonstrating the first equilibrium sampling in Cartesian coordinates of tri-,
tetra- and hexa-peptides that were thus far intractable for prior Boltzmann generators.

Start Sample

w̄(x)−1
Energy Contour
Non-equilibrium
Transport
Sample

Figure 1. SBG uses annealed Langevin dynamics to transport proposal flow samples towards towards the target distribution.

et al., 2011), protein-ligand binding (Buch et al., 2011),
and formation of crystal structures (Parrinello & Rahman,
1980; Matsumoto et al., 2002), whose understanding can
aid in problems that range from long-standing global health
challenges, to efficient energy storage (Deringer, 2020).
The dominant paradigm for molecular sampling involves
running Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or molecular
dynamics (MD), whereby the equations of motion are integrated with finely discretized time steps. However, such
molecular systems often exist in thermodynamic equilibrium by remaining for extended periods in metastable states.
Such metastable states are captured in the minima of a complex energy landscape, itself defining the molecular system’s equilibrium (Boltzmann) distribution at a given temperature. The high-energy barriers separating metastable
states lead to infrequent state transitions (Wirnsberger et al.,
2020), presenting an obstacle for effective sampling with
simulation-based methods such as molecular dynamics or
MCMC, requiring long simulation periods with small time
steps on the order of femtoseconds 1 fs = 10−15 s.

1. Introduction
The sampling of molecular systems at the all-atom resolution is of central interest in understanding complex natural
processes. These include important biophysical processes
such as protein-folding (Noé et al., 2009; Lindorff-Larsen
*

1
Equal contribution
University of Oxford 2 Mila –
3
Québec AI Institute Freie Universität Berlin 4 AITHYRA
5
Université de Montréal. Correspondence to: CBT <charlie.tan@exeter.ox.ac.uk>, AJB <joey.bose@mail.mcgill.ca>, AT
<alexandertongdev@gmail.com>.

Boltzmann generators (BG) (Noé et al., 2019) offer an alternative approach, in which powerful generative models,
such as normalizing flows (Dinh et al., 2017; Rezende &
Mohamed, 2015), are trained on existing (but assumed to
be biased) datasets, and leveraged as a proposal for selfnormalized importance sampling (SNIS), targeting the de-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

