A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Scaling Law Estimation

Leshem Choshen 1 2 3 Yang Zhang 2 3 Jacob Andreas 1

Abstract
Model Performance L

L(t)
L(t)

ARE

f model

Model

Scaling laws predict the loss of a target language
model by extrapolating from easier-to-train models with fewer parameters or smaller training
sets. This provides an efficient way for practitioners and researchers alike to choose optimizers, datasets, and model architectures. Despite
the widespread use of scaling laws to model the
dynamics of language model training, there has
been little work on understanding how to best
estimate and interpret them. We collect (and release) a large-scale dataset containing losses and
downstream evaluations for 485 previously published pretrained models. We use these to estimate
more than 1,000 scaling laws, then derive a set of
best practices for estimating scaling laws in new
model families. We find that fitting scaling laws
to intermediate checkpoints of training runs (and
not just their final losses) substantially improves
accuracy, and that—all else equal—estimates of
performance are generally most accurate when derived from other models of similar sizes. However,
because there is a significant degree of variability across model seeds, training multiple small
models is sometimes more useful than training a
single large one. Moreover, while different model
families differ in scaling behavior, they are often
similar enough that a target model’s behavior can
be predicted from a single model with the same architecture, along with scaling parameter estimates
derived from other model families.1

#toks

Model #params

Figure 1: Illustration of a scaled family, an estimated scaling
law, and its prediction error for a target model.

models’ architecture or training data. There is thus an acute
need for efficient decision-making aids that can evaluate new
methods without full-scale training. A large body of work
motivates or evaluates these changes using small models
(Warstadt et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024a; Hillier et al., 2024),
synthetic tasks (Akyürek et al., 2024; Wortsman et al., 2023)
or theory (Jelassi et al., 2024). But one of the most important
tools for current practitioners is the estimation of scaling
laws for LLMs (Ivgi et al., 2022; Dubey et al., 2024).

MIT 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Leshem Choshen <leshem.choshen@mit.edu>.

A scaling law extrapolates the performance of a target model
from the performance of a set of models with fewer parameters or smaller training sets. Typically, this requires
models to belong to the same model family, differing only
in parameter count and training size, but using the same architecture and training distribution. A high-quality scaling
law accurately predicts the target model’s test performance
(Rosenfeld et al.; Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022).
Most past work fixes a model family and exhaustively trains
models to relate scale and performance through a new scaling law. One question that has received comparatively little
attention is how to create such laws in the first place.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
See our repository for code, data, and experimental results.

This paper offers a practical guide to when, how and which
small models to use, to efficiently obtain meaningful predictions about large models’ behavior—maximizing prediction
reliability while minimizing the budget for preliminary ex-

1. Introduction
Substantial effort and cost are required to train even a single
large language model (LLM), and even greater cost and
effort are required to evaluate proposed changes to language
1

1

