AtlasD: Automatic Local Symmetry Discovery

Manu Bhat 1 Jonghyun Park 1 Jianke Yang 1 Nima Dehmamy 2 Robin Walters 3 Rose Yu 1

Abstract
Existing symmetry discovery methods predominantly focus on global transformations across the
entire system or space, but they fail to consider
the symmetries in local neighborhoods. This may
result in the reported symmetry group being a
misrepresentation of the true symmetry. In this
paper, we formalize the notion of local symmetry as atlas equivariance. Our proposed pipeline,
automatic local symmetry discovery (AtlasD),
recovers the local symmetries of a function by
training local predictor networks and then learning a Lie group basis to which the predictors are
equivariant. We demonstrate AtlasD is capable
of discovering local symmetry groups with multiple connected components in top-quark tagging
and partial differential equation experiments. The
discovered local symmetry is shown to be a useful inductive bias that improves the performance
of downstream tasks in climate segmentation and
vision tasks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/AtlasD.

Figure 1. Global vs local transformations. Global transformations
(left) alter the space in a uniform manner, whereas local transformations (right) only affect a particular neighborhood.

networks require knowledge of the system’s symmetries beforehand. To adhere to this successful design principle even
when the symmetry group is unknown a priori, many works
have developed auxiliary neural networks to automatically
identify symmetries (Benton et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021;
Dehmamy et al., 2021; Moskalev et al., 2022; Yang et al.,
2023; Gabel et al., 2023).
The aforementioned equivariant models and symmetry discovery pipelines focus on global symmetries, where a transformation applies across the entire space. However, arbitrary manifolds generally do not have global symmetries
to begin with (Gerken et al., 2023), preventing the use of
globally equivariant networks. This begs the need to consider local symmetries—transformations on small neighborhoods—which are much more generalized (Figure 1).
Indeed, some recent work considers local symmetry, such
as Cohen et al. (2019), which develops gauge equivariant
CNNs to take advantage of the gauge symmetries of arbitrary manifolds. Construction of such networks once again
requires knowledge of the symmetry beforehand. However,
existing discovery methods are of limited help as they ignore
such local symmetries. Hence, the need to develop a local
symmetry discovery pipeline is clear: it would generalize
symmetry discovery to arbitrary manifolds and allow for
downstream use in gauge equivariant networks.

1. Introduction
Equivariant neural networks (Bronstein et al., 2021), a family of models that exploit symmetry as an inductive bias
for neural network architectures, have received increasing
attention in deep learning due to their training efficiency
and improved generalization (Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Worrall & Welling, 2019; Zaheer et al., 2017). The key idea
behind these models is that many real-world situations exhibit inherent symmetries—transformations such as rotation,
translation, and scaling, which leave the essential properties
of a system unchanged. This has enabled a wide range of
applications, leading to empirical success (Winkels & Cohen, 2018; Brown & Lunter, 2018; Cohen & Welling, 2016;
Cohen et al., 2018). Despite its achievements, equivariant

In this work, we define local symmetry around the notion of
an atlas. An atlas is a collection of local regions, or charts,
that cover a manifold. In short, the principle of atlas equivariance states that when restricting a function to a particular
chart, the localized function must be equivariant. We develop a method based on deep learning that can discover
the atlas equivariances of dataset in the form of a Lie group.
To do so, we first model the task function localized to the

1

University of California San Diego 2 IBM Research
Northeastern University.
Correspondence to: Rose Yu
<roseyu@ucsd.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

