Heads up! Large Language Models Can Perform Tasks Without Your
Instruction via Selective Attention Head Masking

Senyu Han 1 2 3 Hongchuan Zeng 1 2 3 Kai Yu 1 2 3 4 Lu Chen 1 2 3 4

Abstract

ing their inner module functionalities has always been of
significant interest to research within the community.

Large language models (LLMs) consist of numerous Transformer modules, and while the models can perform various functions, it remains an
open question of how these modules are combined to elicit distinct inherent functionalities.
In this paper, we investigate the modules inside
LLMs and demonstrate that, by simply masking
or retaining specific attention heads during inference, LLMs can exhibit specific task functionalities without requiring explicit instructions or
modifications to the model parameters. Experiments across various models and tasks reveal that
LLMs inherently encode “functional pathways”,
the structured groups of interdependent attention
heads that are crucial for executing specific tasks.
These pathways not only govern the model’s
functional behaviors but also enhance parameter efficiency, as suppressing attention heads outside the pathway can improve task performance.
The code is available in this repository: https:
//github.com/OpenDFM/HeadsUp.

Recent works have demonstrated that built-in transformer
modules of LLMs exhibit certain functionality. For example,
decoder layers of different depths vary in their effects on
the inference and functionality of the model, and existing
research probes the importance of layers and their impact
on the outputs (Men et al., 2024; Bandarkar et al., 2025). A
more fine-grained division of model functional modules is
the level of neurons within the FFN layers. Before LLMs
became popular, many studies suggested that Transformerbased models store their knowledge in the neurons of FFN
layers (Dalvi et al., 2019; Geva et al., 2021). Later research
on LLMs has further analyzed and localized the types of
knowledge stored within these neurons, such as languages
(Zeng et al., 2025; Tan et al., 2024), concepts (Rai & Yao,
2024) and various tasks (Xiao et al., 2024). Apart from the
two modules above, many works also study the functional
behaviors of attention heads. Although it is generally believed that function-related knowledge is primarily stored
in the neurons of FFN layers, there are also considerable
works indicating that attention heads play a crucial role in
knowledge storage and processing, including long-context
retrieval, knowledge editing and more (Wu et al., 2025;
Todd et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2024). As these works above
provide valuable insights into the model module functionality, most of their methodologies rely on certain tasks or
carefully designed prompts, limiting their generalization
to other uncovered tasks. Furthermore, these works often
require explicit instructions to elicit the corresponding task
functionalities of the model, but the reasons and mechanisms behind how a module of the same model supports
different functions are still not well explored.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their
powerful capabilities across diverse fields. For the most
popular Transformer-based (Vaswani, 2017) architecture,
the model comprises multiple stacked modules such as attention layers and FFN (Feed-Forward Network) layers.
After being trained on large amounts of data, the model
can support a wide range of functions by prompting texts
containing task instructions. To understand the mechanism
of how a single LLM processes multiple tasks, interpret-

Interestingly, in neuroscience, many similar cases have identified the phenomenon of functional partitioning in the brain
(Bertolero et al., 2015; Wig, 2017; Béna & Goodman, 2025),
where various functions can be exhibited through different
combinations of modules (Diez et al., 2015). Inspired by
the modularity in brains, we suppose that the combinations
of LLM modules form functionalities inside the model, and
we propose a simple yet effective method to detect the task
functionalities in LLMs. More specifically, we investigate

1

X-LANCE Lab, School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 MoE Key Lab of Artificial
Intelligence, Shanghai, China 3 Jiangsu Key Lab of Language Computing, Suzhou, China 4 Suzhou Laboratory, Suzhou, China. Correspondence to: Lu Chen <chenlusz@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

