Independence Tests for Language Models

Sally Zhu * 1 Ahmed Ahmed * 1 Rohith Kuditipudi * 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Motivated by liability and intellectual property
concerns over open-weight models we consider
the following problem: given the weights of two
models, can we test whether they were trained
independently—i.e., from independent random
initializations? We consider two settings: constrained and unconstrained. In the constrained
setting, we make assumptions about model architecture and training and propose statistical tests
that yield exact p-values with respect to the null
hypothesis that the models are trained from independent random initializations. We compute the
p-values by simulating exchangeable copies of
each model under our assumptions and comparing various similarity measures between the original two models versus these copies. We report
p-values on pairs of 21 open-weight models (210
total pairs) and find we correctly identify all pairs
of non-independent models. In the unconstrained
setting we make none of the prior assumptions
and allow for adversarial evasion attacks that do
not change model output. We thus propose a new
test which matches hidden activations between
two models, which is robust to these transformations and to changes in model architecture and
can also identify specific non-independent components of models. Though we no longer obtain
exact p-values from this test, empirically we find
it reliably distinguishes non-independent models
like a p-value. Notably, we can use the test to
identify specific parts of one model that are derived from another (e.g., how Llama 3.1-8B was
pruned to initialize Llama 3.2-3B, or shared layers
between Mistral-7B and StripedHyena-7B), and
it is even robust to retraining individual layers of
either model from scratch.

We consider two settings of the independence testing problem. In the constrained setting, we make assumptions on
training and initialization (essentially, that the training algorithm is equivariant to permuting the hidden units of the
random initialization) that enable us to obtain provably valid
p-values. The main idea is that under these assumptions
we can cheaply simulate many exchangeable copies of each
model’s weights and compare the value of some test statistic
(e.g., cosine similarity of model weights) on each of these
copies with the original model pair. The assumptions generally hold in practice but preclude robustness to adversarial
evasion attacks and architectural changes.

*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, US. Correspondence
to: Sally Zhu <salzhu@stanford.edu>, Ahmed Ahmed
<ahmedah@cs.stanford.edu>.

For the constrained setting, we evaluate various test statistics on 21 models of the Llama 2 architecture (Touvron et al.,
2023), including 12 fine-tunes of Llama 2 and nine independently trained models, obtaining extremely small p-values

Consider the ways in which two models could be related:
one model may be a finetune of the other; one could be
spliced and pruned from certain parts of the other; both
models could be separately fine-tuned from a common ancestor; finally, they could be independently trained from
each other. We consider the problem of determining whether
two models are independently trained versus not from their
weights, which we formalize as a hypothesis testing problem in which the null hypothesis is that the weights of the
two models are independent. We concretely treat only the
weight initialization as random and thus consider two models with different random initial seeds as independent, even
if both models were trained on the same data, or one model
was distilled from the outputs of the other.
A solution to this independence testing problem would help
auditors track provenance of open-weight models. This is
pertinent because while open-weight models enable broader
access and customization, they also pose potential risks for
misuse as they cannot be easily monitored or moderated
(Kapoor et al., 2025). Model developers would also gain an
enhanced ability to protect their intellectual property (IP)
(Mensch, 2024; Peng et al., 2023) and enforce custom model
licenses (Dubey et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

We
share
code
at
https://github.com/
ahmeda14960/model-tracing.

1

