Variational Rectified Flow Matching

Pengsheng Guo 1 Alexander G. Schwing

Abstract

et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024). Those in turn can be viewed
as a variant of a hierarchical variational auto-encoder (Luo,
2022). At inference time, flow matching ‘moves’ a sample
from a source distribution to the target distribution by solving an ordinary differential equation via integration along
a velocity vector-field. To learn this velocity vector-field,
at training time, flow matching regresses to a constructed
vector-field/flow connecting any sample from the source
distribution — think of the data-domain positioned at time
zero — to any sample from the target distribution attained
at time one. Notably, in a ‘rectified flow,’ the samples
from the source and target distribution are connected via
a straight line as shown in Figure 1(a). Inevitably, this
leads to multi-modality/ambiguity, i.e., flows pointing in
different directions at the same location in the data-time
space, as illustrated for a one-dimensional data-domain in
Figure 1(a). Since classic rectified flow matching employs
a standard squared-norm loss to compare the predicted velocity vector-field to the constructed velocity vector-field, it
does not capture this multi-modality. Hence, rectified flow
matching aims to match the source and target distribution in
alternative ways. This is illustrated in Figure 1(b).

We study Variational Rectified Flow Matching, a framework that enhances classic rectified
flow matching by modeling multi-modal velocity
vector-fields. At inference time, classic rectified
flow matching ‘moves’ samples from a source
distribution to the target distribution by solving
an ordinary differential equation via integration
along a velocity vector-field. At training time,
the velocity vector-field is learnt by linearly interpolating between coupled samples one drawn
from the source and one drawn from the target distribution randomly. This leads to “ground-truth”
velocity vector-fields that point in different directions at the same location, i.e., the velocity
vector-fields are multi-modal/ambiguous. However, since training uses a standard mean-squarederror loss, the learnt velocity vector-field averages
“ground-truth” directions and isn’t multi-modal.
In contrast, variational rectified flow matching
learns and samples from multi-modal flow directions. We show on synthetic data, MNIST,
CIFAR-10, and ImageNet that variational rectified flow matching leads to compelling results.

To enable rectified flow matching to capture this multimodality in the data-time space, we study variational rectified flow matching. Intuitively, variational rectified flow
matching introduces a latent variable that permits to disentangle multi-modal/ambiguous flow directions at each
location in the data-time space. This approach follows the
classic variational inference paradigm underlying expectation maximization or variational auto-encoders. Indeed,
as shown in Figure 1(c), variational rectified flow matching permits to model flow trajectories that intersect. This
leads to learned trajectories that more closely align with the
“ground-truth” flow. The latent variable can also be used to
disentangle different directions.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021a;b)
and flow matching (Liu et al., 2023; Lipman et al., 2023;
Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023; Albergo et al., 2023)
have been remarkably successful in recent years. These
techniques have been applied across domains from computer
vision (Ho et al., 2020) and robotics (Kapelyukh et al., 2023)
to computational biology (Guo et al., 2024) and medical
imaging (Song et al., 2022).

Note that flow matching, diffusion models, and variational
auto-encoders are all able to capture multi-modality in the
data-domain, as one expects from a generative model. Importantly, variational rectified flow matching differs in that
it also models multi-modality in the data-time space. This
enables different flow directions at the same data-time space
point, allowing the resulting flows to intersect at that location.

Flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023) can be viewed as a continuous time generalization of classic diffusion models (Albergo
1
Apple. Correspondence to:
sheng guo@apple.com>.

Pengsheng Guo <peng-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

