Stochastic Control for Fine-tuning Diffusion Models:
Optimality, Regularity, and Convergence

Yinbin Han 1 Meisam Razaviyayn 2 Renyuan Xu 1

Abstract

neering fields. Traditional approaches, which fit models
to offline or online data, heavily depend on data quality
and availability. As a result, data limitations can significantly degrade performance (Doersch, 2016; Durgadevi
et al., 2021; Fetaya et al., 2020). For instance, constraints
in experimental design often lead to data scarcity, hindering
model effectiveness. Moreover, acquiring sufficient data
for reliable experimentation is costly and time-consuming,
posing scalability challenges. Most critically, data collected
under specific conditions may not generalize well to new
environments or downstream tasks, limiting the adaptability of learned models (Alzubaidi et al., 2023; Bansal et al.,
2022; Gangwal et al., 2024).

Diffusion models have emerged as powerful tools
for generative modeling, demonstrating exceptional capability in capturing target data distributions from large datasets. However, fine-tuning
these massive models for specific downstream
tasks, constraints, and human preferences remains
a critical challenge. While recent advances have
leveraged reinforcement learning algorithms to
tackle this problem, much of the progress has been
empirical, with limited theoretical understanding. To bridge this gap, we propose a stochastic
control framework for fine-tuning diffusion models. Building on denoising diffusion probabilistic
models as the pre-trained reference dynamics, our
approach integrates linear dynamics control with
Kullback–Leibler regularization. We establish the
well-posedness and regularity of the stochastic
control problem and develop a policy iteration
algorithm (PI-FT) for numerical solution. We
show that PI-FT achieves global convergence at
a linear rate. Unlike existing work that assumes
regularities throughout training, we prove that the
control and value sequences generated by the algorithm preserve the desired regularity. Finally,
we extend our framework to parametric settings
for efficient implementation and demonstrate the
practical effectiveness of the proposed PI-FT algorithm through numerical experiments.

Generative modeling offers a flexible solution by creating
synthetic data that maintains the properties of collected data
while enhancing data diversity. Diffusion models, such as
those proposed by Ho et al. (2020); Sohl-Dickstein et al.
(2015); Song & Ermon (2019); Song et al. (2021), have
emerged as powerful tools in this area, supporting notable
advancements such as DALL·E (Betker et al., 2023; Ramesh
et al., 2022), Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), and
Sora (OpenAI, 2024). These models excel by learning the
score function from potentially high-dimensional and limited data, extracting critical information for the data generation process. To achieve cost-effective, task-specific
data generation and multi-modal integration, techniques like
alignment (Wallace et al., 2024), including guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2021) and fine-tuning
(Black et al., 2024; Clark et al., 2024; Fan & Lee, 2023; Fan
et al., 2024), of pre-trained models are proposed. While diffusion alignment has achieved significant empirical success,
the theoretical foundations remain in the early stages—a
gap this paper seeks to address.

1. Introduction
The growing availability of large-scale datasets, coupled
with advances in high-performance computing, has fueled
the rise of data-driven methods across scientific and engi-

Aligning a pre-trained diffusion model to a specific task or
dataset requires updating its parameters through additional
training, typically using a smaller, task-specific dataset (Dai
et al., 2023; Podell et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022; Wallace et al., 2024). Among the prevalent alignment techniques, fine-tuning and guidance differ in how the additional
criteria are handled—either as a soft constraint or a hard
constraint. The soft constraint approach is particularly effective for applications that incorporate human preference

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Finance and Risk Engineering, New York University 2 Daniel J. Epstein Department of
Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Renyuan Xu <rx2364@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

