NExtLong: Toward Effective Long-Context Training without Long Documents

Chaochen Gao 1 2 Xing Wu 1 2 Zijia Lin 3 Debing Zhang 4 Songlin Hu 1 2

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) with extended
context windows have made significant strides
yet remain a challenge due to the scarcity of
long documents. Existing methods tend to synthesize long-context data but lack a clear mechanism to reinforce the long-range dependency
modeling. To address this limitation, we propose NExtLong, a novel framework for synthesizing long-context data through Negative document
Extension. NExtLong decomposes a document
into multiple meta-chunks and extends the context by interleaving hard negative distractors retrieved from pretraining corpora. This approach
compels the model to discriminate long-range
dependent context from distracting content, enhancing its ability to model long-range dependencies. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
NExtLong achieves significant performance improvements on the HELMET and RULER benchmarks compared to existing long-context synthesis approaches and leading models, which are
trained on non-synthetic long documents. These
findings highlight NExtLong’s ability to reduce
reliance on non-synthetic long documents, making it an effective framework for developing advanced long-context LLMs. Our code is available in https://github.com/caskcsg/
longcontext/tree/main/NExtLong.

Figure 1. Comparison of existing remarkable models and NExtLong on the HELMET(Yen et al., 2024b) and RULER(Hsieh et al.,
2024) benchmarks. We evaluate various task types classified by
HELMET. All results are averaged over sequence lengths of 8K,
16K, 32K, 64K, and 128K.

Li et al., 2025). For example, the Llama series models increase the context length from 4k in Llama 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023b) to 128K in Llama 3.1 (Meta, 2024). The increased
context window enables LLM to unlock more challenging
tasks, such as Document Summary (Wu et al., 2023b), Longbook QA (Caciularu et al., 2023) and Code Planning (Bairi
et al., 2023). To model long-range dependencies, mainstream methods (Fu et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024b) typically
continue training existing LLMs pre-trained on a 4K or 8K
context length with long documents that reach the target
length, e.g., 128K. However, the scarcity of high-quality
long documents 1 in most domains remains a significant
challenge, particularly as the target context length continues
to increase (Gao et al., 2024a).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant
attention due to their powerful and versatile capabilities.
Recently, the context length of LLMs has been rapidly extended (Peng et al., 2023; AI et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024;
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 Tsinghua University 4 Xiaohongshu Inc. Correspondence to: Xing Wu <wuxing@iie.ac.cn>, Songlin Hu <husonglin@iie.ac.cn>.

To address the challenge of scarcity of long documents, existing approaches synthesize long-context data by concatenating shorter documents. Similarity-based methods, such

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

In this work, we define “long-context data” as synthetic longform datasets, and “long documents” as non-synthetic long documents that meet the target training length.

1

