Do Multiple Instance Learning Models Transfer?

Daniel Shao 1 2 Richard J. Chen 2 Andrew H. Song 2 Joel Runevic 2 Ming Y. Lu 1 2 Tong Ding 2
Faisal Mahmood 2

Abstract
0.76

Average performance

Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a cornerstone
approach in computational pathology (CPath) for
generating clinically meaningful slide-level embeddings from gigapixel tissue images. However,
MIL often struggles with small, weakly supervised clinical datasets. In contrast to fields such
as NLP and conventional computer vision, where
transfer learning is widely used to address data
scarcity, the transferability of MIL models remains poorly understood. In this study, we systematically evaluate the transfer learning capabilities of pretrained MIL models by assessing 11
models across 21 pretraining tasks for morphological and molecular subtype prediction. Our
results show that pretrained MIL models, even
when trained on different organs than the target task, consistently outperform models trained
from scratch. Moreover, pretraining on pancancer
datasets enables strong generalization across organs and tasks, outperforming slide foundation
models while using substantially less pretraining data. These findings highlight the robust
adaptability of MIL models and demonstrate the
benefits of leveraging transfer learning to boost
performance in CPath. Lastly, we provide a resource which standardizes the implementation
of MIL models and provide model weights for
FEATHER, a PC-108 pretrained ABMIL model
at https://github.com/mahmoodlab/MIL-Lab.

0.74

0.72

0.70
PC-108
Random init.

M
LA

ax

C

m

A
R

er

ea
n
m

IL

rm

R
T
R

ns
fo
Tr
a

IL
Tr
an
sM
IL

G

SM
D

IL
M

W
IK

D

B
A

FT
D

0.68

MIL architectures

Figure 1. Average performance with supervised pretraining vs.
random initialization. Performance of MIL models trained from
random initialization (black) vs. initialized with weights from a
model pretrained (red) on a 108-class pancancer task (n=3,944
WSIs). Performance is averaged across the 19 classification tasks,
using AUROC for the binary classification tasks, weighted kappa
for grading, and balanced accuracy for the multiclass tasks.

whole slide images (WSIs), pose unique challenges due to
their gigapixel resolutions and sparse diagnostic regions.
The weakly-supervised MIL framework addresses these
challenges by (1) using a pretrained encoder to tokenize
a WSI into patch-level features, and (2) using a trainable
aggregator to pool these patch features into a final slide-level
representation for downstream classification (Song et al.,
2023; Campanella et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has been the foundational
paradigm in computational pathology (CPath) for over a
decade. Digitized human tissue sections, referred to as

While substantial progress has been made in developing
powerful pretrained patch encoders for pathology (Chen
et al., 2024a; Vorontsov et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024b; Lu
et al., 2024), learning an effective aggregation scheme remains an open challenge due to the relatively small training cohorts and sparse diagnostic regions characteristic of
CPath datasets. As a result, new MIL architectures have
been continually emerging since 2015, with each approach
introducing new inductive biases to improve data efficiency

1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA,
USA 2 Harvard University, Boston MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Daniel Shao <dshao@mit.edu>, Faisal Mahmood <FaisalMahmood@bwh.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

