Pairwise Maximum Likelihood for Multi-Class
Logistic Regression Model with Multiple Rare Classes

Xuetong Li 1 Danyang Huang 2 3 Hansheng Wang 4

Abstract
We study in this work the problem of multi-class
logistic regression with one major class and multiple rare classes, which is motivated by a real
application in TikTok live stream data. The model
is inspired by the two-class logistic regression
model of Wang (2020) but with surprising theoretical findings, which in turn motivate new estimation methods with excellent statistical and
computational efficiency. Specifically, since rigorous theoretical analysis suggests that the resulting
maximum likelihood estimators of different rare
classes should be asymptotically independent, we
consider to solve multiple pairwise two-class logistic regression problems instead of optimizing
the joint log-likelihood function with computational challenge in multi-class problem, which
are computationally much easier and can be conducted in a fully parallel way. To further reduce
the computation cost, a subsample-based pairwise likelihood estimator is developed by downsampling the major class. We show rigorously
that the resulting estimators could be as asymptotically efficient as the global maximum likelihood
estimator under appropriate regularity conditions.
Extensive simulation studies are presented to support our theoretical findings and a TikTok live
stream dataset is analyzed for illustration purpose.

Figure 1. Examples of Audi TikTok live streams. Each red bounding box annotates a local region containing a car plate, which
contains valuable model identity information.

This problem is well motivated by many real-world classification tasks, such as recognizing rare animal species
(George et al., 2023; Mou et al., 2023) and detecting uncommon objects in traffic scenes (Mullapudi et al., 2021a;
Zhang et al., 2024). In these real-world settings, the categories of interest are often extremely rare. As pointed out
by Mullapudi et al. (2021a;b), it is typically easy to collect
a large number of negative instances in this case, which
can be obtained through weak- or semi-supervised methods
(Ratner et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020), or as a by-product of
multi-label annotation (Deng et al., 2014), or with random
sampling. This leads to an imbalanced image classification
problem, where the “background” category overwhelmingly
dominates, and rare classes (e.g., target objects) represent
the minority.
To fix the idea, consider for example a car plate recognition
problem in TikTok live streams. Figure 1 shows screenshots
from TikTok live streams sponsored by different Audi car
dealers. Through the live stream, the car dealers wish to
entice as many potential buyers as possible from the TikTok
users to make purchasing decisions (Su et al., 2023). To this
end, it is important to understand TikTok users’ possible
purchase intention, which can be partially reflected in their
viewing behaviors (Ma, 2021; Sun et al., 2024). Interestingly, this important information is accurately shown on the
car plate; see the red bounding boxes in Figure 1. Then, how
to statistically analyze the graphical information provided
by the car plate so that the car model can be accurately and
automatically recognized becomes the key problem. Un-

1. Introduction
We study in this work the problem of multi-class logistic
regression with one major class and multiple rare classes.
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 2 Center for Applied Statistics, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 3 School of Statistics, Renmin
University of China, Beijing, China 4 Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Danyang Huang <dyhuang89@126.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

