I2 MoE: Interpretable Multimodal Interaction-aware Mixture-of-Experts

Jiayi Xin 1 Sukwon Yun 2 Jie Peng 3 Inyoung Choi 1 Jenna L. Ballard 1
Tianlong Chen 2 Qi Long 1

Abstract

Image Modality
Uniqueness
of Image

Language Modality
"A poor student rescues a
Uniqueness
beautiful countess and soon
Language
becomes obsessed of
with her.
A sorcerer makes a deal with
the young man to give him
fabulous wealth and anything
Redundancy he wants, if he will sign his
of both
name to a contract. The
student hurriedly signs the
contract, but doesn't know
Synergy
what he's in for."
of both

Modality fusion is a cornerstone of multimodal
learning, enabling information integration from
diverse data sources. However, vanilla fusion
methods are limited by (1) inability to account for
heterogeneous interactions between modalities
and (2) lack of interpretability in uncovering the
multimodal interactions inherent in the data. To
this end, we propose I2 MoE (Interpretable Multimodal Interaction-aware Mixture of Experts),
an end-to-end MoE framework designed to enhance modality fusion by explicitly modeling
diverse multimodal interactions, as well as providing interpretation on a local and global level.
First, I2 MoE utilizes different interaction experts
with weakly supervised interaction losses to learn
multimodal interactions in a data-driven way. Second, I2 MoE deploys a reweighting model that assigns importance scores for the output of each
interaction expert, which offers sample-level and
dataset-level interpretation. Extensive evaluation of medical and general multimodal datasets
shows that I2 MoE is flexible enough to be combined with different fusion techniques, consistently improves task performance, and provides
interpretation across various real-world scenarios. Code is available at https://github.
com/Raina-Xin/I2MoE.

Genres
"Drama",
"Fantasy",
"Horror",
"Romance"

Figure 1. An illustrative example of modality interaction. The
poster and plot are taken from the IMDB dataset.

ing diverse data sources such as text, images, audio, and
sensor data, modality fusion enables the capture of intricate relationships across modalities, which is especially
crucial in fields like healthcare, where accurate decisionmaking relies on multimodal insights (Liang et al., 2022b;
Kline et al., 2022; Teoh et al., 2024). Although recent advancements in neural architectures, such as transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Tsai et al., 2019) and sparse mixtureof-experts (Shazeer et al., 2017; Fedus et al., 2022; Jin
et al., 2024), have significantly improved the modeling of
modality interactions, an important yet underexplored area
is the systematic understanding of how modalities influence
one another—whether they provide complementary, supplementary, or even conflicting information (Baltrušaitis et al.,
2019; Liang et al., 2022b; 2023).

University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA 2 University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA 3 University of Science and
Technology of China, Anhui, China. Correspondence to: Qi Long
<qlong@upenn.edu>, Tianlong Chen <tianlong@cs.unc.edu>,
Jiayi Xin <jiayixin@seas.upenn.edu>.

Understanding modality interaction is essential for advancing multimodal machine learning (Baltrušaitis et al., 2019;
Liang et al., 2022b). An information-theoretic framework
called Partial Information Decomposition (PID) (Wollstadt
et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023) offers a theoretical foundation for understanding modality interactions. PID decomposes information into four distinct types: uniqueness
for the first modality (information specific to modality 1),
uniqueness for the second modality (information specific
to modality 2), synergy (emergent information arising from
the combination of two modalities), and redundancy (shared
information across two modalities).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Figure 1 illustrates the importance of carefully modeling
different types of multimodal interactions. For instance,
the unique information provided by the image modality

1. Introduction
A core challenge in multimodal learning is modality fusion—the integration of information from multiple modalities to improve predictive performance (Baltrušaitis et al.,
2019; Barnum et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2021). By leverag1

1

