Floating-Point Neural Networks Can Represent
Almost All Floating-Point Functions

Geonho Hwang 1 Yeachan Park 2 Wonyeol Lee 3 Sejun Park 4

Abstract

neural networks can approximate a large class of target functions. Classical results show that two-layer fully-connected
networks using a non-polynomial activation function can
approximate any continuous function on a compact domain
within an arbitrary accuracy (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al.,
1989; Pinkus, 1999; Leshno et al., 1993). Such results have
been extended to width-bounded setups (Lu et al., 2017;
Kidger & Lyons, 2020; Park et al., 2021) and more practical
networks (Zhou, 2020; Tabuada & Gharesifard, 2021; Yun
et al., 2020; Ramanujan et al., 2020; Yuan & Agaian, 2023).

Existing works on the expressive power of neural
networks typically assume real-valued parameters
and exact mathematical operations during the evaluation of networks. However, neural networks
run on actual computers can take parameters only
from a small subset of the reals and perform inexact mathematical operations with round-off errors
and overflows. In this work, we study the expressive power of floating-point neural networks, i.e.,
networks with floating-point parameters and operations. We first observe that for floating-point
neural networks to represent all functions from
floating-point vectors to floating-point vectors, it
is necessary to distinguish different inputs: the
first layer of a network should be able to generate different outputs for different inputs. We
also prove that such distinguishability is sufficient,
along with mild conditions on activation functions. Our result shows that with practical activation functions, floating-point neural networks
can represent floating-point functions from a wide
domain to all finite or infinite floats. For example, the domain is all finite floats for Sigmoid and
tanh, and it is all finite floats of magnitude less
than 1/8 times the largest float for ReLU, ELU,
SeLU, GELU, Swish, Mish and sin.

These universal approximation results assume real-valued
network parameters and/or exact mathematical operations
(e.g., addition and multiplication) during the evaluation of
networks. In practice, however, neural networks are executed on actual computers in which network parameters can
take values only from a finite subset of the reals and mathematical operations can be inexact due to round-off errors.
This presents a clear gap between theoretical assumptions
and practical environments for neural networks, which becomes more significant under low-precision setups: network
parameters can take only a tiny number of values, and mathematical operations can have huge round-off errors.
Several works have studied the expressive power of neural
networks that take parameter values from a fixed finite set.
For example, Ding et al. (2019) investigate the universal
approximation of ReLU networks with quantized parameters, and show that such “quantized” ReLU networks with
at least two distinct parameters can approximate Sobolev
functions W n,∞ (n ≥ 1). Similarly, Gonon et al. (2023) examine the impact of quantization on the approximation ability of ReLU networks, and show that a uniformly quantized
network can approximate a network with real parameters.
However, all these works assume exact mathematical operations, which limits our understanding of neural networks
under finite-precision operations with round-off errors.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success
in various fields of science and engineering (LeCun et al.,
2015). One of the theoretical foundations of neural networks
is the universal approximation theorem, which states that
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, GIST 2 Department
of Mathematics and Statistics, Sejong University 3 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH 4 Department
of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University. Correspondence to:
Sejun Park <sejun.park000@gmail.com>.

Some recent studies have investigated more realistic setups,
where parameters can take values from a finite set and mathematical operations can be inexact. For example, Hwang et al.
(2024) study the expressive power of neural networks under
fixed-point arithmetic, and show that such “fixed-point” networks with finite-precision weights and infinite-precision
biases can approximate any continuous function when they

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

