Scaling Laws for Upcycling Mixture-of-Experts Language Models

Seng Pei Liew 1 Takuya Kato 1 Sho Takase 1

Abstract

Dai et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024).
One direction to further accelerate training convergence is
leveraging smaller pretrained models to guide the training of
larger MoE models. Komatsuzaki et al. proposed upcycling,
which reuses the dense checkpoint to continued pretrain
the upcycled MoE. The MoE is expected to specialize and
optimize routing more rapidly by leveraging the pretrained
dense model weights.

Pretraining large language models (LLMs) is
resource-intensive, often requiring months of
training time even with high-end GPU clusters.
There are two approaches of mitigating such computational demands: reusing smaller models to
train larger ones (upcycling), and training computationally efficient models like mixture-of-experts
(MoE). In this paper, we study the upcycling of
LLMs to MoE models, of which the scaling behavior remains underexplored. Through extensive
experiments, we identify empirical scaling laws
that describe how performance depends on dataset
size and model configuration. Particularly, we
show that, while scaling these factors improves
performance, there is a novel interaction term between the dense and upcycled training dataset that
limits the efficiency of upcycling at large computational budgets. Based on these findings, we
provide guidance to scale upcycling, and establish
conditions under which upcycling outperforms
from-scratch trainings within budget constraints.

Despite the promise of efficient MoE training via upcycling,
the effectiveness and limitations of this technique remain
unclear. While some (Wei et al., 2024; He et al., 2024)
have already adopted it to training large-scale MoE models,
Muennighoff et al. (2024) reported negative results where
upcycling can slow down training convergence. We believe
these seemingly contradictory conclusions are due to insufficient comprehensive studies and assessments. There is also
a lack of guidance on how and when to upcycle, hampering
a wider adoption of this technique.
In this paper, we seek to better understand large language
models’ (LLMs) upcycling to MoE models via a series of
controlled experiments, spanning up to a few hundred billion
(B) training tokens and models up to 7B total parameters.
Specifically, we uncover precise power-law scalings for the
language modeling performance (cross-entropy loss) with
respect to training dataset size (for both dense and upcycled MoE training), and the model configuration, including
the total number of parameters (model size). Building on
these results, we provide a framework for assessing when
upcycling offers advantages over from-scratch training and
how performance gains depend on dataset size and model
configuration.

1. Introduction
Large-scale neural network architectures, such as dense
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), have seen remarkable
success across a wide range of tasks, particularly achieving human-level capabilities in natural language processing (Achiam et al., 2023). However, they often demand
an enormous amount of computation, imposing challenges
of computational efficiency and scalability. Sparse models like mixture-of-experts (MoE) architectures (Shazeer
et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al.) have emerged as an alternative
achieving better efficiency-performance trade-off via partial
activation (routing) of neural parameters when processing
the input. Even so, MoE models still require substantial
compute power to reach its full potential (Wei et al., 2024;

Main results. The major technical findings of this paper are
summarized below. Let D1 , D2 be the number of tokens
used to train the dense model and upcycled MoE respectively. Denote the cross-entropy test loss of the upcycled
MoE by L. We find that the upcycled MoE satisfies the
following relation for a wide range of model configuration:
L = AD1−α1 D2−α2 +α3 log D1 + E

1

SB Intuitions, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Seng Pei
Liew <sengpei.liew@sbintuitions.co.jp>.

(1)

where αi ’s (i = 1, 2, 3) are positive scaling exponents, and
A, E are constants independent of D1 , D2 .

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Moreover, the empirical performance has a power-law scal1

