A Tale of Two Structures:
Do LLMs Capture the Fractal Complexity of Language?

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin 1 Andreas Steiner 1

Abstract

is found in Ethernet traffic (Crovella & Bestavros, 1995;
Leland et al., 1994; Paxson & Floyd, 1995; Willinger et al.,
1997), where self-similarity manifests as burstiness across
all time scales, thereby impacting the design of network
device buffers (Leland & Wilson, 1991). In language, such
self-similarity is attributed to its recursive structure (Altmann et al., 2012). On the other hand, a stochastic process
is called long-range dependent (LRD) if its future is influenced by the distant past, with no particular characteristic
context length.

Language exhibits a fractal structure in its
information-theoretic complexity (i.e. bits per
token), with self-similarity across scales and longrange dependence (LRD). In this work, we investigate whether large language models (LLMs)
can replicate such fractal characteristics and identify conditions—such as temperature setting and
prompting method—under which they may fail.
Moreover, we find that the fractal parameters observed in natural language are contained within
a narrow range, whereas those of LLMs’ output
vary widely, suggesting that fractal parameters
might prove helpful in detecting a non-trivial portion of LLM-generated texts. Notably, these findings, and many others reported in this work, are
robust to the choice of the architecture; e.g. Gemini 1.0 Pro, Mistral-7B and Gemma-2B. We also
release a dataset comprising over 240,000 articles
generated by various LLMs (both pretrained and
instruction-tuned) with different decoding temperatures and prompting methods, along with their
corresponding human-generated texts. We hope
that this work highlights the complex interplay between fractal properties, prompting, and statistical
mimicry in LLMs, offering insights for generating, evaluating and detecting synthetic texts.

Self-similarity and long-range dependence (LRD) can be
quantified using the Hölder and Hurst exponents, respectively. The Hölder exponent, which we denote by S for selfsimilarity, characterizes the rate of decay in the autocorrelation function, with smaller values of S indicating a more significant self-similar structure (heavier tail) (Watkins, 2019).
By contrast, larger values of the Hurst exponent H  0.5
indicate more dependence across time (Hurst, 1951). We
refer the reader to Appendix B for the exact definitions of
these quantities. A natural question that arises, next, is:
How different are S and H in LLM-generated texts from natural language? In this work, we investigate this question in
depth, aiming to identify conditions—such as temperature
settings, instruction-tuning, prompting and model size—that
influence an LLM’s ability to replicate such fractal characteristics.
Before doing that, however, let us consider some arguments
for why LLMs may or may not be capable of replicating
the fractal structure of language. One argument for why
they should be capable of doing so lies in the chain rule of
probability. LLMs are reasonably calibrated at the token
level (Kadavath et al., 2022), implying that auto-regressive
decoding should theoretically capture the structure of natural language as long as token-level probability scores remain
well-calibrated. By the chain rule, each subsequent token’s
probability is conditioned on the prior tokens, and this process should ideally reflect the self-similarity and long-range
dependence inherent in language.

1. Introduction
The information-theoretic complexity of language (i.e., its
bits or ”surprise”) has been shown to exhibit both selfsimilarity and long-range dependence (LRD) (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2024). In simple terms, a stochastic process is
considered self-similar if its statistical properties remain consistent across different scales, regardless of the level of magnification applied. A well-known example of such behavior
1
Google Deepmind, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin <ibomohsin@google.com>.

However, this idealized view may not hold in practice. A
critical issue can arise, for example, from the mismatch
between how LLMs are trained and how they are used at
inference, as pointed out by (Bachmann & Nagarajan, 2024).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

