Fragments to Facts: Partial-Information Fragment Inference from LLMs

Lucas Rosenblatt * 1 Bin Han * 2 Robert Wolfe 2 Bill Howe 2
Partial Information
Fragment Inference

Abstract

public fragments

Large language models (LLMs) can leak sensitive
training data through memorization and membership inference attacks. Prior work has primarily
focused on strong adversarial assumptions, including attacker access to entire samples or long,
ordered prefixes, leaving open the question of
how vulnerable LLMs are when adversaries have
only partial, unordered sample information. For
example, if an attacker knows a patient has “hypertension,” under what conditions can they query
a model fine-tuned on patient data to learn the
patient also has “osteoarthritis?” In this paper,
we introduce a more general threat model under
this weaker assumption and show that fine-tuned
LLMs are susceptible to these fragment-specific
extraction attacks. To systematically investigate
these attacks, we propose two data-blind methods:
(1) a likelihood ratio attack inspired by methods
from membership inference, and (2) a novel approach, PRISM, which regularizes the ratio by
leveraging an external prior. Using examples from
medical and legal settings, we show that both
methods are competitive with a data-aware baseline classifier that assumes access to labeled indistribution data, underscoring their robustness.

{osteoarthritis,
hypertension}

osteoporosis

private fragments

Memorization Attack
The patient is a 76-year-old
known
white female who presents to
the clinic today originally
prefix
for hypertension ...
...and a med check. She has
memorized a history of hypertension,
suffix osteoarthritis,
osteoporosis.

Figure 1. Comparing the PIFI LLM threat model to the memorization threat model in a medical scenario. PIFI uses unordered,
publicly available fragments from a sample (like a patient record)
to infer private fragments (like a sensitive medical condition).
Memorization assumes access to an ordered prefix of the sample,
and checks for verbatim generation by an LLM of the suffix.

they’ve become susceptible to attacks targeting private, sensitive information (Carlini et al., 2021; 2024).
A growing body of work has studied membership inference
attacks which aim to determine if a specific example appears
in the training set (Jagannatha et al., 2021; Carlini et al.,
2022a; Mireshghallah et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023; Mattern et al., 2023; Morris et al., 2023; Duan et al., 2024) and
memorization attacks which attempt to reconstruct verbatim
training examples (Carlini et al., 2021; 2022b; 2024; Lukas
et al., 2023). Membership inference often targets outlier
samples, while memorization attacks focus on content that
is repeated (“inlier” samples (Dionysiou & Athanasopoulos,
2023)), and each approach typically assumes strong adversarial knowledge: at least access to ordered prefixes, and
typically access to entire training samples (for example, in
the case of copyright infringement cases (Grynbaum & Mac,
2023; Small, 2023)). These assumptions overlook more realistic and common scenarios in which an attacker possesses
only partial, unordered information about a target.

1. Introduction
Instruction-tuned language models (LLMs) have transformed how users interact with AI, offering personalized
assistance in domains ranging from fact-checking to postpartum care (Tang et al., 2024; Antoniak et al., 2024; Wolfe &
Mitra, 2024a;b). This tight feedback loop between end users
and developers also enables continuous fine-tuning of LLMs
on the very data collected from user interactions (Poddar
et al., 2024). Yet, as these models grow in size and scope,

We consider a malicious adversary who seeks to acquire
sensitive fragments of information from an individual’s data.
For example, consider an attacker who learns that an individual has hypertension from a social media post, and wants
to learn co-morbid conditions that apply to that individual in
order to target sales, deny insurance, or even aid in identity
theft. Using this small subset of the patient’s data (i.e., a
single diagnosed condition), can the attacker extract those
co-morbidities by prompting a fine-tuned language model?
Though they remain under-specified and under-studied, such
attacks are increasingly plausible, especially in the case of
a clinic or hospital offering a public or internal chatbot created by fine-tuning on the organization’s own medical data

*

Equal contribution 1 New York University, New York, USA
University of Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Lucas Rosenblatt <lr2872@nyu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

