On-Device Collaborative Language Modeling
via a Mixture of Generalists and Specialists

Dongyang Fan * 1 Bettina Messmer * 1 Nikita Doikov 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
On-device LLMs have gained increasing attention
for their ability to enhance privacy and provide a
personalized user experience. To facilitate private
learning with scarce data, Federated Learning has
become a standard approach. However, it faces
challenges such as computational resource heterogeneity and data heterogeneity among end users.
We propose CoMiGS (Collaborative learning with
a Mixture of Generalists and Specialists), the first
approach to address both challenges. A key innovation of our method is the bi-level optimization
formulation of the Mixture-of-Experts learning
objective, where the router is optimized using a
separate validation set to ensure alignment with
the target distribution. We solve our objective
with alternating minimization, for which we provide a theoretical analysis. Our method shares
generalist experts across users while localizing
a varying number of specialist experts, thereby
adapting to users’ computational resources and
preserving privacy. Through extensive experiments, we show CoMiGS effectively balances
general and personalized knowledge for each token generation. We demonstrate that CoMiGS remains robust against overfitting—due to the generalists’ regularizing effect—while adapting to
local data through specialist expertise. We open
source our codebase for collaborative LLMs.

Figure 1: Chat box between two users with different characteristics. Next word prediction for smart keyboards should
be tailored to users’ topic preferences for personalization.
However, to ensure factual accuracy and linguistic consistency, the results of next word prediction should maintain
universality.

Figure 2: Diagram of our proposed method CoMiGS illustrated with a simplified 2-heterogenous-models setup
(corresponding to the two users in Figure 1). Generalist experts ( θ1G , θ2G ) are aggregated across users, and specialist
experts ( {θ1Si }3i=1 , {θ2S1 } ) and Routers ( ϕ1 , ϕ2 ) are
kept local.

*
Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Dongyang Fan <dongyang.fan@epfl.ch>.

ference introduces significant delays for end users, and it
often fails to meet their personalized needs (Ding et al.,
2024; Iyengar & Adusumilli, 2024). Recently, there has
been growing interest in deploying LLMs on edge devices,
which offer benefits like lower latency, data localization, and
more personalized user experiences (Xu et al., 2024). For
instance, Apple (2024) recently launched on-device foundation models as part of its personal intelligence system. Meta
(2024), Qwen (2024) newly released lightweight models
with less than 3B parameters targeting edge AI.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

On-device LLMs present challenges such as limited and variable computational resources, scarce and heterogeneous local data, and privacy concerns related to data sharing (Peng

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have been showing great
success serving as foundation models, evidenced by their
capability to understand a wide range of tasks, such as
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), Claude (Anthropic, 2023), Gemini (DeepMind, 2023) and etc. However, cloud-based in-

1

