TuCo: Measuring the Contribution
of Fine-Tuning to Individual Responses of LLMs

Felipe Nuti 1 Tim Franzmeyer† 1 João Henriques† 1

Abstract

2024). Fine-tuning of these models produces LLMs that can
follow instructions and successfully refuse to generate harmful content or reveal security-critical information (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b). However, fine-tuning has undesired effects, such as weakening certain capabilities (Lin
et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Noukhovitch et al., 2024;
Askell et al., 2021), and does not guarantee safety. This
is evidenced by ‘jailbreak attacks’, which can elicit harmful outputs from even sophisticated closed-source models
such as GPT-4 and Claude (Zou et al., 2023b; Wei et al.,
2024; Kotha et al.; Liu et al.; Zhu et al., 2023). Previous
research into the effects of fine-tuning billion-parameter
models (Jain et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Noukhovitch et al., 2024) focused on
benchmark evaluations (Wei et al., 2023) and mechanistic
interpretability (Jain et al., 2024) at the dataset level, but
did not quantitatively investigate its effects at the level of
individual prompts.

Past work has studied the effects of fine-tuning
on large language models’ (LLMs) overall performance on certain tasks. However, a way to
quantitatively analyze its effect on individual outputs is still lacking. In this work, we propose a
new method for measuring the contribution that
fine-tuning makes to individual LLM responses
using the model’s intermediate hidden states, and
assuming access to the original pre-trained model.
We introduce and theoretically analyze an exact
decomposition of any fine-tuned LLM into a pretraining component and a fine-tuning component.
Empirically, we find that one can steer model behavior and performance by up- or down-scaling
the fine-tuning component during the forward
pass. Motivated by this finding and our theoretical analysis, we define the Tuning Contribution
(TuCo) in terms of the ratio of the fine-tuning
component and the pre-training component. We
find that three prominent adversarial attacks on
LLMs circumvent safety measures in a way that
reduces the Tuning Contribution, and that TuCo
is consistently lower on prompts where the attacks
succeed compared to ones where they do not. This
suggests that attenuating the effect of fine-tuning
on model outputs plays a role in the success of
these attacks. In short, TuCo enables the quantitative study of how fine-tuning influences model
behavior and safety, and vice-versa. 2

In this work, we introduce Tuning Contribution (TuCo), a
method for measuring the contribution of fine-tuning on an
individual LLM response to any prompt.
We start by proposing an exact decomposition of a finetuned LLM as an embedding-space superposition of a PreTraining Component (PTC) and a Fine-Tuning Component
(FTC), which leverages the residual architecture of Transformer LLMs (Vaswani et al., 2017). As shown in Figure 1
in the top right box, PTC is defined as the output of the
respective layer of the pre-trained model, while FTC is
given by the difference in the output of the fine-tuned and
pre-trained layer. An analogous decomposition arises in an
idealized setting where one assumes that fine-tuning adds
additional computational circuits (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022) to a pre-trained LLM. In this analogy, PTC
represents the circuits on the pre-trained model, and FTC
represents the new circuits formed during fine-tuning. However, we formalize our decomposition in a more abstract
way that holds exactly for any LLM.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) pre-trained on internetscale data display impressively broad capabilities (Meta AI,
†
Equal advising 1 University of Oxford. Correspondence to:
Felipe Nuti <felipenuti1182@gmail.com>.

We prove that the relative magnitude of the pre-training and
fine-tuning components bounds the discrepancy between the
final hidden states of the pre-trained and fine-tuned models
on a given prompt. In other words, if the outputs produced
by the fine-tuning component are small throughout the for-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
2
Code
is
available
at
http://github.com/
FelipeNuti/tuning-contribution.

1

