AlphaPO: Reward Shape Matters for LLM Alignment

Aman Gupta * 1 Shao Tang * 1 Qingquan Song 1 Sirou Zhu 1 Jiwoo Hong 2 Ankan Saha 1 Viral Gupta 1
Noah Lee 2 Eunki Kim 2 Siyu Zhu 1 Parag Agrawal† 1 Natesh Pillai 1 S. Sathiya Keerthi† 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Vaswani, 2017; Brown
et al., 2020; Dubey et al., 2024) have ushered in a new era
for artificial intelligence. LLM training can be broadly split
into two stages - pre- and post-training. An important step
in the post-training stage is “alignment” - which involves
improving the model’s ability to follow instructions, human
values and style. This step is crucial in helping bridge the
gap between the raw ability of pre-trained models and the
immense utility of post-trained models.

Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) and its variants have made huge strides
toward the effective alignment of large language
models (LLMs) to follow instructions and reflect
human values. More recently, Direct Alignment
Algorithms (DAAs) have emerged in which the
reward modeling stage of RLHF is skipped by
characterizing the reward directly as a function
of the policy being learned. Some popular examples of DAAs include Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) and Simple Preference Optimization (SimPO). These methods often suffer
from likelihood displacement, a phenomenon by
which the probabilities of preferred responses are
often reduced undesirably. In this paper, we argue
that, for DAAs the reward (function) shape matters. We introduce AlphaPO, a new DAA method
that leverages an α-parameter to help change the
shape of the reward function beyond the standard
log reward. AlphaPO helps maintain fine-grained
control over likelihood displacement and overoptimization. Compared to SimPO, one of the
best performing DAAs, AlphaPO leads to about
7% to 10% relative improvement in alignment performance for the instruct versions of Mistral-7B
and Llama3-8B while achieving 15% to 50% relative improvement over DPO on the same models.
The analysis and results presented highlight the
importance of the reward shape and how one can
systematically change it to affect training dynamics, as well as improve alignment performance.

To this end, researchers have developed several techniques
under the umbrella of Reinforcement Learning with Human
Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2020).
RLHF involves a three stage process - supervised fine-tuning
(SFT), reward modeling and reinforcement learning (RL)based fine-tuning to learn the optimal policy. Learning is
typically performed on preference data, which include preferred and dispreferred responses to the same input prompt.
While achieving impressive results, RLHF involves several
stages and can be cumbersome to train (Casper et al., 2023).
To simplify the alignment process, methods such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023)
and Simple Preference Optimization (SimPO) (Meng et al.,
2024) have been developed. DPO optimizes directly for the
optimal policy, bypassing the reward modeling step. The
optimal policy is identified as the solution to an expected
reward maximization problem while ensuring that the policy
does not diverge too much from a reference policy. SimPO
achieves the same goal with a different reward function normalized by the length of the generation, and also introduces
a margin term to better separate preferred and dispreferred
responses. Both belong to a class of methods known as Direct Alignment Algorithms (DAAs) (Rafailov et al., 2024a).
DAAs include DPO and its variants (Rafailov et al., 2023;
Park et al., 2024a), SimPO (Meng et al., 2024) and methods
like CPO (Xu et al., 2024) and ORPO (Hong et al., 2024)
among others.

*

Equal contribution 1 LinkedIn Corporation, CA, USA
KAIST AI, KAIST, South Korea † Work done while
at LinkedIn Corporation.
Correspondence to:
Aman
Gupta
<amagupta@linkedin.com>,
Shao
Tang
<shatang@linkedin.com>.
2

Several studies have shown that DAAs tend to widen the
margin between preferred and dispreferred responses while
simultaneously reducing the probabilities of preferred responses. Although slightly lower completion likelihood is
known to improve output diversity and generalization, ex-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

