Kernel Quantile Embeddings and Associated Probability Metrics

Masha Naslidnyk 1 Siu Lun Chau 2 François-Xavier Briol 3 Krikamol Muandet 4

Abstract

representation of a distribution as a KME is unique, capturing all information about the distribution. The probability
metric constructed by comparing KMEs, called maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) (Borgwardt et al., 2006; Gretton
et al., 2012), has received significant attention due to its computational tractability. Its most common estimator has cost
O(n2 ) and can be estimated with error O(n−1/2 ) in the number of data points n, but cheaper alternatives have also been
proposed (Gretton et al., 2012; Chwialkowski et al., 2015a;
Bodenham and Kawahara, 2023; Schrab et al., 2022). For
this reason, KMEs and the MMD have been used to tackle a
broad range of tasks from hypothesis testing (Gretton et al.,
2012) to parameter estimation (Briol et al., 2019; ChériefAbdellatif and Alquier, 2020), causal inference (Muandet
et al., 2021; Sejdinovic, 2024), feature attribution (Chau
et al., 2022; 2023), and learning on distributions (Muandet
et al., 2012; Szabó et al., 2016).

Embedding probability distributions into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) has enabled
powerful nonparametric methods such as the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), a statistical distance with strong theoretical and computational
properties. At its core, the MMD relies on kernel mean embeddings to represent distributions
as mean functions in RKHS. However, it remains
unclear if the mean function is the only meaningful RKHS representation. Inspired by generalised
quantiles, we introduce the notion of kernel quantile embeddings (KQEs). We then use KQEs to
construct a family of distances that: (i) are probability metrics under weaker kernel conditions
than MMD; (ii) recover a kernelised form of the
sliced Wasserstein distance; and (iii) can be efficiently estimated with near-linear cost. Through
hypothesis testing, we show that these distances
offer a competitive alternative to MMD and its
fast approximations.

Nevertheless, the question of whether alternative kernelbased embeddings, particularly nonlinear counterparts,
could exhibit desirable properties has long remained underexplored, in part due to the associated computational challenges. Recently, this gap has begun to be addressed, with
works investigating kernelised medians (Nienkötter and
Jiang, 2023), cumulants (Bonnier et al., 2023), and variances (Makigusa, 2024a). In this paper, we consider an
alternative based on the concept of quantiles in an RKHS,
which we term kernel quantile embeddings (KQEs). Similarly to the construction of KMEs, KQEs are obtained by
considering the directional quantiles of a feature map obtained from a reproducing kernel. KQEs also lead naturally
to a family of distances which we call kernel quantile discrepancies (KQDs). This approach is motivated from the
statistics and econometrics literature (Kosorok, 1999; Dominicy and Veredas, 2013; Ranger et al., 2020; Stolfi et al.,
2022), where matching quantiles has been shown effective
in constructing statistical estimators and hypothesis tests.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning and statistical methods rely on representing, comparing, and measuring the distance between
probability distributions. Kernel mean embeddings (KMEs)
have been shown to be a mathematically and computationally convenient approach for this task (Berlinet and ThomasAgnan, 2004; Smola et al., 2007; Muandet et al., 2016). At
its core, a KME represents a distribution as a mean function
in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). When the
kernel function is sufficiently regular and satisfies a condition called ‘characteristic’ (Sriperumbudur et al., 2010), the
1

Department of Computer Science, University College
London, London, UK 2 College of Computing & Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Department
of Statistical Science, University College London, London,
UK 4 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Masha Naslidnyk
<masha.naslidnyk.21@ucl.ac.uk>.

Our paper identifies several desirable properties of KQEs.
Firstly, from a theoretical point of view, we show in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 that KQEs can represent distributions
on any space for which we can define a kernel, and that the
conditions to make a kernel quantile-characteristic, that is
for KQEs to be a one-to-one representation of a probability distribution, are weaker than for the classical notion of
characteristic, which we now call mean-characteristic. We

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

