Pixel2Feature Attack (P2FA): Rethinking the Perturbed Space to Enhance
Adversarial Transferability

Renpu Liu * 1 Hao Wu * 2 Jiawei Zhang 3 Xin Cheng 1 Xiangyang Luo 2 Bin Ma 4 Jinwei Wang 5

Abstract
Adversarial examples have been shown to deceive Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), raising
widespread concerns about this security threat.
More seriously, as different DNN models share
critical features, feature-level attacks can generate transferable adversarial examples, thereby deceiving black-box models in real-world scenarios.
Nevertheless, we have theoretically discovered
the principle behind the limited transferability of
existing feature-level attacks: Their attack effectiveness is essentially equivalent to perturbing features in one step along the direction of feature
importance in the feature space, despite performing multiple perturbations in the pixel space. This
finding indicates that existing feature-level attacks
are inefficient in disrupting features through multiple pixel-space perturbations. To address this
problem, we propose a P2FA that efficiently perturbs features multiple times. Specifically, we
directly shift the perturbed space from pixel to
feature space. Then, we perturb the features multiple times rather than just once in the feature
space with the guidance of feature importance to
enhance the efficiency of disrupting critical shared
features. Finally, we invert the perturbed features
to the pixels to generate more transferable adversarial examples. Numerous experimental results
strongly demonstrate the superior transferability
of P2FA over State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) attacks.

Figure 1. Comparison of existing feature-level attacks (FIA (Wang
et al., 2021), RPA (Zhang et al., 2022b), NAA (Zhang et al., 2022a),
DANAA (Jin et al., 2023), SFVA (Ren et al., 2023), and BFA
(Wang et al., 2024b)) and our attack. Adversarial examples are
generated on the source model (ResNet-152) (He et al., 2016a)
to attack the target model (ResNet-50) (He et al., 2016a). Our
attack keeps models from capturing important features of the object
and focusing on entirely irrelevant regions instead, while existing
feature-level attacks make models still focus on object-related
areas.

1. Introduction
DNNs have achieved significant success in various machine
learning tasks (Girshick, 2015; He et al., 2016b; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012). However, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy, 2013), which add elaborate and
imperceptible perturbations to original images to mislead
DNNs. The existence of adversarial examples has raised
concerns about the security of sensitive applications, such
as autonomous driving and face recognition. Research on
adversarial examples not only enhances the understanding
of their underlying principles and the drawbacks of DNNs,
but also contributes to improving the adversarial robustness
of DNNs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), ensuring their stability
and accuracy in diverse application scenarios.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing, Zhengzhou, China 3 School of Cyber Security and Information Law, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China 4 School of Cyber Security, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), Shandong, China 5 College of Cryptology and Cyber
Science, Nankai University, Tianjing, China. Correspondence
to: Jinwei Wang <wjwei 2004@163.com>, Xiangyang Luo <luoxy ieu@sina.com>.

Numerous adversarial attacks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017;
Xiao et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019) have been proposed to
generate adversarial examples, which are typically categorized into two types based on the attacker’s knowledge of
the target model: white-box attacks and black-box attacks.
White-box attacks imply that the attacker has full access

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

