Distributed Differentially Private Data Analytics via Secure Sketching

Jakob Burkhardt 1 Hannah Keller 1 Claudio Orlandi 1 Chris Schwiegelshohn 1

Abstract

auxiliary information. In the classic central model of differential privacy, clients submit their data to a trusted central
server, which processes the data and releases a (necessarily)
noisy version of the result. Analysts can then use this result to perform queries on the data. Informally, differential
privacy guarantees that the analyst cannot confidently determine whether any individual contributed their data, except
with some small probability.

We introduce the linear-transformation model,
a distributed model of differentially private data
analysis. Clients have access to a trusted platform
capable of applying a public matrix to their inputs.
Such computations can be securely distributed
across multiple servers using simple and efficient
secure multiparty computation techniques. The
linear-transformation model serves as an intermediate model between the highly expressive central
model and the minimal local model. In the central model, clients have access to a trusted platform capable of applying any function to their
inputs. However, this expressiveness comes at a
cost, as it is often prohibitively expensive to distribute such computations, leading to the central
model typically being implemented by a single
trusted server. In contrast, the local model assumes no trusted platform, which forces clients
to add significant noise to their data. The lineartransformation model avoids the single point of
failure for privacy present in the central model,
while also mitigating the high noise required in
the local model. We demonstrate that linear transformations are very useful for differential privacy,
allowing for the computation of linear sketches of
input data. These sketches largely preserve utility
for tasks such as private low-rank approximation
and private ridge regression, while introducing
only minimal error, critically independent of the
number of clients.

The central model requires trust that the server will not reveal any individual’s data and cannot be compromised by
external actors. However, universally trusted servers may
not exist in practice. In situations where privacy is critical
but trusting a single server is not feasible, alternative approaches are available: One such approach is to use secure
multiparty computation (MPC) techniques to distribute the
central server’s computations across multiple servers. Under
the assumption that a subset of these servers are honest, this
setup guarantees the same level of privacy as the central
model. However, MPC techniques often introduce significant computational overhead, especially when distributing
complex or expressive computations.
Another option is to avoid relying on external servers altogether. In this case, each client must publish their data
in a locally differentially private manner, by adding noise
directly to their data. While this removes the need for a
trusted server, it results in lower utility due to the increased
noise. This approach is known as the local model of differential privacy (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2008), an example of
which is randomized response (Warner, 1965).
Both the central and local models of differential privacy have
strengths and drawbacks. The central model typically yields
higher utility but requires strong trust in a single server
or the costly use of MPC. The local model, by contrast,
requires no trust in external parties but suffers from reduced
utility. These tradeoffs have motivated significant research
into finding a middle ground between these two models.
One promising direction is to limit the expressiveness of the
class of functions F that can be executed in a trusted manner.
While this restriction allows for more efficient distributed
implementation, it is only useful if the DP mechanism built
around such functions can still achieve good accuracy.

1. Introduction
Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b) has become
the de-facto standard for ensuring the privacy of individuals whose data is used in data analytics. DP offers strong,
provable guarantees, such as composability and resilience to
1
Aarhus University, Denmark. Correspondence to: Hannah
Keller <hkeller@cs.au.dk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

A notable example of such restricted expressiveness is the
class of functions known as shuffles, where a central entity
1

