Algorithms and Hardness for Active Learning on Graphs

Vincent Cohen-Addad 1 Silvio Lattanzi 1 Simon Meierhans 2

Abstract

on the weighted similarity graph G = (V, E, w ) where the
goal is to maximize Ψ(·) subject to a cardinality constraint
k
max Ψ(L).

We study the offline active learning problem on
graphs. In this problem, one seeks to select k
vertices whose labels are best suited for predicting
the labels of all the other vertices in the graph.
Guillory and Bilmes (Guillory & Bilmes, 2009)
introduced a natural theoretical model motivated
by a label smoothness assumption. Prior to our
work, algorithms with theoretical guarantees were
only known for restricted graph types such as trees
(Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2010) despite the models
simplicity. We present the first O(log n)-resource
augmented algorithm for general weighted graphs.
To complement our algorithm, we show constant
hardness of approximation.

L⊂V :|L|≤k

Concretley, they show that for any consistent labeling ŷ , i.e.
y (v) = ŷ (v) for all v ∈ L, we have
1
∥y − ŷ ∥ ≤
2Ψ(L)
2

+

X


w (i, j) · |ŷ (i) − ŷ (j)|

where the first sum is small by assumption and the second
sum is (approximately) minimized by a suitable prediction
algorithm (See Theorem 1 in (Guillory & Bilmes, 2009)).
We therefore focus on maximizing Ψ(L) in this article.

Graph learning has a wide array of applications across various domains spanning Web Spam detection, genomics, text
classification, face detection and many more (Chang & Yeung, 2006; Goldberg & Zhu, 2006; Herbster & Lever, 2009;
Shin et al., 2009). In active learning, one is presented with
a large unlabeled data set and given the opportunity to uncover the labels of some small number of points. Obtaining labeled data points is often costly, and therefore these
should be chosen carefully. Guillory and Bilmes (Guillory
& Bilmes, 2009) introduced a simple graph based abstraction where every vertex corresponds to a data point, and
edges encode similarities between data points. For vertex
labels y ∈ {0, 1}V , they assume that
X
w (i, j) · |y (i) − y (j)|

Intuitively, the objective asks to position the labeled data
points such that disconnecting a large chunk of unlabeled
data points cuts a lot of edge weight. (Guillory & Bilmes,
2009) present some evidence that solving this problem exactly might be hard, and give practical heuristic algorithms.
Cesa-Bianchi, Gentile, Vitale and Zappella presented the
first algorithm with theoretical guarantees under the assumption that G is an unweighted tree (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2010).
Their algorithm introduces constant error. In the conclusion,
they speculate:
“We also believe that an extension to general
graphs of our algorithm does actually exist. However, the complexity of the methods employed
in (Guillory & Bilmes, 2009) suggests that techniques based on minimizing Ψ(L) on general
graphs are computationally very expensive.”
(Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2010), page 17.

(i,j)∈E

is small and show that then in order to optimize label selection one can then focus on selecting a set of nodes L for the
objective
def

w (i, j) · |y (i) − y (j)|

(i,j)∈E

(i,j)∈E

1. Introduction

Ψ(L) =

 X

min w (C, V \ C)/|C|

C⊆V \L

Google ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Simon
Meierhans <mesimon@inf.ethz.ch>.

In the meantime, they suggest sampling a random spanning
tree as a plausible heuristic for applying their algorithm to
general unweighted graphs.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this article, we show that an efficient and reasonably
simple resource augmented algorithm for maximizing Ψ(L)
on a general graphs exists.

1

2

1

