Position: Graph Matching Systems Deserve Better Benchmarks

Indradyumna Roy 1 Saswat Meher 1 Eeshaan Jain 2 Soumen Chakrabarti 1 Abir De 1

Abstract

to act as a generalized framework for graph matching, subsuming various classic problems such as subgraph isomorphism (Messmer & Bunke, 1994; 1998), maximum common subgraph (MCS) (Bunke, 1997; Brun et al., 2012), and
equal-cost GED as special cases.

Data sets used in recent work on graph similarity
scoring and matching tasks suffer from significant
limitations. Using Graph Edit Distance (GED) as
a showcase, we highlight pervasive issues such as
train-test leakage and poor generalization, which
have misguided the community’s understanding
and assessment of the capabilities of a method
or model. These limitations arise, in part, because preparing labeled data is computationally
expensive for combinatorial graph problems. We
establish some key properties of GED that enable
scalable data augmentation for training, and adversarial test set generation. Together, our analysis,
experiments and insights establish new, sound
guidelines for designing and evaluating future
neural networks, and suggest open challenges for
future research.

One major obstacle to adopting combinatorial GED-based
graph matching is its computational cost, stemming from the
NP-hardness of GED, which becomes infeasible for graphs
with more than a few dozen nodes (Blumenthal & Gamper, 2020). Neural approaches are envisioned as promising
alternatives, ideally offering two key advantages: (A) In
retrieval setups, where a query graph is matched against a
large corpus, neural networks can provide fast, approximate
solutions to the quadratic assignment problem (QAP) by
leveraging hardware accelerators, provided they generalize
to unseen graphs drawn from the same distribution as the
training data. (B) For larger graphs, neural networks trained
on smaller graphs must generalize to approximate GED effectively during inference. Both use cases depend on the
neural models’ ability to generalize beyond the training distribution, ensuring scalability and robust performance for
real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Graph matching systems are critical for aligning structured
objects and relationships, underpinning applications such
as scene graph analysis (Chen et al., 2020; van Engelenburg et al., 2023), molecular compound comparison (GarciaHernandez et al., 2019; Rica et al., 2021), knowledge graphs
(Tang et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2023), social network analysis (Donnat & Holmes, 2018) and fraud detection in ecommerce (Nguyen et al., 2023; Yang & Cogill, 2013; Calabuig et al., 2023). Accurate graph similarity assessment
is key to deriving actionable insights across these domains.
The Graph Edit Distance (GED) framework unifies diverse
similarity notions, both symmetric and asymmetric, through
its variable cost setup. GED calculates the minimum-cost
sequence of edit operations—including node and edge additions, deletions, and substitutions—to transform one graph
into another. This variable-cost formulation allows GED

Recent neural approaches for GED estimation typically
learn from datasets of graph pairs annotated with ground
truth GED values. These methods broadly fall into two
categories: (A) coarse graph-level fixed-size representations
that approximate GED using embedding space similarity,
prioritizing scalability over accuracy, and (B) fine-grained
interaction models that represent graphs as sets of embeddings, enabling richer interaction modeling but at higher
computational cost.
Despite their promise, these approaches suffer from three
critical issues. First, most studies (Bai et al., 2019a; Piao
et al., 2023; Ranjan et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2021; Zhuo
& Tan, 2022) rely on a small collection of datasets reused
over the past five years. These datasets suffer from critical train-test leakage, undermining evaluations of model
generalization and effectiveness. This has led to recent
skepticism regarding the utility of embedding-based methods for GED estimation, with some studies favoring unsupervised approaches (Gao et al., 2021). However, we
argue that such conclusions are premature, as leakage issues
confound evaluations and can lead to incorrect judgments

1

IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Indradyumna Roy
<indraroy15@cse.iitb.ac.in>, Abir De <abir@cse.iitb.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

