When can in-context learning generalize out of task distribution?

Chase Goddard 1 Lindsay M. Smith 1 Vudtiwat Ngampruetikorn * 2 David J. Schwab * 3

Abstract

without re-training. Of particular interest is how the ability
for transformers to perform ICL arises from pretraining and
what the limits of ICL generalization are: What conditions
must be met in order for ICL to emerge and generalize
outside of the pretraining distribution?

In-context learning (ICL) is a remarkable capability of pretrained transformers that allows models
to generalize to unseen tasks after seeing only
a few examples. We investigate empirically the
conditions necessary on the pretraining distribution for ICL to emerge and generalize out-ofdistribution. Previous work has focused on the
number of distinct tasks necessary in the pretraining dataset. Here, we use a different notion of task
diversity to study the emergence of ICL in transformers trained on linear functions. We find that
as task diversity increases, transformers undergo
a transition from a specialized solution, which
exhibits ICL only within the pretraining task distribution, to a solution which generalizes out of
distribution to the entire task space. We also investigate the nature of the solutions learned by
the transformer on both sides of the transition,
and observe similar transitions in nonlinear regression problems. We construct a phase diagram
to characterize how our concept of task diversity
interacts with the number of pretraining tasks. In
addition, we explore how factors such as the depth
of the model and the dimensionality of the regression problem influence the transition.

Prior work (Raventos et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024; He et al.,
2024) has focused on understanding how the number of
pretraining tasks affects the ability of the model to generalize to unseen tasks (generated from the same distribution
as the pretraining tasks). Here, we ask a related but distinct question: If a model is pretrained only on tasks from a
subset of the full task space, what conditions are necessary
for it to generalize to the rest of the space? We think of
this question as asking about the out-of-distribution (OOD)
performance of models trained to do in-context learning.
This question prompts us to consider a more general notion
of task diversity that depends not only on task enumeration
but also on how different or similar they are. Sampling
a distribution with many similar tasks has the potential to
induce the model towards a more specialized ICL solution
that performs well only on novel tasks within its pretraining
distribution. However, we observe that transformers trained
to do ICL of linear functions undergo a transition from a
specialized solution to one that generalizes over the full task
space as we increase the degree of task diversity. This phenomenon of out-of-distribution task generalization sheds
new light on in-context learning behavior1 .

1. Introduction

1.1. Related work

The ability of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) to do
few-shot learning from examples seen in their context is a
striking phenomenon exhibited by modern large language
models called in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020).
ICL has been extensively studied (Raventos et al., 2023; Lu
et al., 2024; Garg et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2022; Singh
et al., 2023) and enables models to solve certain new tasks

Our investigation into the effects of task diversity on the
emergence of ICL was motivated by the results of Raventos
et al. (2023) on pretraining task diversity for linear regression tasks in-context, where they find that the number of pretraining tasks impacts the emergence of ICL in-distribution.
Here, we investigate in-context learning of linear functions
in the out-of-distribution setting, and investigate the domain
generalization performance of transformers. Our experimental setups are intentionally similar to those in Raventos et al.
(2023) in order to aid comparison between in- and out-ofdistribution ICL behavior. See e.g., Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz
(2020); Arjovsky (2021); Liu et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2023)

*

Equal contribution 1 Joseph Henry Laboratories of Physics,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 3 Initiative for the Theoretical
Sciences, The Graduate Center, CUNY, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Chase Goddard <cgoddard@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

1

Code available at https://github.com/cwgoddard/OOD ICL

