Symmetry-Driven Discovery of Dynamical Variables in Molecular Simulations

Jeet Mohapatra 1 Nima Dehmamy 2 Csaba Both 3 Subhro Das 2 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract

most likely conformations correspond to the minima of
this energy landscape. Sampling from this low-energy subspace is crucial for understanding the function and stability
of biomolecules, but it presents significant computational
challenges due to the vast number of possible configurations and the presence of energy barriers separating different conformational states. Existing methods for sampling these low-energy conformations include enhanced
sampling techniques such as metadynamics (Laio & Parrinello, 2002), umbrella sampling (Torrie & Valleau, 1977),
and replica exchange molecular dynamics (REMD) (Sugita
& Okamoto, 1999), which aim to overcome energy barriers and improve exploration of the conformational space.
However, these methods often require careful tuning and
can be computationally expensive. More recently, machine
learning has shown great success in enhanced transition
path sampling (Holdijk et al., 2024; Sipka et al., 2023).
Our work is complementary to these efforts, providing a
data-free way to discover reaction coordinates or collective
variables.

We introduce a novel approach for discovering
effective degrees of freedom (DOF) in molecular dynamics simulations by mapping the DOF
to approximate symmetries of the energy landscape. Unlike most existing methods, we do
not require trajectory data but instead rely on
knowledge of the forcefield (energy function)
around the initial state. We present a scalable
symmetry loss function compatible with existing force-field frameworks and a Hessian-based
method efficient for smaller systems. Our approach enables systematic exploration of conformational space by connecting structural dynamics to energy landscape symmetries. We apply
our method to two systems, Alanine dipeptide
and Chignolin, recovering their known important
conformations. Our approach can prove useful
for efficient exploration in molecular simulations
with potential applications in protein folding and
drug discovery.

In this work, we present a novel approach for discovering degrees of freedom (DOF) that effectively move the
system along the low-energy manifold, enabling more efficient exploration of relevant conformations in the molecular landscape. Our key observation is that low-energy DOF
can be related to approximate symmetries of the energy
function. Recent works in machine learning have made
progress in discovering symmetries in data (Benton et al.,
2020; Dehmamy et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023b;a). Our
setting is different in that we do not have data, but an energy function. The problem of finding symmetries of the
energy function overlaps with the task addressed in LieGG
(Moskalev et al., 2022), which discovers infinitesimal symmetry generators, i.e. Lie algebra elements, for a given loss
function. In our case, we are interested in transformations
which change the energy below a certain threshold, meaning approxiamte symmetries of the energy. For example,
we don’t want change in energy to be so high that it would
break chemical bonds.

1. Introduction
Molecular dynamics (MD) is an essential tool for a wide
range of applications, including drug discovery (Jorgensen,
2004; Hollingsworth & Dror, 2018), protein folding (Shaw
et al., 2010; Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2011), and understanding the physics of biological systems at the molecular level (Karplus & Kuriyan, 2005; McCammon et al.,
1977). The configuration space of molecules is very highdimensional, with each atom contributing three degrees
of freedom (xyz coordinates). However, the physically
relevant conformations of molecules typically occupy a
much lower-dimensional subspace. This space corresponds
to regions of low free energy, which can be thought of
as a negative log-likelihood of the system’s state. The
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
NorthEastern University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Jeet Mohapatra <jeetmo@mit.edu>.

We find approximate symmetries by considering small
transformations of the original DOF and deriving conditions for the near-invariance of the energy. This process
yields a symmetry loss, which we then minimize. In the
case of small molecules, we show that the problem can be

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

