Reinforce LLM Reasoning through Multi-Agent Reflection

Yurun Yuan 1 Tengyang Xie 1

Abstract

ing additional computation at inference time. Mechanisms
such as best-of-N sampling (Charniak and Johnson, 2005;
Stiennon et al., 2020; Chow et al., 2024), self-consistency
(Wang et al., 2022), explicit reasoning (Wei et al., 2022;
Yao et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2024), and refinement through
critique and revision (Qu et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2024)
exemplify this approach.

Leveraging more test-time computation has
proven to be an effective way to boost the reasoning capabilities of large language models
(LLMs). Among various methods, the verifyand-improve paradigm stands out for enabling
dynamic solution exploration and feedback incorporation. However, existing approaches often suffer from restricted feedback spaces and
lack of coordinated training of different parties,
leading to suboptimal performance. To address
this, we model this multi-turn refinement process as a Markov Decision Process and introduce DPSDP (Direct Policy Search by Dynamic
Programming), a reinforcement learning algorithm that trains an actor-critic LLM system to
iteratively refine answers via direct preference
learning on self-generated data. Theoretically,
DPSDP can match the performance of any policy within the training distribution. Empirically,
we instantiate DPSDP with various base models
and show improvements on both in- and out-ofdistribution benchmarks. For example, on benchmark MATH 500, majority voting over five refinement steps increases first-turn accuracy from
58.2% to 63.2% with Ministral-based models.
An ablation study further confirms the benefits of
multi-agent collaboration and out-of-distribution
generalization.

Among the various test-time scaling methods, the verifyand-improve paradigm offers a distinct advantage by enabling interaction with external environments to explore the
solution space and incorporate feedback into response generation. For instance, when faced with tasks like using an
unfamiliar coding library that is not covered in the LLM
agent’s knowledge, the LLM agent needs to compose trial
programs and interact with the compiler and tests to refine
its attempts. In contrast, methods like chain-of-thought and
self-consistency remain confined to the knowledge already
embedded within the LLM, limiting their adaptability in
dynamically evolving tasks.
Various prior works have explored methods to enhance
LLMs’ ability to refine their responses. One line of research focuses on enabling LLMs to correct their own errors by extracting and utilizing latent knowledge that was
not effectively applied in the initial attempt (Kumar et al.,
2024; Qu et al., 2024), despite the findings from other
works that LLMs is unable to reliably correct their errors
without external information (Kamoi et al., 2024; Huang
et al., 2024). Another line of research introduces external feedback mechanisms to guide refinement, leveraging
resources such as compilers, external tools, and verifier
models (Welleck et al., 2022; Havrilla et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2024a; Shinn et al., 2023). By incorporating external feedback, LLMs gain access to new information that
can improve their prior responses. Nonetheless, these approaches face limitations such as: (1) a restricted feedback
space (e.g., compiler messages in code generation tasks or
output of a fixed set of tools for tool-assisted refinement),
and (2) the absence of joint training processes among LLM
agents and feedback providers, resulting in suboptimal interaction between LLMs and their environments.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have shown strong capabilities in solving reasoning tasks such as mathematical problems and coding (Lozhkov et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024;
Team et al., 2024). A series of effective methods to improve the reasoning performance of LLMs involve leverag1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to:
Yurun Yuan <yurun yuan@cs.wisc.edu>, Tengyang Xie
<tx@cs.wisc.edu>.

Recent progress in multi-agent systems have shown great
promise across various tasks, highlighting new opportunities for response improvement (Guo et al., 2024b; Mot-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

