GenZSL: Generative Zero-Shot Learning Via Inductive Variational Autoencoder

Shiming Chen 1 Dingjie Fu 2 Salman Khan 1 3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan 1 4
Strong Class Semantic Vector of Unseen Classes Annotated by Experts

Abstract

black and white strip

…

like a horse

Weak Class Semantic Vector of Unseen Classes Extracted by CLIP

eat grass

Clues

Remarkable progress in zero-shot learning (ZSL)
has been achieved using generative models. However, existing generative ZSL methods merely
generate (imagine) the visual features from
scratch guided by the strong class semantic vectors annotated by experts, resulting in suboptimal generative performance and limited scene
generalization. To address these and advance
ZSL, we propose an inductive variational autoencoder for generative zero-shot learning, dubbed
GenZSL. Mimicking human-level concept learning, GenZSL operates by inducting new class
samples from similar seen classes using weak
class semantic vectors derived from target class
names (i.e., CLIP text embedding). To ensure
the generation of informative samples for training
an effective ZSL classifier, our GenZSL incorporates two key strategies. Firstly, it employs
class diversity promotion to enhance the diversity of class semantic vectors. Secondly, it utilizes target class-guided information boosting criteria to optimize the model. Extensive experiments conducted on three popular benchmark
datasets showcase the superiority and potential
of our GenZSL with significant efficacy and efficiency over f-VAEGAN, e.g., 24.7% performance gains and more than 60× faster training
speed on AWA2. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/shiming-chen/GenZSL.

Clues

…
Scratch Data

Imagining

Visual Features of
Unseen Classes

Generator

(a) Existing Generative ZSL

Visual Features of
Similar Seen Classes

…

Inducing

Visual Features of
Unseen Classes

Generator

(b) Our GenZSL

Figure 1. Motivation illustration. (a) Existing generative ZSL
methods merely generate (imagine) the visual features from scratch
guided by the strong class semantic vectors, resulting in suboptimal
generative performance and scene generalization. For example,
the generator inevitably generates similar classes of "Zebra" or
others, e.g., "Donkey". (b) Our GenZSL generates (induces) the
reliable visual features of unseen classes from the similar seen
classes with the clues of weak class semantic vector, e.g., from
"Horse" to "Zebra".

et al., 2009). Recently, generative models such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014),
and normalizing flows (Dinh et al., 2017) have been successfully applied in ZSL, achieving significant performance
improvements. These models synthesize images or visual
features of unseen classes to alleviate the lack of samples for
those classes (Arora et al., 2018; Xian et al., 2018; 2019b;
Chen et al., 2021a; Narayan et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021b).
Given that GAN architectures can generate higher-quality
visual sample features, there’s a growing trend in synthesizing features using GANs (Xian et al., 2018; 2019b; Chen
et al., 2021a; Narayan et al., 2020; Yue et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2025). However, existing generative ZSL methods
typically generate (imagine) visual features from scratch
(e.g., Gaussian noises) guided by strong class semantic vectors annotated by expert (Xian et al., 2018; 2019b; Chen
et al., 2021a; Narayan et al., 2020; Çetin et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023a). This approach often fails to produce reliable
feature samples and generalize to various scene tasks, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (a). The shortcomings arise from: i)
the generator learning from scratch without sufficient data
to capture the high-dimensional data distribution, and ii) the
reliance on strong class semantic vectors, which are timeconsuming and labor-intensive to collect for various scene
generations. Hence, there’s a pressing need to explore novel

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) enables the recognition of unseen classes by transferring semantic knowledge from some
seen classes to unseen ones (Palatucci et al., 2009; Lampert
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 Australian
National University 4 Linköping University. Correspondence
to: Fahad Shahbaz Khan <fahad.khan@mbzuai.ac.ae; fahad.khan@liu.se>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

