Test-Time Adapted Reinforcement Learning with Action Entropy Regularization

Shoukai Xu * 1 Zihao Lian * 2 Mingkui Tan 1 3 4 Liu Liu 2 Zhong Zhang 2 Peilin Zhao 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning is widely applied
in multiple fields due to its advantages in efficiency and risk control. However, a major problem it faces is the distribution shift between offline
datasets and online environments. This mismatch
leads to out-of-distribution (OOD) state-action
pairs that fall outside the scope of the training
data. Therefore, existing conservative training
policies may not provide reliable decisions when
the test environment deviates greatly from the
offline dataset. In this paper, we propose Testtime Adapted Reinforcement Learning (TARL)
to address this problem. TARL constructs unsupervised test-time optimization objectives for
discrete and continuous control tasks, using test
data without depending on environmental rewards.
In discrete control tasks, it minimizes the entropy
of predicted action probabilities to decrease uncertainty and avoid OOD state-action pairs. For
continuous control tasks, it represents and minimizes action uncertainty based on the normal
distribution of policy network outputs. Moreover,
to prevent model bias caused by overfitting and
error accumulation during the test-time update
process, TARL enforces a KL divergence constraint between the fine-tuned policy and the original policy. For efficiency, TARL only updates
the layer normalization layer parameters during
testing. Extensive experiments on popular Atari
game benchmarks and the D4RL dataset demonstrate the superiority of our method. Our method
achieved a significant improvement over CQL,
with a 13.6% episode return relative increase on
the hopper-expert-v2 task.

Reinforcement learning is an important research field in
artificial intelligence and has achieved remarkable success.
Offline reinforcement learning (Kumar et al., 2020; An et al.,
2021; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Kostrikov et al., 2021) offers
significant advantages, enables efficient data utilization and
low risks by learning promising policies from pre-collected
datasets. Therefore, offline reinforcement learning has become an indispensable method for a wide range of applications. For example, offline reinforcement learning can learn
an optimal driving policy from a large driving dataset to
improve the safety and stability of autonomous driving (Yu
et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2023). Furthermore, offline reinforcement learning can also be applied to robotics control (Kalashnikov et al., 2018), game AI (AlphaStar; Ye
et al., 2020), portfolio selection (Zhang et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2020), recommendation systems (Li et al., 2010; Gao
et al., 2022) and other fields, where it can improve the intelligence of robots or agents by learning from large amounts
of offline data.
The dataset used in offline reinforcement learning can be collected through interaction with the environment based on a
fixed policy, simulation runs or human demonstrations. The
state-action pairs in the offline dataset are unable to cover
all the possibilities of the state-action space. Consequently,
the dataset inevitably exhibits a certain degree of distribution shift from the true state-action visitation frequency
associated with the learned policy, as shown in Figure 1.
During the deployment process, the policy may encounter
novel state-action pairs, which subsequently leads to the
predicament of being incapable of coping with unforeseen
changes and dynamic environments in practical applications.
Specifically, offline reinforcement learning may face outof-distribution (OOD) samples, i.e., samples not present in
the dataset, leading to inaccurate value function estimation
for unseen state-action pairs and resulting in significant extrapolation error (Fujimoto et al., 2019). For example, in
an autonomous driving application, the vehicle controlled
by such a policy may fail to respond appropriately to a rare
combination of road conditions, endangering the safety of
passengers and other road users.

*Equal contribution. This work is done when Zihao Lian
works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab. 1 South China University of Technology 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Pazhou Laboratory 4 Key
Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Peilin
Zhao <masonzhao@tencent.com>, Mingkui Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address this issue, existing methods can be broadly classified into two categories: conservative estimation (Wu et al.,
1

