GHOST: Generalizable One-Shot Federated Graph Learning with Proxy-Based
Topology Knowledge Retention

Jiaru Qian * 1 Guancheng Wan * 1 Wenke Huang * 1 Guibin Zhang * 2 Yuxin Wu 3 Bo Du 1 Mang Ye † 1

Abstract
Federated Graph Learning (FGL) proposes an effective approach to collaboratively training Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) while maintaining privacy. Nevertheless, communication efficiency becomes a critical bottleneck in environments with
limited resources. In this context, one-shot FGL
emerges as a promising solution by restricting
communication to a single round. However, prevailing FGL methods face two key challenges
in the one-shot setting: 1) They heavily rely
on gradual personalized optimization over multiple rounds, undermining the capability of the
global model to efficiently generalize across diverse graph structures. 2) They are prone to
overfitting to local data distributions due to extreme structural bias, leading to catastrophic forgetting. To address these issues, we introduce
GHOST, an innovative one-shot FGL framework.
In GHOST, we establish a proxy model for each
client to leverage diverse local knowledge and
integrate it to train the global model. During
training, we identify and consolidate parameters
essential for capturing topological knowledge,
thereby mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Extensive experiments on real-world tasks demonstrate the superiority and generalization capability of GHOST. The code is available at https:
//github.com/JiaruQian/GHOST .

Figure 1. Problem Illustration. In environments with constrained
resources, one-shot FGL becomes a promising solution by limiting
communication to one round. We identify two key challenges in
the one-shot setting. (a) Poor Generalizable Ability: Traditional
FGL methods depend on gradual personalized updates. However,
pattern shifts in both feature and structure dimension and limited
communication rounds hinder the ability of the global model to
efficiently generalize across diverse graphs. (b) Catastrophic Forgetting: Structural biases across clients cause the model to overfit
to current local data distributions, leading to the loss of critical
topology knowledge acquired previously.

1. Introduction
model training across multiple clients while ensuring data
privacy by avoiding the aggregation of raw data. However,
many real-world datasets are graph-structured (Xia et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2025b; Wan et al., 2025b;
2024b), where nodes represent entities and edges capture the
relationships or connections between them. In the context
of graph-structured data, the integration of Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2020; Scarselli et al., 2008;
Li et al., 2025a; Wan et al., 2025a; Huang et al., 2023a) has
given rise to Federated Graph Learning (FGL) . FGL has applications across various domains, including healthcare (Xu

Federated Learning (FL) (Li et al., 2020a; Kairouz et al.,
2021; Konečnỳ, 2016; Hu et al., 2023) enables decentralized
*

Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center
for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Renmin University of China. Correspondence to: Mang
Ye <yemang@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

