Avoiding Leakage Poisoning: Concept Interventions Under Distribution Shifts

Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga 1 Gabriele Dominici 2 Pietro Barbiero 3 Zohreh Shams 1 4 Mateja Jamnik 1

Abstract

high-level units of information known as “concepts” (e.g.,
“stripes”, “white”, and “black” when predicting
“zebra”). They achieve this through a two-step process:
first, they predict concepts from the inputs, forming a
bottleneck, and then they use these concept predictions to determine the task label. This design enables CBMs to provide
human-like explanations for their predictions by grounding
them in interpretable concept representations. More importantly, these models enable concept interventions (Koh
et al., 2020; Chauhan et al., 2022; Sheth et al., 2022; Shin
et al., 2023), where an expert interacting with the model at
test time can correct mispredicted concepts, leading to significant improvements in accuracy once the CBM updates
its prediction considering such feedback (Figure 1, left).

In this paper, we investigate how concept-based
models (CMs) respond to out-of-distribution
(OOD) inputs. CMs are interpretable neural
architectures that first predict a set of high-level
concepts (e.g., stripes, black) and then
predict a task label from those concepts. In particular, we study the impact of concept interventions
(i.e., operations where a human expert corrects
a CM’s mispredicted concepts at test time) on
CMs’ task predictions when inputs are OOD. Our
analysis reveals a weakness in current state-ofthe-art CMs, which we term leakage poisoning,
that prevents them from properly improving their
accuracy when intervened on for OOD inputs.
To address this, we introduce MixCEM, a new
CM that learns to dynamically exploit leaked
information missing from its concepts only when
this information is in-distribution. Our results
across tasks with and without complete sets of
concept annotations demonstrate that MixCEMs
outperform strong baselines by significantly
improving their accuracy for both in-distribution
and OOD samples in the presence and absence
of concept interventions.

Recent works have significantly advanced the performance
and usability of CMs within challenging in-distribution (ID)
test sets by overcoming the incompleteness gap – the fact
that training concept annotations may be insufficient for accurately predicting the downstream task. By exploiting bypass mechanisms, such as dynamic concept embeddings (Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023; Xu et al.,
2024) or residual connections (Mahinpei et al., 2021; Havasi
et al., 2022; Yuksekgonul et al., 2023), state-of-the-art CMs
enable information to “leak” directly from the features to the
task predictions, bypassing the concept bottleneck and significantly increasing the model’s task accuracy even when
the set of training concept annotations is incomplete.

1. Introduction

In this work, we argue that, although useful, blindly incorporating these bypasses can severely affect how CMs behave
for out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. Specifically, we
suggest that such bypasses can themselves become out-ofdistribution for OOD samples, resulting in the “poisoning”
of the model’s predictions and in concept interventions failing to achieve the intended accuracy improvements (Figure 1, right). Given how interventions can aid a CM in
adjusting to real-world OOD shifts (e.g., an expert can help
a CM process a noisy yet still-interpretable X-ray scan by intervening on some concepts), such leakage poisoning casts
serious doubts on the real usability of existing CMs.

Recent years have seen a surge of interpretable models
whose performance is comparable to that of powerful black-box models such as Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) (Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Chen et al.,
2019; Yuksekgonul et al., 2023). Amongst these, conceptbased models (CMs) (Chen et al., 2020; Espinosa Zarlenga
et al., 2022), and in particular Concept Bottleneck Models
(CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020), have paved the way for
designing expressive yet interpretable models. CBMs and
their variants predict downstream task labels by exploiting
1

University of Cambridge 2 Università della Svizzera Italiana
IBM Research 4 Leap Laboratories Inc.. Correspondence to: Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga <me466@cam.ac.uk>.
3

To address these limitations, we propose the Mixture of
Concept Embeddings Model (MixCEM), a concept-based
interpretable model with high generalisation and receptiveness to interventions across data distributions. MixCEMs

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

