TANGO: Clustering with Typicality-Aware Nonlocal Mode-Seeking and
Graph-Cut Optimization

Haowen Ma 1 Zhiguo Long 1 Hua Meng 2

Abstract
Density-based mode-seeking methods generate a
density-ascending dependency from low-density
points towards higher-density neighbors. Current mode-seeking methods identify modes by
breaking some dependency connections, but relying heavily on local data characteristics, requiring case-by-case threshold settings or human intervention to be effective for different datasets.
To address this issue, we introduce a novel concept called typicality, by exploring the locally
defined dependency from a global perspective,
to quantify how confident a point would be a
mode. We devise an algorithm that effectively
and efficiently identifies modes with the help of
the global-view typicality. To implement and validate our idea, we design a clustering method
called TANGO, which not only leverages typicality to detect modes, but also utilizes graph-cut
with an improved path-based similarity to aggregate data into the final clusters. Moreover, this
paper also provides some theoretical analysis on
the proposed algorithm. Experimental results on
several synthetic and extensive real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
TANGO. The code is available at https://
github.com/SWJTU-ML/TANGO_code.

P

Q

P

×Q

Figure 1. Illustration of that whether point P should be considered
as a mode is influenced by the global structure of the dataset, which
varies with the presence of gray points. Here, each data point links
to its nearest neighbor of higher density.

and Quick Shift (Vedaldi & Soatto, 2008) are two of the
most representative density-based mode-seeking methods.
Mean Shift iteratively converges data points into multiple
clusters along the path of the steepest ascent of the density function. In contrast, Quick Shift enhances efficiency
by establishing a density-ascending dependency through
directly linking each data point to its nearest neighbor with
higher density and uses a distance threshold to break the
dependency to obtain modes and clusters, eliminating the
iterative process of Mean Shift. However, Quick Shift is
highly sensitive to the threshold parameter, and it always
misidentifies outliers as modes.
Building upon this, Density Peaks Clustering (DPC) (Rodriguez & Laio, 2014) introduces a novel approach to detect
modes, where modes of the data (cluster centers) are selected based on a decision graph given by both the local
density and the distance to the nearest point with higher
density. Each non-center point continues following the
density-ascending dependency like Quick Shift, ultimately
connecting to a mode (cluster center) to complete clustering. Subsequent researchers have proposed various improvements of DPC tailored for manifold-structured, unevenly
dense, and noisy data (Liu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Density-based clustering methods (Hartigan, 1975; Ester
et al., 1996; Tobin & Zhang, 2024) have gained wide attention and thorough investigation due to their capability in handling complex data distributions. Mean Shift (Cheng, 1995)

However, local data characteristics such as density and distance of neighboring points are sometimes not enough to
appropriately determine if a data point should be considered
as a mode. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (left), when the dataset
consists of only the blue and orange points, the point P represents the density peak of a sparse cluster containing only a
few points. In this scenario, such a small cluster would usually be considered as outliers and should be merged into a

1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest
Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China 2 School of Mathematics,
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China. Correspondence to: Zhiguo Long <zhiguolong@swjtu.edu.cn>, Hua Meng
<menghua@swjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

