Looking Beyond the Top-1: Transformers Determine Top Tokens in Order

Daria Lioubashevski 1 Tomer Schlank 2 Gabriel Stanovsky 1 Ariel Goldstein 3 4

Abstract

(Zhang et al., 2023; OpenAI et al., 2023). This has lead to
a growing interest in model interpretability, which tries to
explain the internal processes that give rise to these remarkable capabilities. In the language domain, investigation into
the way the model’s predictions are constructed has led to
the discovery of saturation events, where the model’s top-1
prediction is determined in an early layer and remains fixed
in subsequent layers (Geva et al., 2022).

Uncovering the inner mechanisms of Transformer
models offers insights into how they process and
represent information. In this work, we analyze
the computation performed by Transformers in
the layers after the top-1 prediction remains fixed,
known as the “saturation event”. We expand this
concept to top-k tokens, demonstrating that similar saturation events occur across language, vision,
and speech models. We find that these events occur in order of the corresponding tokens’ ranking,
i.e., the model first decides on the top ranking
token, then the second highest ranking token, and
so on. This phenomenon seems intrinsic to the
Transformer architecture, occurring across different variants, and even in untrained Transformers.
We propose that these events reflect task transitions, where determining each token corresponds
to a discrete task. We show that it is possible
to predict the current task from hidden layer embedding, and demonstrate that we can cause the
model to switch to the next task via intervention.
Leveraging our findings, we introduce a tokenlevel early-exit strategy, surpassing existing methods in balancing performance and efficiency and
show how to exploit saturation events for better
language modeling.

In this work, we investigate the following question – what
computation is the Transformer model performing after the
saturation event? Taking inspiration from Frydenlund et al.
(2022), we treat the model’s output as a ranking over the
labels instead of a probability distribution. Using the logit
lens (Nostalgebraist, 2020), we project the hidden states
of intermediate layers onto the vocabulary space to extract
ranking over tokens and analyze the changes over the layers.
For the first time, we show that in all tested decoder-only
text Transformers (Llama3-8B, GPT2-XL, Mistral-7B, and
Falcon-7B) saturation events also take place for the top
ranking tokens beyond the top-1 (2nd, 3rd, 4th, etc.).
Surprisingly, we find that they happen in order of their
ranking, i.e. the second-ranking token is determined only
after the first-ranking token, and so forth (see in Figure 1).
We then generalize the results across different modalities
and Transformer variants, including pretrained Transformers for both vision (encoder-only ViT-L/16) and speech
(encoder-decoder Whisper-large). Next, we demonstrate
that sequential saturation seems intrinsic to the Transformer
architecture, occurring even in an untrained randomly initialized model (Llama3-8B).

1. Introduction
In recent years, Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al.,
2017) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in various tasks across multiple modalities, including text generation, image classification, and automatic speech recognition

We propose that this phenomenon is due to a discrete tasktransition mechanism, where each task i corresponds to the
model determining the i-th token in the final ranking, and
the transition between one task and the next happens at the
corresponding saturation layer. Furthermore, we claim that
the task information is encoded in the layer embeddings and
that at each saturation layer, a discrete “switch” is flipped,
signaling that the relevant token has been determined, causing the model to move on to the next task while keeping this
token fixed in subsequent layers. To support this, we show
that it is possible to predict the task index from the layer
embeddings using a simple logistic regression classifier, and
that we can cause the model to transition from the first to

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 2 Department of Mathematics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, US 3 Business
School, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
4
Department of Cognitive and Brain Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Correspondence to: Daria
Lioubashevski <daria.lioubashevski@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

