Memorization Sinks: Isolating Memorization during LLM Training

Gaurav R. Ghosal 1 Pratyush Maini 1 2 Aditi Raghunathan 1

Abstract

mation from models post-hoc, including fine-tuning based
approaches (Maini et al., 2022; Barbulescu & Triantafillou, 2024). However, presently all such methods present a
substantial tradeoff between removing memorization and
preserving general model capability.

Large language models are susceptible to memorizing repeated sequences, posing privacy and
copyright concerns. A popular mitigation strategy is to remove memorized information from
specific neurons post-hoc. However, such approaches have shown limited success so far. In
a controlled setting, we show that the memorization of natural sequences (those that resemble
linguistically plausible text) become mechanistically entangled with general language abilities,
thereby becoming challenging to remove posthoc. In this work, we put forward a new paradigm
of MemSinks that promotes isolation of memorization by design. We leverage a sequence identifier to activate a unique set of memorization
neurons for each sequence across repetitions. By
analyzing the dynamics of learning and forgetting, we argue that MemSinks facilitates clean
isolation of memorized content, making it easier to remove without compromising general language capabilities. We implement MemSinks
at the billion-parameter and billion-token scale,
and observe both effective isolation and strong
generalization. To our knowledge, this is the
first proof-of-concept on real data demonstrating
that simultaneous generalization and isolation is
achievable. We open-source our code at http:
//github.com/grghosal/MemSinks.

We identify a core reason for the tradeoff: standard training
induces mechanistic entanglement, where the same components support both generalization and memorization. This
occurs when memorization relies on mechanisms also used
for general language understanding. In a controlled setting,
we show that natural-looking repeated sequences are memorized with strong entanglement, making post-hoc removal
difficult without harming general performance. We further
prove that gradient descent has an implicit bias toward such
entangled solutions, suggesting that mechanistic entanglement is inherent to current training methods.
Can new training approaches better disentangle
memorization and general language capabilities?
We begin with a natural disentanglement attempt (Section 4;
see also (Cloud et al., 2024)): restricting gradient updates
from repeated sequences to designated “memorized components”, while the remaining “general components” learn
only from non-repeated data. This approach has two major
flaws. First, it weakens generalization by depriving general
components of all training signal from potentially highquality repeated sequences. Second, and more subtly, generalization further degrades when memorized components
are removed at inference: the memorization components are
active in the forward pass during training, causing the general components to implicitly rely on them. Their post-hoc
removal breaks this dependence and harms performance.

1. Introduction
Large language models often memorize sequences seen frequently throughout pretraining (Carlini et al., 2023; Nasr
et al., 2023), posing concerns in privacy, copyright, and
membership inference. There is significant research on
the problem of “unlearning” or removing memorized infor-

Drawing lessons from the failures above, we introduce Memorization Sinks (MemSinks) — inspired by the previous
study of localization in Maini et al. (2023).
Memorization Sinks selectively activate sequencespecific memorization components alongside shared generalization components. Dropping memorization components erases the memorization of the corresponding
sequence.

1
Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 DataologyAI, Redwood City, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Gaurav Ghosal
<gghosal@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Note that this approach addresses the implicit dependence
1

