Flow Q-Learning

Seohong Park 1 Qiyang Li 1 Sergey Levine 1
BC flow policy µθ (s, z)

Abstract
We present flow Q-learning (FQL), a simple
and performant offline reinforcement learning
(RL) method that leverages an expressive flowmatching policy to model arbitrarily complex action distributions in data. Training a flow policy
with RL is a tricky problem, due to the iterative
nature of the action generation process. We address this challenge by training an expressive onestep policy with RL, rather than directly guiding
an iterative flow policy to maximize values. This
way, we can completely avoid unstable recursive
backpropagation, eliminate costly iterative action
generation at test time, yet still mostly maintain
expressivity. We experimentally show that FQL
leads to strong performance across 73 challenging state- and pixel-based OGBench and D4RL
tasks in offline RL and offline-to-online RL.

Distill

One-step policy µω (s, z)

t=0

t=1

Q

Figure 1. Flow Q-learning. Flow-matching policies can model
complex action distributions, but training an iterative flow policy
with RL is challenging. To address this, we train an expressive
one-step policy : µω (s, z) : S × Rd → A to maximize Q values,
while regularizing it with distillation from a BC flow policy.

https://seohong.me/projects/fql/

to denoising diffusion (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020). By employing an expressive flow policy, we can effectively model the arbitrarily complex action distribution
of the dataset and thus enforce an accurate behavioral constraint, which is central to many offline RL algorithms (Nair
et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Tarasov et al., 2023a).

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) enables training an effective decision-making policy from a previously collected
dataset without costly environment interactions (Lange et al.,
2012; Levine et al., 2020). The essence of offline RL
is constrained optimization: the agent must maximize returns while staying within the dataset’s state-action distribution (Levine et al., 2020). As datasets have grown larger and
more diverse (Collaboration et al., 2024), their behavioral
distributions have become more complex and multimodal,
and this often necessitates an expressive policy class (Mandlekar et al., 2021) capable of capturing these complex distributions and implementing a more precise behavioral constraint. In this work, we aim to develop a scalable offline RL
method by leveraging flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2023), a simple yet powerful generative modeling technique alternative

However, leveraging flow or diffusion models to parameterize policies for offline RL is not a trivial problem. Unlike
with simpler policy classes, such as Gaussian policies, there
is no straightforward way to train the flow or diffusion policies to maximize a learned value function, due to the iterative nature of these generative models. This is an example
of a policy extraction problem, which is known to be a key
challenge in offline RL in general (Park et al., 2024a). Previous works have devised diverse ways to extract an iterative generative policy from a learned value function, based
on weighted regression, reparameterized policy gradient, rejection sampling, and other techniques. While they have
shown promising initial results, these extraction schemes
are often limited or not necessarily scalable to more complex problems, due to their inherent drawbacks (e.g., unstable backpropagation through time, limited use of samples,
and high computational cost; Section 4.1).

1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Seohong Park <seohong@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we propose a simple and effective way to
leverage an expressive flow policy for offline RL. Our main
1

