BiAssemble: Learning Collaborative Affordance
for Bimanual Geometric Assembly

Yan Shen * 1 2 Ruihai Wu * 1 Yubin Ke 1 Xinyuan Song 1 Zeyi Li 1
Xiaoqi Li 1 2 Hongwei Fan 1 2 Haoran Lu 1 Hao Dong 1 2

Abstract

into a fully constructed piece, emphasizing both the functional role of each part and the overall structural design. In
contrast, geometric assembly involves reconstructing broken
objects, like piecing together parts of a shattered mug, to restore their original form. While furniture assembly has been
relatively well-studied—ranging from computer vision tasks
that predict part poses in the assembled object (Zhan et al.,
2020) to robotic systems that assemble parts in both simulation (Ankile et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a)
and real-world environments (Heo et al., 2023; Suárez-Ruiz
et al., 2018; Xian et al., 2017)—geometric assembly remains under-explored despite its significant potential for
real-world applications (Sellán et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2024b),
such as repairing broken household items, reconstructing
archaeological artifacts (Papaioannou & Karabassi, 2003),
assembling irregularly shaped objects in industrial tasks,
aligning bone fragments in surgery (Liu et al., 2014), and
reconstructing fossils in paleontology (Clarke et al., 2005).

Shape assembly, the process of combining parts
into a complete whole, is a crucial robotic skill
with broad real-world applications. Among various assembly tasks, geometric assembly—where
broken parts are reassembled into their original
form (e.g., reconstructing a shattered bowl)—is
particularly challenging. This requires the robot
to recognize geometric cues for grasping, assembly, and subsequent bimanual collaborative
manipulation on varied fragments. In this paper, we exploit the geometric generalization of
point-level affordance, learning affordance aware
of bimanual collaboration in geometric assembly with long-horizon action sequences. To address the evaluation ambiguity caused by geometry diversity of broken parts, we introduce a
real-world benchmark featuring geometric variety and global reproducibility. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
approach over both previous affordance-based
and imitation-based methods. Project page:
https://sites.google.com/view/biassembly/.

Previous works on geometric assembly primarily focused on
generating physically plausible broken parts through precise
physics simulations in the graphics domain (Sellán et al.,
2022; 2023), and estimating the target assembled part poses
based on observations in the computer vision domain (Wu
et al., 2023c; Lu et al., 2024c; Qi et al., 2025). These
studies only consider the geometries and ideal assembled
poses of broken parts, dismissing the process of step-by-step
assembling parts to the complete shape. However, different
from opening a door or closing a drawer, only with the
ideal part poses, it is difficult for a robot to directly and
successfully manipulate broken parts to the complete shape.

1. Introduction
Shape assembly, the task of assembling individual parts
into a complete whole, is a critical skill for robots with
wide-ranging real-world applications. This task can be
broadly categorized into two main branches: furniture assembly (Zhan et al., 2020; Heo et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2021)
and geometric assembly (Wu et al., 2023c; Sellán et al.,
2022; Lu et al., 2024c). Furniture assembly focuses on combining functional components, such as chair legs and arms,

The challenges of the above robotic geometric shape assembly task mainly come from the exceptionally large observation and action spaces. For the observation space, the broken
parts have arbitrary geometries, and the graspness on the
object surface should consider not only the local geometry
itself, but also whether grasping on such point can afford
the subsequent bimanual assembly actions. For the action
space, as illustrated in Figure 1, it requires long-horizon
action trajectories. Given the contact-rich nature of the task,
where collisions among the two parts and two robots will
easily exist, the actions should be fine-grained and aware

*

Equal contribution 1 CFCS, School of Computer Science,
Peking University 2 PKU-Agibot Lab. Correspondence to: Hao
Dong <hao.dong@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

