The Noisy Laplacian: a Threshold Phenomenon for Non-Linear Dimension
Reduction
Alex Kokot 1 Octavian-Vlad Murad 2 Marina Meila 1

Abstract

served. However, the theoretical understanding of manifold
estimation in noise has proved to be slow in surrendering its
secrets; even in the face of remarkable tours de force such
as the ones we mention below, progress has been in small
steps. The following seminal papers have both advanced
the knowledge of what is possible and brought to light the
informational limitations posed by the presence of noise
for various statistical settings. In (4; 5; 6) it was shown
that manifold reconstruction is possible, and (7) studied the
minimax rate of covegence obtaining almost tight upper and
2
lower bounds of n− d+2 for the Hausdorff error (where d is
the manifold intrinsic dimension). However, these, as well
as (8), consider reconstruction typically in ambient space
RD .

In this paper, we clarify the effect of noise on
common spectrally motivated algorithms such as
Diffusion Maps (DM) for dimension reduction.
Empirically, these methods are much more robust
to noise than current work suggests. Specifically,
existing consistency results require that either the
noise amplitude or dimensionality must vary with
the sample size n. We provide new theoretical results demonstrating that low-frequency eigenpairs
reliably capture the geometry of the underlying
manifold under a constant noise level, up to a dimension independent threshold O(r−2 ), where
r is the noise amplitude. Our results rely on a
decomposition of the manifold Laplacian in the
Sasaki metric, a technique not used before in this
area, to our knowledge. We experimentally validate our theoretical predictions. Additionally, we
observe similar robust behavior for other manifold learning algorithms which are not based on
computing the Laplacian, namely LTSA and VAE.

For estimating the Laplace-Beltrami operator, the state of
knowledge is less advanced. We recall that the m principal
eigenfunctions of ∆M provide an embedding of a manifold
in m ≪ D dimensions, by the well known Diffusion Maps
(DM) / Laplacian Eigenmaps algorithm and its variants. (9)
obtains consistency and rates for the problem of Laplacian
estimation, albeit with the assumption that the noise amplitude decays to 0 with the sample size n. For non-vanishing
noise, (10) assume the noise is subgaussian and decaying to
0 with n and D in every direction, but not in L2 norm1

1. Introduction

Contributions Our paper studies the spectral convergence
of the noisy manifold Laplacian to the noise-free manifold
Laplacian under realistic assumptions of fixed ambient dimension D, and fixed noise amplitude r.

In this paper, we revisit embedding algorithms such as Diffusion Maps (1; 2), providing a novel perspective on how these
methods allow for effective dimension reduction. A large
literature has been developed to study non-linear dimension
reduction under the so-called manifold hypothesis (3), where
samples are assumed to be drawn from a low-dimensional
manifold. Our goal is to show why these techniques remain
effective, even in settings where this assumption is violated,
with data having been contaminated with high-dimensional
noise.

Under these conditions we firstly find that only the part
of the manifold spectrum below the noise spectrum is recoverable, with error proportional to the noise amplitude r.
This leads to a sharp threshold phenomenon in the recovery of the spectrum of the noiseless manifold’s Laplacian
∆M from (infinite) noisy data. The recovery threshold is
O(1/r2 ) for a fixed noise distribution (constant dimension
and amplitude), and we discuss how this relates to noise
dimensionality in Section 3.1. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors above the threshold are essentially irrecoverable, as the

That diffusion maps is robust to noise has been often ob1
Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA 2 Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Alex Kokot
<akokot@uw.edu>.

1

Similarly, (5) also rely on D being very large to obtain error
d2

bounds (for example n ∼ 1010 in the second paper), but with
exponential sample sizes (in the inverse tolerance and d) they
succeed to obtain errors that decrease with n.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

