Learning In-context n -grams with Transformers:
Sub-n -grams Are Near-stationary Points

Aditya Varre * 1 Gizem Yüce * 1 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract

behaviors with plateaus such as grokking (Power et al.,
2022) and stage-wise transitions (Olsson et al., 2022) where
the training process frequently lingers in regions of slow
progress before going through a sudden phase transition
after which ICL abilities are acquired. Mechanistic interpretability studies suggest that after these plateaus, specific
circuits, such as induction heads (Olsson et al., 2022), or syntactic structures (Chen et al., 2024a), are gradually learned.
This raises a natural question:

Motivated by empirical observations of prolonged
plateaus and stage-wise progression during training, we investigate the loss landscape of transformer models trained on in-context next-token
prediction tasks. In particular, we focus on learning in-context n-gram language models under
cross-entropy loss, and establish a sufficient condition for parameter configurations to be stationary points. We then construct a set of parameter
configurations for a simplified transformer model
that represent k-gram estimators (for k ⩽ n), and
show that the gradient of the population loss at
these solutions vanishes in the limit of infinite
sequence length and parameter norm. This reveals a key property of the loss landscape: sub-ngrams are near-stationary points of the population
cross-entropy loss, offering theoretical insight
into widely observed phenomena such as stagewise learning dynamics and emergent phase transitions. These insights are further supported by
numerical experiments that illustrate the learning
dynamics of n-grams, characterized by discrete
transitions between near-stationary solutions.

Why does training linger at plateaus before developing such
abilities?
The setting of Edelman et al. (2024) provides an avenue
to take a closer look at this question with the specialized
task of learning in-context n-grams (Shannon, 1948; Chomsky, 1956; Brown et al., 1992). Here, the training unfolds
in a hierarchical, phase-wise manner. It begins with the
transformer making uniform predictions, progresses through
unigram and bigram predictions, and potentially generalizes to higher-order n-grams. Figure 1 illustrates how these
training phases overlap with the losses of the sub-n-gram
estimators.
Building on this observation, we provide a theoretical foundation for why training lingers at long plateaus—the loss
landscape of transformers trained on in-context sequential
data exhibit stationary points aligned with sub-hierarchical
or sub-syntactic solutions. These points act as intermediate solutions where gradients vanish, causing training to
stagnate before transitioning to the next hierarchical level.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become central
to modern machine learning, due to their capabilities such
as in-context learning (ICL) (Brown, 2020)—the ability of
models to perform new tasks by leveraging a few examples
provided within the context, without the need for parameter
updates or retraining.

Concretely, this paper explores the loss landscape of transformer models trained on in-context n-gram language models to predict the next token. We show a sufficient stationarity condition for the cross-entropy loss that the sub-n-gram
constructions satisfy, shedding light on the incremental and
phase-wise learning phenomena observed during training
for in-context n-grams. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

Recent empirical studies have revealed that the dynamics
that result in in-context learning abilities often deviate from
a simple monotonic decrease in loss, exhibiting complex
*

Equal contribution 1 Theory of Machine Learning Lab,
EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Aditya Varre
<aditya.varre@epfl.ch>, Gizem Yüce <gizem.yuce@epfl.ch>.

• In Section 3, we provide a sufficient condition for the
solutions to be the stationary points of the cross-entropy
loss in the next-token prediction task when model’s score
function depends solely on a sub-sequence of the input
history. This characterization provides a powerful tool for

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

