Towards a General Time Series Forecasting Model with Unified Representation
and Adaptive Transfer

Yihang Wang * 1 Yuying Qiu * 1 Peng Chen 1 Kai Zhao 2 Yang Shu 1 Zhongwen Rao 3 Lujia Pan 3 Bin Yang 1
Chenjuan Guo 1

Abstract

economics (Qiu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025a; Qiu et al.,
2025b). However, training deep learning models for each
specific dataset is resource-intensive and requires tailored
parameter tuning. This approach often suffers from limited
prediction accuracy due to data scarcity (Liu et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2021b; 2024; 2025c). A promising solution is
to pre-train a general model on diverse time series datasets,
which can then be fine-tuned with minimal data for different
downstream scenarios or even used directly without finetuning. Following this idea, foundation models for time
series forecasting have gained significant attention. Recent
efforts have focused on scaling up pre-training datasets and
model sizes to enhance generalization performance (Woo
et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2024; Ansari et al., 2024). However, excessive scaling introduces high computational costs
during training and inference, undermining the practicality of general models, particularly in resource-constrained
settings. Beyond scaling, the design of general time series
forecasting models can also be approached through pretraining tasks and downstream transfer adaptation. From
these two perspectives, we identify the following challenges.

With the growing availability of multi-domain
time series data, there is an increasing demand for
general forecasting models pre-trained on multisource datasets to support diverse downstream prediction scenarios. Existing time series foundation
models primarily focus on scaling up pre-training
datasets and model sizes to enhance generalization performance. In this paper, we take a different approach by addressing two critical aspects
of general forecasting models: (1) how to derive
unified representations from heterogeneous multidomain time series data, and (2) how to effectively
capture domain-specific features to enable adaptive transfer across various downstream scenarios.
To address the first aspect, we propose Decomposed Frequency Learning as the pre-training task,
which leverages frequency-based masking and reconstruction to decompose coupled semantic information in time series, resulting in unified representations across domains. For the second aspect,
we introduce the Time Series Register, which
captures domain-specific representations during
pre-training and enhances adaptive transferability to downstream tasks. Our model achieves the
state-of-the-art forecasting performance on seven
real-world benchmarks, demonstrating remarkable few-shot and zero-shot capabilities.

Obtaining a unified representation from time series data
across various domains is challenging. Time series from
each domain involve complex temporal patterns, composed
of multiple frequency components combined with each
other (Zhou et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2025b), which is frequency superposition. As shown in Figure 1(a), different frequency components contain distinct semantic information.
For example, low and high-frequency components represent
long-term trends and rapid variations, respectively (Zhang
et al., 2022). Furthermore, different datasets exhibit diverse frequency distributions, and the significance of lowfrequency and high-frequency components for time series
modeling varies across domains(Zhang et al., 2024). As a
result, large-scale time series data from different domains
introduce even more complex temporal patterns and frequency diversity. Existing pre-training frameworks (Dong
et al., 2024; Nie et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023), such as
masked modeling and contrastive learning, were proposed
to learn a unified representation from time domain. However, these methods overlook the frequency diversity and
complexity exhibited in heterogeneous time series that come

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a crucial role in various domains, including energy, smart transportation, weather, and
*

Equal contribution 1 East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 2 Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark 3 Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to:
Zhongwen Rao <raozhongwen@huawei.com>, Chenjuan Guo
<cjguo@dase.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

