Scalable Gaussian Processes with Latent Kronecker Structure
Jihao Andreas Lin 1 2 3 Sebastian Ament 1 Maximilian Balandat 1 David Eriksson 1
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 2 Eytan Bakshy 1

Abstract

GPs are notoriously challenging to scale to large numbers
of training examples n. This primarily stems from having
to solve an n × n linear system involving the kernel matrix
to compute the marginal likelihood and the posterior, which
has O(n3 ) time complexity using direct methods.

Applying Gaussian processes (GPs) to very large
datasets remains a challenge due to limited computational scalability. Matrix structures, such as
the Kronecker product, can accelerate operations
significantly, but their application commonly entails approximations or unrealistic assumptions.
In particular, the most common path to creating
a Kronecker-structured kernel matrix is by evaluating a product kernel on gridded inputs that can
be expressed as a Cartesian product. However,
this structure is lost if any observation is missing,
breaking the Cartesian product structure, which
frequently occurs in real-world data such as time
series. To address this limitation, we propose
leveraging latent Kronecker structure, by expressing the kernel matrix of observed values as the
projection of a latent Kronecker product. In combination with iterative linear system solvers and
pathwise conditioning, our method facilitates inference of exact GPs while requiring substantially
fewer computational resources than standard iterative methods. We demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art sparse and variational
GPs on real-world datasets with up to five million
examples, including robotics, automated machine
learning, and climate applications.

To address these scalability challenges, a plethora of approaches have been proposed, which usually fall into two
main categories. Sparse GP approaches reduce the size of
the underlying linear system by introducing a set of inducing
points to approximate the full GP; they include conventional
(Quinonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005) and variational
(Titsias, 2009) formulations. Iterative approaches (Gardner
et al., 2018a; Wang et al., 2019) employ solvers such as the
linear conjugate gradient method, often leveraging hardware
parallelism and structured kernel matrices.
In particular, Kronecker product structure permits efficient
matrix-vector multiplication (MVM). This structure arises
when a product kernel is evaluated on data points from a
Cartesian product space. A common (though not the only)
example of this is spatiotemporal data, as found in climate
science for instance, where a quantity of interest, such as
temperature or humidity, varies across space and is measured at regular time intervals. In particular, assuming observations collected at p locations and q times result in pq
data points in total, the kernel matrix generated by evaluating a product kernel on this data can then be expressed as the
Kronecker product of two smaller p × p and q × q matrices.
This allows MVM in O(p2 q + pq 2 ) instead of O(p2 q 2 ) time
and O(p2 + q 2 ) instead of O(p2 q 2 ) space, such that iterative methods require substantially less time and memory.
However, in real-world data, this structure frequently breaks
due to missing observations, typically requiring a reversion
to generic sparse or iterative methods that either do not take
advantage of special structure or entail approximations to
the matrix.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are probabilistic models prized
for their flexibility, data efficiency, and well-calibrated uncertainty estimates. They play a key role in many applications such as Bayesian optimization (Frazier, 2018; Garnett,
2023), reinforcement learning (Deisenroth & Rasmussen,
2011), and active learning (Riis et al., 2022). However, exact

In this paper, we propose latent Kronecker structure, which
enables efficient inference despite missing values by representing the joint covariance matrix of observed values as a
lazily-evaluated product between projection matrices and a
latent Kronecker product. Combined with iterative methods,
which otherwise would not be able to leverage Kronecker
structure in the presence of missing values, this reduces the
asymptotic time complexity from O(p2 q 2 ) to O(p2 q + pq 2 ),

1

Meta 2 University of Cambridge 3 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen. Correspondence to: Jihao Andreas
Lin <jandylin@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

