Position: You Can’t Manufacture a NeRF
MA Kimmel 1 Mueed Rehman 2 Yonatan Bisk 3 Gary K. Fedder 1

Abstract

shape be created using modern manufacturing processes?

In this paper, we examine the manufacturability
gap in state-of-the-art generative models for 3D
object representations. Many models for generating 3D assets focus on rendering virtual content
and do not consider the constraints of real-world
manufacturing, such as milling, casting, or injection molding. We demonstrate that existing generative models for computer-aided design representation do not generalize outside of their training
datasets or to unmodified real, human-created objects. We identify limitations with the current
approaches, including missing manufacturingreadable semantics, the inability to decompose
complex shapes into parameterized segments appropriate for computer-aided manufacturing, and
a lack of appropriate scoring metrics to assess the
generated output versus the true reconstruction.
The academic community could greatly impact
real-world manufacturing by rallying around pathways to solve these challenges. We offer revised,
more realistic datasets and baseline benchmarks
as a step in targeting the challenge. In evaluating
these datasets, we find that existing models are
severely overfit to simpler data.

Figure 1. Example of a shape decomposed into its parametric
boundary form on the left, discretely triangulated on the right

Modern physical environments are replete with a wide range
of complex shapes and assemblies, most often realized
through mass-manufacturing processes such as subtractive
machining, casting, injection molding, or forming. Traditionally, these objects are designed by humans via a sequence of operations specified in computer-aided design
software, which outputs a parametric boundary representation of the shape. Humans have the ability to both construct
and decompose an object into logical sections or segments,
even if sections do not have a nominal “classification” or
semantic function. The shape in Figure 1 has clearly defined
geometric segments as indicated on the left. It loses semantic context and precision when represented by a collection
of triangles stitched together, as seen on the right.

1. Introduction
Consider the shape in Figure 1. How would one create this
shape as an output of a generative AI model? Consider the
input and output modalities. Could you describe the shape
with sufficient detail in text as input? What level of precision
would be required to retain the filleted edges and smooth
curves if a discrete output, such as a mesh or point cloud,
were generated? Is there any way to create the clean surface
segmentation seen in the leftmost image? How would this

From a mathematical standpoint, these shapes are necessarily “2-manifold watertight” objects (White, 2001), meaning
that if each individual shape was represented as a polygonal
mesh, every edge would be incident to exactly two faces. In
addition to these raw physical constraints of the real world,
in practice parametrized, continuous-boundary models allow for ease of editing, simulation (due to differentiability
and interpolation) (Szabó & Babuška, 2021), and automated
manufacturing (often involving feature-based machining)
(Nasir & Sassani, 2021). Often formatted as either STEP
or BREP files, these geometries usually bear additional useful features such as perfect symmetry, perfectly parallel
or orthogonal surface normals, and completely consistent
curvature (no bumps i.e. variability in surface normal rateof-change) on a given surface. In contrast, discrete primitive

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA 2 Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Cornell University 3 Language Technologies Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA. Correspondence
to: Ani Kimmel <akimmel@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

