Off-Policy Actor-Critic for Adversarial Observation Robustness:
Virtual Alternative Training via Symmetric Policy Evaluation

Kosuke Nakanishi 1 2 Akihiro Kubo 1 3 4 Yuji Yasui 2 Shin Ishii 1 3 4

Abstract

promising framework for such applications, demonstrating
performance that surpasses human capabilities by acquiring
high-dimensional representational power through function
approximation (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals
et al., 2019; Wurman et al., 2022). However, the concerns
are raised that only for the small input perturbations, such as
adversarial attacks, significant performance degradation can
occur, not only in supervised learning tasks (Szegedy et al.,
2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Papernot et al., 2016), but also in decision making and control
tasks (Huang et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2017).

Recently, robust reinforcement learning (RL)
methods designed to handle adversarial input observations have received significant attention, motivated by RL’s inherent vulnerabilities. While
existing approaches have demonstrated reasonable success, addressing worst-case scenarios
over long time horizons requires both minimizing the agent’s cumulative rewards for adversaries
and training agents to counteract them through
alternating learning. However, this process introduces mutual dependencies between the agent
and the adversary, making interactions with the
environment inefficient and hindering the development of off-policy methods. In this work, we
propose a novel off-policy method that eliminates the need for additional environmental interactions by reformulating adversarial learning
as a soft-constrained optimization problem. Our
approach is theoretically supported by the symmetric property of policy evaluation between
the agent and the adversary. The implementation is available at https://github.com/
nakanakakosuke/VALT_SAC.

Robust decision-making under uncertainty has long been
studied by formulating worst-case scenarios to ensure stable
performance in adverse conditions. Classical approaches include game-theoretic models such as the two-player Markovian game (Shapley, 1953), and the Robust Markov Decision Process (Robust-MDP) framework (Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2005; Iyengar, 2005; Tamar et al., 2014), which seeks policies that perform well under the most pessimistic transition
dynamics. However, these methods are typically restricted
to tabular or linear settings and do not scale well to complex environments (Tessler et al., 2019). More recently,
Pinto et al. (2017) proposed an adversarial RL framework
in which an agent is jointly trained with an adversary to
approximate a max-min Nash equilibrium (Nash, 1951),
yielding policies that are empirically robust, though lacking
theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction
In recent years, advancements in computational technology,
coupled with the practical successes of deep neural networks
(DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; He et al., 2016), have fueled expectations for automated decision-making and control in increasingly complex
environments (Kober et al., 2013; Levine et al., 2016; Kiran et al., 2021). Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is a

These early studies primarily addressed robustness by explicitly modeling uncertainty in environment dynamics or
introducing adversarial agents to simulate worst-case behaviors. In contrast, recent work has highlighted the need to
distinguish between different sources of uncertainty and to
formulate robustness at the level of specific failure modes.
In this work, we focus on observation uncertainty, which
has emerged as a critical yet underexplored challenge in
DRL.

1
Department of Information Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 2 Honda R&D Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan 3 ATR Neural
Information Processing Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan 4 International
Research Center for Neurointelligence, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kosuke Nakanishi <kosuke nakanishi@jp.honda>, Shin Ishii <ishii@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.

Recent research (Zhang et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Liang
et al., 2022) identifies two main types of vulnerabilities for
observation robustness in DRL. The first arises from the
function approximation properties of DNNs, often manifesting as sensitivity to small perturbations due to lack of
smoothness in the learned policy. The second vulnerability

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

