Cowpox: Towards the Immunity of VLM-based Multi-Agent Systems

Yutong Wu 1 Jie Zhang 2 Yiming Li 1 Chao Zhang 3 Qing Guo 2 Han Qiu 3 Nils Lukas 4 Tianwei Zhang 1

Abstract

Q
A

…

…

Vision Language Model (VLM)-based agents
are stateful, autonomous entities capable of perceiving and interacting with their environments
through vision and language. Multi-agent systems comprise specialized agents who collaborate to solve a (complex) task. A core security property is robustness, stating that the system should maintain its integrity under adversarial attacks. However, the design of existing
multi-agent systems lacks the robustness consideration, as a successful exploit against one
agent can spread and infect other agents to undermine the entire system’s assurance. To address this, we propose a new defense approach,
C OWPOX, to provably enhance the robustness of
multi-agent systems. It incorporates a distributed
mechanism, which improves the recovery rate of
agents by limiting the expected number of infections to other agents. The core idea is to generate and distribute a special cure sample that immunizes an agent against the attack before exposure and helps recover the already infected agents.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of C OWPOX
empirically and provide theoretical robustness
guarantees. The code can be found via https:
//github.com/WU-YU-TONG/Cowpox.

…
Normal
Agent

Infected
Agent

Normal
Agent

Q

A

𝑁 agents
Pairwise Chat
Q
History
Histories
Prompt

A

+

MLLM

+

Middle
prompt

RAG

Virus MLLM Harmful
Question
Memory Updating

MLLM Harmful
Answer

Figure 1. An illustration of an infectious attack and the VLM-based
multi-agent system (Gu et al., 2024). N agents are deployed to
solve a task through pairwise communication.

ory bank for information storage. Multi-agent systems are
networks of agents instructed to solve tasks collaboratively.
These systems have been practically applied to embodied
agents (Zhao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2024), virtual assistants (Gao et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024),
or software development systems (Hong et al., 2024).
A core security property of multi-agent systems is robustness, which states that the system should remain functional
even when an adversary has compromised a subset of agents.
Currently, individual agents can be compromised by jailbreak attacks, where adversaries manipulate model outputs
via targeted adversarial attacks (Zhang et al., 2022; Lu et al.,
2023; Han et al., 2023), adversarially crafted prompts (Gong
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024) or targeting multiple modalities
simultaneously (Lu et al., 2024). In a multi-agent system,
an attacked agent could then be instructed to infect other
agents, compromising the whole system, as is discussed in
some latest studies (Peigné et al., 2025; Gu et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Modern agents equipped with Vision Language Models
(VLMs) can interpret and interact with their environment
using visual and linguistic inputs. They perform complex
tasks via a sequence of actions while maintaining a mem1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. 2 CFAR and IHPC, Agency
for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore. 3 Network
and Information Security Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Masdar City, Abu Dhabi. Correspondence to: Jie Zhang
<zhang jie@cfar.a-star.edu.sg>.

For example, Gu et al. (2024) study the threat of an infectious jailbreak attack against VLM-based multi-agent systems, illustrated in Fig. 1. An agent stores a virus adversarial
example in its memory bank, which was imperceptibly manipulated to be more prominently retrieved from the agent’s
memory bank when answering queries. The virus spreads
when a compromised agent shares it with other agents and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

