DAMA: Data- and Model-aware Alignment of Multi-modal LLMs

Jinda Lu 1 Junkang Wu 1 Jinghan Li 1 Xiaojun Jia 2 Shuo Wang 1 Yifan Zhang 3 Junfeng Fang 4
Xiang Wang 1 * Xiangnan He 1 *

Abstract
Prompt : What time` of day is it in the image?

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has shown
effectiveness in aligning multi-modal large language models (MLLM) with human preferences.
However, existing methods exhibit an imbalanced
responsiveness to the data of varying hardness,
tending to overfit on the easy-to-distinguish data
while underfitting on the hard-to-distinguish data.
In this paper, we propose Data- and Model-aware
DPO (DAMA) to dynamically adjust the optimization process from two key aspects: (1) a dataaware strategy that incorporates data hardness,
and (2) a model-aware strategy that integrates
real-time model responses. By combining the
two strategies, DAMA enables the model to effectively adapt to data with varying levels of hardness. Extensive experiments on five benchmarks
demonstrate that DAMA not only significantly
enhances the trustworthiness, but also improves
the effectiveness over general tasks. For instance,
on the Object HalBench, our DAMA-7B reduces
response-level and mentioned-level hallucination
by 90.0% and 95.3%, respectively, surpassing
the performance of GPT-4V. Code is available at:
https://github.com/injadlu/DAMA.

𝑦𝑤 : It is not possible to determine the exact

time … two boats … clear blue sky suggest that …
Preferred

likely during daytime.

𝑦𝑙 : … boats … cityscape
Rejected

𝑦𝑙 : … boats … few birds

Hard-to-distinguish

`

Easy-to-distinguish

Rejected

… groups of people …
presumed daytime

Early Stage

Later Stage

Reward

Reward

Image-Text
Sim Score

… leisure activities …
perhaps afternoon

Figure 1. (1) Preference data (Prompt, Image, Preferred response
yw , Rejected response yl ) with different hardness: “easy-todistinguish” data denotes a large Image-Text sim score gap between yl and yw ; “hard-to-distinguish” data indicates a low score
gap between yl and yw . (2) Implicit reward across the optimization stage: the reward gap for “easy-to-distinguish” data enhances
significantly during optimization, while for “hard-to-distinguish”
data, the gap remains low.

1. Introduction
broader applicability (Liu et al., 2023a; Yu et al., 2024b). To
address this, direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov
et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b;a) has been adapted into
MLLM alignment (Yu et al., 2024c; Wang et al., 2024;
Lu et al., 2025), achieving encouraging performance with
moderate computational costs.

Recent advances in Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable visual understanding capabilities on the basis of large language models (Liu
et al., 2023b; 2024a). However, despite their effectiveness,
the hallucination issue — generating outputs inconsistent
with the image content and human preference — limits their

DPO methods (Lu et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2024c) collect preference data consisting of an image, a prompt, and two responses (yw , yl ). The preferred response yw is better aligned
with the visual content (large Image-Text similarity score),
while the rejected response yl contains more hallucinated
content (small Image-Text similarity score). They prioritize
preferred responses yw over the rejected ones yl using DPO
with a hyperparameter β, which balances retaining the reference model πref and incorporating new preferences into the

*Corresponding Authors. 1 MoE Key Lab of BIPC, University
of Science and Technology of China 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Institute of Automation, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 4 National University of Singapore. Correspondence
to: Xiang Wang <xiangwang1223@gmail.com>, Xiangnan He
<hexn@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

