MoMa: Modulating Mamba for
Adapting Image Foundation Models to Video Recognition

Yuhuan Yang 1 Chaofan Ma 1 Zhenjie Mao 1 Jiangchao Yao 1 2 Ya Zhang 3 2 Yanfeng Wang 3 2

Abstract

video understanding model from scratch is highly inefficient
and data demanding. In contrast, image understanding has
made significant progress by using image foundation models
(IFMs) (Radford et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2022). This progress has spurred efforts to leverage IFMs
for video understanding, as IFMs provide strong pre-trained
representations, reducing the reliance on training models
from scratch for specific tasks.

Video understanding is a complex challenge that
requires effective modeling of spatial-temporal
dynamics. With the success of image foundation models (IFMs) in image understanding, recent approaches have explored parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) to adapt IFMs for video. However, most of these methods tend to process spatial
and temporal information separately, which may
fail to capture the full intricacy of video dynamics. In this paper, we propose MoMa, an efficient adapter framework that achieves full spatialtemporal modeling by integrating Mamba’s selective state space modeling into IFMs. We propose a novel SeqMod operation to inject spatialtemporal information into pre-trained IFMs, without disrupting their original features. By incorporating SeqMod into a Divide-and-Modulate architecture, MoMa enhances video understanding while maintaining computational efficiency.
Extensive experiments on multiple video benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of MoMa,
achieving superior performance with reduced
computational cost.

Some early works have attempted to adapt IFMs to video
understanding by conducting full parameter training on
video data (Xue et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). These methods, although effective, still require considerable computational resources and data. To alleviate this, a more efficient
approach is to adapt IFMs using parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT), and keeping most of the parameters frozen.
Since IFMs do not explicitly model temporal dynamics during pre-training, these PEFT-based methods are compelled
to incorporate additional modules to capture temporal dependencies across frames, often independently of the original spatial representations. For instance, AIM (Yang et al.,
2023a) introduces a temporal attention layer within each
Transformer block. DualPath (Park et al., 2023) designs two
separate adapter modules for spatial and temporal modeling,
and DiST (Qing et al., 2023) introduces a parallel temporal
encoding branch alongside the spatial one. By processing
spatial and temporal information separately, these PEFT
designs simplify the full modeling of sequences. As a result, patches at different spatial and temporal positions can
only interact with each other in an indirect, implicit manner.
This is potentially insufficient for capturing the complex
dynamics inherent in video data.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a crucial yet challenging task in
computer vision. The key to addressing this challenge lies
in learning effective spatial-temporal representations from
video data (Tong et al., 2022; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022;
Carreira & Zisserman, 2017; Hara et al., 2017; Feichtenhofer et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022). Since video data exhibits complex spatial-temporal dynamics, training such a

To explicitly capture the full spatial-temporal dynamics
while using PEFT, one straightforward method is to apply
an additional full attention over the entire spatial-temporal
sequence after IFMs. However, due to the long length of
the spatial-temporal sequence, the quadratic complexity of
full attention causes scalability issues, resulting in a drastic
increase in memory usage and inefficiencies in speed when
processing multiple frames. In this context, recent low-cost
operators like Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023) offer a promising
solution with its selective state space model (SSM), achieving linear complexity for long-term dynamic modeling. This

1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 School
of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Jiangchao Yao <sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn>, Yanfeng
Wang <wangyanfeng622@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

