TruthFlow: Truthful LLM Generation via Representation Flow Correction

Hanyu Wang 1 Bochuan Cao 1 Yuanpu Cao 1 Jinghui Chen 1

Abstract
Given a fair coin, which coin toss sequence
is more likely: HHHHH or HTTHT?

Large language models (LLMs) are known to
struggle with consistently generating truthful responses. While various representation intervention techniques have been proposed, these methods typically apply a universal representation correction vector to all input queries, limiting their
effectiveness against diverse queries in practice.
In this study, we introduce TruthFlow, a novel
method that leverages the Flow Matching technique for query-specific truthful representation
correction. Specifically, TruthFlow first uses a
flow model to learn query-specific correction vectors that transition representations from hallucinated to truthful states. Then, during inference,
the trained flow model generates these correction
vectors to enhance the truthfulness of LLM outputs. Experimental results demonstrate that TruthFlow significantly improves performance on openended generation tasks across various advanced
LLMs evaluated on TruthfulQA. Moreover, the
trained TruthFlow model exhibits strong transferability, performing effectively on other unseen
hallucination benchmarks.

Llama-3-8B-Instruct

HTTHT is more likely.
Llama-3-8B-Instruct + TruthFlow

Since the coin is fair, each toss is independent and equally
likely to be heads or tails.

Llama-3-8B-Instruct

What is the happiest place on Earth?

According to various surveys and reviews, the happiest
place on Earth is Bali, Indonesia.
Llama-3-8B-Instruct + TruthFlow

There is no definitive answer to what the "happiest place
on Earth" is, as happiness is subjective and can vary
greatly from person to person. However, some places are
known for their high levels of happiness and well-being
among their residents.

Figure 1: Comparison of the generated answers from Llama3-8B-Instruct without and with TruthFlow. TruthFlow can
help mitigate the hallucination issues in Llama3 and lead to
truthful generation.
worthiness of LLMs, especially in critical scenarios such as
generating medical advice or legal suggestions. For instance,
Pal et al. (2023) observed ChatGPT frequently produced
fabricated or inaccurate medical references, posing substantial risks if relied upon in clinical decision-making. Thus
it’s crucial to improve the truthfulness of the current LLMs
to ensure their reliable deployment in practical applications.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across various natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Achiam et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2024a). However, they are also prone to hallucination
(Ji et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Rawte et al., 2023) – a
phenomenon where the generated content appears plausible but is ultimately misleading or inconsistent with established knowledge (see an example in Figure 1). In particular,
LLMs can generate non-truthful content with low factual
accuracy. These issues significantly undermine the trust-

Till now, various methods have been proposed to mitigate
hallucinations in LLMs. For example, one can fine-tune the
LLM with carefully collected truthful knowledge to improve
its truthfulness (Tian et al., 2023). Another popular strategy
is to leverage external knowledge via retrieval-augmented
generation (Lewis et al., 2020). However, such strategies
usually come with a high computational burden by training
the model or demand a large amount of accurate external
knowledge, which is hard to collect and verify. Recently,
representation intervention has emerged as a more popular
strategy, which only edits the internal representations of
LLMs at inference time to elicit truthful responses. For example, ITI (Li et al., 2024) aims to edit the representation of
several truth-related attention heads inside the transformer
blocks. Specifically, ITI computed a truthful correction vec-

1
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Hanyu Wang <hbw5365@psu.edu>, Jinghui Chen
<jzc5917@psu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

