Privacy-Preserving Federated Convex Optimization:
Balancing Partial-Participation and Efficiency via Noise Cancellation

Roie Reshef *

1

Kfir Yehuda Levy * 1

Abstract

In this work, we focus on guaranteeing DP in centralized
FL systems, which are prevalent both in academic research
and in many real-world applications. In such systems all
machines communicate through a coordinating server which
orchestrates the training process (Kairouz et al., 2021b).
A key challenge here is that multi-round communication
can compromise privacy, and research on integrating DP
in FL (Huang et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020; Girgis et al.,
2021; Noble et al., 2022; Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023; Lowy
et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024) focuses on balancing data
masking with model performance to protect privacy while
maintaining performance.

This paper tackles the challenge of achieving Differential Privacy (DP) in Federated Learning (FL)
under partial-participation, where only a subset of
the machines participate in each time-step. While
previous work achieved optimal performance in
full-participation settings, these methods struggled to extend to partial-participation scenarios.
Our approach fills this gap by introducing a novel
noise-cancellation mechanism that preserves privacy without sacrificing convergence rates or computational efficiency. We analyze our method
within the Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO)
framework and show that it delivers optimal performance for both homogeneous and heterogeneous data distributions. This work expands the
applicability of DP in FL, offering an efficient and
practical solution for privacy-preserving learning
in distributed systems with partial participation.

While many FL protocols assume full-participation from
all machines, real-world deployments often face inconsistent device availability, limited connectivity, or scheduling
conflicts. This leads to partial-participation, where only
a subset of machines engage in each training round. Ensuring DP in these settings is more challenging but crucial
for expanding FL to large-scale, resource-constrained, and
dynamic environments.
Moreover, in the context of privacy, FL systems can be categorized into trusted and untrusted Server cases. In Trusted
Server scenarios, devices rely on the server’s assurance of
correct DP implementation. However, in more practical
cases with an Untrusted Server, devices must protect their
data from potential misuse by the server.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an innovative framework within
Machine Learning (ML) that facilitates collaborative learning across a wide range of decentralized devices or systems
(McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021b). Privacy is a
central concern in FL, highlighting the critical importance
of safeguarding personal data during the training process.

Ensuring DP in centralized FL has mainly been studied in
the context of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Huang
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020; Girgis et al., 2021; Noble
et al., 2022), focusing on minimizing training loss. However, translating ERM guarantees to population loss leads to
suboptimal bounds, as shown in (Bassily et al., 2019).

Differential Privacy (DP) is a strong framework for assessing and mitigating privacy risks (Dwork et al., 2006a;b;
Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011). It formally ensures that data
analysis results remain largely unchanged regardless of an
individual’s data inclusion, thus preserving data privacy
(Dwork & Roth, 2014).

Recent works have explored population loss (generalization) guarantees under DP (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023;
Gao et al., 2024; Reshef & Levy, 2024), providing optimal
guarantees for both trusted and untrusted server cases. Notably, (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023) addresses both full and
partial-participation but relies on mega-batches,
leading to

super-linear complexity of O n3/2 , where n is the total
dataset size, and (Gao et al., 2024) build upon the algorithm
of (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023) in iterations to improve the

*
Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Roie Reshef <sror@campus.technion.ac.il>, Kfir Yehuda Levy
<kfirylevy@technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

