Prune ’n Predict: Optimizing LLM Decision-making with Conformal Prediction

Harit Vishwakarma 1 2 Alan Mishler 1 Thomas Cook 1 Niccolò Dalmasso 1 Natraj Raman 1 Sumitra Ganesh 1

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are empowering
decision-making in several applications, including tool or API usage and answering multiplechoice questions (MCQs). However, incorrect
outputs pose significant risks in high-stakes domains like healthcare and finance. To quantify
LLM uncertainty and thereby mitigate these risks,
recent works employ conformal prediction (CP), a
model- and distribution-agnostic framework that
uses LLM outputs to generate a prediction set
containing the true answer with high probability.
Leveraging CP, we propose conformal revision of
questions (CROQ), which revises the question by
narrowing down the available choices to those in
the prediction set and asking the LLM the revised
question. We expect LLMs to be more accurate
on revised questions with fewer choices. Furthermore, we expect CROQ to be effective when the
prediction sets from CP are small. Commonly
used logit scores often lead to large sets, diminishing CROQ’s effectiveness. To overcome this,
we propose CP-OPT, an optimization framework
to learn scores that minimize set sizes while maintaining coverage. Our extensive experiments on
MMLU, ToolAlpaca, and TruthfulQA datasets
with multiple LLMs show that CROQ improves
accuracy over the standard inference, with more
pronounced gains when paired with CP-OPT.

Figure 1: Accuracy for three LLMs on the TruthfulQA
dataset with 15 response options as a function of the number
of incorrect answer options (distractors) removed from the
prompt. As more distractor answers are eliminated, accuracy increases. Accuracy is averaged across 5 iterations,
error bars denote ±2 standard deviations.
where the model must select the correct tool or API to complete a task (Qu et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2023; Hendrycks
et al., 2021). However, LLMs often exhibit overconfidence
in wrong answers (Krause et al., 2023; Groot & Valdenegro Toro, 2024). Such unreliable predictions entail significant risks in critical domains like finance. Successful usage
in such settings demands principled solutions to improve
accuracy and quantify uncertainty in the predictions.
A commonly taught strategy for human test takers to solve
multi-choice questions (MCQs) is the process of elimination (pruning) of incorrect (distractor) answer choices. The
underlying principle is that this enables them to focus their
attention on the remaining answer choices, and it increases
the likelihood of a correct answer even if they have to guess
randomly. Inspired by this, we investigate whether LLMs
can benefit from a similar strategy.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023;
Databricks, 2024; Abdin et al., 2024) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in various decision-making tasks,
including multi-choice question answering and tool usage,

We first examine the relationship between the number of distractor answers and LLM accuracy on an MCQ task. Figure
1 illustrates accuracy for three different LLMs on a version
of TruthfulQA, a widely used MCQ dataset. The MCQs in
this version of TruthfulQA have 15 answer options, only
one of which is correct. (We discuss how this dataset is
constructed in Appendix E.2.) For each question, we repeatedly prompt the LLM, randomly eliminating one distractor

1

JPMorganChase AI Research, New York, NY, USA
Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA. This work was performed while at JPMorganChase. Correspondence to: Harit Vishwakarma <hvishwakarma@cs.wisc.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

