Scalable Approximation Algorithms for p-Wasserstein Distance and Its Variants

Nathaniel Lahn 1 Sharath Raghvendra 2 Emma Saarinen 2 Pouyan Shirzadian 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Let µ and ν be discrete probability distributions supported
on sets A and B, respectively, with |A| + |B| = n. For
each pair (a, b) ∈ A × B, let d(a, b) denote the distance
between a and b. For simplicity, assume that the diameter
of A ∪ B is 1, i.e., max(a,b)∈A×B d(a, b) = 1. A transport
plan is a function σ : A × B P
→ R≥0 that assigns a mass
to
each
pair
(a,
b)
such
that
b∈B σ(a, b) ≤ µ(a) and
P
a∈A σ(a, b) ≤ ν(b). Given a parameter p ≥ 1, suppose
the cost of moving a unit of mass from a point a ∈ A to a
point b ∈ B is given by d(a, b)p . The p-Wasserstein cost of
any transport plan σ between µ and ν is defined as

The p-Wasserstein distance measures the cost of
optimally transporting one distribution to another,
where the cost of moving a unit mass from a to
b is the pth power of the ground distance d(a, b)
between them. Despite its strong theoretical properties, its use in practice – especially for p ≥ 2 –
is limited due to two key challenges: sensitivity to
noise and a lack of scalable algorithms. We identify noise sensitivity as a key reason why some
existing approximation algorithms for p = 1 fail
to generalize to p ≥ 2 and then present new algorithms for approximating the p-Wasserstein distance and its variant. First, when d(·, ·) is a metric,
for any constant p ≥ 2, we present a novel relative
O(log n)- approximation algorithm to compute
the p-Wasserstein distance between any two discrete distributions of size n. The algorithm runs
in O(n2 log U log ∆ log n) time, where log U is
the bit-length of the input probabilities and ∆ is
the ratio of the largest to the smallest pairwise
distance. We use p hierarchically well-separated
trees to define a distance that approximates the pWasserstein cost within a factor of O(log n) and
then present a simple primal-dual algorithm to
compute the p-Wasserstein cost with respect to
this distance. Second, due to the noise sensitivity
of the p-Wasserstein distance, we show that existing combinatorial approaches require Ω(n2 /δ p )
time to approximate the p-Wasserstein distance
within an additive error of δ. In contrast, we show
that, for any arbitrary distance d(·, ·), a recent
noise-resistant variant of the p-Wasserstein distance, called the p-RPW distance, can be approximated in O(n2 /δ 3 ) time.

1/p


wp (σ) := 

X

σ(a, b) × d(a, b)p 

.

a∈A,b∈B

In the α-partial p-Wasserstein problem, we wish to compute
the transport plan σα∗ that transports α fraction of the mass
and has the smallest p-Wasserstein cost. We refer to this
cost as the α-partial p-Wasserstein distance and denote it
by Wp,α (µ, ν) = wp (σα∗ ). The p-Wasserstein distance,
denoted by Wp (µ, ν), is equal to the cost wp (σ1∗ ).
A standard approach to estimating the p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν is to draw n samples from both and
construct empirical distributions µn and νn by assigning
a mass of 1/n to each sampled point. Computing the pWasserstein distance between these empirical distributions
corresponds to a well-known problem in combinatorial optimization: the assignment problem. In this setting, the
optimal transport plan is a matching – a set of n vertexdisjoint edges, each carrying a mass of 1/n.
The p-Wasserstein distance is effective in capturing geometric similarity between distributions, especially when
p ≥ 2. When the ground distance d(·, ·) is a metric, the
p-Wasserstein distance is also a metric. Furthermore, when
the diameter of the supports is bounded, the empirical pWasserstein distance converges to the true distance as the
sample size increases (Fournier and Guillin, 2015). These
favorable theoretical properties have led to its widespread
adoption in applications across machine learning (Chang
et al., 2023; Chuang et al., 2022), computer vision (Backurs
et al., 2020; Lai et al., 2022), and natural language processing (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2018; Yurochkin et al.,

*

Authors are listed Alphabetically 1 Radford University
North Carolina State University 3 Virginia Tech. Correspondence to: N. Lahn <nlahn@radford.edu>, S. Raghvendra
<skraghve@ncsu.edu>, E. Saarinen <ecsaarin@ncsu.edu>, P.
Shirzadian <pshirzadian@vt.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

