Bridging Layout and RTL: Knowledge Distillation based Timing Prediction

Mingjun Wang * 1 2 3 4 Yihan Wen * 5 2 Bin Sun 1 3 Jianan Mu 1 3 Juan Li 5 Xiaoyi Wang 5 Jing Ye 1 4 Bei Yu 2
Huawei Li 1 3 4

Abstract
Accurate and efficient timing prediction at the
register-transfer level (RTL) remains a fundamental challenge in electronic design automation
(EDA), particularly in striking a balance between
accuracy and computational efficiency. While
static timing analysis (STA) provides high-fidelity
results through comprehensive physical parameters, its computational overhead makes it impractical for rapid design iterations. Conversely, existing RTL-level approaches sacrifice accuracy
due to the limited physical information available. We propose RTLDistil, a novel cross-stage
knowledge distillation framework that bridges this
gap by transferring precise physical characteristics from a layout-aware teacher model (Teacher
GNN) to an efficient RTL-level student model
(Student GNN), both implemented as graph neural networks (GNNs). RTLDistil efficiently predicts key timing metrics, such as arrival time (AT),
and employs a multi-granularity distillation strategy that captures timing-critical features at node,
subgraph, and global levels. Experimental results
demonstrate that RTLDistil achieves significant
improvement in RTL-level timing prediction error reduction, compared to state-of-the-art prediction models. This framework enables accurate
early-stage timing prediction, advancing EDA’s
“left-shift” paradigm while maintaining computational efficiency. Our code and dataset will be
publicly available at https://github.com/sklp-edalab/RTLDistil.

Slow EDA Flow

RTL

Change #gate, topology
Generate parasitic param.

Layout

(a)
RTL-level Timing model

Physical Layout-level Timing model
D Q

D Q

CLK

Early stage for optimization
Accuracy

(b)

Early stage for optimization
Accuracy

Figure 1: (a) Gap between RTL-level representation and
layout-level representation in the chip design process. (b)
RTL-level timing models provide faster and earlier predictions compared to the slower and later layout-level models.

1. Introduction
Digital circuits constitute the cornerstone of contemporary
computing infrastructure (Agarwal & Lang, 2005; Clements,
2006). As illustrated in Figure 1(a), integrated circuit (IC)
design involves a complex evolution spanning multiple
stages of abstraction and representation paradigms (Chang,
1997; Chen et al., 2024). This progression moves from highlevel behavioral descriptions to the topological interconnect
of logic cells and ultimately culminates in a transistor- and
interconnect-level layout ready for physical manufacturing (Bryant et al., 2001). However, traditional EDA flows
often follow a top-down, waterfall-like methodology, where
performance bottlenecks typically emerge late in the design cycle, resulting in lengthy verification and iteration
periods (Wang et al., 2009). Layout-level timing prediction is too late and too slow. Consequently, recent research
efforts have advocated an EDA “left-shift”, wherein performance prediction and issue detection are introduced at earlier stages—such as the RTL level—to facilitate more timely
design adjustments and optimization of key metrics (Xing,
2024; Zeng, 2024).

*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, HKSAR
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 4 CASTEST
Co., Ltd., China 5 Beijing University of Technology, China. Correspondence to: Jianan Mu <mujianan@ict.ac.cn>, Bei Yu
<byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

