Flexibility-conditioned protein structure design with flow matching

Vsevolod Viliuga * 1 2 3 Leif Seute * 1 3 4 Nicolas Wolf 1 3 4 Simon Wagner 4
Arne Elofsson 2 Jan Stühmer 1 5 Frauke Gräter 3 1 4

Abstract

the way for more controllable and precise design of protein
structures with specific functional properties. For example,
proteins with on-demand chemical reactivities or binding
propensities are of particular interest for biotechnological
applications (Lovelock et al., 2022), therapeutics development (Bennett et al., 2024) and even sustainability problems,
such as plastic degradation (Chen et al., 2022).

Recent advances in geometric deep learning and
generative modeling have enabled the design of
novel proteins with a wide range of desired properties. However, current state-of-the-art approaches
are typically restricted to generating proteins with
only static target properties, such as motifs and
symmetries. In this work, we take a step towards
overcoming this limitation by proposing a framework to condition structure generation on flexibility, which is crucial for key functionalities such
as catalysis or molecular recognition. We first introduce BackFlip, an equivariant neural network
for predicting per-residue flexibility from an input backbone structure. Relying on BackFlip, we
propose FliPS, an SE(3)-equivariant conditional
flow matching model that solves the inverse problem, that is, generating backbones that display a
target flexibility profile. In our experiments, we
show that FliPS is able to generate novel and diverse protein backbones with the desired flexibility, verified by Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations. FliPS and BackFlip are available at https:
//github.com/graeter-group/flips.

Only recently, several deep generative models for protein
structure design based on diffusion (Song et al., 2021) or
flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023; Albergo & VandenEijnden, 2022) have successfully demonstrated high biophysical consistency of generated samples (Watson et al.,
2023; Bose et al., 2024; Yim et al., 2023a). The molecular
context that such state-of-the-art models can be conditioned
on is typically restricted to static properties like the presence of a certain motif in the final structure, adherence to
specific symmetry groups or binding to target proteins or ligands (Ingraham et al., 2023; Krishna et al., 2024; Yim et al.,
2024; Lin et al., 2024; Huguet et al., 2024). Protein structures generated by deep learning methods tend to be highly
thermostable, (Watson et al., 2023; Zambaldi et al., 2024),
which suggests high degree of structural rigidity (Scandurra
et al., 1998), and incorporating flexibility into specific parts
of a backbone remains a great challenge. Proteins, however,
must possess dynamic behavior in order to encode function such as chemical reactivities or specific recognition of
binding partners. For example, enzymes have complicated
free-energy landscapes (Benkovic et al., 2008) and traverse
from one conformation to another in their catalytic cycle,
which includes loop opening and closure, concurrent domain movements and local folding and unfolding events
(Miller & Benkovic, 1998; Liao et al., 2018; Zinovjev et al.,
2024). Also molecule-specific protein binders require local
structural flexibility in order to engage in a complex with
DNA, RNA or ligand molecules (Glasscock et al., 2023;
Pacesa et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024). Since protein structure defines protein function, the limited structural diversity
and high rigidity of proteins designed with state-of-the-art
generative models impede the exploration of a vast potential
functional space.

1. Introduction
The past few years have arguably marked the golden age
of de novo protein design. Rapid advancement of deep
learning-based approaches and their application to the protein structure prediction problem have enabled an unprecedented level of modeling accuracy (Jumper et al., 2021;
Dauparas et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022). This, in turn, paved
*
Equal contribution 1 Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany 2 Dept. of Biochemistry and Biophysics
at Stockholm University and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden 3 Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz,
Germany 4 IWR, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
5
IAR, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.

Main contributions In this work, we propose a framework for generating protein structures conditioned on structural flexibility relying on two key innovations. We first

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

