Enforcing Idempotency in Neural Networks

Nikolaj Banke Jensen 1 Jamie Vicary 2

Abstract

2022), video generation (Ma et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021),
sorting algorithms (Tambouratzis, 1999), compression algorithms (Namphol et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2021), image
denoising (Ilesanmi & Ilesanmi, 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Mao
et al., 2023), and image generation (Liu et al., 2021), among
others.

In this work, we propose a new architectureagnostic method for training idempotent neural networks. An idempotent operator satisfies
f (x) = f (f (x)), meaning it can be applied iteratively with no effect beyond the first application.
Some neural networks used in data transformation
tasks, such as image generation and augmentation, can represent non-linear idempotent projections. Using methods from perturbation theory we
derive the recurrence relation K′ ← 3K2 − 2K3
for iteratively projecting a real-valued matrix K
onto the manifold of idempotent matrices. Our
analysis shows that for linear, single-layer MLP
networks this projection 1) has idempotent fixed
points, and 2) is attracting only around idempotent points. We give an extension to non-linear
networks by considering our approach as a substitution of the gradient for the canonical loss
function, achieving an architecture-agnostic training scheme. We provide experimental results for
MLP- and CNN-based architectures with significant improvement in idempotent error over the
canonical gradient-based approach. Finally, we
demonstrate practical applications of the method
as we train generative networks on MNIST and
CelebA successfully using only a simple reconstruction loss paired with our method.

Some data transformation tasks admit only idempotent solutions (e.g., sorting), whilst other tasks admit no idempotent
solutions (e.g., rotating an image by 90◦ ). This work is concerned with a class of data transformation tasks which has
both idempotent and non-idempotent solutions and where
idempotency might be a desirable property. For example,
in Section 3 we study idempotency in generative networks
where it is the formal requirement of one-step inference, but
also denoising and image augmentation (e.g., application of
effect-filters) are examples of tasks where idempotent solutions may be desirable (Liu et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2023).
Since solutions are not inherently idempotent in this class,
we explore actively enforcing idempotency as a component
of the loss function used in training.
In this paper we are primarily concerned with networks
fθ : Rn → Rn , where θ is a collection of weight parameters. The condition that fθ is idempotent is the following,
for all x ∈ Rn :
fθ (x) = fθ (fθ (x)).

(1)

If fθ (x) = Wx (a single-layer, fully-connected network
with no bias and the identity activation function) where
W ∈ Rn×n is the weight matrix, then condition (1) reduces
to the familiar notion from linear algebra where W = W2
and eigenvalues of W are either 0 or 1. Condition (1) also
gives the correct notion for non-linear networks acting as
idempotent projections, and can be optimized using a simple
mean-squared error loss, where x ∈ Rn :

1. Introduction
Using neural networks as data augmentation tools is becoming more widespread in areas such as signal processing and
generative artificial intelligence. In particular, networks of
the form f : X → X, mapping data within the same space
X, are frequently used in image augmentation (Lu et al.,

m

Lidem (x) =

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to:
Nikolaj Banke Jensen <nikolaj.jensen@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Jamie Vicary <jamie.vicary@cl.cam.ac.uk>.

2
1 X
fθ (fθ (x)) − fθ x
.
m i=1

(2)

As we show in Section 3, minimizing this loss using canonical gradient descent can yield relatively poor improvement in the idempotent loss. Additionally, due to the secondary application of fθ the number of terms in the gradient
∇θ Lidem grows exponentially in the number of layers if
memoization is not used, making the approach computationally expensive for certain architectures. If memoization is

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

