Toward Data-centric Directed Graph Learning: An Entropy-driven Approach

Xunkai Li 1 Zhengyu Wu 1 Kaichi Yu 1 Hongchao Qin 1 Guang Zeng 2 Rong-Hua Li 1 Guoren Wang 1

Abstract

et al., 2023), graph-level tasks (Zhang et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2022). However, most GNNs are tailored for undirected scenarios, resulting in a cascade of negative impacts:

Although directed graphs (digraphs) offer strong
modeling capabilities for complex topological
systems, existing DiGraph Neural Networks
(DiGNNs) struggle to fully capture the concealed
rich structural information. This data-level limitation results in model-level sub-optimal predictive performance and underscores the necessity of further exploring the potential correlations between the directed edges (topology) and
node profiles (features and labels) from a datacentric perspective, thereby empowering modelcentric neural networks with stronger encoding
capabilities. In this paper, we propose Entropydriven Digraph knowlEdge distillatioN (EDEN),
which can serve as a data-centric digraph learning paradigm or a model-agnostic hot-and-plug
data-centric Knowledge Distillation (KD) module.
EDEN implements data-centric machine learning by constructing a coarse-grained Hierarchical
Knowledge Tree (HKT) using the proposed hierarchical encoding theory, and refining HKT through
mutual information analysis of node profiles to
guide knowledge distillation during training. As
a general framework, EDEN naturally extends
to undirected graphs and consistently delivers
strong performance. Extensive experiments on 14
(di)graph datasets—spanning both homophily and
heterophily settings—and across four downstream
tasks show that EDEN achieves SOTA results and
significantly enhances existing (Di)GNNs.

(1) Data-level sub-optimal representation: Due to the complex structural patterns present in the real world, the absence
of directed topology limits the captured relational information, thereby resulting in sub-optimal data representations
with inevitable information loss (Koke & Cremers, 2024;
Geisler et al., 2023; Maekawa et al., 2023); (2) Model-level
inefficient learning: The optimization dilemma arises when
powerful GNNs are applied to sub-optimal data. For instance, undirected GNNs struggle to analyze the connective
rules among nodes in the entanglement of homophily and
heterophily (i.e., whether connected nodes have similar features or same labels) (Luan et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022;
Platonov et al., 2023) due to neglect the valuable directed
topology (Rossi et al., 2023; Maekawa et al., 2023; Sun et al.,
2024). This oversight compels the undirected methods to
rely heavily on well-designed models or tricky theoretical
assumptions to remedy the neglect of directed topology.
To break these long-standing limitations, Directed GNNs
(DiGNNs) are proposed to extract implicit data knowledge
from directed graphs (Rossi et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2024a) by exploring directionality of edges as critical topological patterns in guiding more efficient message
passing of DiGNNs and enhancing representation learning.
Despite advancements in existing model design considering asymmetric topology, these methods still fail to fully
explore the potential correlations between directed topology and node profiles at the data level. More importantly,
this potential correlation extends beyond directed edges and
high-order neighbors to unseen but pivotal structural patterns (referred to as digraph data knowledge).

1. Introduction

Therefore, we emphasize revealing this data knowledge
from a data-centric perspective to improve the learning utility of model-centric approaches fundamentally. Specifically,
(1) Topology: unlike undirected graphs, directed topology
offers node pairs or groups a more diverse range of connection patterns, implying abundant structural knowledge; (2)
Profile: digraph nodes present greater potential for more
sophisticated profile knowledge caused by directed edges
when compared to nodes in the undirected graph that often
present with predominant homophily (Ma et al., 2021; Luan

Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved
SOTA performance across node- (Wu et al., 2019; Hu et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2024b), link- (Zhang & Chen, 2018; Tan
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 2 Alibaba Group,
HangZhou, Zhejiang, China. Correspondence to: Rong-Hua Li
<lironghuabit@126.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

