PiD: Generalized AI-Generated Images Detection with Pixelwise Decomposition
Residuals
Xinghe Fu 1 Zhiyuan Yan 2 Zheng Yang 1 Taiping Yao 2 Yandan Zhao 2 Shouhong Ding 2 Xi Li 1

Abstract
Fake images, created by recently advanced generative models, have become increasingly indistinguishable from real ones, making their detection
crucial, urgent, and challenging. This paper introduces PiD (Pixelwise Decomposition Residuals),
a novel detection method that focuses on residual signals within images. Generative models are
designed to optimize high-level semantic content
(principal components), often overlooking lowlevel signals (residual components). PiD leverages this observation by disentangling residual
components from images, encouraging the model
to uncover more underlying and general forgery
clues independent of semantic content. Compared
to prior approaches that rely on reconstruction
techniques or high-frequency information, PiD is
computationally efficient and does not rely on any
generative models for reconstruction. Specifically,
PiD operates at the pixel level, mapping the pixel
vector to another color space (e.g., YUV) and then
quantizing the vector. The pixel vector is mapped
back to the RGB space and the quantization loss
is taken as the residual for AIGC detection. Our
experiment results are striking and highly surprising: PiD achieves 98% accuracy on the widely
used GenImage benchmark, highlighting the effectiveness and generalization performance.

Figure 1. Cross-generators detection performance on the GenImage benchmark (Zhu et al., 2024) using the Accuracy metric.
We compare our method (PiD) with existing SOTA detectors and
demonstrate surprisingly superior results in generalization (98%
Accuracy on average).

difficult to distinguish from real ones (Rombach et al., 2022;
Zhan et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2025). Although these advanced technologies have opened up new possibilities in
industries, they have also raised significant security concerns about the spread of disinformation. AI-generated fake
images can be misused to misguide public opinion, fabricate evidence in forensic science, undermine trust in digital
media, and more. Therefore, detecting such AI-generated
images (AIGIs) has become a critical and urgent topic in
both academia and industry.

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Diffusion Models,
has revolutionized the field of image synthesis, enabling
the creation of photorealistic images that are increasingly

One particularly effective detection strategy is using reconstruction. Reconstruction-based methods like DIRE (Wang
et al., 2023), LARE2 (Luo et al., 2024), and DRCT (Chen
et al., 2024) have proven generalization performance for
detecting AI-generated images by leveraging discrepancies
between originals and their reconstructions. However, these
approaches typically rely on heavy self-reconstruction generators (e.g., DDIM in DIRE) to simulate how a generative model might rebuild an image, capitalizing on the idea
that real images often fail to preserve low-level details during reconstruction. Their high computational cost is also

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Xi Li <xilizju@zju.edu.cn>, Taiping Yao
<taipingyao@tencent.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

