QuanONet: Quantum Neural Operator with Application to Differential Equation

Ruocheng Wang 1 Zhuo Xia 1 Ge Yan 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

tum algorithms for solving differential equations map equations into higher or infinite dimensional linear spaces (Carleman, 1932; Forets & Pouly, 2017; Kowalski & Steeb, 1991;
Jin et al., 2024) or use gradient computation of differentiable
quantum circuits (Kyriienko et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2024b)
to solve differential equations. However, these methods are
inherently limited to solving specific differential equations
and lack the ability to learn nonlinear operators or generalize
across varying conditions. This restricts their applicability
in solving more complex real-world problems.

Differential equations are essential and popular
in science and engineering. Learning-based methods including neural operators, have emerged as
a promising paradigm. We explore its quantum
counterpart, and propose QuanONet – a quantum
neural operator which has not been well studied
in literature compared with their counterparts in
other machine learning areas. We design a novel
architecture as a hardware-efficient ansatz, in the
era of noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ).
Its circuit is pure quantum. By lying its ground
on the operator approximation theorem for its
quantum counterpart, QuanONet in theory can fit
various differential equation operators. We also
propose its modified version TF-QuanONet with
ability to adaptively fit the dominant frequency
of the problem. The real-device empirical results on problems including anti-derivative operators, Diffusion-reaction Systems demonstrate that
QuanONet outperforms peer quantum methods
when their model sizes are set akin to QuanONet.

Quantum neural networks (QNNs) leverage the exponentially large Hilbert space of quantum systems to achieve
quadratic speedup in online perceptron (Kapoor et al., 2016)
and reinforcement learning (Dunjko et al., 2016). So there
have been many studies using QNN to implement popular classical neural network architectures. However, existing QNN implementations of neural operators, such as
QFNO (Jain et al., 2024) and quantum DeepONet (Xiao
et al., 2024a), are limited to accelerating the evaluation
phase using quantum Fourier transforms (QFT) and quantum orthogonal neural networks. The former is not observed
to outperform classical operators on differential equation
problems, and the latter uses a hybrid network structure that
brings the communication overhead between quantum and
classical devices.

1. Introduction

We propose QuanONet, a general framework for learning
(nonlinear) operators in differential equations using QNN.
This means that it can not only be well-suited for the era
of noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) by using any
QNN architecture that features low qubit requirements and
does not rely on high-connectivity quantum hardware, but
also has potential in the future fault-tolerant quantum era.

Nonlinear differential equations are essential tools in modeling complex phenomena across various scientific and engineering fields. Traditional numerical methods, including
finite element methods (FEM) and finite difference methods
(FDM), often rely on discretizing the problem domain and
solving it iteratively. Recently, artificial intelligence (AI)
methods, such as neural operators (Lu et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2020), have emerged as promising alternatives by learning
nonlinear operators directly and achieving some degree of
generalization across different conditions.

Our QuanONet is grounded in the Universal Approximation Theorem for operators, and we show that its QNN implementation retains the powerful operator approximation
capabilities of classical methods and have good generalization performance in different cases. Furthermore, we
propose TF-QuanONet, a version of QuanONet that uses
the trainable-frequency method (Jaderberg et al., 2024). By
using the input encoded coefficients as additional trainable
parameters, it can efficiently learn the spectrum of operators without the need for extremely deep quantum circuit
repetition. These features position QuanONet as a versatile

Quantum computing offers a fundamentally different approach to addressing these challenges. Some existing quan1

School of Artificial Intelligence & School of Computer Science & Zhiyuan College, SJTU. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

