Synthesizing Privacy-Preserving Text Data via Finetuning
without Finetuning Billion-Scale LLMs

Bowen Tan ∗ 1 Zheng Xu 2 Eric Xing 1 3 Zhiting Hu 4 Shanshan Wu 2

Abstract

ple, models are improved by adapting to the typing text in
user’s mobile virtual keyboard (Hard et al., 2018; Xu et al.,
2023), and aligning with user preference in a chatbot (OpenAI, 2024; Google, 2024; Llama Team, 2024). However,
training models on user data raises privacy concerns, particularly in domains involving highly sensitive information,
such as healthcare records (Milmo & Stacey, 2025) and chat
messages (Silva, 2025). Researchers have shown that the
training data can be memorized and potentially extracted
from models (Carlini et al., 2021; Nasr et al., 2023; Carlini
et al., 2023). Synthesizing privacy-preserving user data has
emerged as a promising approach to mitigating these privacy risks. A popular approach is to differentially-private
(DP) finetune a generative language model (LM) on user
data, followed by generating synthetic data using the finetuned model (Bommasani et al., 2019; Putta et al., 2022;
Mattern et al., 2022a; Yue et al., 2023). Benefiting from the
development of open-sourced billion-scale large language
models (LLMs) such as Llama (Touvron et al., 2023), DPfinetuned generators have demonstrated effectiveness in the
downstream classification (Kurakin et al., 2023) and instruction tuning tasks (Yu et al., 2024). However, DP finetuning
is both computationally expensive and resource-intensive,
because it requires per-sample gradient operations in every
training batch and large batch size to get good privacy-utility
trade-off (Ponomareva et al., 2023). This results in higher
memory usage and slower training speeds compared to the
non-DP finetuning. Moreover, when the user data are decentralized across their own devices, and no centralized
data collection is allowed following the data minimization
privacy principle (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al.,
2021; Daly et al., 2024), the devices performing local computations typically lack the necessary resources to finetune
billion-scale LLMs.

Synthetic data offers a promising path to train
models while preserving data privacy. Differentially private (DP) finetuning of large language
models (LLMs) as data generator is effective, but
is impractical when computation resources are
limited. Meanwhile, prompt-based methods such
as private evolution (Xie et al., 2024; Hou et al.,
2024) depend heavily on the manual prompts, and
ineffectively use private information in their iterative data selection process. To overcome these
limitations, we propose CTCL (Data Synthesis
with ConTrollability and CLustering), a novel
framework for generating privacy-preserving synthetic data without extensive prompt engineering
or billion-scale LLM finetuning. CTCL pretrains
a lightweight 140M conditional generator and a
clustering-based topic model on large-scale public data. To further adapt to the private domain,
the generator is DP finetuned on private data for
fine-grained textual information, while the topic
model extracts a DP histogram representing distributional information. The DP generator then samples according to the DP histogram to synthesize
a desired number of data examples. Evaluation
across five diverse domains demonstrates the effectiveness of our framework, particularly in the
strong privacy regime. Systematic ablation validates the design of each framework component
and highlights the scalability of our approach.

1. Introduction
Many artificial intelligence (AI) applications improves their
model performances by leveraging user data. For exam-

To address the resource limitations, recent work has explored generating synthetic data that only require LLM API
access, exemplified by the Private Evolution (PE) framework (Lin et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024).
These methods use an iterative process where samples are
drawn from the LLMs using human-crafted prompts, and
then filtered based on their similarity to the private data.
This line of work has several limitations. First, they require
prompt writers to have deep domain knowledge of the pri-

∗

Work done during an internship at Google.
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research 3 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 4 UC San
Diego.
Correspondence to: Bowen Tan, Shanshan Wu
<btan2@andrew.cmu.edu, shanshanw@google.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

