Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with Targeted Causal Interventions

Sadegh Khorasani 1 Saber Salehkaleybar 2 Negar Kiyavash 3 Matthias Grossglauser 1

Abstract

many real-world applications, the agent faces tasks where
rewards are sparse and delayed. This poses a significant
challenge to traditional RL since the agent must take many
actions without receiving an immediate reward. For instance, in maze-solving tasks, the agent might only receive
a reward once it finds a path to a specific exit or a location within the maze. Hierarchical reinforcement learning
(HRL) allows the agent to break down the problem into
subtasks, which is helpful in environments where achieving
goals requires a long horizon (Bacon et al., 2017; Barto &
Mahadevan, 2003; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Le et al., 2018).

Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL)
improves the efficiency of long-horizon
reinforcement-learning tasks with sparse rewards
by decomposing the task into a hierarchy of
subgoals. The main challenge of HRL is efficient
discovery of the hierarchical structure among
subgoals and utilizing this structure to achieve
the final goal. We address this challenge by
modeling the subgoal structure as a causal graph
and propose a causal discovery algorithm to
learn it. Additionally, rather than intervening
on the subgoals at random during exploration,
we harness the discovered causal model to
prioritize subgoal interventions based on their
importance in attaining the final goal. These
targeted interventions result in a significantly
more efficient policy in terms of the training cost.
Unlike previous work on causal HRL, which
lacked theoretical analysis, we provide a formal
analysis of the problem. Specifically, for tree
structures and, for a variant of Erdős-Rényi random graphs, our approach results in remarkable
improvements. Our experimental results on HRL
tasks also illustrate that our proposed framework
outperforms existing work in terms of training
cost.

Hierarchical policies are widely used in HRL to manage the
complexity of long-horizon and sparse-reward tasks. However, learning hierarchical policies introduces significant
challenges. To address these issues, many methods are proposed to improve learning efficiency (Kulkarni et al., 2016;
Levy et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al., 2017). The high-level
policy does not deal with primitive actions but instead sets
subgoals or options (Sutton et al., 1999) that the lower-level
policies must achieve. Lower-level policies are trained to
achieve subgoals assigned by the high-level policy. In order to discover meaningful subgoals and their relationships,
it is essential to ensure that both high-level and low-level
policies explore the environment efficiently. However, naive
exploration of the entire goal space is not sample efficient
in high-dimensional goal spaces. Some studies in the literature aim to improve sample efficiency and scalability by
employing off-policy techniques (Nachum et al., 2018b),
utilizing representation learning (Nachum et al., 2018a), or
restricting the high-level policy to explore only a subset of
the goal space (Zhang et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
In traditional reinforcement learning (RL), an agent is typically required to solve a specific task based on immediate
feedback from the environment (Sutton, 2018). However, in

In order to improve exploration efficiency, recently, Hu
et al. (2022); Nguyen et al. (2024) proposed using an offthe-shelf causal discovery algorithm (Ke et al., 2019) to
infer the causal structure among subgoals. This learned
causal structure is subsequently used to select a subset of
subgoals, from which one is chosen uniformly at random
for exploration. In Nguyen et al. (2024), the agent initially
takes random actions until it serendipitously achieves the
final goal a few times–a scenario that is highly unlikely in
long-horizon tasks with a huge state space. After that, the
agent infers the causal structure among state-action pairs
which is more challenging than recovering the causal structure among subgoals when the state space is very large. It

1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences,
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Leiden Institute of Advanced
Computer Science (LIACS), Leiden University, Leiden,
The Netherlands 3 College of Management of Technology, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Sadegh Khorasani <sadegh.khorasani@epfl.ch>,
Saber
Salehkaleybar <s.salehkaleybar@liacs.leidenuniv.nl>, Negar
Kiyavash <negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch>, Matthias Grossglauser
<matthias.grossglauser@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

