High Dynamic Range Novel View Synthesis with Single Exposure

Kaixuan Zhang 1 Hu Wang 2 Minxian Li 1 3 Mingwu Ren 1 3 Mao Ye 2 Xiatian Zhu 4

Abstract

Δ𝑡 = 0.125𝑠

High Dynamic Range Novel View Synthesis
(HDR-NVS) aims to establish a 3D scene HDR
model from Low Dynamic Range (LDR) imagery. Typically, multiple-exposure LDR images are employed to capture a wider range of
brightness levels in a scene, as a single LDR image cannot represent both the brightest and darkest regions simultaneously. While effective, this
multiple-exposure HDR-NVS approach has significant limitations, including susceptibility to motion artifacts (e.g., ghosting and blurring), high
capture and storage costs. To overcome these
challenges, we introduce, for the first time, the
single-exposure HDR-NVS problem, where only
single exposure LDR images are available during
training. We further introduce a novel approach,
Mono-HDR-3D, featuring two dedicated modules
formulated by the LDR image formation principles, one for converting LDR colors to HDR
counterparts and the other for transforming HDR
images to LDR format so that unsupervised learning is enabled in a closed loop. Designed as a
meta-algorithm, our approach can be seamlessly
integrated with existing NVS models. Extensive
experiments show that Mono-HDR-3D significantly outperforms previous methods. Source
code is released at https://github.com/
prinasi/Mono-HDR-3D.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Δ𝑡 = 32𝑠

Figure 1. Examples of (a, b) underexposure and (c, d) overexposure. ∆t: Exposure time.

appealing representations of real-world scenes (Cai et al.,
2024). It can encompass both the darkest shadows and the
brightest highlights within a single frame. This capability
is crucial in a number of fields such as creative media production, photography, virtual reality, and augmented reality
that require precise color reproduction, detailed shadow and
highlight information, and enhanced visual realism (Wang
& Yoon, 2021). This enhanced dynamic range not only facilitates more realistic and visually appealing representations
of complex scenes (Liu et al., 2023), but also improves the
performance of various computer vision tasks, such as object recognition, scene segmentation, and depth estimation,
by providing richer and more detailed visual information
(Yan et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Compared to common Low Dynamic Range (LDR) imaging,
High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging enables the capture
and representation of a broader range of luminance / brightness levels, thereby providing more realistic and visually
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology. 2 University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China. 3 State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing of Advanced Construction
Machinery. 4 University of Surrey. Correspondence to: Minxian Li
<minxianli@njust.edu.cn>.

Novel View Synthesis (NVS) refers to the process of generating new views of a scene from arbitrary viewpoints, given
a set of input images captured from different perspectives
(Duan et al., 2024). This involves understanding and modeling the underlying 3D structure of a scene, as well as
accurately rendering the appearance of the scene and ob-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

