Towards a Unified Framework of Clustering-based Anomaly Detection

Zeyu Fang 1 Ming Gu 2 Sheng Zhou 1 Jiawei Chen 2 Qiaoyu Tan 3 Haishuai Wang 2 Jiajun Bu 2

Abstract
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection (UAD) plays
a crucial role in identifying abnormal patterns
within data without labeled examples, holding
significant practical implications across various
domains. Although the individual contributions of
representation learning and clustering to anomaly
detection are well-established, their interdependencies remain under-explored due to the absence
of a unified theoretical framework. Consequently,
their collective potential to enhance anomaly detection performance remains largely untapped. To
bridge this gap, in this paper, we propose a novel
probabilistic mixture model for anomaly detection to establish a theoretical connection among
representation learning, clustering, and anomaly
detection. By maximizing a novel anomaly-aware
data likelihood, representation learning and clustering can effectively reduce the adverse impact
of anomalous data and collaboratively benefit
anomaly detection. Meanwhile, a theoretically
substantiated anomaly score is naturally derived
from this framework. Lastly, drawing inspiration
from gravitational analysis in physics, we have
devised an improved anomaly score that more
effectively harnesses the combined power of representation learning and clustering. Extensive experiments, involving 17 baseline methods across
30 diverse datasets, validate the effectiveness and
generalization capability of the proposed method,
surpassing state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Interdependent relationships among representation
learning, clustering, and anomaly detection.

within data in the absence of labeled examples (Chandola
et al., 2009). It has long received extensive attention in
the past decades for its wide-ranging applications in numerous practical scenarios, including financial auditing (Bakumenko & Elragal, 2022), healthcare monitoring (Salem
et al., 2014) and e-commerce sector (Kou et al., 2004). Due
to the lack of explicit label guidance, the key to UAD is
to uncover the dominant patterns that widely exist in the
dataset so that samples do not conform to these patterns
can be recognized as anomalies. To achieve this, early
works (Chalapathy & Chawla, 2019) have heavily relied
on powerful unsupervised representation learning methods
to extract the normal patterns from high-dimensional and
complex data such as images, text, and graphs. More recent
works (Song et al., 2021; Aytekin et al., 2018) have utilized
clustering, a widely observed natural pattern in real-world
data, to provide critical global information for anomaly detection and achieved tremendous success.
While the individual contributions of representation learning
and clustering to anomaly detection are well-established,
their interrelationships remain largely unexplored. Intuitively, discriminative representation learning can leverage
accurate clustering results to differentiate samples from distinct clusters in the embedding space (i.e., ➀). Similarly, it
can utilize accurate anomaly detection to avoid preserving
abnormal patterns (i.e., ➁). For accurate clustering, it can
gain advantages from representation learning by operating
in the discriminative embedding space (i.e., ➂). Meanwhile,
it can potentially benefit from accurate anomaly detection
by excluding anomalies when formulating clusters (i.e., ➃).
Anomaly detection can greatly benefit from both discriminative representation learning and accurate clustering (i.e.,
➄ & ➅). However, these benefits hinge on the successful
identification of anomalies and the reduction of their detri-

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection (UAD) refers to the task
dedicated to identifying abnormal patterns or instances
1

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 The
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Hangzhou,
China 3 New York University Shanghai, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Sheng Zhou <zhousheng_zju@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

