Q-VDiT: Towards Accurate Quantization and Distillation of Video-Generation
Diffusion Transformers
Weilun Feng 1 2 Chuanguang YangB 1 Haotong Qin 3 Xiangqi Li 1 2 Yu Wang 1 Zhulin AnB 1 Libo Huang 1
Boyu Diao 1 Zixiang Zhao 3 Yongjun Xu 1 Michele Magno 3

Abstract
Motion Smooth.

Diffusion transformers (DiT) have demonstrated
exceptional performance in video generation.
However, their large number of parameters and
high computational complexity limit their deployment on edge devices. Quantization can reduce
storage requirements and accelerate inference by
lowering the bit-width of model parameters. Yet,
existing quantization methods for image generation models do not generalize well to video generation tasks. We identify two primary challenges:
the loss of information during quantization and
the misalignment between optimization objectives
and the unique requirements of video generation.
To address these challenges, we present Q-VDiT,
a quantization framework specifically designed
for video DiT models. From the quantization
perspective, we propose the Token-aware Quantization Estimator (TQE), which compensates for
quantization errors in both the token and feature
dimensions. From the optimization perspective,
we introduce Temporal Maintenance Distillation
(TMD), which preserves the spatiotemporal correlations between frames and enables the optimization of each frame with respect to the overall
video context. Our W3A6 Q-VDiT achieves a
scene consistency of 23.40, setting a new benchmark and outperforming current state-of-the-art
quantization methods by 1.9×. Code will be available at https://github.com/cantbebetter2/Q-VDiT.

Aesthetic Quality

Dynamic Degree

Imaging Quality

BG. Consist.

Subject Consist.

Overall Consist.

FP16
Q-DiT
PTQ4DiT
ViDiT-Q

Scene Consist.

Q VDiT(Ours)

Figure 1. Evaluation on VBench of different quantization methods
under W3A6 setting.

of generative tasks, including image generation (Ho et al.,
2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Feng
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025), image super-resolution (Lin
et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024b; Wu et al., 2024b), and video
generation (HPC-AI, 2024; Ma et al., 2024). Diffusion
Transformers (DiT) (Peebles & Xie, 2023) have emerged
as a prominent architecture for generation tasks, leveraging their ability to capture long-range dependencies and
scale to large parameter spaces. However, up to billions
of parameters (Black-Forest-Labs, 2024) and the increased
computational complexity pose significant challenges for
their deployment on edge devices.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020)
have demonstrated remarkable success across a wide range

As an effective model compression technique, quantization
reduces the bit-width of parameters and enhances inference
speed by utilizing integer operations (Gholami et al., 2022).
This approach has been extensively applied to compress
CNN-based (Pilipović et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2024) and
Transformer-based (Chitty-Venkata et al., 2023) architectures. However, existing quantization methods for Diffusion
Transformers (DiT) have primarily focused on image generation tasks, with limited exploration in the context of video

1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 ETH
Zurich. Correspondence to: B Zhulin An <anzhulin@ict.ac.cn>,
B
Chuanguang Yang <yangchuanguang@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

