Robust Reward Alignment via Hypothesis Space Batch Cutting

Zhixian Xie* 1 Haode Zhang* 2 Yizhe Feng 2 Wanxin Jin 1

Abstract

(Radosavovic et al., 2024; Tsounis et al., 2020; Hoeller et al.,
2024). In these applications, reward/cost functions are essential, as they dictate agent behavior by rewarding/penalizing
different aspects of motion in a balanced manner. However, designing different reward terms and tuning their relative weights is nontrivial, often requiring extensive domain
knowledge and laborious trial-and-error. This is further amplified in user-specific applications, where agent behavior
must be tuned to align with individual user preferences.

Reward design in reinforcement learning and optimal control is challenging. Preference-based
alignment addresses this by enabling agents to
learn rewards from ranked trajectory pairs provided by humans. However, existing methods
often struggle from poor robustness to unknown
false human preferences. In this work, we propose
a robust and efficient reward alignment method
based on a novel and geometrically interpretable
perspective: hypothesis space batched cutting.
Our method iteratively refines the reward hypothesis space through “cuts” based on batches of
human preferences. Within each batch, human
preferences, queried based on disagreement, are
grouped using a voting function to determine the
appropriate cut, ensuring a bounded human query
complexity. To handle unknown erroneous preferences, we introduce a conservative cutting method
within each batch, preventing erroneous human
preferences from making overly aggressive cuts
to the hypothesis space. This guarantees provable robustness against false preferences, while
eliminating the need to explicitly identify them.
We evaluate our method in a model predictive
control setting across diverse tasks. The results
demonstrate that our framework achieves comparable or superior performance to state-of-the-art
methods in error-free settings while significantly
outperforming existing methods when handling a
high percentage of erroneous human preferences.
Paper website and code can be accessed via link.

Reward alignment automates reward design by enabling an
agent to learn its reward function directly from intuitive
human feedback (Casper et al., 2023). In preference-based
feedback, a human ranks a pair of the agent’s motion trajectories, and then the agent infers a reward function that best
aligns with human judgment. Numerous alignment methods
have been proposed (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al.,
2018; Hejna III & Sadigh, 2023), and most of them rely on
the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry, 1952), which
formalizes the rationality of human preferences. While
effective, these models are vulnerable to false human preferences, where rankings may be irrational or inconsistent
due to human errors, mistakes, malicious interference, or
difficulty distinguishing between equally undesirable trajectories. When a significant portion of human feedback is
erroneous, the learned reward function degrades substantially, leading to poor agent behavior (Lee et al., 2021a).
In this paper, we propose a robust reward alignment framework based on a novel and interpretable perspective: hypothesis space batch cutting. We maintain a hypothesis
space of reward models during learning, where each batch
of human preferences introduces a nonlinear cut, removing
portions of the hypothesis space. Within each batch, human
preferences, queried based on disagreement over the current
hypothesis space, are grouped using a proposed voting function to determine the appropriate cut. This process ensures
a certifiable upper bound on the total number of human
preferences required. To tackle false human preferences, we
introduce a conservative cutting method within each batch.
This prevents false human preferences from making overly
aggressive cuts to the hypothesis space and ensures provable
robustness, while eliminating the need to explicitly identify
the false preferences. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our framework achieves comparable or superior performance to state-of-the-art methods in error-free settings

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning and optimal control have shown
great success in generating intricate behavior of an agent/robot, such as dexterous manipulation (Qi et al., 2023;
Handa et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023) and agile locomotion
*

Equal contribution 1 Arizona State University, Tempe AZ
85283, United States. 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Zhixian Xie <zxxie@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

