Learning Vision and Language Concepts for Controllable Image Generation

Shaoan Xie * 1 Lingjing Kong * 1 Yujia Zheng 1 Zeyu Tang 1 Eric P. Xing 1 2 Guangyi Chen 1 2 Kun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

range of machine learning tasks, including visual understanding and generation, transfer learning, and explainable
decision making (Gal et al., 2022a; Jahanian et al., 2019;
Härkönen et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021;
Ruiz et al., 2023; Burgess et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020;
Du et al., 2022a;b; Liu et al., 2023). For example, learning
atomic concepts within both visual and textual modalities,
along with their patterns of interaction, facilitates seamless
alignment between these modalities. This alignment can
significantly enhance downstream tasks such as controllable
text-to-image (T2I) generation and editing.

Concept learning seeks to extract semantic and
interpretable representations of atomic concepts
from high-dimensional data such as images and
text, which can be instrumental to a variety of
downstream tasks (e.g., image generation/editing).
Despite its importance, the theoretical foundations for learning atomic concepts and their interactions, especially from multimodal distributions,
remain underexplored. In this work, we establish fundamental conditions for learning atomic
multimodal concepts and their underlying interactions With identfiability guarantees. We formulate concept learning as a latent variable identification problem, representing atomic concepts in
each modality as latent variables, with a graphical
model to specify their interactions across modalities. Our theoretical contribution is to provide
component-wise identifiability of atomic concepts
under flexible, nonparametric conditions that accommodate both continuous and discrete modalities. Building on these theoretical insights, we
demonstrate the practical utility of our theory in a
downstream task text-to-image (T2I) generation.
We develop a principled T2I model that explicitly learns atomic textual and visual concepts with
sparse connections between them, allowing us
to achieve image generation and editing at the
atomic concept level. Empirical evaluations show
that our model outperforms existing methods in
T2I generation tasks, offering superior controllability and interpretability.

1

However, achieving this alignment without proper guiding principles is highly challenging. In practice, current
T2I methods often suffer from controllability issues, where
modifications specified in the text input lead to unintended
variations in the generated images (Saharia et al., 2022;
Ding et al., 2022; Esser et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2022; Lee
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Betker et al., 2023). These
issues stem from the entanglement of multimodal concepts
and the resulting misalignment. These empirical challenges
underscore the need for principled approaches to concept
learning. Unfortunately, the theoretical foundations in this
area have been lacking. Only recently, Kong et al. (2024)
have formalized concept learning within the framework of
latent-variable identification, proposing identification conditions for learning discrete hierarchical models. Nevertheless,
their theoretical formulation is limited to single-modal distributions, restricting its applicability for aligning concepts
across different modalities as required in T2I applications.
In this work, we seek to establish fundamental conditions
for learning atomic concepts and their interactions from
multimodal distributions. We approach this challenge by
framing it as a latent variable identification problem, where
atomic concepts and their interactions are represented as
latent variables and a graphical model among them. Under
this framework, our goal can be formalized as:

Introduction

Concept learning seeks to extract semantic and interpretable
representations from high-dimensional data, such as images
and text. These representations are essential for a wide

Under what conditions can we identify multimodal latent
variables and the underlying graph?

*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.

Closely related to our problem is the literature on multimodal causal representation learning (Yao et al., 2024;
Morioka & Hyvarinen, 2023; 2024; Daunhawer et al., 2023;
Sturma et al., 2023; Gresele et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2024;

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

