Position: Rethinking LLM Bias Probing Using Lessons from the Social Sciences
Kirsten N. Morehouse 1 Siddharth Swaroop 2 Weiwei Pan 2

Abstract

believe the field is in a unique position to shape how social
biases in LLMs are detected, discussed, and addressed, and
that doing so systematically (and collectively) will magnify
the impact of this research area.

The proliferation of LLM bias probes introduces
three challenges: we lack (1) principled criteria for selecting appropriate probes, (2) a system
for reconciling conflicting results across probes,
and (3) formal frameworks for reasoning about
when and why experimental findings will generalize to real user behavior. In response, we propose a systematic approach to LLM social bias
probing, drawing on insights from the social sciences. Central to this approach is EcoLevels—a
novel framework that helps (a) identify appropriate bias probes, (b) reconcile conflicting results,
and (c) generate predictions about bias generalization. We ground our framework in the social
sciences, as many LLM probes are adapted from
human studies, and these fields have faced similar
challenges when studying bias in humans. Finally, we outline five lessons that demonstrate
how LLM bias probing can (and should) benefit
from decades of social science research.

To illustrate these challenges, suppose you are a Machine
Learning (ML) researcher studying gender-occupation bias
in a recently deployed LLM. Since creating and evaluating job materials is a frequent and impactful use case, you
decide to examine whether using the LLM could affect gender hiring disparities. You identify dozens of probes that
target gender bias (e.g., via sentence completion, coreference resolution, or template-based tasks) and eventually
find two highly relevant papers. The first paper observes
strong evidence of gender-occupation bias: LLMs consistently pair male-gendered names with historically maledominated professions (e.g., surgeon-John) and femalegendered names with female-dominated professions (e.g.,
nurse-Emily; Morehouse et al., 2024; Exp. 1). The second
paper observes minimal evidence of gender-occupation bias:
the LLM assigns equivalent scores to resumes “authored”
by male and female candidates when resume quality is comparable (Armstrong et al., 2024, Fig. 3). What should you
conclude about the degree of gender-occupation bias?

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are rapidly integrating into
daily life, helping millions of users plan trips, draft emails,
and seek medical advice (Chiang et al., 2024). Yet, emerging
research shows that biases in LLMs often mirror systemic
inequities present in the human-generated data on which
they are trained, and can therefore amplify existing inequalities (e.g., by perpetuating unfair outcomes; for a review, see
Gallegos et al., 2024). In response, numerous probes (and
mitigations) for LLM biases have been proposed. While
many of these probes are direct applications of methods
used to study bias in humans, connections between LLM
bias probing and psychological theory are limited.

This example highlights three main challenges introduced
by the expanding number of bias probes: (1) determining
which probe(s) to adopt, (2) reconciling conflicting results
across probes, and (3) establishing whether obtained results will generalize to real user behavior. Addressing these
challenges is both practically and theoretically important.
From a practical perspective, a structured approach for probe
selection is needed for two reasons. First, choosing an inappropriate probe may hinder researchers’ ability to capture
the intended construct (i.e., latent concept; see Fig. 1 and
Table 1 for examples). Indeed, the predictive validity of
a probe increases when the probe and target construct are
equally general or specific – a phenomenon known as the
correspondence principle (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1977). For
example, Kurdi et al. (2021) examined the predictors of responses to a workplace hair discrimination case (construct:
bias towards Black hair). Human participants’ implicit attitudes toward Afrocentric hair texture were stronger predictors than general anti-Black attitudes (i.e., global feelings
of positivity/negativity). Second, probes targeting similar
constructs may yield inconsistent results (e.g., embeddingbased tasks often do not correlate with downstream tasks;
Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2021; Delobelle et al., 2022), partly
due to subjective design choices (Delobelle et al., 2022) and

In this work, we argue that the expanding number of bias
probes introduces significant challenges for the field. We
highlight these challenges and propose solutions that are
grounded in insights from the social sciences. With increasing attention on the capabilities and limitations of LLMs, we
1
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Kirsten Morehouse
<knmorehouse@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

