C OLLAB LLM: From Passive Responders to Active Collaborators
Shirley Wu 1 Michel Galley 2 Baolin Peng 2 Hao Cheng 2 Gavin Li 1 Yao Dou 3 Weixin Cai 1
James Zou 1 Jure Leskovec 1 Jianfeng Gao 2
http://aka.ms/CollabLLM
① Context state (𝒙)

…

—–

To get us started, what kind
of tone are you aiming for?

I need to write about how optimism
can improve our well-being.

② Response 𝒚

③ Collaborative Simulation
Forward Sampling

(𝒙, 𝒚)

Reward Computation
#1

…

Extrinsic Reward
e.g., Performance

#1

#2

#3

Real-world or
Simulated User

#2

#3

④ Multiturn-aware
Reward

Intrinsic Reward

RL finetuning

Policy
Interactivity

Efficiency

𝝅𝜽 𝒚 𝒙

Online generation

Figure 1: C OLLAB LLM Framework: Given a context 1 , the model generates a response 2 to maximize long-term collaboration gains, termed Multiturn-aware Rewards (MR). During training, MRs are estimated via 3 collaborative simulation,
which forward-samples conversations with simulated users. Finally, 4 reinforcement fine-tuning is applied using the MRs.
improved interactivity by LLM judges. Finally, we conduct
a large user study with 201 judges, where C OLLAB LLM
increases user satisfaction by 17.6% and reduces user spent
time by 10.4%

Abstract
Large Language Models are typically trained
with next-turn rewards, limiting their ability to
optimize for long-term interaction. As a result,
they often respond passively to ambiguous or
open-ended user requests, failing to help users
reach their ultimate intents and leading to inefficient conversations. To address these limitations, we introduce C OLLAB LLM, a novel and
general training framework that enhances multiturn human-LLM collaboration. Its key innovation is a collaborative simulation that estimates the long-term contribution of responses
using Multiturn-aware Rewards. By reinforcement fine-tuning these rewards, C OLLAB LLM
goes beyond responding to user requests, and actively uncovers user intent and offers insightful
suggestions—a key step towards more humancentered AI. We also devise a multiturn interaction benchmark with three challenging tasks such
as document creation. C OLLAB LLM significantly outperforms our baselines with averages
of 18.5% higher task performance and 46.3%

1. Introduction
Modern Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at generating high-quality single-turn responses when given wellspecified inputs. However, real-world users often do not
fully articulate their intents and sometimes initiate conversations with an imprecise understanding of their own
needs (Taylor, 1968). As a result, users routinely refine
their requests post hoc through iterative corrections, which
can increase frustration, hinder effective task completion,
and reduce conversational efficiency (Amershi et al., 2019;
Zamfirescu-Pereira et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Kim
et al., 2024). Therefore, an open problem is to train models that actively guide users in clarifying and refining their
intents, and helps them achieve their goals. This key challenge would improve user satisfaction and efficiency and
streamline human-LLM interactions—especially as LLMs
are being applied to real-world tasks that are increasingly
complex and open-ended.

1
Stanford University 2 Microsoft 3 Georgia Tech. Correspondence to: <shirwu@stanford.edu>, <mgalley@microsoft.com>.

A notable limitation of established fine-tuning techniques,
such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), is that they primarily reward LLMs for immediate, single-turn responses, reducing
their incentive to seek clarification or assist users in refin-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

