Janus: Dual-Server Multi-Round Secure Aggregation
with Verifiability for Federated Learning

Lang Pu 1 Jingjing Gu 1 Chao Lin 2 Xinyi Huang 3

Abstract

and directly accessible by the server. However, users are generally unwilling to share their raw data, particularly when
it involves sensitive information, such as medical records,
photographs, or confidential business information. Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a distributed
learning framework proposed to protect user privacy by enabling collaborative model training without exposing private
data, thus encouraging greater user participation. Unfortunately, it has been demonstrated that an adversary can invert
a single model update to reveal sensitive information about
the target user’s local dataset (Hitaj et al., 2017; Nasr et al.,
2019; Zhu et al., 2019).

Secure Aggregation (SA) is a cornerstone of
Federated Learning (FL), ensuring that user updates remain hidden from servers. The advanced
Flamingo (S&P’23) has realized multi-round aggregation and improved efficiency. However, it
still faces several key challenges: scalability issues with dynamic user participation, a lack of
verifiability for server-side aggregation results,
and vulnerability to Model Inconsistency Attacks
(MIA) caused by a malicious server distributing
inconsistent models. To address these issues, we
propose Janus, a generic SA scheme based on
dual-server architecture. Janus ensures security
against up to n − 2 colluding clients (where n
is the total client count), which prevents privacy
breaches for non-colluders. Additionally, Janus is
model-independent, ensuring applicability across
any FL model without specific adaptations. Furthermore, Janus introduces a new cryptographic
primitive, Separable Homomorphic Commitment,
which enables clients to efficiently verify the correctness of aggregation. Finally, extensive experiments show that Janus not only significantly
enhances security but also reduces per-client communication and computation overhead from logarithmic to constant scale, with a tolerable impact
on model performance.

Secure Aggregation (SA) (Bonawitz et al., 2017) is designed
to enhance privacy by preventing the adversary from accessing individual update. SA has been regarded as one of the
most robust defenses against gradient inversion and inference attacks (Huang et al., 2021). Most existing SA schemes
rely on the double-mask technique, which involves timeconsuming secret sharing and key agreement. BBSA (Bell
et al., 2020) optimizes the communication graph to reduce time-consuming operations and significantly improve
overall efficiency. However, it remains limited to singleround aggregation. In contrast, FL typically requires multiple rounds of aggregation to achieve model convergence.
Although the protocol can be executed multiple times to
support multi-round aggregation, the setup phase must be
re-run in each round to maintain privacy. Consequently, the
server must interact with all clients every round, leading to
heavy communication overhead and reduced efficiency.
Recently, the state-of-the-art Flamingo (Ma et al., 2023)
eliminates the re-setup in each round, which supports multiround SA based on the BBSA. It also optimizes the communication graph to improve the system’s performance by introducing a set of decryptors to handle part of the computation.
Although Flamingo demonstrates significant advantages in
efficiency and functionality, it also has the following limitations. Firstly, the complicated setup procedures of Flamingo
limit its practicality in dynamic environments where users
frequently join or leave. Secondly, the server can exploit
the Model Inconsistency Attacks (MIA) (Pasquini et al.,
2022), which result from a malicious server distributing
inconsistent models to infer users’ local datasets. Lastly,

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning relies on centralized training,
where the entire dataset is stored in a single central location
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing,
China 2 College of Computer and Cyber Security, Fujian Normal
University, Fuzhou, China 3 College of Cyber Security, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Jingjing Gu <
gujingjing@nuaa.edu.cn>, Chao Lin < linchao91@fjnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

