CAN: Leveraging Clients As Navigators for Generative Replay
in Federated Continual Learning

Xuankun Rong * 1 Jianshu Zhang * 2 Kun He 2 Mang Ye 1

Abstract

a)

Client Expertise Superiority
Dog

Logits

Generative replay (GR) has been extensively validated in continual learning as a mechanism to
synthesize data and replay past knowledge to mitigate forgetting. By leveraging synthetic rather
than real data for the replay, GR has been adopted
in some federated continual learning (FCL) approaches to ensure the privacy of client-side data.
While existing GR-based FCL approaches have
introduced improvements, none of their enhancements specifically take into account the unique
characteristics of federated learning settings. Beyond privacy constraints, what other fundamental
aspects of federated learning should be explored
in the context of FCL? In this work, we explore the
potential benefits that come from emphasizing the
role of clients throughout the process. We begin
by highlighting two key observations: (a) Client
Expertise Superiority, where clients, rather than
the server, act as domain experts, and (b) Client
Forgetting Variance, where heterogeneous data
distributions across clients lead to varying levels
of forgetting. Building on these insights, we propose CAN (Clients As Navigators), highlighting
the pivotal role of clients in both data synthesis
and data replay. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that this client-centric approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Notably, it requires
a smaller buffer size, reducing storage overhead
and enhancing computational efficiency.

Fox

Server

Label
Logits Fox

Client
b)

Label

Client Forgetting Variance

Acc
After
localized
training

…
…

distribute

Server

Client 1

Client 2

Client n

Figure 1. a) Client Expertise Superiority (Sec. 3.1): Clients may
possess more accurate knowledge of specific classes compared to
the server, highlighting the need to utilize client expertise during
synthetic data generation. b) Client Forgetting Variance (Sec. 3.2):
The non-IID nature of client data leads to diverse forgetting patterns across clients, emphasizing the need for adaptive replay
strategies tailored to each client.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (Konečnỳ, 2016; McMahan et al.,
2017; Yang et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Huang et al., 2024;
2023a) is a learning paradigm that utilizes distributed data
across clients rather than relying on centralized datasets.
Clients train models locally on their own data, which are
then aggregated into a global model on the server (Li et al.,
2020b; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Fallah et al., 2020; Pi
et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2022). However, one key challenge
in this paradigm is that data distributions can change over
time (Liu et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023b;
Gao et al., 2022a; Jiang et al., 2022). For example, user
preferences in mobile apps might change (Ma et al., 2022),
sensor data collected by IoT devices could vary with environmental conditions (Nguyen et al., 2021), or healthcare
records may evolve as new medical trends emerge (Xu et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2023). These evolving distributions can
lead to catastrophic forgetting, a challenge that is particu-

*

Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center for
Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 2 School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Mang Ye
<yemang@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

