ADIOS: Antibody Development via Opponent Shaping

Sebastian Towers * 1 2 Aleksandra Kalisz * 1 2 Philippe A. Robert 3 Alicia Higueruelo 4 Francesca Vianello 5
Ming-Han Chloe Tsai 6 Harrison Steel 2 Jakob Foerster 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Anti-viral therapies are typically designed to target only the current strains of a virus, a myopic response. However, therapy-induced selective pressures drive the emergence of new viral
strains, against which the original myopic therapies are no longer effective. This evolutionary response presents an opportunity: our therapies could both defend against and actively influence viral evolution. This motivates our method
ADIOS: Antibody Development vIa Opponent
Shaping. ADIOS is a meta-learning framework
where the process of antibody therapy design, the
outer loop, accounts for the virus’s adaptive response, the inner loop. With ADIOS, antibodies
are not only robust against potential future variants, they also influence, i.e., shape, which future variants emerge. In line with the opponent
shaping literature, we refer to our optimised antibodies as shapers. To demonstrate the value of
ADIOS, we build a viral evolution simulator using the Absolut! framework, in which shapers
successfully target both current and future viral
variants, outperforming myopic antibodies. Furthermore, we show that shapers modify the distribution over viral evolutionary trajectories to
result in weaker variants. We believe that our
ADIOS paradigm will facilitate the discovery of
long-lived vaccines and antibody therapies while
also generalising to other domains. Specifically,
domains such as antimicrobial resistance, cancer
treatment, and others with evolutionarily adaptive opponents. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/olakalisz/adios.

Designing effective therapies to fight off viral pathogens is
crucial for limiting their devastating social and economic
costs (Nandi & Shet; Orenstein & Ahmed, 2017; Samsudin
et al., 2024; Faramarzi et al., 2024). However, traditional
design approaches only target the current variant of a virus.
Although this myopic design approach may yield therapies
with high initial efficacy, it fails to account for viral adaptation, leaving treatments vulnerable to becoming ineffective
over time (Weisblum et al., 2020; Doud et al., 2018; Lee
et al., 2019; Dingens et al., 2019; Greaney et al., 2021).
Myopic Therapy
Induced Pressure

Myopic
Therapy

Virus
Variant A

Virus
Variant B

Myopic
Therapy

Virus
Variant C

Shaper
Therapy

Shaper Therapy
Induced Pressure

Shaper
Therapy

Virus
Variant A

Figure 1. Myopic Therapies Become Ineffective Over Time. Initial virus (variant A) evolves in response to the evolutionary pressures induced by therapies, resulting in new variants. In case of
traditional myopic therapies (top), the new emerging variants (variant B) are often therapy resistant. In contrast, ADIOS designs
shapers or shaper therapies (bottom) which remain effective and
steer the viral evolution towards less harmful variants (variant C).

The COVID-19 pandemic starkly illustrated the challenges
of adaptive viruses. While the rapid development of vaccines was a remarkable achievement, concerns quickly arose
about their long-term efficacy against new emerging COVID
variants (Carabelli et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2021). For example, the B.1.351 variant demonstrated that the vaccine loses
its effectiveness against new strains (Madhi et al., 2021).
This underscores the need for approaches that consider both
the current and future efficacy of a designed therapy.

*

Equal contribution 1 FLAIR, Foerster Lab for AI Research
Department of Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3
Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 4 Isomorphic Labs, London, UK 5 Exscientia, Oxford, UK
6
Epsilogen Ltd., London, UK. Correspondence to: Sebastian Towers <sebastian.towers@eng.ox.ac.uk>, Aleksandra Kalisz <aleksandra.kalisz@eng.ox.ac.uk>.
2

The virus inevitably adapts in response to selective pressures
imposed by our therapies, i.e., we influence the viral evolution (Chéron et al., 2016; Meijers et al., 2022). Our work
turns this influence in our favour, designing therapies that
steer the virus towards less dangerous variants, see Figure 1.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

