Exact Recovery of Sparse Binary Vectors from
Generalized Linear Measurements
Arya Mazumdar 1 Neha Sangwan 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sparse linear regression and compressed sensing have been
a topic of intense research in statistics and signal processing for the past few decades (Candès et al., 2006; Donoho,
2006; Tibshirani, 1996; Do Ba et al., 2010). The problem of binary sparse linear regression (SparseLinearReg)
considers linear measurements of an unknown binary vector, corrupted by additive Gaussian noise. Focusing on
binary signals, this particular problem has recently been
studied in (Gamarnik & Zadik, 2017a;b; 2022; Reeves
et al., 2019), mainly motivated by the question of support
recovery of sparse signals (Wainwright, 2009). Formally,
n
for an unknown k-sparse signal x ∈ {0, 1} , a sensing mam×n
trix A ∈ R
and a noise vector z = (z1 , . . . , zm ) where
zi s are iid N (0, σ 2 ) for some variance σ 2 , we observe y
given by

We consider the problem of exact recovery of
a k-sparse binary vector from generalized linear measurements (such as logistic regression).
We analyze the linear estimation algorithm (Plan,
Vershynin, Yudovina, 2017), and also show information theoretic lower bounds on the number
of required measurements. As a consequence
of our results, for noisy one bit quantized linear
measurements (1bCSbinary), we obtain a sample
complexity of O((k + σ 2 ) log n), where σ 2 is the
noise variance. This is shown to be optimal due
to the information theoretic lower bound. We
also obtain tight sample complexity characterization for logistic regression. Since 1bCSbinary is a
strictly harder problem than noisy linear measurements (SparseLinearReg) because of added quantization, the same sample complexity is achievable for SparseLinearReg. While this sample
complexity can be obtained via the popular lasso
algorithm, linear estimation is computationally
more efficient. Our lower bound holds for any
set of measurements for SparseLinearReg (similar bound was known for Gaussian measurement
matrices) and is closely matched by the maximumlikelihood upper bound. For SparseLinearReg, it
was conjectured in Gamarnik and Zadik, 2017
that there is a statistical-computational gap and
the number of measurements should be at least
(2k + σ 2 ) log n for efficient algorithms to exist. It is worth noting that our results imply that
there is no such statistical-computational gap for
1bCSbinary and logistic regression.

y = Ax + z.

(1)

Our goal is to design the (possibly random) sensing matrix
A with a power constraint, i.e.,
E[(ATi x)2 ] ≤ k, i = 1, . . . , m,

(2)

where Ai denotes ith row of the matrix A and the expectation is over the possible randomness in A, and a decoding
algorithm ϕ such that
max

x∈{0,1}n ,|x|H =k

P (ϕ(A, y) ̸= x) → 0 as n → ∞.

(3)
n

Here, |x|H denotes the Hamming weight of x ∈ {0, 1} .
The probability is computed over the randomness of the
sensing matrix and the (randomized) algorithm.
The problem of one bit quantized linear measurements (also
known as one bit compressed sensing (1bCSbinary)) is similar, except that the output vector y is the sign of Ax + z
instead of the entire vector Ax + z (Boufounos & Baraniuk,
2008). That is, we observe

1

Halicioğlu Data Science Institute, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, United States. Correspondence to: Neha Sangwan
<nehasangwan010@gmail.com>.

y = sign(Ax + z).

(4)

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Here, y = (y1 , . . . , ym ) is defined as yi = sign(ATi x + zi ),
i ∈ [1 : m] where sign(a) = 1 if a ≥ 0 and sign(a) = −1
1

