Calibrating Video Watch-time Predictions with Credible Prototype Alignment

Chao Cui * 1 2 Shisong Tang * 1 2 Fan Li 1 Jiechao Gao 3 Hechang Chen 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
The rapid growth of online-video services (e.g. YouTube
and Hulu) and video-sharing platforms (e.g. TikTok and
Douyin) has driven the increasing demand for personalized
and high-quality content (Zhou et al., 2018; Tang et al.,
2023). In video recommendation systems, user watch-time
has become a key metric for measuring user engagement
(Covington et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024).
Accurately predicting user watch-time not only helps improve user stickiness and retention but also optimizes content distribution and resource allocation, thereby driving the
growth of Daily Active Users (DAUs) on the platform (Lin
et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024).

Accurately predicting user watch-time is crucial
for enhancing user stickiness and retention in
video recommendation systems. Existing watchtime prediction approaches typically involve transformations of watch-time labels for prediction
and subsequent reversal, ignoring both the natural
distribution properties of label and the instance
representation confusion that results in inaccurate
predictions. wo-stage method combining prototype learning and optimal transport for watch-time
regression prediction, suitable for any deep recommendation model. Specifically, we observe that
the watch-ratio (the ratio of watch-time to video
duration) within same duration bucket exhibits
a multimodal distribution. To facilitate incorporation into models, we use a hierarchical vector
quantized variational autoencoder (HVQ-VAE)
to convert the continuous label distribution into
a high-dimensional discrete distribution, serving
as credible prototypes for calibrations. Based
on this, ProWTP views the alignment between
prototypes and instance representations as a Semirelaxed Unbalanced Optimal Transport (SUOT)
problem, where the marginal constraints of prototypes are relaxed. And the corresponding optimization problem is reformulated as a weighted
Lasso problem for solution. Moreover, ProWTP
introduces assignment and compactness losses
to encourage instances to cluster closely around
their respective prototypes, thereby enhancing the
prototype-level distinguishability. Finally, we conducted extensive experiments, demonstrating our
consistent superiority in real-world application.

Existing methods for Watch-time Prediction (WTP) usually
focus on designing specific loss functions or transforming
watch-time labels in particular ways to train the model,
aiming to improve performance. Weighted Logistic Regression (WLR) (Covington et al., 2016) treats WTP task as a
weighted binary classification problem, approximating the
expected watch-time by assigning weights to positive samples. Duration-Deconfounded Quantile-based (D2Q) model
(Zhan et al., 2022) divides videos into different groups based
on duration and employs traditional regression within each
group to estimate the transformed watch-time. Tree-based
Progressive Regression (TPM) (Lin et al., 2023) decomposes WTP into a series of ordinal classifications, leveraging
a tree structure to model conditional dependencies.
However, those methods struggle to consistently maintain
high predictive accuracy across different models. They
overlook the natural distribution properties of labels—we
observed that the watch ratio (i.e., the ratio of watch-time
to video duration) within the same video duration bucket
exhibits a pronounced multimodal distribution, as shown
in Fig.1(a), which has not yet been explicitly captured.
Moreover, model trained with watch-time supervision suffers from instance representation confusion, as shown in
Fig.1(b), making it challenging to accurately differentiate
various patterns, consequently, limiting its predictive capability. To address the aforementioned issues, we propose
a two-stage method called ProWTP, which combines prototype learning (Snell et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2022) and
optimal transport (Villani et al., 2009; Peyré et al., 2019;
Caffarelli & McCann, 2010; Chizat et al., 2018; Chapel

*

Equal contribution 1 Kuaishou Inc. 2 Tsinghua University 3 Stanford University 4 Jilin University. Correspondence to:
Hechang Chen <chenhc@jlu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

