Expected Variational Inequalities

Brian Hu Zhang * 1 Ioannis Anagnostides * 1 Emanuel Tewolde 1 2 Ratip Emin Berker 1 2 Gabriele Farina 3
Vincent Conitzer 1 2 4 Tuomas Sandholm 1 5 6 7

Abstract

problems—estimating the steady-state of a congested network wherein users compete for its resources (Dafermos,
1980); frictional contact problems in mechanical engineering (Capatina, 2014); and pricing options, a foundational
problem in financial economics (Black & Scholes, 1973).

Variational inequalities (VIs) encompass many
fundamental problems in diverse areas ranging
from engineering to economics and machine learning. However, their considerable expressivity
comes at the cost of computational intractability. In this paper, we introduce and analyze a
natural relaxation—which we refer to as expected
variational inequalities (EVIs)—where the goal
is to find a distribution that satisfies the VI constraint in expectation. By adapting recent techniques from game theory, we show that, unlike
VIs, EVIs can be solved in polynomial time under
general (nonmonotone) operators. EVIs capture
the seminal notion of correlated equilibria, but
enjoy a greater reach beyond games. We also
employ our framework to capture and generalize
several existing disparate results, including from
settings such as smooth games, and games with
coupled constraints or nonconcave utilities.

Formally, in a general form, a VI can be defined as follows.1
Definition 1.1. Let X be a convex and compact subset of
Rd and F : X → Rd a bounded map. The variational
inequality (VI) problem asks for a point x ∈ X such that
⟨F (x), x′ − x⟩ ≥ 0

∀x′ ∈ X .

(1)

For computational purposes, it is common to consider the
ϵ-approximate VI problem, wherein the right-hand side of
(1) is replaced by −ϵ for some precision parameter ϵ > 0.
Definition 1.1 abstracts the description of F and X . As a
concrete example, when F : x 7→ −∇u(x) is the negative
gradient of a differentiable function u : X → R, the solutions to (1) are points that satisfy the first-order optimality
conditions for maximizing u (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004).
Unfortunately, the considerable expressivity of VIs comes
at the expense of intractability: even when F is linear and
ϵ is an absolute constant, identifying an ϵ-approximate VI
solution is computationally hard; this follows readily from
the intractability of Nash equilibria—under plausible complexity assumptions (Daskalakis et al., 2008; Chen et al.,
2009; Rubinstein, 2016). Unconditional, query-complexity
lower bounds have also been established (Hirsch et al., 1989;
Babichenko, 2016); cf. Milionis et al. (2023) and Hart &
Mas-Colell (2003) for other pertinent impossibility results.

1. Introduction
Variational inequalities (VIs) provide a unifying framework
for analyzing a wide range of optimization and equilibrium problems. They have a host of important applications in engineering and economics (Facchinei & Pang,
2003), including identifying stationary points in constrained
optimization; computing Nash equilibria in multi-player
games (Nash, 1951), such as Cournot’s classical model of
oligopoly (Cournot, 1838); predicting economic activity—
commodity prices and consumer consumption—in a closed,
competitive economy (Arrow & Debreu, 1954), which is at
the heart of general equilibrium theory; traffic equilibrium

This bleak realization has shifted the focus of contemporary
research primarily to characterizing specific subclasses of
VIs that elude those complexity barriers, with the ensuing
line of work flourishing in recent years. Some notable examples include the classical Minty property (Facchinei & Pang,
2003; Mertikopoulos & Zhou, 2019), as well as certain relaxations thereof (Diakonikolas et al., 2021; Böhm, 2023;
Bauschke et al., 2021; Combettes & Pennanen, 2004; Gorbunov et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2024b; Alacaoglu et al., 2023;

*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Foundations
of Cooperative AI Lab (FOCAL) 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 University of Oxford 5 Strategy Robot, Inc. 6 Strategic Machine, Inc. 7 Optimized Markets, Inc. Correspondence to: Brian Hu
Zhang <bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu>, Ioannis Anagnostides <ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
As is standard, a VI throughout this paper refers to the Stampacchia VI (SVI) (Kinderlehrer & Stampacchia, 2000).

1

