Leveraging Per-Instance Privacy for Machine Unlearning

Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand * 1 2 Anvith Thudi * 3 4 Berivan Isik 5 Ashmita Bhattacharyya 3 4
Nicolas Papernot 3 4 Eleni Triantafillou 6 Daniel M. Roy 4 7 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite 8 2 9

Abstract

et al., 2024), mitigating the impact of poisoning attacks (Liu
et al., 2024b), or updating out-of-date information.

We present a principled, per-instance approach to
quantifying the difficulty of unlearning via finetuning. We begin by sharpening an analysis of
noisy gradient descent for unlearning (Chien et al.,
2024), obtaining a better utility–unlearning tradeoff by replacing worst-case privacy loss bounds
with per-instance privacy losses (Thudi et al.,
2024), each of which bounds the (Rényi) divergence to retraining without an individual data
point. To demonstrate the practical applicability
of our theory, we present empirical results showing that our theoretical predictions are born out
both for Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics
(SGLD) as well as for standard fine-tuning without explicit noise. We further demonstrate that
per-instance privacy losses correlate well with
several existing data difficulty metrics, while also
identifying harder groups of data points, and introduce novel evaluation methods based on loss
barriers. All together, our findings provide a foundation for more efficient and adaptive unlearning
strategies tailored to the unique properties of individual data points.

In modern large-scale AI training regimes, exact unlearning (i.e., anything equivalent to retraining the model from
scratch, without the forget set) is prohibitively expensive.
To meet this challenge, a range of approximate unlearning
methods have been developed.
Approaches based on ideas from differential privacy (DP)
offer meaningful worst-case guarantees (Guo et al., 2020;
Sekhari et al., 2021). These will be our focus. Unfortunately,
for non-convex models, like neural networks, DP-based unlearning guarantees have so far come with higher error than
their counterparts not designed to support unlearning, limiting their practical applicability. One of the key problems is
the mismatch between the worst-case, data-agnostic nature
of DP and the data-dependent nature of unlearning. Our
work attempts to bridge this gap.
Alongside work on theoretical guarantees, research into
heuristics has flourished. The aesthetics of such research
is to combine strong utility with empirical evaluations on
metrics inspired by DP-based notions of approximate unlearning. It is not uncommon, however, for state of the art
heuristics to be caught out by new attacks, revealing that
they do not meet stringent theoretical criteria (Hayes et al.,
2024; Pawelczyk et al., 2024). These challenges highlight
the need for methods that can balance strong theoretical
guarantees with strong practical performance.

1. Introduction
Machine unlearning aims to efficiently remove the influence
of specific subsets of training data, called forget sets. The
need for unlearning arises in many scenarios, such as handling requests for data deletion (Mantelero, 2013; Cooper

Towards understanding failure modes of unlearning, recent
empirical work has shown that the behavior of unlearning
varies considerably across individual data points (Zhao et al.,
2024; Baluta et al., 2024). While prior work has attempted to
incorporate these insights into methodology and evaluation,
we lack a theoretical basis to 1) explain how individual data
influence unlearning and 2) exploit this effect optimally.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 2 Mila, Montreal, Canada 3 Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada 4 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
5
Google, Mountain View, US 6 Google DeepMind, London, UK
7
Department of Statistical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada 8 Department of Computer Science, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada 9 Google DeepMind, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Gintare Karolina Dziugaite <gkdz@google.com>.

In this work, we introduce a principled approach to estimating the unlearning difficulty of individual data points.
Our approach applies to learning with noisy gradient descent. Using recent results in differential privacy with Rényi
divergences (Thudi et al., 2024), our proposed measures—
per-instance privacy losses—bound the Rényi divergence
between a model trained with and without an individual

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

