When Diffusion Models Memorize: Inductive Biases in Probability Flow of
Minimum-Norm Shallow Neural Nets
Chen Zeno 1 Hila Manor 1 Greg Ongie 2 Nir Weinberger 1 Tomer Michaeli 1 Daniel Soudry 1

Abstract

score function of a Gaussian-blurred version of the data
distribution. The connection between the score function
and the denoiser, often called Tweedie’s identity (Robbins,
1956; Miyasawa et al., 1961; Stein, 1981), holds only under optimal Bayes estimation. Moreover, for the estimated
score to be a true gradient field, the denoiser must have
a symmetric positive semidefinite Jacobian matrix (Chao
et al., 2023; Manor & Michaeli, 2024). However, in practice,
neural network denoisers are used, and their Jacobian matrix
is generally non-symmetric, raising open questions about
the convergence of the sampling process in score-based
diffusion algorithms.

While diffusion models generate high-quality images via probability flow, the theoretical understanding of this process remains incomplete. A
key question is when probability flow converges
to training samples or more general points on the
data manifold. We analyze this by studying the
probability flow of shallow ReLU neural network
denoisers trained with minimal ℓ2 norm. For intuition, we introduce a simpler score flow and
show that for orthogonal datasets, both flows follow similar trajectories, converging to a training
point or a sum of training points. However, early
stopping by the diffusion time scheduler allows
probability flow to reach more general manifold
points. This reflects the tendency of diffusion
models to both memorize training samples and
generate novel points that combine aspects of multiple samples, motivating our study of such behavior in simplified settings. We extend these results
to obtuse simplex data and, through simulations in
the orthogonal case, confirm that probability flow
converges to a training point, a sum of training
points, or a manifold point. Moreover, memorization decreases when the number of training
samples grows, as fewer samples accumulate near
training points.

Diffusion models typically use a stochastic sampling process, which can be described by a stochastic differential
equation (SDE) (Song et al., 2021b). Alternatively, a deterministic version of the sampling process can also be used,
formulated as an ordinary differential equation (ODE) (Song
et al., 2021a), called the probability flow ODE. We aim to
theoretically analyze the probability flow, in order to illuminate this complex sampling process. However, practical
diffusion architectures are typically deep and not fully connected, making it difficult to obtain theoretical guarantees
without making additional strong assumptions (e.g., assuming a linearized regime, like the neural tangent kernel (Jacot
et al., 2018)). Therefore, in this paper, we focus on diffusion
models based on shallow ReLU neural network denoisers.
Such networks are simple enough to allow for a theoretical
investigation yet rich enough to offer valuable insights.

1. Introduction

To gain insight into the dynamics of the probability flow
ODE, we also explore a simpler ODE, which corresponds
to flowing in the direction of the score of the noisy data
distribution, for a fixed noise level. We call this the scoreflow ODE. The score flow aims to sample from one of
the modes of the noise-perturbed data distribution. We
explore both the probability flow and the score flow ODEs
for denoisers with minimal representation cost that perfectly
fit the training data. Our analysis reveals that, for small noise
levels, the trajectories of both flows are similar for a given
initialization. However, the diffusion time scheduler induces
“early stopping”, which determines whether the probability
flow converges to training samples or to other points on
the data manifold. This analysis provides insights into the
stability and convergence properties of these processes.

In diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021b), new images are sampled from
the data distribution through an iterative process. Beginning
with a random initialization, the model gradually denoises
the image until a final image emerges. At their core, diffusion models learn the data distribution by estimating the
*
Equal contribution 1 Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Mathematical and Statistical Sciences,
Marquette University, Marquette, USA. Correspondence to: Chen
Zeno <chenzeno@campus.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

