Learning Cascade Ranking as One Network

Yunli Wang 1 Zhen Zhang 1 Zhiqiang Wang 1 Zixuan Yang 1 Yu Li 1 Jian Yang 2 Shiyang Wen 1 Peng Jiang 1
Kun Gai 3

Abstract

Matching Stage
Selected

Cascade Ranking is a prevalent architecture in
large-scale top-k selection systems like recommendation and advertising platforms. Traditional
training methods focus on single-stage optimization, neglecting interactions between stages. Recent advances have introduced interaction-aware
training paradigms, but still struggle to 1) align
training objectives with the goal of the entire cascade ranking (i.e., end-to-end recall of groundtruth items) and 2) learn effective collaboration
patterns for different stages. To address these
challenges, we propose LCRON, which introduces a novel surrogate loss function derived from
the lower bound probability that ground truth
items are selected by cascade ranking, ensuring
alignment with the overall objective of the system. According to the properties of the derived
bound, we further design an auxiliary loss for
each stage to drive the reduction of this bound,
leading to a more robust and effective top-k selection. LCRON enables end-to-end training of
the entire cascade ranking system as a unified
network. Experimental results demonstrate that
LCRON achieves significant improvement over
existing methods on public benchmarks and industrial applications, addressing key limitations
in cascade ranking training and significantly enhancing system performance.

Pre-ranking Stage
Selected

size: 103

Ranking Stage
Selected

size: 102

Mix-ranking Stage
Selected

size: 101

Final results

size: 107

Figure 1. A typical cascade ranking architecture, including four
stages: Matching, Pre-ranking, Ranking, and Mix-ranking. The
red points represent the ground truth for the selection.

utilization and performance through a multi-stage, funnellike filtering process. A typical cascade ranking system
comprises multiple stages, including Matching, Pre-ranking,
Ranking, and Mix-ranking, as illustrated in Figure 1. The
objective is to select ground truth items (referred to as the
red points in Figure 1) as the final outputs.
Early traditional training approaches for cascade ranking
systems often optimize each stage in isolation, constructing samples, designing learning objectives, and defining
proxy losses separately (Crammer & Singer, 2001; Burges
et al., 2005; Li et al., 2007; Covington et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2018; Sheng et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2024). This fragmented approach overlooks the interactions
between stages, leading to suboptimal alignment with the
overall system objective. Specifically, two key challenges
arise: 1) Misalignment of Training Objectives: Cascade
ranking aims to collaboratively select all relevant items from
the ground truth set across multiple stages. However, each
stage’s learning targets optimized by pointwise or pairwise
losses are often more strict than the collaborative goal of
cascade ranking. This misalignment may lead to inefficiency, particularly in recommendation scenarios where the
model capacity is typically limited. 2) Lack of Learning
to Collaborate: During online serving, different stages
in a cascade ranking system will interact and collaborate
with each other. Efficient interactions and collaborations
are crucial for improving the overall performance of the
cascade ranking system. For example, a Retrieval model
can preemptively avoid items that the ranking model tends
to overestimate, while the Ranking model can accurately
identify ground-truth items from the recalled set. However,
when models for different stages are trained independently,

1. Introduction
Cascade ranking has emerged as a prevalent architecture in
large-scale top-k selection systems, widely adopted in industrial applications such as recommendation and advertising
platforms. This architecture efficiently balances resource
1
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China 2 Beihang University, Beijing, China 3 Independent, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yunli Wang, Jian Yang <wangyunli@kuaishou.com,
jiaya@buaa.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

