Maximizing Intermediate Checkpoint Value in LLM Pretraining with Bayesian
Optimization

Bingning Wang

2

Deyuan Liu† * 1 Zecheng Wang† * 1
Weipeng Chen 3 Chunshan Li 1 Zhiying Tu 1 Dianhui Chu 1 Dianbo Sui(
†

deyuanliu@stu.hit.edu.cn

†

)1

zechengwang@stu.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapid proliferation of large language models
(LLMs), such as GPT-4 and Gemini, underscores
the intense demand for resources during their
training processes, posing significant challenges
due to substantial computational and environmental costs. In this paper, we introduce a
novel checkpoint merging strategy aimed at
making efficient use of intermediate checkpoints
during LLM pretraining. This method utilizes
intermediate checkpoints with shared training
trajectories, and is rooted in an extensive search
space exploration for the best merging weight via
Bayesian optimization. Through various experiments, we demonstrate that: (1) Our proposed
methodology exhibits the capacity to augment
pretraining, presenting an opportunity akin to
obtaining substantial benefits at minimal cost;
(2) Our proposed methodology, despite requiring
a given held-out dataset, still demonstrates
robust generalization capabilities across diverse
domains, a pivotal aspect in pretraining.

λ

𝑪𝒌𝒑𝒕𝒕−𝟐

1-λ

𝑪𝒌𝒑𝒕𝒕−𝟏

𝑪𝒌𝒑𝒕𝒕

Loss Landscape

Training Step

Figure 1: Overview of the Bayesian optimization framework
for checkpoint merging in LLM pretraining. The framework
operates by linearly combining intermediate checkpoints Θt−1
and Θt with optimized merging weights λt . Through iterative
Bayesian optimization, the method identifies performance "sweet
spots" in the loss landscape that enhance model efficacy without
much additional computational resources, effectively transforming
intermediate checkpoints into improved models.

instance, training the LLaMA2 70B model with 2T tokens
necessitates 1,720,320 GPU hours (Touvron et al., 2023),
and the development of a transformer with 213 million
parameters through neural architecture search can lead to
environmental burdens equivalent to the lifetime CO2 emissions of five cars over their entire lifespans (Strubell et al.,
2019; Faiz et al., 2023). Consequently, making efficient use
of checkpoints and the intermediate stages of the pretraining
process has emerged as a key challenge in this field.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of LLMs, such as GPT-3 (OpenAI, 2023), GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2023), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023) and Gemini (Team et al., 2023), which
boasts tens to hundreds of billions of parameters, the
demand for new LLMs and the research aimed at enhancing
their capabilities have significantly increased. But we
should note that the training requirements for these LLMs
are substantial, not only in terms of computational resources,
human resources, and capital resources, but also regarding
energy consumption and environmental impact. For
Equal contribution 1 Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Tencent
Wechat 3 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Dianbo Sui
<suidianbo@hit.edu.cn>.

In response to this challenge, researchers have adopted
various strategies in LLM pretraining, including mixedprecision training (Shoeybi et al., 2019), zero-redundancy
optimizer (Rajbhandari et al., 2020), continuous retraining (Qin et al., 2022), pipeline parallelism (Liu et al., 2023),
and depth up-scaling methods (Kim et al., 2023). Although
these approaches contribute to efficient pretraining by
optimizing model architecture and processes, they primarily
focus on structural or optimization improvements rather
than directly enhancing the utilization of intermediate
checkpoints in the pretraining phase (Hou et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Unlike these studies, we focus on the model merging strategy, a classic topic in machine learning (Utans, 1996; Chen
et al., 2017; Wortsman et al., 2022; Akiba et al., 2024; Li

*

1

