Hessian Geometry of Latent Space in Generative Models

Alexander Lobashev 1 Dmitry Guskov 2 Maria Larchenko 3 Mikhail Tamm 4
Image Space

Latent Space

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method for analyzing
the latent space geometry of generative models,
including statistical physics models and diffusion
models, by reconstructing the Fisher information
metric. The method approximates the posterior
distribution of latent variables given generated
samples and uses this to learn the log-partition
function, which defines the Fisher metric for
exponential families. Theoretical convergence
guarantees are provided, and the method is
validated on the Ising and TASEP models, outperforming existing baselines in reconstructing
thermodynamic quantities. Applied to diffusion
models, the method reveals a fractal structure of
phase transitions in the latent space, characterized
by abrupt changes in the Fisher metric. We
demonstrate that while geodesic interpolations
are approximately linear within individual phases,
this linearity breaks down at phase boundaries,
where the diffusion model exhibits a divergent
Lipschitz constant with respect to the latent
space. These findings provide new insights into
the complex structure of diffusion model latent
spaces and their connection to phenomena like
phase transitions. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/alobashev/
hessian-geometry-of-diffusion-models.

p(x|t')
t'

sampling from
generative model

p(t|x)

p(x|t')
x
estimating posterior
distribution from
a single sample

p(t|x1 , ... N
xx)

p(x|t')
x1
xN
posterior estimation
in our approach

8

p(t|x1 , ... xx)
N
N

depends only on
log_Z(t)

Figure 1: Visualization of Theorem 3.1. Having samples from p(x|t′ ) we can approximate posterior distribution
p(t|x1 , . . . xN ). The partition function log Z(t) defines a
Hessian metric on the latent space. Our Theorem 3.1 guarantees that log Z(t) in limit depends only on the posterior
distributions p(t|x1 , . . . , xN ) and Theorem 3.2 offers a way
to learn log Z(t) from p(t|x1 , . . . , xN ).

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art image generation models often exhibit
abrupt changes in image appearance during interpolation,
indicating a non-smooth latent space (Liu et al., 2021; Guo
et al., 2024). These abrupt transitions have been studied in

community from two different perspectives.
Riemannian geometry of latent space Recent work by
Park et al. (2023) constructs a latent basis by considering
singular vectors of Jacobian in the feature space, deriving a
metric on a latent space via pullback from the euclidean metric in the feature space. A similar pullback-based approach
from euclidean metric in image space was used by Shao
et al. (2018). It was demonstrated that linear interpolation in
the latent space closely approximates geodesic interpolation.

1

Glam AI, San Francisco, USA 2 Artificial Neural Computing
Corp., Weston, FL, USA 3 Magicly AI, Dubai, UAE 4 School of Digital Technologies, Tallinn University, Tallinn, Estonia. Correspondence to: Alexander Lobashev <lobashevalexander@gmail.com>,
Dmitry Guskov <guskov01dmitry@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

