Optimizing Social Network Interventions via
Hypergradient-Based Recommender System Design

Marino Kühne 1 Panagiotis D. Grontas 1 Giulia De Pasquale 2 Giuseppe Belgioioso 3
Florian Dörfler 1 John Lygeros 1

Abstract

Allcott et al., 2020; Levy, 2021; Guess et al., 2023a;b). The
algorithms employed by social media companies to maintain
user engagement are thought to contribute to the isolation
of the users into echo chambers, where opinions are segregated by party lines and ties to opposing views are severed
(Pariser, 2011). Even though the literature suggests that the
algorithms of major social media companies may decrease
the share of cross-cutting content in users’ feeds (Bakshy
et al., 2015; González-Bailón et al., 2023), thereby limiting diverse content exposure, the user’s choice of engaging
with opinion-confirming material tends to be a comparable
cause of this isolation (Garrett, 2009; González-Bailón et al.,
2023; Wojcieszak et al., 2022).

Although social networks have expanded the
range of ideas and information accessible to users,
they are also criticized for amplifying the polarization of user opinions. Given the inherent complexity of these phenomena, existing approaches
to counteract these effects typically rely on handcrafted algorithms and heuristics. We propose an
elegant solution: we act on the network weights
that model user interactions on social networks
(e.g., ranking of users’ shared content in feeds),
to optimize a performance metric (e.g., minimize
polarization), while users’ opinions follow the
classical Friedkin-Johnsen model. Our formulation gives rise to a challenging, large-scale optimization problem with non-convex constraints,
for which we develop a gradient-based algorithm.
Our scheme is simple, scalable, and versatile, as
it can readily integrate different, potentially nonconvex, objectives. We demonstrate its merit by:
(i) rapidly solving complex social network intervention problems with 4.8 million variables based
on the Reddit, LiveJournal, and DBLP datasets;
(ii) outperforming competing approaches in terms
of both computation time and disagreement reduction.

The field of opinion dynamics studies how the content provided by social media shapes user opinions and how opinions propagate in a social network (Noorazar, 2020). Users
in the social networks are modeled as nodes in a directed,
weighted graph, where the edge orientation represents the
direction of influence between users and the edge weights
represent the intensity of the social influence. Here we
consider the well-established Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model
(Friedkin & Johnsen, 1990), which has been successfully
employed in the study of polarization and disagreement
in social networks (Chitra & Musco, 2020; Musco et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2018). In the FJ model, users have both a
constant internal opinion (prejudice) and a time-varying external, declared opinion. The external opinion of each user
evolves by repeated averaging of the internal opinion with
the external opinions of interacting users, while the prejudice remains constant. We propose a unified framework to
address a broad class of problems involving the influence of
user opinions on social platforms, such as polarization mitigation, through modifications to users’ connections when
opinions evolve according to the FJ dynamics.

1. Introduction
Problem description and motivation: Social media platforms brought many societal benefits but they have also
been associated with the spread of fake news and the polarization of opinions (Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017; Bail et al.,
2018; Bakshy et al., 2015; González-Bailón et al., 2023;

Literature review: The literature on network interventions
under the FJ dynamics is vast (Bindel et al., 2015; Wang &
Kleinberg, 2023; Gionis et al., 2013; Gaitonde et al., 2020;
Ancona et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2018; Musco et al., 2018;
Matakos et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2021; Chitra & Musco,
2020; Cinus et al., 2025). Most of these works seek to
achieve various objectives by designing interventions on the

1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands 3 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden.
Correspondence to: Marino Kühne
<marino.kuehne@outlook.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

