MCU: An Evaluation Framework for Open-Ended Game Agents

Xinyue Zheng 1 * Haowei Lin 2 * Kaichen He 2 Zihao Wang 2 Qiang Fu 3 Haobo Fu 3 Zilong Zheng 1 ‡
Yitao Liang 2 ‡

Abstract

choice, as they provide real-world challenges within programmable simulators, offering valuable opportunities for
real-world simulation (Bruce et al., 2024; Reed et al., 2022;
Raad et al., 2024). Compared to other digital environments
such as web/apps (Zhou et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2025; Lin
et al., 2024), mobile platforms (Pan et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024), and coding IDEs (Xu et al., 2022; Jimenez et al.,
2024; Huang et al., 2023), games present a higher degree of
control complexity, similar to that encountered by physical
robotic agents (Nasiriany et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023b;
Zhou et al., 2024b). While compared to robotics, games
support long-horizon planning tasks and enable safer and
more efficient testing within sandbox environments.

Developing AI agents capable of interacting with
open-world environments to solve diverse tasks
is a compelling challenge. However, evaluating
such open-ended agents remains difficult, with
current benchmarks facing scalability limitations.
To address this, we introduce Minecraft Universe
(MCU), a comprehensive evaluation framework
set within the open-world video game Minecraft.
MCU incorporates three key components: (1) an
expanding collection of 3,452 composable atomic
tasks that encompasses 11 major categories and
41 subcategories of challenges; (2) a task composition mechanism capable of generating infinite
diverse tasks with varying difficulty; and (3) a
general evaluation framework that achieves 91.5%
alignment with human ratings for open-ended task
assessment. Empirical results reveal that even
state-of-the-art foundation agents struggle with
the increasing diversity and complexity of tasks.
These findings highlight the necessity of MCU as
a robust benchmark to drive progress in AI agent
development within open-ended environments.
Our evaluation code and scripts are available at
https://github.com/CraftJarvis/MCU.

A crucial aspect of open-ended game agents is their generalizability. The ultimate goal of developing AI agents is
to deploy them in real, open-world environments, where
they must solve tasks robustly across drastically different
situations. With this in mind, early game agents have been
studied in procedurally generated Atari-like environments
with diverse configurations (Cobbe et al., 2020). Recent
efforts shift toward complex environments with greater freedom (Fan et al., 2022; Hafner, 2021; Team et al., 2021),
among which Minecraft stands out. Minecraft is a video
game that provides procedurally generated open-world environments with a state space exceeding the number of
atoms in the universe (we elaborate on the benefits of using
Minecraft for open-ended game agents in Section 2.1). This
vast environment allows agents to tackle infinite open-ended
tasks using human-like actions in diverse situations.

1. Introduction
Developing AI agents capable of interacting with dynamic
environments—often referred to as “open-world” in the literature (Parmar et al., 2023)—to solve diverse tasks remains
a long-standing challenge in Artificial Intelligence (Kejriwal et al., 2024). Among the various environments used
to study AI agents, games have emerged as a prominent

Despite the numerous advantages of Minecraft as an experimental environment, we have identified several limitations in existing benchmarks that impede a comprehensive
evaluation of agents’ generalizability. These limitations
include low task quality (Fan et al., 2022), insufficient diversity (Hafner, 2021), and the lack of automatic evaluation
suites (Cai et al., 2024c). We further illustrate these issues
in Figure 2. Based on these issues, we find that Minecraft
agents lack a unified benchmark, and each agent is evaluated
on a distinct set of tasks (see Section 4 for further discussion). To address this, we introduce Minecraft Universe
(MCU), an advanced evaluation framework in Minecraft
(Figure 1). MCU encompasses thousands of composable

* Equal contribution. ‡ Equal contribution as co-corresponding
authors. 1 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI), Beijing, China 2 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Zilong Zheng <zlzheng@bigai.ai>, Yitao Liang
<yitaol@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

