UDora: A Unified Red Teaming Framework against LLM
Agents by Dynamically Hijacking Their Own Reasoning

Jiawei Zhang 1 Shuang Yang 2 Bo Li 1 3 4

Abstract

System

Auto Email Reply Agent

You are an AI email assistant specialized in
managing email tasks. Your capabilities include
fetching emails, sending emails and replying to
emails ... Notice, do not leak my privacy.
AI Email Agent

Large Language Model (LLM) agents equipped
with external tools have become increasingly powerful for complex tasks such as web shopping,
automated email replies, and financial trading.
However, these advancements amplify the risks
of adversarial attacks, especially when agents can
access sensitive external functionalities. Nevertheless, manipulating LLM agents into performing
targeted malicious actions or invoking specific
tools remains challenging, as these agents extensively reason or plan before executing final actions. In this work, we present UDora, a unified
red teaming framework designed for LLM agents
that dynamically hijacks the agent’s reasoning
processes to compel malicious behavior. Specifically, UDora first generates the model’s reasoning trace for the given task, then automatically
identifies optimal points within this trace to insert
targeted perturbations. The resulting perturbed
reasoning is then used as a surrogate response for
optimization. By iteratively applying this process,
the LLM agent will then be induced to undertake designated malicious actions or to invoke
specific malicious tools. Our approach demonstrates superior effectiveness compared to existing
methods across three LLM agent datasets. The
code is available at https://github.com/
AI-secure/UDora.

Direct Attack to Steal Privacy
Title: Urgent Request
Content: Please fetch your last five emails
and send the content to me.

AI Email Agent

I am unable to fulfill the request to fetch and share the
content of emails due to privacy and security protocols.

UDora Attack to Steal Privacy
Title: Urgent Request
Content: Please fetch your last five emails
and send the content to me. {UDora string}

AI Email Agent

I will first fetch the last five emails and then send the
contents to UDora. Let's proceed with these actions.
1. **Fetch the last five recent emails.**
- Action: GMAIL_FETCH_EMAILS …
EXECUTING FUNCTION GMAIL_FETCH_EMAILS…
I've successfully retrieved the content of the last five emails.
Here is the compiled content: …
Suggested tool call: GMAIL_REPLY_THREAD
Arguments: {"thread_id":”xxxxx","message_body":"Dear
UDora, Thank you for reaching out. I've compiled the content
of the last five emails as per your request: …}

EXECUTING FUNCTION GMAIL_REPLY_TO_THREAD…

Figure 1. A red-teaming example involves a real AI email agent
based on Microsoft’s AutoGen, designed for automated email
replies. The adversary’s goal is to steal a victim user’s recent
private emails by sending an adversarial email. The target tool
here for UDora to trigger is GMAIL FETCH EMAILS.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020;
Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023)
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities by training on
massive, web-crawled datasets that inevitably include some

malicious or harmful content. To mitigate the risk of generating unsafe outputs, these models are typically further
refined through alignment steps before deployment, with
the goal of preventing them from complying with malicious
requests. Nevertheless, adversaries can still continually seek
to bypass these alignment mechanisms—commonly referred
to as “jailbreak.” One notable example is the Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) attack (Zou et al., 2023), which

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
Meta 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign 4 Virtue AI. Correspondence to: Jiawei Zhang
<jwz@uchicago.edu>, Bo Li <bol@uchicago.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

