Learning Multi-Level Features with Matryoshka Sparse Autoencoders

Bart Bussmann * Noa Nabeshima * Adam Karvonen Neel Nanda

Abstract

extract meaningful, human-interpretable features that provide insight into a model’s decision-making process. In
practice, however, sparsity is only an imperfect proxy for
interpretability; optimizing to represent inputs using as few
active latents as possible can lead to pathological solutions.

Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a
powerful tool for interpreting neural networks by
extracting the concepts represented in their activations. However, choosing the size of the SAE
dictionary (i.e. number of learned concepts) creates a tension: as dictionary size increases to capture more relevant concepts, sparsity incentivizes
features to be split or absorbed into more specific features, leaving high-level features missing
or warped. We introduce Matryoshka SAEs, a
novel variant that addresses these issues by simultaneously training multiple nested dictionaries of
increasing size, forcing the smaller dictionaries
to independently reconstruct the inputs without
using the larger dictionaries. This organizes features hierarchically - the smaller dictionaries learn
general concepts, while the larger dictionaries
learn more specific concepts, without incentive
to absorb the high-level features. We train Matryoshka SAEs on Gemma-2-2B and TinyStories
and find superior performance on sparse probing and targeted concept erasure tasks, more disentangled concept representations, and reduced
feature absorption. While there is a minor tradeoff with reconstruction performance, we believe
Matryoshka SAEs are a superior alternative for
practical tasks, as they enable training arbitrarily
large SAEs while retaining interpretable features
at different levels of abstraction.

A core issue lies in the mismatch between the flat sparsity objective and the inherent hierarchical structure of real-world
features. For example, a broad, general concept (e.g. “punctuation marks”) might be a parent feature to more specific
ones (“punctuation mark and period”, “punctuation mark
and question mark,” and “punctuation mark and comma”).
When an SAE has the capacity to learn many latents, the
sparsity penalty can push it to replace each general concept
with a set of narrowly specialized features without retaining the original high-level category—a phenomenon called
feature splitting (Bricken et al., 2023). Even more problematic is feature absorption (Chanin et al., 2024), where a
parent feature only partially splits and a number of specific
instances of a general feature are absorbed by more specialized latents, leaving “holes” in the representation of the
more general feature (e.g. a latent that activates on all tokens
starting with an E, except if the word is Elephant). Finally,
feature composition occurs when the SAE merges distinct
concepts (like “red” and “triangle”) into single composite
features (”red triangle”) to minimize the number of active
latents, instead of learning the underlying features (Anders
et al., 2024; Wattenberg & Viégas, 2024; Leask et al., 2025).
These problems become more severe as SAEs scale to larger
dictionary sizes (i.e., more learned concepts), since the
model exploits the additional capacity to further minimize
active latents through mechanisms like feature splitting (Karvonen et al., 2024a). This presents a stark contrast to typical
deep learning, where scaling consistently improves both
training loss and model capabilities (Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022). While larger SAEs do achieve lower
training loss (Gao et al., 2024; Templeton, 2024), their performance on downstream tasks often deteriorates (Karvonen
et al., 2024a). This fundamental tension creates significant
practical challenges for deploying SAEs in interpretability research - they become less reliable for probing model
behavior, steering models, analyzing feature circuits, or understanding how models process information. The current
recommended approach is to train a sweep of different sizes
and evaluate each of them, but this is costly (Lieberum et al.,

1. Introduction
Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a powerful
tool for interpreting the internal representations of neural
networks (Bricken et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023).
By training autoencoders to map dense activations of neural networks into a sparse latent space, researchers aim to
*
Equal contribution . Author order determined by coin flip. Correspondence to: Bart Bussmann <bartbussmann@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

