Generalizable Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection from a Single Source via
Fourier Cross-View Learning

Xue Zhao 1 Qinying Gu 2 Xinbing Wang 1 Chenghu Zhou 1 Nanyang Ye 1

Abstract

and conditions vary widely. This performance drop occurs
because camera data in practical applications often has different distributions compared to the limited training data.
As a result, enhancing the generalization of these models is
critical for their safe deployment. Domain generalization
(DG) aims to generalize a model to an unseen target domain
by learning from multiple source domains. However, gathering diverse sources of data for training is time-consuming
and labor-intensive, especially in autonomous driving scenarios, and cannot always guarantee improved performance.
In this paper, we tackle a more practical yet challenging
problem: boosting the generalization of 3D object detectors
trained on a single source domain. Focusing on singledomain generalization (SDG) not only addresses practical
constraints but also provides a more rigorous assessment of
model adaptability.

Improving the generalization of multi-camera 3D
object detection is essential for safe autonomous
driving in the real world. In this paper, we consider a realistic yet more challenging scenario,
which aims to improve the generalization when
only single source data available for training,
as gathering diverse domains of data and collecting annotations is time-consuming and laborintensive. To this end, we propose the Fourier
Cross-View Learning (FCVL) framework including Fourier Hierarchical Augmentation (FHiAug),
an augmentation strategy in the frequency domain
to boost domain diversity, and Fourier Cross-View
Semantic Consistency Loss to facilitate the model
to learn more domain-invariant features from adjacent perspectives. Furthermore, we provide theoretical guarantees via augmentation graph theory. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study to explore generalizable multi-camera
3D object detection with a single source. Extensive experiments on various testing domains have
demonstrated that our approach achieves the best
performance across various domain generalization methods.

In SDG for 2D image classification, previous works (Zhao
et al., 2024; Qiao et al., 2020) focus on enhancing data diversity through common 2D data augmentation techniques,
such as geometric transformations, style transfer, or adversarial data generation. However, directly applying these
approaches to BEV-based tasks introduces several challenges. First, BEV representations are generated by projecting multi-view 2D features using real-world physical
constraints, which limits the use of strong geometric transformations. For example, large rotation of the input images
will disrupt the spatial relationships, thereby affecting the
spatial consistency of the BEV features. Second, style transfer techniques (Zhao et al., 2024) replace the original image
statistics with those from the target style, but this often blurs
the boundary between style and content (Lee et al., 2023),
distorting important features and ultimately harming model
accuracy and generalization. Third, adversarial generation
methods (Goodfellow et al., 2020) suffer from unstable training and mode collapse. While diffusion-based techniques
(Ho et al., 2020) are more stable, they add significant computational and storage overhead, making them impractical
for complex 3D detection models. Therefore, common 2D
data augmentations cannot be effectively leveraged to create
diverse training samples for BEV-based tasks. More importantly, for multi-camera 3D object detection, the natural
availability of cross-view data offers a unique opportunity
to learn domain-invariant features, a potential that remains

1. Introduction
Multi-camera 3D detection based on Bird’s Eye View (BEV)
representations has achieved rapid development, as BEV
captures both spatial locations and semantic features without being heavily affected by occlusions. While existing
models (Philion & Fidler, 2020; Huang et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023; 2022b) have achieved excellent performance on indistribution datasets like nuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020),
they struggle in real-world settings where the environment
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 2 Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Nanyang Ye <ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

