Tightening Causal Bounds via Covariate-Aware Optimal Transport

Sirui Lin * 1 Zijun Gao * 2 José Blanchet 1 Peter Glynn 1

Abstract

outcomes: one under the control condition and one under
the treatment condition. However, for each unit, only the
potential outcome corresponding to the received treatment
is observed, and the other potential outcome is missing. As
a result, the joint distribution of the potential outcomes is
never observable, while the marginal distributions of the
two potential outcomes can often be identified1 . This poses
a fundamental challenge: causal estimands that depend on
the joint distribution are only partially identifiable, meaning
that their exact values cannot be determined.

Causal estimands can vary significantly depending on the relationship between outcomes in treatment and control groups, potentially leading to
wide partial identification (PI) intervals that impede decision making. Incorporating covariates
can substantially tighten these bounds, but requires determining the range of PI over probability models consistent with the joint distributions
of observed covariates and outcomes in treatment
and control groups. This problem is known to
be equivalent to a conditional optimal transport
(COT) optimization task, which is more challenging than standard optimal transport (OT) due to
the additional conditioning constraints. In this
work, we study a tight relaxation of COT that
effectively reduces it to standard OT, leveraging
its well-established computational and theoretical
foundations. Our relaxation incorporates covariate information and ensures narrower PI intervals for any value of the penalty parameter, while
becoming asymptotically exact as a penalty increases to infinity. This approach preserves the
benefits of covariate adjustment in PI and results
in a data-driven estimator for the PI set that is
easy to implement using existing OT packages.
We analyze the convergence rate of our estimator
and demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
through extensive simulations, highlighting its
practical use and superior performance compared
to existing methods.

Previous works (Chernozhukov et al., 2017; Torous et al.,
2024; Gao et al., 2025) have used OT, a rapidly growing
field with various applications in machine learning (Agueh
& Carlier, 2011; Choi et al., 2018; Hui et al., 2018), to
obtain the PI set – the range of plausible values that the
causal estimand may take. This thread of research is built
upon the key observation: for causal estimands defined as
the expectation of a function of potential outcomes, the
PI set is an interval whose boundaries are effectively the
optimal objective values of two OT problems. Explicitly, in
these two OT problems, the function in the causal estimand
(or its negative counterpart) serves as the cost function, and
the marginal distributions of the two potential outcomes
serve as the source and target distributions, respectively.
In many applications, each unit is associated with a set of covariates. Leveraging the covariate information typically can
reduce the uncertainty in the outcome’s joint distribution
thus the width of the PI interval. From an OT perspective, this reduction in uncertainty involves optimizing an
expected cost function over all couplings (i.e. joint distributions) that respect the conditional marginal outcome
distributions – a framework termed as Conditional Optimal
Transport (COT). A comparison of optimal transport coupling for OT and COT is illustrated in Figure 1. Compared
to standard OT, which disregards covariates, COT enforces
stricter coupling constraints, leading to tighter PI bounds.
This refinement is particularly beneficial when covariates
have a substantial influence on the distribution of potential
outcomes.

1. Introduction
In the potential outcome model (Rubin, 1974) with a binary treatment, each unit is associated with two potential
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Management Science
and Engineering, Stanford University, USA 2 Marshall School of
Business, University of Southern California, USA. Correspondence to: Sirui Lin <siruilin@stanford.edu>, Zijun Gao <zijungao@marshall.usc.edu>.

1
The marginal distributions of the two potential outcomes can
be identified in randomized experiments or in observational studies
where the experiment is unconfounded—the potential outcomes
are independent of the treatment assignment conditional on the
observed covariates.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

