KBQA-o1: Agentic Knowledge Base Question Answering
with Monte Carlo Tree Search
Haoran Luo 1 2 Haihong E 1 Yikai Guo 3 Qika Lin 4 Xiaobao Wu 2 Xinyu Mu 1 Wenhao Liu 1 Meina Song 1
Yifan Zhu 1 Luu Anh Tuan 2

Abstract

Question

Knowledge Base Question Answering (KBQA)
aims to answer natural language questions with a
large-scale structured knowledge base (KB). Despite advancements with large language models
(LLMs), KBQA still faces challenges in weak KB
awareness, imbalance between effectiveness and
efficiency, and high reliance on annotated data. To
address these challenges, we propose KBQA-o1,
a novel agentic KBQA method with Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS). It introduces a ReAct-based
agent process for stepwise logical form generation
with KB environment exploration. Moreover, it
employs MCTS, a heuristic search method driven
by policy and reward models, to balance agentic exploration’s performance and search space.
With heuristic exploration, KBQA-o1 generates
high-quality annotations for further improvement
by incremental fine-tuning. Experimental results
show that KBQA-o1 outperforms previous lowresource KBQA methods with limited annotated
data, boosting Llama-3.1-8B model’s GrailQA F1
performance to 78.5% compared to 48.5% of the
previous sota method with GPT-3.5-turbo. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.
com/LHRLAB/KBQA-o1.

KB
Environment
Exploration

What movie with a television running time of
less than 60 minutes features Taylor Lautner?

Extract_entity
[ Taylor Lautner ]

Extract_entity
[ 60 ]

Find_relation
[ film.actior.film ]

[ LESS THAN | tv.tv_program.
episode_running_time ]

Find_relation
[ film.performance.film ]

[ expression1 | expression ]

Compare

Observation

KBQA
Agent

Logical
Form

Merge

(AND (lt tv.tv_program.episode_running_time 60)
(JOIN (R film.performance.film)
(JOIN (R film.actor.film) Taylor Lautner)))

SPARQL Query

He's a Bully, Charlie Brown

m.02686wj

Figure 1. An example of KBQA task to answer a natural language
question by exploring the KB environment with KBQA agent.

2024), and legal analysis (Cui et al., 2023). Typically, KBs
are stored in graph databases and accessed using graph
queries, such as SPARQL (Pérez et al., 2009), which support multi-hop and logical queries to acquire knowledge information. To answer natural language questions, language
models are usually leveraged (Ye et al., 2022) to convert
the questions into logical forms, such as S-expression (Gu
et al., 2021), and then transform them into executable graph
queries to obtain answers from KB, as shown in Figure 1.
With the emergence of LLMs (OpenAI, 2024; Dubey et al.,
2024), two main types of KBQA methods appear, as shown
in Figure 2. On the one hand, end-to-end methods (Luo
et al., 2024b;a) generate logical forms directly from natural
language questions and utilize retrieval before or after generation for improvement. On the other hand, step-by-step
methods (Huang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024) alternate between generation and retrieval for stepwise thinking on KB,
performing in a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022)
or Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023a) manner.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Base Question Answering (KBQA) leverages a
large-scale structured knowledge base (KB), such as Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008) or Wikidata (Vrandečić &
Krötzsch, 2014), as a reference to answer questions in natural language, widely applied in fields such as search engines (Jang et al., 2017), medical consultations (Wu et al.,

However, three main challenges remain: (1) Poor awareness of the KB environment in end-to-end methods. Relying on direct logical form generation by language models,
end-to-end KBQA methods (Li et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2024)
struggle with limited logical form schemas and unseen entities and relations that existed in KB, making it difficult
to fully capture the KB environment. (2) Local optima

1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Nanyang Technological University 3 Beijing Institute of Computer
Technology and Application 4 National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Haihong E <ehaihong@bupt.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

