Improving Generalization with Flat Hilbert Bayesian Inference

Tuan Truong * 1 Quyen Tran * 1 Ngoc-Quan Pham 1 Nhat Ho 2 Dinh Phung 1 3 Trung Le 3

Abstract

area, including those by Kingma & Welling (2014); Kingma
et al. (2015), and Blundell et al. (2015), who extended the
Gaussian variational posterior approximation for neural networks, as well as Gupta & Nagar (2018), who enhanced the
flexibility of posterior approximations. In addition to variational methods, various particle sampling techniques have
been proposed for Bayesian inference, especially in scenarios requiring multiple models. Notable particle sampling
methods include Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal,
1996), Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD)
(Welling & Teh, 2011), Stochastic Gradient HMC (SGHMC)
(Chen et al., 2014), and Stein Variational Gradient Descent
(SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016). Each method contributes to
a deeper understanding and more practical application of
Bayesian inference in deep learning.

We introduce Flat Hilbert Bayesian Inference
(FHBI), an algorithm designed to enhance generalization in Bayesian inference. Our approach
involves an iterative two-step procedure with
an adversarial functional perturbation step and
a functional descent step within a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space. This methodology is supported by a theoretical analysis that extends previous findings on generalization ability from
finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces to infinitedimensional functional spaces. To evaluate the
effectiveness of FHBI, we conduct comprehensive comparisons against nine baseline methods
on the VTAB-1K benchmark, which encompasses
19 diverse datasets across various domains with
diverse semantics. Empirical results demonstrate
that FHBI consistently outperforms the baselines
by notable margins, highlighting its practical efficacy.

Besides quantifying uncertainty, tackling overfitting is a
significant challenge in machine learning. Overfitting often
occurs when the training process gets stuck in local minima,
leading to a model that fails to generalize well to unseen
data. This problem is mainly due to loss functions’ highdimensional and non-convex nature, which often exhibit
multiple local minima in the loss landscape. In standard
deep network training, flat minimizers improve model generalization (Keskar et al., 2017; Kaddour et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2022). Among the flat minimizers, Sharpness-Aware
Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021) has emerged as a
practical approach by concurrently minimizing the empirical
loss and reducing the sharpness of the loss function. Recently, SAM has demonstrated its versatility and effectiveness across a wide range of tasks, including meta-learning
(Abbas et al., 2022), vision models (Chen et al., 2021), and
language models (Bahri et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Quantifying and tackling uncertainty in deep learning is
one of the most challenging problems, mainly due to the
inherent randomness of the real world and the presence of
noisy data. Bayesian inference provides a robust framework
for understanding complex data, allowing for probabilistic
interpretation of deep learning models and reasoning under
uncertainty. This approach not only facilitates predictions
but also enables the quantification of uncertainty. A primary
challenge in this domain is the computation and sampling
from intricate distributions, mainly when dealing with deep
learning models. One effective strategy to tackle this issue is variational inference, which seeks to approximate
the true posterior distribution with simpler forms, known
as approximate posteriors, while optimizing a variational
lower bound. Several techniques have been developed in this

Contribution. We combine flat minimizers and particlebased Bayesian methods to introduce a novel Bayesian inference framework with improved generalization ability. To accomplish this, we first present Theorem 4.2, which strengthens prior generalization bounds from finite-dimensional
Euclidean spaces to the reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHS), which are broader functional spaces and are typically infinite-dimensional. Notably, this theorem introduces
the notion of functional sharpness that offers an insight
to improve the generalization ability of current particlesampling methods. Subsequently, Theorem 4.3 translates

*

Equal contribution 1 Movian AI, Vietnam 2 The University of
Texas at Austin, USA 3 Monash University, Australia. Correspondence to: Trung Le <trunglm@monash.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

