Going Deeper into Locally Differentially Private Graph Neural Networks

Longzhu He 1 Chaozhuo Li 1 Peng Tang 2 Sen Su 1
Client-Side

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated superior performance in a variety of graph
mining and learning tasks. However, when node
representations involve sensitive personal information or variables related to individuals, learning from graph data can raise significant privacy
concerns. Although recent studies have explored
local differential privacy (LDP) to address these
concerns, they often introduce significant distortions to graph data, severely degrading private
learning utility (e.g., node classification accuracy).
In this paper, we present UPGN ET, an LDP-based
privacy-preserving graph learning framework that
enhances utility while protecting user data privacy.
Specifically, we propose a three-stage pipeline
that generalizes the LDP protocols for node features, targeting privacy-sensitive scenarios. Our
analysis identifies two key factors that affect the
utility of privacy-preserving graph learning: feature dimension and neighborhood size. Based on
the above analysis, UPGN ET enhances utility by
introducing two core layers: High-Order Aggregator (HOA) layer and the Node Feature Regularization (NFR) layer. Extensive experiments on
real-world datasets indicate that UPGN ET significantly outperforms existing methods in terms of
both privacy protection and learning utility.

User 1

Server-Side

x1 LDP x1

Private Graph Learning
GNN
Low Utility

(a) Prior Works
User 1

x1 LDP x1

(b) Ours

(

Private Graph Learning
GNN High Utility

: NFR layer + HOA layer )

Figure 1. Comparison of (a) prior works and (b) ours in the locally private graph learning scenario. The scenario comprises a
cloud server and multiple users situated across different clients.
Users’ sensitive node features x are perturbed to x′ using LDP
before uploading to the cloud server for graph learning. Our approach achieves higher utility by integrating than prior works.

2018), and community detection (Chen et al., 2019). In
real-world scenarios, graphs frequently contain significant
amounts of sensitive personal information, such as user profiles on social networks. However, recent studies (Wang &
Wang, 2022; Shen et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Meng
et al., 2023) have proposed various privacy attack methods
targeting GNN models, which pose serious security and privacy challenges during their training. Therefore, designing
an efficient privacy-preserving GNN framework to protect
users’ private information is of paramount importance.
To collect and analyze private data from decentralized data
owners, local differential privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan
et al., 2011) has been increasingly accepted as the de facto
standard for data privacy in the research community (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019a;b).
In the LDP protocol, multiple users must interact with an untrustworthy server that may exploit their private data. Each
user perturbs their data locally, typically through noise injection (Dwork et al., 2006), to ensure privacy. The perturbed
data is then transmitted to the server, which conducts data
analysis and learning based on this information. Locally
private graph learning have recently gained significant attention from researchers (Sajadmanesh & Gatica-Perez, 2021;
Lin et al., 2022; Jin & Chen, 2022; Pei et al., 2023). Fig. 1
illustrates this scenario, where a cloud server interacts with
decentralized users. Each user perturbs their sensitive node
features x to x′ under LDP before submitting them to the
server for private graph learning (e.g., node classification).

1. Introduction
In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown
superior performance in various domains, including social
sciences (Hamilton et al., 2017), graph mining (Li et al.,
2019), and bioinformatics (Fout et al., 2017). GNNs have
also achieved state-of-the-art performance on a range of
downstream graph learning tasks, such as node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017), link prediction (Zhang & Chen,
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunication, Beijing,
China 2 Shandong University, Qingdao, China. Correspondence to:
Sen Su <susen@bupt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

