A Unified Approach to Routing and Cascading for LLMs

Jasper Dekoninck 1 Maximilian Baader 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

To maximize performance, it is crucial to select the most
suitable model for each query, accounting for both the expected quality of the model’s output and the model’s cost.
Such model selection strategies can significantly improve
performance over any individual model and can reduce inference costs by selecting a smaller model when the query
does not require the full capacity of a larger model.

The availability of a wide range of large language
models (LLMs) embedded in various agentic
systems has significantly increased the potential
of model selection strategies to improve the costperformance tradeoff. Existing strategies involve
either routing, where a single model is chosen per
query, or cascading, which sequentially runs increasingly larger models until a satisfactory answer is found. However, current approaches face
three key limitations: they (1) lack formal proofs
of optimality, (2) fail to identify the conditions
under which these strategies are most effective to
improve the cost-performance tradeoff, and (3)
are unable to combine both paradigms for further improvements. To address these issues, we
first derive a novel optimal strategy for cascading
and prove the optimality of an existing routing
strategy. Further, we propose cascade routing,
a unified framework that integrates routing and
cascading into a theoretically optimal strategy.
Through our analysis, we identify good quality
estimators as the critical factor for the success of
model selection paradigms. Finally, in our experiments, we show that cascade routing consistently outperforms the individual approaches by
a large margin and we analyze quality estimators
to determine when routing and/or cascading are
useful paradigms for model selection.1

Routing and Cascading Two primary strategies have
been proposed to solve model selection. The first, routing,
directs each input query to a specific model from a set of
available models (Chen et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024), as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). This approach is particularly effective
when different expert LLMs are needed for diverse tasks,
enabling the selection of the most suitable expert for each
query. The second strategy, cascading, processes an input
query through a sequence of increasingly larger models,
stopping when a model produces an answer deemed sufficiently good (Chen et al., 2023; Varshney & Baral, 2022),
as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Cascading is particularly valuable for handling queries of varying difficulty, as it allows
simpler queries to be addressed by smaller models while
reserving more complex queries for larger models.
Restrictive Conditions Despite their utility, both routing
and cascading impose significant restrictions on the model
selection process. In routing, the initial selection of a model
is final, preventing any reconsideration after the initial decision. In cascading, each query must sequentially pass
through all models in the chain, with no option to skip a
model. Therefore, a less restrictive strategy that combines
the strengths of both routing and cascading could offer significant performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have found applications in
a wide range of tasks, some of which are easily handled by
small models, while others require the full capacity of stateof-the-art LLMs. This has led to the development of many
fine-tuned models of various sizes that target specific tasks.

Lack of Deeper Understanding Further, the conditions
under which current routing and cascading strategies are
optimal, are not well understood. For routing, an extensive proof is required just to show that current strategies
are close to optimal (Chen et al., 2022), while the theoretical analysis of cascading does not provide optimality
guarantees (Chen et al., 2023; Varshney & Baral, 2022).
This lack of theoretical understanding hinders the development of more effective model selection strategies. Moreover, prior work fails to provide insights into the limitations
of model selection strategies and cannot identify the conditions under which they are useful in practical scenarios.

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Jasper Dekoninck
<jasper.dekoninck@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Code
available
at
https://github.com/eth-sri/
cascade-routing

1

