Riemannian Diffusion Adaptation for Distributed Optimization on Manifolds

Xiuheng Wang 1 Ricardo Borsoi 1 Cédric Richard 2 Ali H. Sayed 3

Abstract

of applications in machine learning, signal processing, and
control can be written in the form of (1), including principal
component analysis (PCA) (Cunningham & Ghahramani,
2015; Zhang et al., 2016), parameter estimation for Gaussian mixture models (GMM) (Hosseini & Sra, 2015; Collas
et al., 2023), low-rank matrix completion (Boumal & Absil,
2011; Vandereycken, 2013), and deep neural networks with
orthogonal constraints (Vorontsov et al., 2017).

Online distributed optimization is particularly useful for solving optimization problems with streaming data collected by multiple agents over a network. When the solutions lie on a Riemannian
manifold, such problems become challenging to
solve, particularly when efficiency and continuous
adaptation are required. This work tackles these
challenges and devises a diffusion adaptation strategy for decentralized optimization over general
manifolds. A theoretical analysis shows that the
proposed algorithm is able to approach network
agreement after sufficient iterations, which allows
a non-asymptotic convergence result to be derived.
We apply the algorithm to the online decentralized principal component analysis problem and
Gaussian mixture model inference. Experimental
results with both synthetic and real data illustrate
its performance.

Decentralized optimization in Euclidean spaces has been
extensively studied. As such, one may consider converting the constraint w ∈ M into a cost function in the Euclidean space and solve (1) in a composite setting. Then,
a distributed proximal gradient-type algorithm can be applied if the projection onto the manifold is available. However, previous studies, e.g., (Bianchi & Jakubowicz, 2012;
Di Lorenzo & Scutari, 2016; Zeng & Yin, 2018), require a
convex regularizer or at least the convexity of its domain.
In addition, for certain manifolds, the dimension of an embedded Euclidean space can be relatively high according to
the Whitney Embedding Theorem (Lee, 2013). Due to the
non-convexity and non-linearity of certain M, these decentralized algorithms may fail when dealing with problem (1).

1. Introduction

In response to these challenges, this paper aims to introduce a general framework to solve (1) by developing fully
decentralized optimization on manifolds, which directly operates on M by exploiting its inherent geometry. Our main
contributions are as follows:

In the decentralized setting, this work deals with the multiagent optimization problem seeking consensus on a Riemannian manifold M:
K

1 X
Jk (w) ,
w∈M K
min

(1)

k=1

1. Riemannian diffusion adaptation: We devise a Riemannian diffusion adaptation strategy, which is fully
intrinsic and thus can be applied to general manifolds1 .
It comprises a sequence of efficient adaptation and
combination steps. In the adaptation step, a Riemannian stochastic gradient descent (R-SGD) method is
used to estimate the local solution at each agent. In the
combination step, the local estimates of the neighboring agents are combined on the tangent space of the
manifold.

where Jk : M → R is alocal risk function defined for each
agent by Jk (w) = Exk Q(w; xk ) in terms of the expectation of some loss function Q(w; xk ). The computation
of Jk (w) is over the unknown distribution of the data xk ,
which makes it necessary to use a stochastic approximation
for the gradient vector based on a set of independent realizations xk,t , observed sequentially over time. A wide range
Part of this work was done while Xiuheng Wang was a PhD
student at Université Côte d’Azur. 1 Université de Lorraine, CNRS,
CRAN, France 2 Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, OCA, France
3
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Xiuheng Wang <dr.xiuheng.wang@gmail.com>.

2. Theoretical analysis: We provide a theoretical analysis for the performance of the proposed Riemannian
diffusion adaptation strategy with a constant step size.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
This strategy is not designed for a specific manifold as it does
not require an embedding of M into a Euclidean space.

1

