Structured Preconditioners in Adaptive Optimization: A Unified Analysis

Shuo Xie 1 Tianhao Wang 1 Sashank Reddi 2 Sanjiv Kumar 2 Zhiyuan Li 1 2

Abstract

root of a d × d matrix where d is the number of parameters. Thus, for large-scale settings, the huge computation
and memory cost makes it prohibitively expensive. This
has inspired works on designing more efficient adaptive
optimizers by using a structured preconditioner, such as
coordinate-wise adaptivity employed by AdaGrad (Streeter
& McMahan, 2010; Duchi et al., 2011), Kronecker product based preconditioner employed by Shampoo (Gupta
et al., 2018; Anil et al., 2020) and layerwise adaptivity employed by LARS (You et al., 2017) and LAMB (You et al.,
2019)), which all aim to provide a computational and memory efficient approximation of full-matrix AdaGrad. These
algorithms have been shown to be very effective for general deep learning settings. It is often assumed that a better
approximation of full-matrix preconditioner usually results
in better optimization convergence, as seen with methods
like Shampoo (Gupta et al., 2018). In contrast, preconditioners with more structure such as diagonal preconditioner
have inferior performance. In this paper, we challenge these
prevailing notions by providing theoretical and empirical
evidence against them.

We present a novel unified analysis for a
broad class of adaptive optimization algorithms
with structured (e.g., layerwise, diagonal, and
kronecker-factored) preconditioners for both online regret minimization and offline convex optimization. Our analysis not only provides matching rate to several important structured preconditioned algorithms including diagonal AdaGrad,
full-matrix AdaGrad, and AdaGrad-Norm, but
also gives an improved convergence rate for a
one-sided variant of Shampoo over that of original
Shampoo. Interestingly, more structured preconditioners (e.g., diagonal Adagrad, AdaGrad-Norm
which use less space and compute) are often presented as computationally efficient approximations to full-matrix Adagrad, aiming for improved
optimization performance through better approximations. Our unified analysis challenges this
prevailing view and reveals, perhaps surprisingly,
that more structured preconditioners, despite using less space and computation per step, can outperform their less structured counterparts. To
demonstrate this, we show that one-sided Shampoo, which is relatively much cheaper than fullmatrix AdaGrad could outperform it both theoretically and experimentally.

Conceptually, one could equate the degree of structure in
a preconditioner to the ease of its computation and storage.
In this view, full-matrix AdaGrad can be considered as the
least structured and most expensive preconditioner while
AdaGrad-Norm (Ward et al., 2020), which only maintains a
scalar and uses the same preconditioning for every direction,
is the most structured and least expensive. The conventional
wisdom here is that using a less structured preconditioner,
which requires more space and compute per step, reduces
the number of steps needed for training. Thus, choosing the
right structure balances this trade-off between convergence
speed and training step cost.

1. Introduction
Adaptive optimization algorithms (Streeter & McMahan,
2010; Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2014) play a pivotal
role in modern machine learning, especially in the expensive
training of large foundation models. Within the machine
learning community, full-matrix AdaGrad is considered as
an ideal adaptive preconditioner for fast convergence in
terms of number of steps. The computation of full-matrix
AdaGrad precondtioner typically involves inverse square

Among these preconditioning methods, Shampoo (Gupta
et al., 2018) has gained notable attention for its Kroneckerfactored preconditioning approach, which promises improved convergence in large-scale optimization tasks (Dahl
et al., 2023). Shampoo was originally proposed as a computationally efficient surrogate for full-matrix AdaGrad (Duchi
et al., 2011). Despite its popularity, existing analyses of
Shampoo (Gupta et al., 2018) are limited and do not provide a full justification for its effectiveness. In particular,
we argue that the best-known regret bounds for both Shampoo as well as full-matrix AdaGrad are consistently worse

1

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Shuo Xie <shuox@ttic.edu>, Zhiyuan Li
<zhiyuanli@ttic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

