Mastering Massive Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning
via Mixture-of-Expert Decision Transformer

Yilun Kong 1 Guozheng Ma 2 Qi Zhao 1 Haoyu Wang 1 Li Shen 3 Xueqian Wang 1 Dacheng Tao 2
90

Despite recent advancements in offline multi-task
reinforcement learning (MTRL) have harnessed
the powerful capabilities of the Transformer architecture, most approaches focus on a limited
number of tasks, with scaling to extremely massive tasks remaining a formidable challenge. In
this paper, we first revisit the key impact of task
numbers on current MTRL method, and further reveal that naively expanding the parameters proves
insufficient to counteract the performance degradation as the number of tasks escalates. Building
upon these insights, we propose M3DT, a novel
mixture-of-experts (MoE) framework that tackles
task scalability by further unlocking the model’s
parameter scalability. Specifically, we enhance
both the architecture and the optimization of the
agent, where we strengthen the Decision Transformer (DT) backbone with MoE to reduce task
load on parameter subsets, and introduce a threestage training mechanism to facilitate efficient
training with optimal performance. Experimental
results show that, by increasing the number of
experts, M3DT not only consistently enhances its
performance as model expansion on the fixed task
numbers, but also exhibits remarkable task scalability, successfully extending to 160 tasks with
superior performance.

85

Normalized Score

Abstract

M3DT
MTDT
PromptDT
HarmoDT

75
70

0

20

40

60

80

100

Task Number

120

140

160

Figure 1: Illustration of a comparative analysis of normalized score across various task numbers. M3DT achieves
unparalleled task scalability. An in-depth exploration of
these results refers to Section 5.
These models also prove valuable for multi-task RL (MTRL)
challenges, offering a high-capacity framework capable of
accommodating task variances and assimilating knowledge
from diverse datasets. Additionally, they pave the way for
incorporating innovations from language modeling (Brown
et al., 2020) into MTRL methodologies, unlocking new
potential for cross-disciplinary advancements.
Drawing inspiration from large language models (LLM),
where models harness a remarkable generalization capability to address massive tasks, there’s a growing interest in the
potential of training RL agent to master increasingly diverse
tasks. However, the application of these high-capacity sequential models to massive multi-task RL presents considerable challenges. Firstly, existing approaches exhibit limited
scalability with respect to task numbers. With most studies
confined to dozens of tasks in Atari or Meta-World (Lee
et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024), when scaled to a larger number
of tasks, their performance degrades significantly; while
Gato (Reed et al., 2022) extends the research to over 600
tasks, its performance on control tasks remains suboptimal.
Secondly, current research either overlooks the impact of
parameter scaling, with most studies confined to very small
models (Xu et al., 2022), or overly relies on the inherent
parameter scalability of the Transformer architecture. Although Gato (Reed et al., 2022) and Multi-Game DT (Lee
et al., 2022) have experimentally demonstrated the performance enhancements with expanded model size, a comparison between the increase in model size and the corresponding performance gains suggests that these approaches cannot
be considered an efficient method of parameter scaling.

1. Introduction
Recent developments, such as Decision Transformer (Chen
et al., 2021) and Trajectory Transformer (Janner et al., 2021),
have reframed offline reinforcement learning (RL) as a sequence modeling problem, showcasing their ability to transform large-scale datasets into potent decision-making agents.
1

80

Tsinghua University, China 2 Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 3 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University. Correspondence to: Xueqian Wang <wang.xq@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

