Stable Offline Value Function Learning with Bisimulation-based Representations

Brahma S. Pavse 1 Yudong Chen 1 Qiaomin Xie 1 Josiah P. Hanna 1

Abstract

(Sutton & Barto, 2018). While value function learning algorithms such as temporal-difference learning (TD) have been
successful, they can be unreliable. In particular, the deadly
triad, i.e., the combination of off-policy updates, function
approximation, and bootstrapping, can make TD-based methods diverge (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy,
1997; Baird, 1995; Hasselt et al., 2018). Function approximation is a critical component of value function learning
since it determines the representations of state-action pairs,
which in turn defines the space of expressible value functions. Depending on how this value function space is represented, value function learning algorithms may diverge
(Ghosh & Bellemare, 2020). That is, the value function
learning algorithm may not converge to its fixed-point, or
may even diverge away from it. In this work, we explicitly
learn state-action representations to improve the stability of
offline value function learning.

In reinforcement learning, offline value function learning is the procedure of using an offline
dataset to estimate the expected discounted return from each state when taking actions according to a fixed target policy. The stability of this
procedure, i.e., whether it converges to its fixedpoint, critically depends on the representations
of the state-action pairs. Poorly learned representations can make value function learning unstable, or even divergent. Therefore, it is critical
to stabilize value function learning by explicitly
shaping the state-action representations. Recently,
the class of bisimulation-based algorithms have
shown promise in shaping representations for control. However, it is still unclear if this class of
methods can stabilize value function learning. In
this work, we investigate this question and answer it affirmatively. We introduce a bisimulationbased algorithm called kernel representations for
offline policy evaluation (KROPE). KROPE uses a
kernel to shape state-action representations such
that state-action pairs that have similar immediate
rewards and lead to similar next state-action pairs
under the target policy also have similar representations. We show that KROPE: 1) learns stable representations and 2) leads to lower value error than
baselines. Our analysis provides new theoretical
insight into the stability properties of bisimulationbased methods and suggests that practitioners can
use these methods to improve the stability and
accuracy of offline evaluation of reinforcement
learning agents.

Figure 1. The figure illustrates the native state-action representations X and π-bisimulation representations Φπ−BISIM . πbisimulation algorithms use a distance function d that captures
differences between state-action pairs based on immediate rewards
and differences of next state-action pairs under π to shape their
representations. Ultimately, the goal of π-bisimulation methods is
to learn representations such that state-actions pairs with similar
action-values under π also have similar representations. The function d outputs low values within the blue (and orange) state-actions
but high values between blue and orange state-actions. Therefore,
the blue (and orange) state-actions have similar representations,
but different representations between the distinct colors.

1. Introduction
Learning the value function of a policy is a critical component of many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
1
University of Wisconsin – Madison. Correspondence to:
Brahma S. Pavse <pavse@wisc.edu>.

In seeking such representations, we turn to π-bisimulation
algorithms. These algorithms define a metric to capture
behavioral similarity between state-action pairs such that
similarity is based on immediate rewards received and the
similarity of next state-action pairs visited by π (Castro,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

