Should Decision-Makers Reveal Classifiers in Online Strategic Classification?

Han Shao 1 Shuo Xie 2 Kunhe Yang 3

Abstract

their features to receive favorable outcomes (Brückner &
Scheffer, 2011; Hardt et al., 2016; Ahmadi et al., 2023).
For example, in college admissions, when a decision-maker
evaluates applicants, students may retake the SAT, switch
schools, or enroll in easier classes to boost their GPAs in
hopes of gaining admission. Similarly, in loan approval,
where a classifier assesses applicants based on their credit
scores, individuals may open or close credit cards or bank
accounts to improve their credit scores.

Strategic classification addresses a learning problem where a decision-maker implements a classifier over agents who may manipulate their features
in order to receive favorable predictions. In the
standard model of online strategic classification,
in each round, the decision-maker implements and
publicly reveals a classifier, after which agents
perfectly best respond based on this knowledge.
However, in practice, whether to disclose the classifier is often debated—some decision-makers believe that hiding the classifier can prevent misclassification errors caused by manipulation. In
this paper, we formally examine how limiting the
agents’ access to the current classifier affects the
decision-maker’s performance. Specifically, we
consider an extended online strategic classification setting where agents lack direct knowledge
about the current classifier and instead manipulate
based on a weighted average of historically implemented classifiers. Our main result shows that in
this setting, the decision-maker incurs (1 − γ)−1
or kin times more mistakes compared to the fullknowledge setting, where kin is the maximum
in-degree of the manipulation graph (representing
how many distinct feature vectors can be manipulated to appear as a single one), and γ is the
discount factor indicating agents’ memory of past
classifiers. Our results demonstrate how withholding access to the classifier can backfire and degrade the decision-maker’s performance in online
strategic classification.

More formally, an agent (x, y) consists of a premanipulation feature vector x and a ground-truth label y.
When modeling strategic manipulation, we assume that each
agent has limited manipulation power. We adopt manipulation graphs, initially introduced by Zhang & Conitzer
(2021), to represent feasible manipulations. In this graph,
the nodes correspond to all possible feature vectors. There
is an edge from x to x′ if and only if an agent with the
feature vector x can manipulate their feature vector to x′ .
Additionally, there is always a self-loop at each node, as
agents can choose to remain at x by doing nothing.
A sequence of agents (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . arrives sequentially. In each round t, the decision-maker implements a
classifier ht , and the agent (xt , yt ) manipulates their feature
vector from xt to a neighbor vt in an attempt to receive
a positive prediction under ht . In prior work, it is usually assumed that the decision-maker is transparent—they
reveal their current classifier to the agents before manipulation—and that agents are rational—they best respond
by manipulating to a reachable feature that is labeled as
positive (if one exists) in the most cost-efficient way. Specifically, if all their neighbors are labeled as negative, they
remain at their current feature without making any changes,
as manipulation would not help change the prediction from
negative to positive. Many algorithms developed in prior
work (e.g. Ahmadi et al., 2023; 2024; Cohen et al., 2024a)
heavily rely on this standard tie-breaking assumption.

1. Introduction
In online strategic classification, a decision-maker makes
decisions over a sequence of agents who may manipulate

However, in real-world applications, the decision-maker
may withhold their classifier to prevent agents from manipulating their features. Nevertheless, even without knowledge
of the current classifier, agents will still attempt to optimize
their outcomes through strategic manipulation. This raises a
fundamental question:

1

CMSA, Harvard University 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Han Shao <han@cmsa.fas.harvard.edu>, Shuo Xie
<shuox@ttic.edu>, Kunhe Yang <kunheyang@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Can decision-makers benefit from hiding the classifiers?
1

