Balancing Preservation and Modification:
A Region and Semantic-Aware Metric for Instruction-Based Image Editing

Zhuoying Li 1 * Zhu Xu 1 * Yuxin Peng 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
Instruction-based image editing, which aims to
modify the image faithfully towards instruction
while preserving irrelevant content unchanged,
has made advanced progresses. However, there
still lacks a comprehensive metric for assessing
the editing quality. Existing metrics either require high costs concerning human evaluation,
which hinders large-scale evaluation, or adapt
from other tasks and lose specified concerns, failing to comprehensively evaluate the modification of instruction and the preservation of irrelevant regions, resulting in biased evaluation. To
tackle it, we introduce a new metric Balancing
Preservation Modification (BPM), that tailored
for instruction-based image editing by explicitly
disentangling the image into editing-relevant and
irrelevant regions for specific consideration. We
first identify and locate editing-relevant regions,
followed by a two-tier process to assess editing
quality: Region-Aware Judge evaluates whether
the position and size of the edited region align
with instruction, and Semantic-Aware Judge further assesses the instruction content compliance
within editing-relevant regions as well as content preservation within irrelevant regions, yielding comprehensive and interpretable quality assessment. Moreover, the editing-relevant region
localization in BPM can be integrated into image editing approaches to improve the editing
quality, manifesting its wild application. We
verify the effectiveness of BPM metric on comprehensive instruction-editing data, and the results show that we yield the highest alignment
with human evaluation compared to existing metrics, indicating efficacy. The code is available at
https://joyli-x.github.io/BPM/.

(a) Results of evaluation metrics for identical sample.

(b) Visualized Example of Ground Truth Test.
Figure 1: (a) The scores rated by existing metrics LPIPS, CLIPScore and DINOScore all witness a contradict trends with human
evaluation, while our proposed BPM aligns with human evaluation.
(b) Previous metrics favor excessively preserved or modified result,
while our BPM favor the well-edited image.

1. Introduction
Instruction-based image editing (Hertz et al., 2022; Kawar
et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2022; Han et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024) has gained increasing attention, which aims to modify
the given image via text instructions, requiring the edited
image faithfully align with the modification requirements
while preserving the unrelated parts of the origin image.
Though a great success, the field still lacks a sufficiently
standardized metric for comprehensively assessing the editing quality. Ideally, we would expect the most authoritative
evaluations to come from human assessments. However, the
costs and overhead associated with human evaluation are
too high to scale, hindering its practical value in large-scale
evaluations. In response to it, a series of existing works
(Hertz et al., 2023; Basu et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2022; Kim
& Ye, 2021; Brooks et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2023; Kocasari
et al., 2022) have proposed automated evaluation metrics.

*

Equal contribution 1 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yang Liu <yangliu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

