Position: Contextual Integrity is Inadequately Applied to Language Models

Yan Shvartzshnaider * 1 Vasisht Duddu * 2

Abstract

Notably, these efforts evaluate privacy in LLMs using contextual integrity (CI), which defines privacy as the appropriate flow of information by adhering to privacy norms.
CI provides a structured way to identify potential privacy
violations based on the context (e.g., by capturing the actors’ capacities in the information exchange, the information type, and the constraints of sharing information).

Machine learning community is discovering
Contextual Integrity (CI) as a useful framework
to assess the privacy implications of large language models (LLMs). This is an encouraging
development. The CI theory emphasizes sharing
information in accordance with privacy norms
and can bridge the social, legal, political, and
technical aspects essential for evaluating privacy
in LLMs. However, this is also a good point to
reflect on use of CI for LLMs. This position paper argues that existing literature inadequately
applies CI for LLMs without embracing the theory’s fundamental tenets.

Despite the apparent simplicity of the CI framework, its
application is far from trivial. A rote use of the CI framework, while insightful, does not advance our understanding
of the privacy implications of LLMs. To meaningfully operationalize the CI theory, we require supporting its four
essential tenets (Nissenbaum, 2019): T1 Privacy is the appropriate flow of information; T2 Appropriate flows should
conform with privacy norms; T3 Information flows are defined using five parameters; T4 Ethical legitimacy of privacy norms is evaluated using the CI heuristic.

Inadequate applications of CI could lead to incorrect conclusions and flawed privacy-preserving
designs. We clarify the four fundamental tenets
of CI theory, systematize prior work on whether
they deviate from these tenets, and highlight
overlooked issues in experimental hygiene for
LLMs (e.g., prompt sensitivity, positional bias).

Position. Existing LLM literature inadequately applies
CI by not supporting the core CI tenets. This undermines
the reliability of their claims, risking misinterpretations
and flawed privacy-preserving system designs.

1. Introduction
The growing use of large language models (LLMs) to
automate tasks across and within social contexts (e.g.,
workspace, households, health, education) raises questions
about the models’ privacy implications and effective ways
to evaluate it. Traditional notions of privacy–focusing
on restricting certain types of information, dichotomies
of data types, data minimization, access control–provide
inadequate protection in an inter-connected society (Nissenbaum, 2019). This has prompted efforts to incorporate
a more robust notion of privacy that includes contextual
and societal considerations, particularly for LLMs (Brown
et al., 2022; Mireshghallah et al., 2023; Bagdasaryan et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024).
*

We would like to emphasize that the discrepancies in use
of CI do not render the existing work obsolete. Nevertheless, the use of CI without adhering to the theory’s main
tenets sends the wrong message to the unfamiliar reader.
Our goal is to set the record straight and to engage the ML
community to help fulfill the full potential in applying the
CI framework. We support our position by:
1. Clarifying Tenets of CI Theory. We specify the four
fundamental tenets of the CI theory (T1-T4), and what
constitutes the CI-based privacy analysis. (Section §2)
2. Survey and Systematization of Prior Work. We discuss nine “Alternate Views” of using CI for LLMs in
prior works, and highlight how these works deviate from
the CI core tenets. (Section §3)
3. Experimental hygiene. We highlight the importance of
accounting for prompt sensitivity in LLMs (variation in
responses due to small changes in prompts), and examine existing efforts. (Section §4)

Equal contribution 1 York University 2 University of Waterloo.
Correspondence to: Yan Shvartzshnaider <yansh@yorku.ca>,
Vasisht Duddu <vasisht.duddu@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

