A Manifold Perspective on the Statistical Generalization of
Graph Neural Networks

Zhiyang Wang * 1 Juan Cerviño * 2 Alejandro Ribeiro 1

Abstract

empirical success across various fields, including but not
limited to weather prediction (Lam et al., 2023), protein
structure prediction in biochemistry (Jumper et al., 2021;
Strokach et al., 2020), resource allocation in wireless communications (Wang et al., 2022a), social network analysis in
sociology (Fan et al., 2020), point cloud in 3D model reconstruction (Shi & Rajkumar, 2020) and learning simulators
(Fortunato et al., 2022).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) extend convolutional neural networks to operate on graphs. Despite their impressive performances in various
graph learning tasks, the theoretical understanding of their generalization capability is still lacking. Previous GNN generalization bounds ignore
the underlying graph structures, often leading to
bounds that increase with the number of nodes – a
behavior contrary to the one experienced in practice. In this paper, we take a manifold perspective
to establish the statistical generalization theory
of GNNs on graphs sampled from a manifold in
the spectral domain. As demonstrated empirically,
we prove that the generalization bounds of GNNs
decrease linearly with the size of the graphs in the
logarithmic scale, and increase linearly with the
spectral continuity constants of the filter functions.
Notably, our theory explains both node-level and
graph-level tasks. Our result has two implications:
i) guaranteeing the generalization of GNNs to unseen data over manifolds; ii) providing insights
into the practical design of GNNs, i.e., restrictions
on the discriminability of GNNs are necessary to
obtain a better generalization performance. We
demonstrate our generalization bounds of GNNs
using synthetic and multiple real-world datasets.

The effectiveness of GNNs relies on their empirical ability
to predict over unseen data. This capability is evaluated
theoretically with statistical generalization in deep learning
theory (Kawaguchi et al., 2017), which quantifies the difference between the empirical risk (i.e. training error) and
the statistical risk (i.e. testing error). Despite the abundant
evidence of GNNs’ generalization capabilities in practice,
developing concrete theories to explain their generalization is an active area of research. Many recent works have
studied the generalization bounds of GNNs without any
dependence on the underlying model responsible for generating the graph data (Scarselli et al., 2018; Garg et al.,
2020; Verma & Zhang, 2019). Generalization analysis on
graph classification, when graphs are drawn from random
limit models, is also studied in a series of works (Ruiz et al.,
2023; Maskey et al., 2022; 2024; Levie, 2024). In this work,
we take the manifold perspective to formulate graph data on
continuous topological spaces, i.e., manifolds. We emphasize that manifolds are realistic models to generate graph
data that enable rigorous theoretical analysis and a deep
understanding of the behaviors of GNNs.

1. Introduction

We explore the generalization bound of GNNs through the
lens of manifold theory on both node-level and graph-level
tasks in the spectral domain. The graphs are constructed
based on points randomly sampled from underlying manifolds, indicating that the manifold can be viewed as a statistical model for these discretely sampled points. As deep
learning architectures have been established over manifolds
(Wang et al., 2022b; Chew et al., 2024), the convergence
of GNNs to manifold neural networks (MNNs) and the algebraical equivalence of these two frameworks facilitate
a detailed generalization understanding of GNNs through
spectral analysis. We demonstrate that, with an appropriate
graph construction based on the sampled points from the

Graph convolutional neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli
et al., 2008; Defferrard et al., 2016; Bruna et al., 2014)
have emerged as one of the leading tools for processing
graph-structured data. There is abundant evidence of their
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Systems
Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
2
Laboratory of Information and Decision Systems (LIDS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Zhiyang Wang <zhiyangw@seas.upenn.edu>, Juan
Cerviño <jcervino@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

