Gandalf the Red: Adaptive Security for LLMs

Niklas Pfister * 1 Václav Volhejn * 1 Manuel Knott * 1 Santiago Arias 1 Julia Bazińska 1 Mykhailo Bichurin 1
Alan Commike 1 Janet Darling 1 Peter Dienes 1 Matthew Fiedler 1 David Haber 1 Matthias Kraft 1
Marco Lancini 1 Max Mathys 1 Damián Pascual-Ortiz 1 Jakub Podolak 1 Adrià Romero-López 1
Kyriacos Shiarlis 1 Andreas Signer 1 Zsolt Terek 1 Athanasios Theocharis 1 Daniel Timbrell 1
Samuel Trautwein 1 Samuel Watts 1 Yun-Han Wu 1 Mateo Rojas-Carulla 1

Abstract

controlled by natural language inputs. Current LLM applications primarily include chatbots for customer support and
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems for databasedriven queries. However, improved reasoning and enhanced
API access are paving the way for more sophisticated LLM
agents equipped with tools and collaborative capabilities to
tackle complex tasks (Talebirad & Nadiri, 2023).

Current evaluations of defenses against prompt
attacks in large language model (LLM) applications often overlook two critical factors: the
dynamic nature of adversarial behavior and the
usability penalties imposed on legitimate users
by restrictive defenses. We propose D-SEC (Dynamic Security Utility Threat Model), which explicitly separates attackers from legitimate users,
models multi-step interactions, and expresses the
security-utility in an optimizable form. We further
address the shortcomings in existing evaluations
by introducing Gandalf, a crowd-sourced, gamified red-teaming platform designed to generate
realistic, adaptive attack. Using Gandalf, we collect and release a dataset of 279k prompt attacks.
Complemented by benign user data, our analysis
reveals the interplay between security and utility, showing that defenses integrated in the LLM
(e.g., system prompts) can degrade usability even
without blocking requests. We demonstrate that
restricted application domains, defense-in-depth,
and adaptive defenses are effective strategies for
building secure and useful LLM applications.

As with any other traditional software application, LLM
applications possess security vulnerabilities that can be exploited by malicious attackers, potentially causing substantial damage. In addition to conventional security vulnerabilities such as broken access control, cryptographic failures,
or injections (OWASP, 2025a), LLM applications introduce
several novel vulnerabilities, the most serious of which are
prompt attacks2 (OWASP, 2025b). Prompt attacks make
use of the fact that LLMs cannot programmatically distinguish between commands used to define the original task
and input data used to execute the task. Attackers can exploit this to manipulate LLM behavior, causing it to deviate
from its intended use case. Examples include jailbreak attacks, system prompt leakage, and indirect injection attacks
(Greshake et al., 2023).
Defending against prompt attacks is challenging due to the
ability of LLMs to interpret natural language, multimodal
inputs, code, and obfuscated commands, making it easy
to hide malicious commands within benign-looking inputs.
In the literature, many approaches for defending against
prompt attacks have been proposed. They can be roughly
divided into three categories: (i) Input/output classifier defenses that use the input and/or the resulting LLM output to
classify whether a given prompt is malicious (e.g., Kumar
et al., 2024; Ayub & Majumdar, 2024; Kim et al., 2024;
Sawtell et al., 2024), (ii) LLM internal defenses that modify
the model itself through the system prompt, fine-tuning, or
other post-training methods to ensure it adheres strictly to
its original intended task (e.g., Bai et al., 2022; Wei et al.,

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language models (LLMs), such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT, Google’s Gemini, and Anthropic’s Claude,
have revolutionized the capabilities of machine learning systems. One of the most promising features of these models
is their ability to bridge the gap between natural language
and code. This capability has enabled developers to design LLM-based applications that can perform various tasks
*
Equal contribution 1 Lakera. Correspondence to: Niklas Pfister
<niklas.pfister@lakera.ai>.

2

We prefer the term ‘prompt attack’ over ‘prompt injection’,
used by OWASP (2025b) since some authors use ‘prompt injection’
exclusively to refer to indirect attacks.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

