On the Provable Separation of Scales in Maximal Update Parameterization

Letong “Carina” Hong∗ 1 Zhangyang “Atlas” Wang∗ 1

Abstract

model training pipelines adopt a similar, ad-hoc approach:
they identify hyperparameters from the first few epochs
and assume those settings generalize throughout training
to avoid prohibitively expensive full-run searches. While
widely used in industry to reduce cost, this early-stage strategy lacks a rigorous theoretical grounding, motivating our
work. Specifically, it is unclear how the dynamics of optimization adapt to changes in model size and interact with
µP to preserve hyperparameter validity. Bridging this gap
requires deeper insights into the interplay between parameterization, training stability, and the loss landscape across
scales. Such understanding could further enhance the robustness and efficiency of hyperparameter transfer.

Maximal Update Parameterization (µP) has
shown significant promise in allowing zero-shot
hyperparameter transfer across neural network
scales, reducing the prohibitive cost of hyperparameter tuning for large models. However, the theoretical foundation behind the observed approximate transferability of hyperparameters remains
underexplored. Relying on a width-dominance
regime, which ensures that as width grows, certain terms of the learning dynamics dominate,
we establish the first fundamental separation of
scales in µP between macro-variables (e.g. loss
landscapes) and micro-variables (e.g. individual
weights). Our formulation explains why hyperparameter tuning can be effectively performed
in early training stages, i.e., early statistics effectively approximate global hyperparameter optima,
implying the potential to further reduce the training costs required for searching optimal hyperparameters. We further apply our main theory to
explain an empirical deep learning phenomenon
discovered independently by prior work.

This paper formalizes a novel scale-separation framework, showing that the macro-level descriptors (e.g., gradient norms, loss landscapes) converge at O(1/n), while
micro-level
√ variables (individual weights) only converge
at Θ(1/ n). This theoretical lens provides an immediate
explanation for the ad-hoc industry practice of “early-stage”
hyperparameter tuning: even if individual weights are far
from their eventual values, large-width models induce stable
macro-level signals that can guide hyperparameter selection.
As a result, optimizing hyperparameters on a smaller proxy
model or a small fraction of training steps can approximate
globally optimal hyperparameters within O(1/n) error - potentially reducing the cost of full-run searches substantially
in large-scale neural network pipelines.

1. Introduction
The success of hyperparameter transfer in deep learning
relies critically on the choice of network parameterization.
Recent work introduced the Maximal Update parameterization (µP), which enables reliable µTransfer of hyperparameters from small proxy models to larger ones (Yang et al.,
2021). This breakthrough allows practitioners to efficiently
optimize hyperparameters on smaller, cheaper models while
retaining effectiveness when scaled to larger architectures.

Our work introduces several key technical advances:
• We introduce a stochastic differential equation (SDE)
framework that cleanly separates macro (loss landscapes) and micro (individual weight) variables in
large-width neural networks. This leads to a precise understanding of why hyperparameter tuning can succeed
early in training, marking the first rigorous application
of such SDE techniques to hyperparameter transfer.

However, the theoretical understanding of whether or why
early-stage tuning can transfer effectively across different
model scales remains limited. In practice, many large-scale

• We develop a new mathematical treatment of how
loss landscapes vary with network width n, proving
that macro-level descriptors converge at O(1/n) while
micro-level weights evolve rigorously more slowly.
This width “regularity” underlies an O(1/n) bound on
hyperparameter transfer error, providing a principled
foundation for zero-shot transfer across scales.

*

Equal contribution 1 XTY AI Labs, XTX Markets. Authors are
listed in alphabetic order (α-β). Correspondence to: Atlas Wang
<Atlas.Wang@xtxmarkets.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We extend our macro–micro separation framework to
1

