Stable Fair Graph Representation Learning with Lipschitz Constraint

Qiang Chen * 1 Zhongze Wu * 1 Xiu Su † 1 Xi Lin † 2 Zhe Qu 1 Shan You 3 Shuo Yang 4 Chang Xu 5

0.8

80

Training Accuracy

Group fairness based on adversarial training has
gained significant attention on graph data, which
was implemented by masking sensitive attributes
to generate fair feature views. However, existing models suffer from training instability due
to uncertainty of the generated masks and the
trade-off between fairness and utility. In this
work, we propose a stable fair Graph Neural
Network (SFG) to maintain training stability
while preserving accuracy and fairness performance. Specifically, we first theoretically derive a tight upper Lipschitz bound to control
the stability of existing adversarial-based models and employ a stochastic projected subgradient algorithm to constrain the bound, which operates in a block-coordinate manner. Additionally, we construct the uncertainty set to train the
model, which can prevent unstable training by
dropping some overfitting nodes caused by chasing fairness. Extensive experiments conducted on
three real-world datasets demonstrate that SFG
is stable and outperforms other state-of-the-art
adversarial-based methods in terms of both fairness and utility performance. Codes are available
at https://github.com/sh-qiangchen/SFG.

0.6

60

0.4
0.2

Training Accuracy

Abstract

German
Bail
Credit

170 175 180 185 190 195 200

Epoch

(a) Training accuracy curve

40
20

German
Bail
Credit

t-3

t-2

t-1

t

Epoch

t+1 t+2 t+3

(b) Accuracy near the optimum

Figure 1. Instability of the existing adversarial-based model utility
on German/Bail/Credit dataset. (a) visualizes the accuracy curve
in the convergence phase. (b) visualizes the accuracy near the
optimal model.

GNNs can suffer from fairness issues that can be divided
mainly into individual fairness(Dong et al., 2021) and group
fairness(Dai & Wang, 2021). Group fairness highlights mitigating bias in the demographic groups defined by sensitive
attributes, e.g., gender, race(Agarwal et al., 2021). In other
words, group fairness concentrates on ensuring that the outputs of GNNs are independent of the sensitive attribute.
Recent studies(Dai & Wang, 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Zhu
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024) have revealed that the removal
of sensitive attribute-related information can force GNNs
to make decisions independently of the sensitive attribute.
The core idea behind most of these approaches is masking
sensitive-relevant features by a learnable mask and adopting
adversarial learning(Ling et al., 2023) to learn fair node
representations. However, in our empirical investigations,
we observed that when employing learnable masks and
adversarial-based methods to optimize the framework for
both model fairness and utility on real datasets, the training
process suffers from significant instability. This instability results in the selection of an optimal model becoming
largely accidental and not trustworthy(Zhang et al., 2024;
Jing et al., 2024). As shown in Figure 1, we see that the accuracy curve in the convergence phase is still very unstable,
and the accuracy near the optimal model fluctuates greatly.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)(Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Hamilton & Ying, 2017) have recently emerged as a crucial tool for modeling and representing graph-structured
data, which are widely used in various applications such as
recommendation systems(Gao et al., 2022) and drug discovery(Rozemberczki et al., 2022). Despite significant success,
*
Equal contribution 1 Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China 3 SenseTime Research, Shanghai, China 4 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China 5 University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to: Xiu Su
<xiusu1994@csu.edu.cn>, Xi Lin <linxi234@sjtu.edu.cn>.

To ensure the reliability of the model in the trade-off between model utility and fairness, it is urgently needed to
maintain the stability of the training process. Most existing methods(Scaman & Virmaux, 2018; Zhao et al., 2021;
Agarwal et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2024) maintain stability by
constraining the Lipschitz bound of the model, which is a
separable accumulation form of each component parameter,
or using the Jacobian matrix to approximate. These forms

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

