NTK-DFL: Enhancing Decentralized Federated Learning in Heterogeneous
Settings via Neural Tangent Kernel

Gabriel Thompson 1 Kai Yue 1 Chau-Wai Wong 1 2 Huaiyu Dai 1

Abstract

model aggregation. In the popular federated averaging (FedAvg) algorithm (McMahan et al., 2017), clients perform
multiple rounds of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on
their own local data, then send this new weight vector to a
central server for aggregation. As FL gains popularity in
both theoretical studies and real-world applications, numerous improvements have been made to address challenges,
including communication efficiency, heterogeneous data
distributions, and security concerns (Sattler et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2020b; Zhu et al., 2019). To handle the performance
degradation caused by data heterogeneity, many works have
proposed mitigation strategies for FedAvg (Karimireddy
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b). Notably, some researchers
have introduced the neural tangent kernel (NTK), replacing
the commonly-used SGD in order to improve the model
convergence (Yu et al., 2022; Yue et al., 2022).

Decentralized federated learning (DFL) is a collaborative machine learning framework for training a model across participants without a central
server or raw data exchange. DFL faces challenges due to statistical heterogeneity, as participants often possess data of different distributions
reflecting local environments and user behaviors.
Recent work has shown that the neural tangent kernel (NTK) approach, when applied to federated
learning in a centralized framework, can lead to
improved performance. We propose an approach
leveraging the NTK to train client models in the
decentralized setting, while introducing a synergy
between NTK-based evolution and model averaging. This synergy exploits inter-client model
deviation and improves both accuracy and convergence in heterogeneous settings. Empirical
results demonstrate that our approach consistently
achieves higher accuracy than baselines in highly
heterogeneous settings, where other approaches
often underperform. Additionally, it reaches target performance in 4.6 times fewer communication rounds. We validate our approach across
multiple datasets, network topologies, and heterogeneity settings to ensure robustness and generalization. Source code for NTK-DFL is available at
https://github.com/Gabe-Thomp/ntk-dfl.

Despite these advancements, the centralized nature of traditional FL schemes introduces the possibility for client data
leakage, computational bottlenecks at the server, and high
communication bandwidth demand (Kairouz et al., 2021).
Decentralized federated learning (DFL) has been proposed
as a solution to these issues (Martı́nez Beltrán et al., 2023).
In DFL, clients may communicate with each other along
an undirected graph, where each node represents a client
and each edge represents a communication channel between
clients. While DFL addresses some of the issues inherent
to centralized FL, both frameworks grapple with the challenge of statistical heterogeneity across clients. Although
mixing data on a central server could readily resolve this
issue, transmitting raw, private training data from clients introduces privacy concerns, making FL and DFL approaches
good candidates to address this challenge (Yuan et al., 2024).
This paper focuses on the following research question: How
can we design a DFL approach that effectively addresses
statistical heterogeneity?

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm
in which multiple clients train a global model without the
explicit communication of training data. In most FL scenarios, clients communicate with a central server that performs

We propose a method that exploits the NTK to evolve
weights. We denote this paradigm NTK-DFL. Our approach
combines the advantages of NTK-based optimization with
the decentralized structure of DFL. The NTK-DFL weight
evolution scheme makes use of the communication of client
Jacobians, allowing for more expressive updates than traditional weight vector transmissions and improving per-

1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, NC State University 2 Secure Computing Institute, NC State University, Raleigh, USA. Correspondence to: Chau-Wai Wong
<chauwai.wong@ncsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

