Towards a Mechanistic Explanation of Diffusion Model Generalization

Matthew Niedoba 1 2 Berend Zwartsenberg 2 Kevin Murphy 1 Frank Wood 1 2 3
Empirical

NCSN++

DiT

DDPM++

PSPC-Flex

t = 8.4

Abstract

t = 0.3

t = 0.6

t = 1.1

t = 1.9

t = 3.3

t = 5.3

We propose a simple, training-free mechanism
which explains the generalization behaviour of
diffusion models. By comparing pre-trained diffusion models to their theoretically optimal empirical counterparts, we identify a shared local
inductive bias across a variety of network architectures. From this observation, we hypothesize that
network denoisers generalize through localized
denoising operations, as these operations approximate the training objective well over much of the
training distribution. To validate our hypothesis,
we introduce novel denoising algorithms which
aggregate local empirical denoisers to replicate
network behaviour. Comparing these algorithms
to network denoisers across forward and reverse
diffusion processes, our approach exhibits consistent visual similarity to neural network outputs,
with lower mean squared error than previously
proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021) have become the de facto standard for modelling image (Rombach et al., 2022) and video
(Harvey et al., 2022) data due to their high sample quality
and generalization abilities. When properly tuned, diffusion
models produce samples that are distributionally similar to
their training set, but are not exact copies of training data
(Zhang et al., 2023).

Figure 1. Denoiser outputs given shared reverse process noisy inputs from CIFAR-10. Column 1: Optimal empirical denoiser,
i.e. what a “perfect” neural network denoiser would output if appropriately parameterized and trained to achieve minimal loss on
the diffusion denoising loss (Equation (5)). Columns 2-4: Outputs
from various denoising neural networks. For t < 3.3 all networks deviate from the optimal denoiser in similar ways. Column
5: Our learning-free patch set posterior composite denoiser produces qualitatively similar outputs to the neural network denoisers,
suggesting that neural networks may generalize in part via patch
denoising and composition.

This behaviour is remarkable, as linear increases in data dimensionality require exponentially more training samples to
model the data density (Bellman, 1966). Avoiding this curse
of dimensionality requires inductive biases that enable generalization from sparse examples (Goyal & Bengio, 2022).
Recently, research has found that diffusion models produce

near-identical samples despite differences in architecture,
optimization, or diffusion hyperparameters (Zhang et al.,
2023), suggesting the presence of inductive biases common
to all image diffusion models.

1

University of British Columbia 2 Inverted AI 3 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute. Correspondence to: Matthew Niedoba
<mniedoba@cs.ubc.ca>.

Diffusion models generate samples through an iterative process in which noise is progressively removed via repeated
denoising operations. Crucially, at each step of this process,
there exists an optimal denoiser function that can be ex-

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

