Rectifying Conformity Scores for Better Conditional Coverage

Vincent Plassier * 1 Alexander Fishkov * 2 3 Victor Dheur * 4 Mohsen Guizani 2 Souhaib Ben Taieb 2 4
Maxim Panov 2 Eric Moulines 2 5
Classical CP approaches guarantee marginal validity but
fail to ensure the more desirable property of conditional
validity, which customizes prediction regions to specific covariates. Prior studies have shown constructing meaningful
prediction regions with exact conditional validity is infeasible without additional distributional assumptions (Vovk,
2012; Lei & Wasserman, 2014; Foygel Barber et al., 2021).
Consequently, current research emphasizes developing conformal methods that maintain marginal validity and achieve
approximate conditional validity (Colombo, 2024; Gibbs
et al., 2025).

Abstract
We present a new method for generating confidence sets within the split conformal prediction
framework. Our method performs a trainable
transformation of any given conformity score to
improve conditional coverage while ensuring exact marginal coverage. The transformation is
based on an estimate of the conditional quantile
of conformity scores. The resulting method is particularly beneficial for constructing adaptive confidence sets in multi-output problems where standard conformal quantile regression approaches
have limited applicability. We develop a theoretical bound that captures the influence of the
accuracy of the quantile estimate on the approximate conditional validity, unlike classical bounds
for conformal prediction methods that only offer marginal coverage. We experimentally show
that our method is highly adaptive to the local
data structure and outperforms existing methods
in terms of conditional coverage, improving the
reliability of statistical inference in various applications.

A typical relaxation of exact conditional coverage in earlier
work involves group-conditional guarantees (Jung et al.,
2023; Ding et al., 2024), which provide coverage guarantees
for a predefined set of groups. Another branch of work
partitions the covariate space X into multiple regions and
applies CP within each set in the partition (LeRoy & Zhao,
2021; Alaa et al., 2023; Kiyani et al., 2024). However, such
partitioning based on the calibration set often leads to overly
large prediction regions (Bian & Barber, 2023; Plassier et al.,
2024).
An alternative approach weights the empirical cumulative
distribution function with a “localizer” function that quantifies the similarity between calibration points and the test
sample (Guan, 2023). Although this method improves the
localization of predictions, it has significant limitations, especially in high-dimensional covariate spaces.

1. Introduction
The widespread deployment of AI models emphasizes the
need for reliable uncertainty quantification (Gruber et al.,
2023). Although highly flexible in capturing complex statistical dependencies, these models can produce unreliable or
overly confident predictions (Nalisnick et al., 2018). Conformal prediction (CP; Vovk et al. (2005); Shafer & Vovk
(2008)) offers a robust, distribution-free framework for predictions with finite-sample validity guarantees (Angelopoulos et al., 2023; 2024).

Finally, several methods focus on the transformation of conformity scores (Han et al., 2022; Dey et al., 2022; Izbicki
et al., 2022; Deutschmann et al., 2023; Dheur et al., 2024;
Colombo, 2024). These techniques adjust conformity scores
to better approximate the conditional coverage. However,
they usually require estimating the conditional distribution
of conformity scores, which is both computationally intensive and difficult to perform accurately.

*

Equal contribution 1 Lagrange Mathematics and Computing Research Center 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 3 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 4 University
of Mons 5 École Polytechnique. Correspondence to: Maxim Panov
<maxim.panov@mbzuai.ac.ae>.

In this paper, we propose a novel CP method, Rectified
Conformal Prediction (RCP), extending normalized nonconformity scores; see, e.g., (Papadopoulos et al., 2008; Papadopoulos & Haralambous, 2011). RCP aims to enhance
conditional coverage while preserving exact marginal coverage guarantees. By constructing a new conformity score
whose quantile at a given coverage level is independent

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

