AI for Global Climate Cooperation: Modeling Global Climate Negotiations,
Agreements, and Long-Term Cooperation in RICE-N

Tianyu Zhang * 1 2 Andrew Williams * 1 2 Phillip Wozny * 3 Kai-Hendrik Cohrs * 4
Koen Ponse 5 Marco Jiralerspong 1 2 Soham Rajesh Phade 6 Sunil Srinivasa 7 Lu Li 8
Yang Zhang 9 Prateek Gupta 10 Erman Acar 11 Irina Rish 1 2 12 Yoshua Bengio 1 2 12 Stephan Zheng 13

Abstract

action, warning that it is “now or never” to avert a climate
disaster (Pörtner et al., 2022). Ecosystems are drastically
changing: the Amazon rainforest is receding (Lovejoy & Nobre, 2018) and polar ice sheets are melting (Boers & Rypdal,
2021; DeConto et al., 2021). Extreme weather events, including the recent increase in coastal flooding and forest fires
are unequivocal warning signs (Kundzewicz, 2016; Schmidt
et al., 2022). These developments are increasingly being attributed to climate change and driving towards a system-wide
tipping point (van Oldenborgh et al., 2021; Stott et al., 2016).

Global cooperation on climate change mitigation
is essential to limit temperature increases while
supporting long-term, equitable economic growth
and sustainable development. Achieving such
cooperation among diverse regions, each with
different incentives, in a dynamic environment
shaped by complex political and economic
factors, without a central authority, is a profoundly
challenging game-theoretic problem. This article
introduces RICE-N, a multi-region integrated assessment model that simulates the global climate,
economy, and climate negotiations and agreements. RICE-N uses multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) to incentivize agents to develop
strategic behaviors based on the environmental dynamics and the actions of others. We present two
negotiation protocols: (1) Bilateral Negotiation,
an example protocol and (2) Basic Club, inspired
by Climate Clubs and the carbon border adjustment mechanism (Nordhaus, 2015; Commission,
2022). When we compare their impact against a
no-negotiation baseline with various mitigation
strategies, we find that both protocols significantly
reduce temperature growth at the cost of a minor
drop in production while ensuring a more equitable
distribution of the emissions reduction costs.

1

Climate change is a global issue impacting all. In response,
public and private financing have driven technological
innovation (e.g. in renewable energy) and community
initiatives for systemic change. However, mitigation
investments vary across countries due to social and economic
factors. For example, developing nations may prioritize basic
needs, while developed nations likely have more resources
to address climate impacts.1 This creates a ”tragedy of the
commons,” where self-interest can lead to harmful outcomes
for all (Gardiner, 2001).
As such, achieving and maintaining global cooperation is
crucial to achieve the Paris Agreement’s long-term goal
of limiting the global temperature rise above pre-industrial
levels to well below 2◦ C (DeConto et al., 2021). At the same
time, it is important to maintain economic development,
including growth and inequality reduction. For instance,
international trade treaties, foreign investment, and technology transfer can help developing countries meet net-zero
targets while supporting global economic growth. Such
cooperation could be fostered through climate clubs, which
tackle barriers to climate action (Nordhaus, 2015).

Introduction

The latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) report emphasizes the urgent need for immediate

From a modeling perspective, achieving and maintaining
global cooperation poses a complex game-theoretic problem
involving cooperation, communication, and competition. It
can be modeled with n strategic agents, each representing
a region or nation seeking to maximize their own utility
through policies aimed at their own socio-economic and

*

Equal contribution 1 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 DIRO,
Université de Montréal 3 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 4 Universitat
de València 5 Leiden University 6 Wayve 7 NVIDIA 8 University of
Pennsylvania 9 Bank of Canada 10 University of Oxford 11 University
of Amsterdam 12 CIFAR 13 Asari AI. Correspondence to: Tianyu
Zhang <tianyu.zhang@mila.quebec>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Developing countries typically pay more to reduce emissions
than higher-income countries (Erickson et al., 2015).

1

