Exploring Vision Semantic Prompt for Efficient
Point Cloud Understanding

Yixin Zha 1 Chuxin Wang 1 Wenfei Yang 1 2 Tianzhu Zhang 1 2 Feng Wu 1 2

Abstract

in natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel
et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Floridi & Chiriatti, 2020)
and vision understanding (He et al., 2022; Radford et al.,
2021; Oquab et al., 2023; Dehghani et al., 2023), similar
methods of point cloud understanding have been proposed,
such as PointBERT (Yu et al., 2022), PointMAE (Pang et al.,
2022) and PointGPT (Chen et al., 2024). These works utilize
large amounts of unlabeled data to learn general representations and apply them to downstream tasks through full
fine-tuning. However, the full fine-tuning strategy faces two
significant shortcomings: (1) Fine-tuning the entire model
leads to the forgetting of pretrained knowledge; (2) Full
fine-tuning imposes a significant storage burden.

A series of pretrained models have demonstrated
promising results in point cloud understanding
tasks and are widely applied to downstream tasks
through fine-tuning. However, full fine-tuning
leads to the forgetting of pretrained knowledge
and substantial storage costs on edge devices. To
address these issues, Parameter-Efficient Transfer
Learning (PETL) methods have been proposed.
According to our analysis, we find that existing
3D PETL methods cannot adequately align with
semantic relationships of features required by
downstream tasks, resulting in suboptimal performance. To ensure parameter efficiency while introducing rich semantic cues, we propose a novel
fine-tuning paradigm for 3D pretrained models.
We utilize frozen 2D pretrained models to provide vision semantic prompts and design a new
Hybrid Attention Adapter to efficiently fuse 2D
semantic cues into 3D representations with minimal trainable parameters(1.8M). Extensive experiments conducted on datasets including ScanObjectNN, ModelNet40, and ShapeNetPart demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed paradigm.
In particular, our method achieves 95.6% accuracy on ModelNet40 and attains 90.09% performance on the most challenging classification split
ScanObjectNN(PB-T50-RS).

To address the aforementioned constraints, a series of
Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning (PETL) (Hu et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022) methods have been
proposed. In point cloud understanding tasks, researchers
have also proposed a series of PETL approaches, such as
IDPT (Zha et al., 2023), DAPT (Zhou et al., 2024), and
Point-PEFT (Tang et al., 2024). However, as shown in Figure 1(b), performance of the 3D PETL method on complex
tasks remains unsatisfactory. Upon analysis, we believe
this limitation may stem from the differences in feature requirements between point cloud pretraining tasks and downstream tasks. As shown in Figure 1(a), point cloud features
of pretrained models are limited to local structural information and exhibit positional preferences. In contrast, features
obtained through full fine-tuning contain rich semantic information, with consistent representations for components
of the same structure. However, in PETL methods, the
main backbones are frozen, resulting in output features with
limited semantic cues, which constrains networks generalization ability in downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
With the growing of training data and model parameters,
large foundation models have achieved success across various domains and tasks. Point clouds, as direct representations of the real world, play a crucial role in various fields (Li
et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2024). Inspired by pretrained models

Compared to point clouds, 2D images contain richer semantic details. Currently, there are many existing 2D models
pretrained on large-scale image datasets. These models not
only learn rich semantic cues but are also widely deployed
on edge devices. This raises an intriguing question worth
exploring: Can we leverage 2D semantics to enhance the
performance of efficient 3D understanding? We believe that
effectively integrating 2D semantic cues with 3D features
could significantly improve model performances, even with
minimal trainable parameters. To explore the feasibility of

1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Deep Space Exploration Lab, Hefei, China. Correspondence to:
Yixin Zha <zyxcn@mail.ustc.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

