Decision Theoretic Foundations for Conformal Prediction:
Optimal Uncertainty Quantification for Risk-Averse Agents

Shayan Kiyani 1 George Pappas 1 Aaron Roth 1 Hamed Hassani 1

Abstract

high-stakes cases—where an incorrect treatment decision
could lead to serious complications or death—it is crucial
not to rely solely on a model’s predictions. Instead, decisions must account for the uncertainty in these predictions,
opting for more conservative interventions when that uncertainty makes the potential outcomes (e.g., complications,
side effects) highly variable. Connecting uncertain predictions to actionable, principled decisions is a significant
challenge in safety-critical domains, including medical diagnosis, finance, robotics, and control, and requires balancing
safety with utility. One extreme is to avoid any action entirely—sacrificing prediction’s practical value for absolute
safety—while the other is to aggressively exploit predictions
to maximize expected utility, accepting significant downside
risk at the cost of realizing poor outcomes with substantial
probability. Balancing this trade-off calls for an optimal
approach to risk-sensitive decision making. To this end, we
focus on the following question:

A fundamental question in data-driven decision making is how to quantify the uncertainty
of predictions to inform risk-sensitive downstream actions, as often required in domains such
as medicine. We develop a decision-theoretic
foundation linking prediction sets to risk-averse
decision-making, addressing three questions: (1)
What is the correct notion of uncertainty quantification for risk-averse decision makers? We prove
that prediction sets are optimal for decision makers who wish to optimize their value at risk. (2)
What is the optimal policy that a risk averse decision maker should use to map prediction sets to
actions? We show that a simple max-min decision
policy is optimal for risk-averse decision makers.
Finally, (3) How can we derive prediction sets that
are optimal for such decision makers? We provide an exact characterization in the population
regime and a distribution free finite-sample construction. These insights leads to Risk-Averse Calibration (RAC), a principled algorithm that is both
practical—exploiting black-box predictions to enhance downstream utility—and safe—adhering to
user-defined risk thresholds. We experimentally
demonstrate RAC’s advantages in medical diagnosis and recommendation systems, showing that
it substantially improves the trade-off between
safety and utility, delivering higher utility than
existing methods while avoiding critical errors.

What is the optimal interface between prediction and action
that allows for navigating the trade-off between safety and
utility in high stakes applications?

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Shayan
Kiyani <shayank@seas.upenn.edu>.

The optimal design of an action policy crucially depends
on how uncertainty is quantified. Among various methods,
a widely adopted approach—spurred by advances in conformal prediction—is to produce prediction sets rather than
point estimates. But what exactly are prediction sets good
for? Which decision-making processes make them the right
language for communicating uncertainty? And, given such
a process, what is the optimal rule for transforming prediction sets into actions? To address these questions, we first
introduce our setting and notation. We consider a feature
space X and a label set Y, endowed with the distribution
(x, y) ∼ D. A downstream decision maker has an action set
A and a utility function u : A × Y → R that maps actions a
and realized labels y to utilities u(a, y), which the decision
maker seeks to maximize. Upon observing x ∈ X , the decision maker must take an action a ∈ A without observing the
true label y, relying instead on predictions about y. Within
this framework, we aim to answer the above questions.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In seeking answers, it is instructive to reflect on what we can
say about calibrated forecasts, an alternative way of quantifying uncertainty with well-established decision-theoretic

1. Introduction
Predictions are frequently used to inform actions. For example, in clinical medicine, patient data are used to predict diagnoses and outcomes when choosing treatments. In
1

1

