Test-time Adaptation on Graphs via Adaptive Subgraph-based Selection and
Regularized Prototypes

Yusheng Zhao 1 Qixin Zhang 2 Xiao Luo # 3 Junyu Luo 1 Wei Ju 1 Zhiping Xiao # 4 Ming Zhang # 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning from non-Euclidean graph-structured data has recently received increasing attention, with a wide range of
applications in knowledge graph representation learning
(Chen et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020), social network analysis
(Fan et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2024), molecular property
prediction (Godwin et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2022; Stärk et al.,
2022), novel drug discovery (Jiang et al., 2021; Bongini
et al., 2021), and traffic flow forecasting (Zhao et al., 2023;
Ju et al., 2024b). Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf
& Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al.,
2018) have achieved promising performance on learning representations on graph-structured data via message passing.
Subsequently, graph-level features are obtained by pooling
operations, enabling a plethora of downstream tasks.

Test-time adaptation aims to adapt a well-trained
model using test data only, without accessing
training data. It is a crucial topic in machine
learning, enabling a wide range of applications
in the real world, especially when it comes to
data privacy. While existing works on test-time
adaptation primarily focus on Euclidean data,
research on non-Euclidean graph data remains
scarce. Prevalent graph neural network methods could encounter serious performance degradation in the face of test-time domain shifts. In
this work, we propose a novel method named
Adaptive Subgraph-based SElection and Regularized Prototype SuperviSion (ASSESS) for reliable test-time adaptation on graphs. Specifically,
to achieve flexible selection of reliable test graphs,
ASSESS adopts an adaptive selection strategy
based on fine-grained individual-level subgraph
mutual information. Moreover, to utilize the information from both training and test graphs, ASSESS constructs semantic prototypes from the
well-trained model as prior knowledge from the
unknown training graphs and optimizes the posterior given the unlabeled test graphs. We also
provide a theoretical analysis of the proposed algorithm. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of ASSESS against various baselines.

Despite their superior performance, GNNs mostly assume
that test graphs come from the same distribution as training
graphs, which is often violated in real-world scenarios (Gui
et al., 2022). Distribution shifts during test time are often
inevitable, and some prior works (Wu et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021b; Yin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024) investigate
the problem of unsupervised graph domain adaptation that
attempt to transfer the knowledge from the labeled training
graphs to unlabeled test graphs via domain discrepancy minimization. However, these methods typically require labeled
source graphs to perform domain alignment, which is often impractical when facing data privacy issues (Tan et al.,
2023). It is a common practice for institutions to disclose
their pretrained models for downstream tasks, while keeping
the training dataset private. Towards this end, this paper
investigates a more realistic yet under-explored problem
of test-time adaptation on graphs, which aims to adapt the
off-the-shelf well-trained model using test-time data only,
without accessing training data.

1

School of Computer Science, State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, PKU-Anker LLM Lab, Peking
University, Beijing, China 2 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA 4 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Luo <xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>, Zhiping Xiao <patxiao@uw.edu>, Ming Zhang <mzhang cs@pku.edu.cn>.

Previously, several solutions have been proposed to tackle
the problem of test-time adaptation (Sun et al., 2020b; Liang
et al., 2020; Nado et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Litrico et al.,
2023; Karmanov et al., 2024). These methods often adopt
self-training with pseudo-labels or use data-centric methods on the test data. However, these works focus mainly
on Euclidean data, while research on non-Euclidean graphstructured data remains scarce. Specifically, test-time adap-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

