Joint Learning of Energy-based Models and their Partition Function

Michaël E. Sander 1 Vincent Roulet 1 Tianlin Liu 1 Mathieu Blondel 1

Abstract

distribution p(y|x). Probabilistic EBMs include Bolzmann
machines (Ackley et al., 1985) as a special case.

Probabilistic energy-based models (EBMs) offer
a flexible framework for parameterizing probability distributions using neural networks. However, learning probabilistic EBMs by exact maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is generally intractable, due to the need to compute the partition
function (normalization constant). In this paper,
we propose a novel formulation for approximately
learning probabilistic EBMs in combinatoriallylarge discrete spaces, such as sets or permutations.
Our key idea is to jointly learn both an energy
model and its log-partition, both parameterized as
neural networks. Our approach not only provides
a novel tractable objective criterion to learn EBMs
by stochastic gradient descent (without relying on
MCMC), but also a novel means to estimate the
log-partition function on unseen data points. On
the theoretical side, we show that our approach recovers the optimal MLE solution when optimizing
in the space of continuous functions. Furthermore,
we show that our approach naturally extends to
the broader family of Fenchel-Young losses, allowing us to obtain the first tractable method for
optimizing the sparsemax loss in combinatoriallylarge spaces. We demonstrate our approach on
multilabel classification and label ranking.

Unfortunately, this flexibility makes learning, sampling and
inference with probabilistic EBMs much more challenging.
Indeed, without factorization assumptions, turning an energy function into a valid probability distribution involves
computing the partition function (normalization constant),
which is generally intractable to compute exactly in continuous spaces or in combinatorially-large discrete spaces. To
perform maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of the network parameters, a standard approach is to rely on Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to estimate stochastic
gradients of the log-likelihood function (Song & Kingma,
2021). However, deriving an MCMC sampler is usually
case by case. For instance, for continuous outputs we may
use Langevin-MCMC and for binary outputs we may use
Gibbs sampling. In practice, as is the case in contrastive
divergences (Hinton, 2002), MCMC iterations are not run
to convergence, leading to biased stochastic gradient estimates (Fischer & Igel, 2010). In continuous spaces, score
matching (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005) is often used as an
alternative to MLE but it requires computing the Laplacian operator, which is challenging in high dimension. In
combinatorially-large discrete spaces, one can use the generalized perceptron loss (LeCun et al., 2006) or the generalized Fenchel-Young loss (Blondel et al., 2022), which
only involve computing an argmax or a regularized argmax,
respectively. These losses sidestep computing the partition
function, but they learn non-probabilistic EBMs.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a novel formulation for learning
probabilistic EBMs p(y|x) in combinatorially-large discrete
spaces (such as sets or permutations in our experiments) by
MLE or any loss function in the Fenchel-Young family
(Blondel et al., 2020a). Our approach not only provides a
new tractable objective criterion that can be optimized by
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) without MCMC, but also
a new means to estimate the log-partition function on unseen
data points using a jointly-learned separate neural network.
We demonstrate our method on multilabel classification
(space of sets) and label ranking (space of permutations).

Probabilistic energy-based models (EBMs) are a powerful
framework for parameterizing probability distributions using neural networks, without any factorization assumptions.
They have been successfully used both in the unsupervised
setting (density estimation, image generation), where the
goal is to learn a probability density function p(x) and in
the supervised learning setting (classification, structured prediction), where the goal is to learn a conditional probability
1

Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Mathieu Blondel <mblondel@google.com>, Michaël E. Sander <michaelsander@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Contributions.
• After reviewing some extensive background, we propose
1

