Noise-Guided Predicate Representation Extraction and Diffusion-Enhanced
Discretization for Scene Graph Generation

Guoqing Zhang 1 2 3 Shichao Kan 4 Fanghui Zhang 5 Wanru Xu 2 Yue Zhang 6 Yigang Cen 1 2 3

Abstract
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) is a fundamental task in visual understanding, aimed at providing more precise local detail comprehension for
downstream applications. Existing SGG methods often overlook the diversity of predicate representations and the consistency among similar
predicates when dealing with long-tail distributions. As a result, the model’s decision layer
fails to effectively capture details from the tail
end, leading to biased predictions. To address
this, we propose a Noise-Guided Predicate Representation Extraction and Diffusion-Enhanced
Discretization (NoDIS) method. On the one hand,
expanding the predicate representation space enhances the model’s ability to learn both common
and rare predicates, thus reducing prediction bias
caused by data scarcity. We propose a conditional diffusion model to reconstructs features
and increase the diversity of representations for
same category predicates. On the other hand, independent predicate representations in the decision phase increase the learning complexity of
the decision layer, making accurate predictions
more challenging. To address this issue, we introduce a discretization mapper that learns consistent representations among similar predicates,
reducing the learning difficulty and decision ambiguity in the decision layer. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we integrate NoDIS

(a) NoDIS for Discretized Feature Enhancement.

(b) Intra-Class Variance Changes.
Figure 1. (a) Our method enhances the diversity and homogeneity
of representations for predicates within the same category by introducing diffusion and discretization mapping, effectively mitigating
the scene graph bias problem. (b) Variance change between feature distributions. A larger variance indicates a greater difference
between the feature distributions.

with various SGG baseline models and conduct
experiments on multiple datasets. The results
consistently demonstrate superior performance.
We have uploaded the code to GitHub: https:
//github.com/gavin-gqzhang/NoDIS.

1. Introduction

1

State Key Laboratory of Advanced Rail Autonomous Operation, Bejing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Bejing Jiaotong University, Beijing,
China 3 Visual Intelligence +X International Cooperation Joint
Laboratory of MOE, Bejing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Central South University, Hunan, China 5 School of Artificial Intelligence, Henan
University, Henan, China 6 College of Computer and Information
Engineering, Henan Normal University, Henan, China. Correspondence to: Wanru Xu <xwanru@bjtu.edu.cn>, Yigang Cen
<ygcen@bjtu.edu.cn>.

Scene graph generation constructs relational representations
for object pairs in an image, which provides essential insights for downstream tasks such as image captioning (Chen
et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2020), visual question answering
(Hudson & Manning, 2019b; Teney et al., 2017), and image
retrieval (Johnson et al., 2015; Schroeder & Tripathi, 2020),
helping to understand local details within images.
However, the long-tail distribution inherent in datasets poses
significant challenges. Traditional methods for predicate
prediction tend to favor head predicates with shallow semantics while neglecting tail predicates with deeper meanings.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

