Behavior-agnostic Task Inference
for Robust Offline In-context Reinforcement Learning

Long Ma 1 2 Fangwei Zhong 3 2 Yizhou Wang 4 5 6

Abstract

People don’t
wear space
suits on Earth.
He must be on
the Moon!

The ability to adapt to new environments with
noisy dynamics and unseen objectives is crucial
for AI agents. In-context reinforcement learning (ICRL) has emerged as a paradigm to build
adaptive policies, employing a context trajectory
of the test-time interactions to infer the true task
and the corresponding optimal policy efficiently
without gradient updates. However, ICRL policies heavily rely on context trajectories, making
them vulnerable to distribution shifts from training to testing and degrading performance, particularly in offline settings where the training
data is static. In this paper, we highlight that
most existing offline ICRL methods are trained
for approximate Bayesian inference based on the
training distribution, rendering them vulnerable
to distribution shifts at test time and resulting in
poor generalization. To address this, we introduce Behavior-agnostic Task Inference (BATI)
for ICRL, a model-based maximum-likelihood solution to infer the task representation robustly. In
contrast to previous methods that rely on a learned
encoder as the approximate posterior, BATI focuses purely on dynamics, thus insulating itself
against the behavior of the context collection
policy. Experiments on MuJoCo environments
demonstrate that BATI effectively interprets outof-distribution contexts and outperforms other
methods, even in the presence of significant environmental noise.

The jump is
not very high.
He could be
training on
Earth!

Figure 1. Illustration of the core idea behind BATI. The boy (left)
infers the astronaut’s location using behavioral cues (e.g., wearing
space suits), while the girl (right) relies on physical dynamics
(e.g., jump height). Although the former behavioral correlation is
easier to spot, the latter is more robust to distribution shifts and
leads to the correct answer in this example. BATI mirrors the latter
strategy, prioritizing dynamics over behavior.

1. Introduction
The ability of AI agents to adapt to new environments with
noisy dynamics and unknown objectives is becoming increasingly important as we push the boundaries of artificial intelligence applications. Meta-reinforcement learning (Finn et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2016; Beck et al., 2023)
has emerged as a promising paradigm for developing adaptive policies. This approach leverages the concept of learning to learn, enabling agents to generalize from previous
experiences and effectively tackle novel tasks quickly. Recently, the marriage of in-context learning (Brown et al.,
2020; Min et al., 2022; Hendel et al., 2023) and meta-RL
has attracted attention from the community, referred to as
in-context reinforcement learning (ICRL) (Laskin et al.,
2023; Grigsby et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2024). It leverages a
context trajectory of interactions during testing to infer the
true task and determine the corresponding optimal policy
without any gradient update, showing significant potential
for effective generalization across diverse and unknown environments. However, such context-conditioned policies
can be expensive and time-consuming to train with online
interactions due to the sample inefficiency of RL algorithms
and the costs associated with online data collection (Yu,
2018; Gu et al., 2024). People thus turn to offline ICRL to
extract in-context policies from offline data without online
interactions (Laskin et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024).

1

Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China 3 School
of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing,
China 4 School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China 5 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 6 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Fangwei Zhong <fangweizhong@bnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

