Unraveling the Interplay between Carryover Effects and Reward
Autocorrelations in Switchback Experiments

Qianglin Wen * 1 Chengchun Shi * 2 Ying Yang 3 Niansheng Tang 1 Hongtu Zhu 4

Abstract

continuously refine their policies for order dispatching and
subsidies to optimize key metrics such as supply-demand
balance, driver earnings, response rates, and order completion rates (Qin et al., 2025). A/B testing is a common tool
used by these companies for policy evaluation and is vital
for identifying the most effective strategies to enhance the
efficiency and convenience of the transportation system (Xu
et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021).

A/B testing has become the gold standard for policy evaluation in modern technological industries.
Motivated by the widespread use of switchback
experiments in A/B testing, this paper conducts
a comprehensive comparative analysis of various
switchback designs in Markovian environments.
Unlike many existing works which derive the optimal design based on specific and relatively simple
estimators, our analysis covers a range of state-ofthe-art estimators developed in the reinforcement
learning (RL) literature. It reveals that the effectiveness of different switchback designs depends
crucially on (i) the size of the carryover effect
and (ii) the auto-correlations among reward errors over time. Meanwhile, these findings are
estimator-agnostic, i.e., they apply to most RL
estimators. Based on these insights, we provide a
workflow to offer guidelines for practitioners on
designing switchback experiments in A/B testing.

Challenges. In numerous applications, treatments are assigned sequentially over time (Robins, 1986; Bojinov &
Shephard, 2019), posing unique challenges for A/B testing:
1. A primary challenge is the carryover effect ± the effect
of previous treatments on future outcomes. Such effects
are ubiquitous in many applications. For instance, in
ridesharing, the implementation of a specific order dispatch policy can change the spatial distribution of drivers
in a city, impacting subsequent outcomes (see Li et al.,
2024, Figure 2). These carryover effects substantially
challenge A/B testing. Standard solutions like the twosample t-test often fail to capture these effects, frequently
resulting in insignificant p-values (Shi et al., 2023b).

1. Introduction

2. Another challenge is the limited sample size, coupled
with generally weak treatment effects, making it extremely difficult to determine the most effective policy.
This issue is particularly prevalent in online experiments
in ridesharing, which seldomly last more than two weeks
and typically exhibit effect sizes ranging from 0.5% to
2% (Xu et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2019).

Motivation. Policy evaluation has become increasingly important in applications such as economics (Athey & Imbens,
2017), medicine (Luedtke & Van Der Laan, 2016), environmental science (Reich et al., 2021) and epidemiology
(Hudgens & Halloran, 2008). In the technology sector, companies such as Google, Amazon, Netflix, and Microsoft
extensively use A/B testing to measure and improve the effectiveness of new products or strategies against established
ones (e.g., Johari et al., 2017; Waudby-Smith et al., 2022).
For instance, ridesharing platforms like Uber, Lyft and Didi

Contributions. This paper conducts a quantitative analysis to understand the effects of various switchback designs
on the precision of their resulting policy value estimators.
Switchback designs alternate between a baseline and a new
policy at fixed intervals. Each policy is implemented for a
specified duration before transitioning to the other. When
the duration of each policy extends to a full day, the design
becomes an ªalternating-dayº (AD) design, involving daily
policy switches. These designs are increasingly utilized in
large-scale ridesharing platforms (Xiong et al., 2024; Qin
et al., 2025). Luo et al. (2024) has empirically demonstrated that more frequent policy alternations can reduce
mean squared error (MSE) in estimating the average treat-

*

Equal contribution 1 Yunnan Key Laboratory of Statistical Modeling and Data Analysis, Yunnan University 2 Department of Statistics, London School of Economics and Political Science 3 Center
for Applied Mathematics, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics, Fudan University 4 Department of
Biostatistics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Correspondence to: Hongtu Zhu <htzhu@email.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

