Safety-Polarized and Prioritized Reinforcement Learning

Ke Fan * 1 Jinpeng Zhang * 1 Xuefeng Zhang 2 Yunze Wu 3 Jingyu Cao 3 Yuan Zhou 4 1 5 Jianzhu Ma 6 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Safety is a critical bottleneck for deploying reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms in real-world applications due to
the catastrophic consequences of unsafe decisions, such as
crashes in autonomous driving (Leurent & Mercat, 2019).
In such scenarios, safety takes precedence over all other
objectives, and RL algorithms must prioritize achieving
maximal safety (Gu et al., 2024; Garcı́a & Fernández, 2015).
A widely adopted framework for safe RL is the Constrained
Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999; Achiam
et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2019; Ray et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2022), which enforces safety by constraining the expected
cumulative safety cost to remain below a predefined budget.
While this framework provides a practical way to manage
safety constraints, it is inherently limited to ensuring a userspecified safety level rather than learning the optimal safety
cost. Furthermore, CMDP-based algorithms typically rely
on dense cost signals to guide the agent’s behavior, making
them ill-suited for scenarios where safety costs are sparse
but highly consequential. To address these limitations, our
work focuses on developing RL algorithms that maximize
cumulative rewards while ensuring the unsafe probability is
minimized.

Motivated by the first priority of safety in many
real-world applications, we propose M AX S AFE,
a chance-constrained bi-level optimization framework for safe reinforcement learning. M AX S AFE
first minimizes the unsafe probability and then
maximizes the return among the safest policies.
We provide a tailored Q-learning algorithm for the
M AX S AFE objective, featuring a novel learning
process for optimal action masks with theoretical
convergence guarantees. To enable the application of our algorithm to large-scale experiments,
we introduce two key techniques: safety polarization and safety prioritized experience replay.
Safety polarization generalizes the optimal action
masking by polarizing the Q-function, which assigns low values to unsafe state-action pairs, effectively discouraging their selection. In parallel,
safety prioritized experience replay enhances the
learning of optimal action masks by prioritizing
samples based on temporal-difference (TD) errors
derived from our proposed state-action reachability estimation functions. This approach efficiently addresses the challenges posed by sparse
cost signals. Experiments on diverse autonomous
driving and safe control tasks show that our methods achieve near-maximal safety and an optimal
reward-safety trade-off.

There are two primary methodologies in the literature for
providing frequent safety guidance to learning agents: action correction and action masking. Action correction modifies unsafe actions by either replacing them with safe ones
based on a predefined backup policy or projecting them
back to the safe set (Alshiekh et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2023). However, this approach often leads to suboptimal rewards due to the over-conservatism of the backup policy or
projection. In contrast, action masking excludes unsafe actions, allowing agents to explore safe options and potentially
achieve optimal rewards while maintaining maximal safety.
Despite its promise, designing effective action-masking procedures remains challenging. For instance, Srinivasan et al.
(2020) masks actions with unsafe probabilities exceeding
a fixed threshold ε. However, this uniform, state-agnostic
threshold may fail to differentiate actions with varying unsafe probabilities, limiting the policy’s ability to learn the
safest actions and compromising safety performance.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China 4 Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 5 Beijing Institute of Mathematical
Sciences and Applications, Beijing, China 6 Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 7 Institute
for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Yuan Zhou <yuan-zhou@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Jianzhu Ma <majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, we propose a novel chance-constrained bilevel optimization framework, namely M AX S AFE, for the
1

