Position: Certified Robustness Does Not (Yet) Imply Model Security

Andrew C. Cullen 1 Paul Montague 2 Sarah Erfani 1 Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein 1

Abstract

In response to these security concerns, significant research
effort has been devoted to what are known as adversarial defenses, which are designed to minimize or mitigate
specific attacks (Chakraborty et al., 2018). However, it is
crucial to note that these defenses are rarely more than best
response strategies to particular attack vectors, as deployed
mitigations can often be defeated by identifying a single,
undefended vector (Perolat et al., 2018). This makes AI
security into an expensive, reactive process that requires
constant vigilance by model deployers.

While certified robustness is widely promoted as
a solution to adversarial examples in Artificial
Intelligence systems, significant challenges remain before these techniques can be meaningfully
deployed in real-world applications. We identify critical gaps in current research, including
the paradox of detection without distinction, the
lack of clear criteria for practitioners to evaluate
certification schemes, and the potential security
risks arising from users’ expectations surrounding
“guaranteed" robustness claims. These create an
alignment issue between how certifications are
presented and perceived, relative to their actual
capabilities. This position paper is a call to arms
for the certification research community, proposing concrete steps to address these fundamental
challenges and advance the field toward practical
applicability.

Certified defenses eschew this best response paradigm by
guaranteeing the absence of a family of potential attacks,
rather than any one attack (Lecuyer et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019). These families are typically parameterized by `p
inputs, with the certification guaranteeing the absence of
adversarial examples within a calculated region. While
the literature has primarily focused upon classifiers, recent
works have begun to explore extensions of certified defenses
to other problem spaces, including reinforcement learning
and regression (Han et al., 2018; Lütjens et al., 2020; Hammoudeh & Lowd, 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Rekavandi et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2025b).

1. Introduction
A known property of learned models like neural networks is
that they can have their outputs changed through semantically indistinguishable changes to their inputs (Biggio et al.,
2013; Szegedy et al., 2014). The risk associated with these
manipulated samples—known as adversarial examples—is
heightened by both the confidence ascribed by models to
these samples (Kumar et al., 2020), and how simple they are
to construct, with mechanisms typically relying upon the
same gradient descent style processes that are used in model
training (Papernot et al., 2017; Carlini & Wagner, 2017b).
As Artificial Intelligence (AI) increasingly permeates both
interpersonal and business interactions, these adversarial
examples have the potential to impact the security of real
world systems (Ibitoye et al., 2019; Finlayson et al., 2019;
Albert et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2025a).

For all the promise of such systems, when it comes to the
practical implications of these approaches, the devil is very
much in the details. These techniques are presented as
producing the distance to the nearest adversarial example, which implies that the sample being certified is itself
not already attacked. However, as we observed by Cullen
et al. (2024b), a more precise framing is that: a certification
bounds the distance to the nearest class changing example.
This distinction may appear minor, however, it is crucial for
understanding the limitations of these techniques, as there
is no guarantee that the class prediction is accurate. As such
the certification could be the distance from either a clean
sample to an adversarial instance, an adversarial instance
to a different adversarial class, or an adversarial sample
to a clean sample. Thus current certifications provide no
information for distinguishing between clean and attacked
samples, with certifications existing for both, and thus, there
is no inherent security inferred by the certificate. Even the
idea that a certification can be considered a measure for
how much effort would be required to attack a particular
sample does not hold, given the observation that certifications themselves can be exploited to guide adversarial

1
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Australia 2 DST Group, Adelaide,
Australia.
Correspondence to: Andrew C. Cullen <andrew.cullen@unimelb.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

