Do Bayesian Neural Networks Actually Behave Like Bayesian Models?

Gábor Pituk 1 Vik Shirvaikar 1 Tom Rainforth 1

Abstract

settings (Izmailov et al., 2021b). However, due to the approximate nature of this inference, it is no longer a given
that they will still conform to Bayesian ideals.

We empirically investigate how well popular approximate inference algorithms for Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) respect the theoretical properties of Bayesian belief updating. We find strong
evidence on synthetic regression and real-world
image classification tasks that common BNN algorithms such as variational inference, Laplace
approximation, SWAG, and SGLD fail to update
in a consistent manner, forget about old data under sequential updates, and violate the predictive
coherence properties that would be expected of
Bayesian methods. These observed behaviors imply that care should be taken when treating BNNs
as true Bayesian models, particularly when using
them beyond static prediction settings, such as for
active, continual, or transfer learning.

Why does it matter if BNNs do not behave like Bayesian
models? Firstly, several recent efforts seek to improve
BNNs by refining priors (Fortuin, 2022) or proposing
methodological or algorithmic improvements for enhancing
the fidelity of approximate inference (Papamarkou et al.,
2024). However, if BNNs fail to respect Bayesian principles
such as consistent prior updating and meaningful posterior
uncertainty, then we cannot trust that objectively better priors or more faithful inference will translate to performance
gains. This is exacerbated by the fact that it is challenging to even precisely evaluate the accuracy of inference in
high-dimensional BNNs, so most research has subsequently
focused only on improving final predictive performance and
calibration metrics of the model-averaged solution (Guo
et al., 2017; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020).
Secondly, the adherence of BNNs to Bayesian principles is
of direct importance in many contexts. For example, popular active learning acquisition functions such as BALD
(Houlsby et al., 2011) and EPIG (Bickford Smith et al.,
2023) assume the model will be updated in a true Bayesian
manner, and so will become misaligned if this fails to hold.
Meanwhile, in settings such as continual and transfer learning, it is essential that sequential updates do not forget about
old data (Shwartz-Ziv et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024). More
generally, the conformity of BNNs to Bayesian ideals is
important whenever we go beyond static prediction settings,
such as when we wish to capture reducible (epistemic) uncertainty, make joint predictions, reason about possible future
data, or sequentially update our model.

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) extend the principles of
Bayesian inference (Robins & Wasserman, 2000; Jaynes,
2003) to neural networks by placing prior distributions on
the model parameters and updating them based on observed
data (MacKay, 1992b; Hinton & Van Camp, 1993; Neal,
2012). This approach promises benefits such as principled
uncertainty quantification (Neal et al., 2011; Kendall & Gal,
2017), robustness to distribution shift (Daxberger et al.,
2021b), and coherent belief propagation (Gal et al., 2017),
often cited as important for tasks such as out-of-distribution
detection, sequential decision-making, and active learning.
Unfortunately, the practical implementation of Bayesian
inference in neural networks is fundamentally intractable,
necessitating the use of approximate inference methods. Despite typically being crude approximations of the highly
complex BNN posterior in parameter space, these methods
generally offer better predictive performance and uncertainty calibration than deterministic networks in multiple

In this paper we critically evaluate the behavioral properties of popular BNN algorithms. Whereas previous studies
have focused on static predictive performance and inference
convergence diagnostics (Izmailov et al., 2021b; Sommer
et al., 2024), our study aims to more systematically investigate the adherence of BNNs to the expected behavior of
true Bayesian models. We find on synthetic regression
tasks and the CIFAR and IMDB image and text classification settings of Izmailov et al. (2021b) that BNNs fail to
preserve key features of Bayesian inference. In particular,
we show that, for the tasks considered, (1) approximate

1
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Correspondence to: Gábor Pituk <pitukgabor@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

