Revisiting Non-Acyclic GFlowNets in Discrete Environments

Nikita Morozov * 1 Ian Maksimov * 1 Daniil Tiapkin 2 3 Sergey Samsonov 1

Abstract

2025) and fine-tuning of large language models and diffusion models (Hu et al., 2023; Venkatraman et al., 2024;
Uehara et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Lee et al., 2025).
The detailed theoretical foundations of GFlowNets in discrete environments were developed in (Bengio et al., 2023).
While the majority of GFlowNet literature considers the
discrete setting, it is possible to apply the methodology of
continuous GFlowNets (Lahlou et al., 2023) to sampling
problems on more general spaces.

Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) are a
family of generative models that learn to sample
objects from a given probability distribution, potentially known up to a normalizing constant. Instead of working in the object space, GFlowNets
proceed by sampling trajectories in an appropriately constructed directed acyclic graph environment, greatly relying on the acyclicity of
the graph. In our paper, we revisit the theory
that relaxes the acyclicity assumption and present
a simpler theoretical framework for non-acyclic
GFlowNets in discrete environments. Moreover,
we provide various novel theoretical insights related to training with fixed backward policies,
the nature of flow functions, and connections between entropy-regularized RL and non-acyclic
GFlowNets, which naturally generalize the respective concepts and theoretical results from the
acyclic setting. In addition, we experimentally
re-examine the concept of loss stability in nonacyclic GFlowNet training, as well as validate our
own theoretical findings.

The main idea behind the generation process in GFlowNets
lies in sampling trajectories in the appropriately constructed
directed acyclic graph environment instead of working directly in the object space. A standard intuition behind this
process is a sequence of actions applied in order to construct
a composite object from ”blocks”. One of the limitations of
this setting is that it requires acyclicity. While this limitation
can be naturally interpreted in, e.g., molecule generation
setting, it can confine the practical design of GFlowNet environments, as well as restrict the applicability of GFlowNets
in other scenarios. A motivational example for non-acyclic
GFlowNets presented by (Brunswic et al., 2024) is related
to modeling distributions over objects with intrinsic symmetries. Consider a class of environments where states are
elements of some group, e.g. symmetric group or Rubik’s
Cube group. The transitions are given via a generating set of
this group, thus corresponding to applying the group operation on the current state and some element of the generating
set, which leads to the existence of cycles. While in some
cases an acyclic environment can be designed to generate
group elements, such environments of “algebraic” origin
naturally contain cycles, thus falling under the area of our
study. In addition, there is a growing body of work that
connects GFlowNets and Reinforcement Learning (Tiapkin
et al., 2024; Mohammadpour et al., 2024; Deleu et al., 2024;
He et al., 2024). Most RL environments contain cycles, thus
understanding how GFlowNets can be applied in cyclic environments and connecting them to RL in such cases can be
a crucial step towards further bridging two research fields.

1. Introduction
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets, Bengio et al., 2021)
are models that aim to sample discrete objects from distributions known proportionally up to a constant. They operate
by constructing an object through a sequence of stochastic
transitions defined by a forward policy. GFlowNets have
been successfully applied in various areas, starting from
molecule generation (Bengio et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2024;
Koziarski et al., 2024; Cretu et al., 2025) and biological
sequence design (Jain et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2024) to combinatorial optimization (Zhang et al., 2023a;b; Kim et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 HSE University, Moscow, Russia 2 CMAP
– CNRS – École polytechnique – Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
91128, Palaiseau, France 3 Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LMO,
91405, Orsay, France. Correspondence to: Nikita Morozov
<nvmorozov@hse.ru>.

To the best of our knowledge, methodological aspects of
working with non-acyclic environments in GFlowNets were
previously considered only in the recent work of (Brunswic
et al., 2024). The latter paper, similarly to (Lahlou et al.,
2023), uses the machinery of measurable spaces and measure theory, which is harder to build new extensions and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

