Certifiably Robust Model Evaluation in Federated Learning
under Meta-Distributional Shifts
Amir Najafi 1 Samin Mahdizadeh Sani 2 Farzan Farnia 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

We address the challenge of certifying the
performance of a federated learning model on an
unseen target network using only measurements
from the source network that trained the model.
Specifically, consider a source network “A” with
K clients, each holding private, non-IID datasets
drawn from heterogeneous distributions, modeled
as samples from a broader meta-distribution
µ. Our goal is to provide certified guarantees
for the model’s performance on a different,
unseen network “B”, governed by an unknown
meta-distribution µ′ , assuming the deviation
between µ and µ′ is bounded—either in Wasserstein distance or an f -divergence. We derive
worst-case uniform guarantees for both the
model’s average loss and its risk CDF, the latter
corresponding to a novel, adversarially robust
version of the Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz
(DKW) inequality. In addition, we show how
the vanilla DKW bound enables principled
certification of the model’s true performance
on unseen clients within the same (source)
network. Our bounds are efficiently computable,
asymptotically minimax optimal, and preserve
clients’ privacy. We also establish non-asymptotic
generalization bounds that converge to zero as
K grows and the minimum per-client sample
size exceeds O(log K). Empirical evaluations
confirm the practical utility of our bounds across
real-world tasks. The project code is available
at:
github.com/samin-mehdizadeh/
Robust-Evaluation-DKW

The distributed nature of modern learning environments,
where local datasets are scattered across clients in a network, presents significant challenges for the machine learning community. Federated learning (FL) addresses some
of these challenges by enabling clients to collaboratively
train a decentralized model through communications with
a central server (McMahan et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2024).
A major obstacle in FL is the heterogeneity of data distributions among clients. This non-IID nature of client data
not only impacts the training stage but also complicates
the evaluation of trained models, especially when applied
to unseen clients from the same or different networks (Ye
et al., 2023; Zawad et al., 2021). In this paper, we focus on
the latter problem.
Consider a network with K clients, each possessing their
own private dataset. For k ∈ [K], the kth client’s dataset
is assumed to include nk ≥ 1 samples from a unique and
unknown distribution Pk , which forms an empirical and
private estimate Pbk . Note that the distributions P1 , . . . , PK
may be highly heterogeneous and distant from one another.
In this setting, assume the server wants to assess the performance of a given machine learning model h on this network.
Let the risk function R(h, Pbk ) denote the loss of h when
evaluated over the private data samples of the kth client, i.e.,
Pbk . This quantity can be queried by the server by sending
h to client k and requesting its local loss value, without directly accessing any of the private data samples in client k’s
dataset. Hence, the server can collect all K loss values and
empirically approximate the average performance of h over
the network, using various
PK metrics.bOne common approach
1
is the average loss: K
k=1 R(h, Pk ), which measures the
empirical average performance of the model in the network.

1
Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran (Corresponding author) 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Tehran,
Tehran, Iran 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Amir Najafi <amir.najafi@sharif.edu>, Samin
Mahdizadeh Sani <samin.mahdizadeh@ut.ac.ir>, Farzan Farnia
<farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Another approach is the loss CDF, representing the percentage
 exceeds a given threshold λ:
PK of clients bwhose loss
1
1
R(h,
P
)
≥
λ
, which is useful for estimating
k
k=1
K
the quantiles of the risk (see (Laguel et al., 2021)). For a
recent related work on the use of super-quantiles in FL with
heterogeneous clients, see (Pillutla et al., 2024). While that
study focuses on optimization and convergence aspects, our
work provides a theoretical treatment of generalization.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

