Collaborative Mean Estimation Among Heterogeneous Strategic Agents:
Individual Rationality, Fairness, and Truthful Contribution

Alex Clinton 1 Yiding Chen 2 Xiaojin Zhu 1 Kirthevasan Kandasamy 1

Abstract

often involves significant costs and resources, such as experiments, simulations, surveys, or market research. If agents
share data, it can be mutually beneficial, particularly when
they have complementary data collection capabilities, as
an agent can exchange cheap or easily accessible data for
costly or hard-to-obtain data. For example, a hospital may
be limited in the type of data it collects, due to local demographic and disease patterns, but values diverse data from
other hospitals to improve treatments for all patients. Today,
data sharing platforms exist in many sectors, including business (goo; aws; azu; del), science (pub, a; 53 & 68, 2013;
cit; pub, b), and public institutions (mad; sfo; nyc).

We study a collaborative learning problem where
m agents aim to estimate a vector µ =
(µ1 , . . . , µd ) ∈ Rd by sampling from associated
univariate normal distributions {N (µk , σ 2 )}k∈[d] .
Agent i incurs a cost ci,k to sample from
N (µk , σ 2 ). Instead of working independently,
agents can exchange data, collecting cheaper samples and sharing them in return for costly data,
thereby reducing both costs and estimation error. We design a mechanism to facilitate such
collaboration, while addressing two key challenges: ensuring individually rational (IR) and
fair outcomes so all agents benefit, and preventing strategic behavior (e.g., non-collection, data
fabrication) to avoid socially undesirable outcomes. We design a mechanism and an associated Nash equilibrium (NE) which minimizes the
social penalty–sum of agents’ estimation errors
and collection costs–while
being IR for all agents.
√
We achieve a O( m)–approximation to the minimum social penalty in the worst case and an O(1)–
approximation under favorable conditions. Additionally, we establish three hardness results: no
nontrivial mechanism guarantees (i) a dominant
strategy equilibrium where agents report truthfully, (ii) is IR for every strategy profile
√ of other
agents, (iii) or avoids a worst-case Ω( m) price
of stability in any NE. Finally, by integrating concepts from axiomatic bargaining, we demonstrate
that our mechanism supports fairer outcomes than
one which minimizes social penalty.

Incentive-related challenges. However, data sharing raises
two fundamental incentive-related challenges. (i) First, we
must divide the data collection work and distribute the collected data in an individually rational (no agent loses by
participating) and fair way. For example, while it would be
most efficient to have agents with the cheapest costs collect
all of the data, this would not be fair to such agents and even
discourage them from participating. (ii) Second, we must
guard against strategic behavior, ensuring agents cannot
manipulate mechanisms for personal gain at others’ expense.
For example, naive protocols like pooling and sharing all
agents’ data can lead to free-riding, where an agent may
contribute little data if others are expected to contribute
more. Moreover, simple checks to prevent free-riding, such
as counting the number of data submitted, can be easily
bypassed by submitting fabricated (fake) data.
These considerations make defining individual rationality
(IR) and fairness nontrivial. While some prior work address
free-riding behaviors like non-collection and data fabrication, they assume homogeneous agents with identical collection costs. Moreover, the interplay between IR/fairness and
strategic behavior presents novel challenges. In this work,
we investigate these challenges in Gaussian mean estimation
problem.

1. Introduction
With the rise of machine learning, data has become a crucial resource for organizations. However, collecting data
1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Alex Clinton <aclinton@wisc.edu>.

1.1. Summary of Contributions
Model. There are m agents who seek to estimate an unknown vector µ ∈ Rd using samples from d associated
univariate normal distributions. Agent i incurs a cost ci,k to
draw one sample from the k th distribution N (µk , σ 2 ). An

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

