DIME: Diffusion-Based Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning

Onur Celik 1 Zechu Li 2 Denis Blessing 1 Ge Li 1 Daniel Palenicek 3 4 Jan Peters 3 4 5 6 Georgia Chalvatzaki 2 4
Gerhard Neumann 1

Abstract

several favorable properties among which improved exploration (Ziebart, 2010; Haarnoja et al., 2017) is crucial for
RL. Recent successful model-free RL algorithms leverage
these favorable properties and build upon this framework
(Bhatt et al., 2024; Nauman et al., 2024) improving sample efficiency and leading to remarkable results. However,
the policies are traditionally parameterized using Gaussian
distributions, significantly limiting their representational capacity. On the other hand, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Karras et al.,
2022) are highly expressive generative models and have
proven beneficial in representing complex behavior policies
(Reuss et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023). However, important
metrics such as the marginal entropy are intractable to compute (Zhou et al., 2024) which restricts their usage in RL.
Because of this shortcoming, recent methods propose different ways to train diffusion-based methods in off-policy
RL. While these methods are discussed in more detail in
the related work section, most of them require additional
techniques to add artificial (in most cases Gaussian) noise
to the generated actions to induce exploration in the behavior generation process. Hence, they do not leverage the
diffusion model to generate potentially non-Gaussian exploration patterns but fall back to mainly Gaussian exploration.
Nonetheless, there have been significant advances in training
diffusion-based models for approximate inference (Berner
et al.; Richter & Berner). Since the policy improvement in
MaxEnt-RL can also be cast as an approximate inference
problem to the energy-based policy (Haarnoja et al., 2017),
it is a natural step to explore these parallels.

Maximum entropy reinforcement learning
(MaxEnt-RL) has become the standard approach
to RL due to its beneficial exploration properties.
Traditionally, policies are parameterized using
Gaussian distributions, which significantly limits
their representational capacity. Diffusion-based
policies offer a more expressive alternative,
yet integrating them into MaxEnt-RL poses
challenges—primarily due to the intractability of
computing their marginal entropy. To overcome
this, we propose Diffusion-Based Maximum
Entropy RL (DIME). DIME leverages recent
advances in approximate inference with diffusion
models to derive a lower bound on the maximum
entropy objective. Additionally, we propose a
policy iteration scheme that provably converges to
the optimal diffusion policy. Our method enables
the use of expressive diffusion-based policies
while retaining the principled exploration benefits
of MaxEnt-RL, significantly outperforming
other diffusion-based methods on challenging
high-dimensional control benchmarks. It is also
competitive with state-of-the-art non-diffusion
based RL methods while requiring fewer algorithmic design choices and smaller update-to-data
ratios, reducing computational complexity1 .

1. Introduction

We propose Diffusion-Based Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning (DIME). DIME leverages recent advances
in approximate inference with diffusion models (Richter &
Berner) to derive a lower bound on the MaxEnt objective.
We propose a policy iteration framework with monotonic
policy improvement that converges to the optimal diffusion
policy. Additionally, building on recent off-policy RL algorithms such as Cross-Q (Bhatt et al., 2024) and distributional
RL (Bellemare et al., 2017), we propose a practical version
of DIME that can be used for training diffusion-based RL
policies. On 13 challenging continuous high-dimensional
control benchmarks, we empirically validate that DIME significantly outperforms other diffusion-based baselines on

The maximum entropy reinforcement learning (MaxEnt-RL)
objective augments the task reward in each time step with
the entropy of the policy (Ziebart et al., 2008; Toussaint,
2009; Haarnoja et al., 2017; 2018b). This objective has
1
Autonomous Learning Robots, KIT 2 Interactive Robot Perception & Learning, TU Darmstadt 3 Intelligent Autonomous Systems, TU Darmstadt 4 Hessian.AI 5 German Research Center for AI
6
Centre for Cognitivie Science, TU Darmstadt . Correspondence
to: Onur Celik <celik@kit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
https://alrhub.github.io/dime-website/

1

