Pre-training Auto-regressive Robotic Models with 4D Representations

Dantong Niu * 1 Yuvan Sharma * 1 Haoru Xue 1 Giscard Biamby 1 Junyi Zhang 1 Ziteng Ji 1
Trevor Darrell † 1 Roei Herzig † 1
https://arm4r.github.io/

Abstract

models exhibit impressive zero-shot and few-shot learning
capabilities (Radford et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei
et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2024), highlighting the power of
pre-training on generic data. However, numerous attempts
in robotics (Xiao et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2024; Zhen et al.,
2024b; Niu et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2024) have yet to achieve
the same pre-training success seen in other domains. This
could potentially be attributed to the scarcity of large-scale,
diverse robotic data, unlike the abundance of text and image
data available for vision and language FMs.

Foundation models pre-trained on massive unlabeled datasets have revolutionized natural language and computer vision, exhibiting remarkable
generalization capabilities, thus highlighting the
importance of pre-training. Yet, efforts in robotics
have struggled to achieve similar success, limited
by either the need for costly robotic annotations or
the lack of representations that effectively model
the physical world. In this paper, we introduce
ARM4R, an Auto-regressive Robotic Model that
leverages low-level 4D Representations learned
from human video data to yield a better pretrained robotic model. Specifically, we focus on
utilizing 3D point tracking representations from
videos derived by lifting 2D representations into
3D space via monocular depth estimation across
time. These 4D representations maintain a shared
geometric structure between the points and robot
state representations up to a linear transformation,
enabling efficient transfer learning from human
video data to low-level robotic control. Our experiments show that ARM4R can transfer efficiently
from human video data to robotics and consistently improves performance on tasks across various robot environments and configurations.

The lack of robotic data poses a significant bottleneck in
training foundation models that can effectively generalize
across diverse robotic platforms and tasks. To overcome this
limitation, several recent approaches (Xiao et al., 2022; Ye
et al., 2024) employ representation learning by pre-training
on an abundance of human data, enabling transfer to robotic
systems. These approaches aim to recognize the inherent
similarities between human and robot manipulation tasks
and exploit the vast repositories of human video data available on the internet. Yet, these approaches have not been
able to demonstrate effective generalization to downstream
tasks. In part, this is due to their representations lacking an
understanding of the physical world (Zhen et al., 2024a),
and therefore being less effective for robotics.
In contrast with these methods, Vision-Language-Action
(VLAs) models take a slightly different approach, implicitly leveraging human data in robotics by incorporating
pre-trained components from Vision-and-Language Models
(VLMs). In particular, they use language decoders pretrained on tasks like visual question answering (e.g., RT2 (Brohan et al., 2023a)) and image captioning (e.g., OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024)). Despite such efforts, there is a
discrepancy between these models’ high-level pre-training
objective and the goal of enabling robotic models to handle
low-level action prediction. While these initial objectives
are valuable for comprehending visual and linguistic content,
they don’t directly address the nuances of low-level robot
control, which involves aspects like precise manipulation
and spatial reasoning. To address this, this paper’s method
employs a lower-level pre-training objective by starting with
a model that utilizes next-token prediction to learn 4D representations from human video data. These representations

1. Introduction
Recently, foundation models (FMs) have shown remarkable
success, particularly in the domains of language (Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023), vision (Kirillov et al.,
2023), and multi-modal models (Chen et al., 2022; Alayrac
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023)
pre-trained on vast amounts of vision and text data. These
Equal contribution. † Equal advising. 1 Berkeley AI Research, UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Dantong Niu
<bias 88@berkeley.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

