Distributionally Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for
Dynamic Chute Mapping

Guangyi Liu 1 Suzan Iloglu 1 Michael Caldara 1 Joseph W. Durham 1 Michael M. Zavlanos 1 2

Abstract
In Amazon robotic warehouses, the destinationto-chute mapping problem is crucial for efficient
package sorting. Often, however, this problem is
complicated by uncertain and dynamic package
induction rates, which can lead to increased package recirculation. To tackle this challenge, we
introduce a Distributionally Robust Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (DRMARL) framework
that learns a destination-to-chute mapping policy that is resilient to adversarial variations in
induction rates. Specifically, DRMARL relies on
group distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
to learn a policy that performs well not only on average but also on each individual subpopulation of
induction rates within the group that capture, for
example, different seasonality or operation modes
of the system. This approach is then combined
with a novel contextual bandit-based estimator
of the worst-case induction distribution for each
state-action pair, significantly reducing the cost
of exploration and thereby increasing the learning
efficiency and scalability of our framework. Extensive simulations demonstrate that DRMARL
achieves robust chute mapping in the presence of
varying induction distributions, reducing package
recirculation by an average of 80% in the simulation scenario.

Figure 1: Schematic layout of an Amazon robotic sortation warehouse featuring robot drives and eject chutes.

gins at induction stations, where packages are loaded onto
mobile robots and subsequently transported to designated
eject chutes based on their destinations (Figure 1). A critical factor determining the package throughput capacity of
these facilities is the effective allocation of eject chutes to
different destinations. Therefore, the destination-to-chute
mapping policy plays a crucial role in optimizing the overall
throughput performance of the robotic sortation warehouses.
Our previous work (Shen et al., 2023) addresses the destination assignment problem (DAP) (Boysen & Fliedner,
2010) in robotic sortation systems by developing a dynamic
chute mapping policy. This policy determines the optimal
allocation of eject chutes to destinations with the objective
of minimizing the number of unsorted packages. We proposed a model-free reinforcement learning approach that
dynamically adjusts the number of chutes assigned to each
destination throughout the day. Our solution formulates
the chute mapping problem within a Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) framework (Lowe et al., 2017;
Sunehag et al., 2017; Samvelyan et al., 2019; Rashid et al.,
2020), where each destination is represented as an agent
that controls its chute allocation at each time step.

1. Introduction
In Amazon robotic sortation warehouses, mobile robots
are deployed to transport and sort packages efficiently to
different destinations (Wurman et al., 2008; Azadeh et al.,
2019; Amazon, 2022b;a; 2023). The sorting process be-

While the MARL policy proposed in our previous work
(Shen et al., 2023) demonstrates superior performance compared to traditional reactive chute mapping approaches often
implemented in Amazon robotic sortation warehouses, its
effectiveness assumes that the induction distribution during deployment matches the training distribution and that
the daily induction rate remains close to its average value.

1
Amazon Robotics, North Reading, MA, USA 2 Department
of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Guangyi Liu
<gyliu@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

