SCENIR: Visual Semantic Clarity through
Unsupervised Scene Graph Retrieval

Nikolaos Chaidos 1 Angeliki Dimitriou 1 Maria Lymperaiou 1 Giorgos Stamou 1

Abstract
Despite the dominance of convolutional and
transformer-based architectures in image-toimage retrieval, these models are prone to biases
arising from low-level visual features, such as
color. Recognizing the lack of semantic understanding as a key limitation, we propose a novel
scene graph-based retrieval framework that emphasizes semantic content over superficial image characteristics. Prior approaches to scene
graph retrieval predominantly rely on supervised
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which require
ground truth graph pairs driven from image captions. However, the inconsistency of captionbased supervision stemming from variable text encodings undermine retrieval reliability. To address
these, we present SCENIR, a Graph Autoencoderbased unsupervised retrieval framework, which
eliminates the dependence on labeled training
data. Our model demonstrates superior performance across metrics and runtime efficiency, outperforming existing vision-based, multimodal,
and supervised GNN approaches. We further
advocate for Graph Edit Distance (GED) as a
deterministic and robust ground truth measure
for scene graph similarity, replacing the inconsistent caption-based alternatives for the first time
in image-to-image retrieval evaluation. Finally,
we validate the generalizability of our method
by applying it to unannotated datasets via automated scene graph generation, while substantially
contributing in advancing state-of-the-art in counterfactual image retrieval. The source code is
available at https://github.com/nickhaidos/sceniricml2025.

Figure 1. Top: Example of visual biases (color bias) in image
retrieval when using visual models vs ours. Bottom: Example of
the retrieval variability of SBERT models (top-1 retrieved items).

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep visual models, transiting from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to Vision Transformers
(ViT), unprecedented performance has been reported across
a variety of vision tasks. However, it is still unclear whether
related models fully rely on correlational patterns or acquire
an understanding of semantics, i.e. objects, attributes and
their relationships. For example, CNNs lack understanding
of contextual dependencies (Lin et al., 2020), while ViTs are
widely exposed to correlation biases (Ghosal & Li, 2024),
revealing that true knowledge of visual semantics has not
yet been conquered (Wang et al., 2023b). To this end, there
is an extensive line of work exposing erroneous results on
state-of-the-art (SotA) visual models due to biases (Shi et al.,
2022; Park & Kim, 2022; Wei et al., 2023; Murali et al.,
2023; Menon et al., 2023; Izmailov et al., 2024; Puaduraru
et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2025).

1

Artificial Intelligence and Learning Systems Laboratory, National Technical University of Athens. Correspondence to: Nikolaos Chaidos <nchaidos@ails.ece.ntua.gr>.

We briefly demonstrate an example of biased image-toimage retrieval in Figure 1. Efficient-ViT (Cai et al., 2023) a SotA image classifier - retrieves results that are predominantly based on color attributes, such as ’black & white’

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

