A Novel Characterization of the Population Area Under the Risk Coverage
Curve (AURC) and Rates of Finite Sample Estimators

Han Zhou 1 Jordy Van Landeghem 2 Teodora Popordanoska 1 Matthew B. Blaschko 1

Abstract

and El-Yaniv, 2017; Geifman et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020;
Galil et al., 2023). Specifically, these classifiers employ
cost-based models (Chow, 1970; Cortes et al., 2016; Hendrickx et al., 2024) with a reject region to balance the risks
of wrong predictions against the non-decision costs. The
goal of an effective SC system is to minimize the expected
misclassification costs—termed selective risk—while maximizing coverage, ensuring the model provides accurate
predictions for as many instances as possible. This dual
focus on selective risk and coverage motivates the development and evaluation of SC systems.

The selective classifier (SC) has been proposed
for rank based uncertainty thresholding, which
could have applications in safety critical areas
such as medical diagnostics, autonomous driving, and the justice system. The Area Under the
Risk-Coverage Curve (AURC) has emerged as
the foremost evaluation metric for assessing the
performance of SC systems. In this work, we
present a formal statistical formulation of population AURC, presenting an equivalent expression
that can be interpreted as a reweighted risk function. Through Monte Carlo methods, we derive
empirical AURC plug-in estimators for finite sample scenarios. The weight estimators associated
with these plug-in estimators are shown to be consistent, with low bias and tightly bounded mean
squared error (MSE). The plug-in estimators
are
p
proven to converge at a rate of O( ln(n)/n)
demonstrating statistical consistency. We empirically validate the effectiveness of our estimators through experiments across multiple datasets,
model architectures, and confidence score functions (CSFs), demonstrating consistency and effectiveness in fine-tuning AURC performance.

Prominent evaluation metrics in SC systems, such as the
area under the risk-coverage curve (AURC) and the normalized AURC (E-AURC) (Geifman et al., 2019), are widely
used to assess model performance based on selective risk
and coverage. While most studies interpret and improve (Ao
et al., 2023; Traub et al., 2024) these metrics from the perspective of risk and coverage, relatively little attention has
been given to directly optimizing SC models by treating
AURC as a loss function. In addition, these metrics are typically computed empirically from the given datasets, making
them susceptible to biases and variances, particularly in the
context of a small finite sample rather than the underlying
population. Franc et al. (2023) proposed the Selective Classifier Learning (SELE) loss as a lower bound of empirical
AURC and is designed to optimize uncertainty scores by
minimizing both the regression and SELE losses using batch
training strategies. This approach only learns uncertainty
scores on top of a pre-trained model within the selective
classifier framework, and does not directly optimize the classifier itself based on the loss. Franc et al. (2023) motivate
the SELE loss by the fact that it is “a close approximation of
the AuRC and, at the same time, amenable to optimization.”
We demonstrate here through analysis of the computational
complexity and statistical properties of direct AURC estimation, that approximation by a lower bound is unnecessary
and both AURC and SELE are equally amenable to optimization.

1. Introduction
In safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous driving,
medical diagnostics, and the justice system (Berk et al.,
2021; Leibig et al., 2022; Dvijotham et al., 2023; Franc
et al., 2023; Groh et al., 2024), selective classifiers (SC)
are promising for their ability to withhold predictions under conditions of uncertainty, thereby mitigating associated
risks and enhancing the reliability of the models (Geifman
1

Processing Speech and Images, Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, Belgium 2 Instabase, San Francisco, USA.
Correspondence to: Han Zhou <han.zhou@esat.kuleuven.be>.

We establish a formal definition of AURC at the population
level based on the underlying data distribution and derive
an equivalent expression that explicitly represents it as a
reweighted risk function, where the weights are determined

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

