Perceptual-GS: Scene-adaptive Perceptual Densification for Gaussian Splatting

Hongbi Zhou 1 Zhangkai Ni 1

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as
a powerful technique for novel view synthesis.
However, existing methods struggle to adaptively
optimize the distribution of Gaussian primitives
based on scene characteristics, making it challenging to balance reconstruction quality and efficiency. Inspired by human perception, we propose
scene-adaptive perceptual densification for Gaussian Splatting (Perceptual-GS), a novel framework that integrates perceptual sensitivity into
the 3DGS training process to address this challenge. We first introduce a perception-aware representation that models human visual sensitivity while constraining the number of Gaussian
primitives. Building on this foundation, we develop a perceptual sensitivity-adaptive distribution to allocate finer Gaussian granularity to visually critical regions, enhancing reconstruction
quality and robustness. Extensive evaluations
on multiple datasets, including BungeeNeRF for
large-scale scenes, demonstrate that PerceptualGS achieves state-of-the-art performance in reconstruction quality, efficiency, and robustness.
The code is publicly available at: https://
github.com/eezkni/Perceptual-GS

Figure 1. The quality-efficiency trade-off and robustness in largescale scenes of Perceptual-GS are quantified by LPIPS and the
number of Gaussians (millions).

sian primitives in 3DGS dynamically evolves during training
through adaptive density control, using the average position
gradient of Gaussians to determine the need for additional
primitives, enhancing the model’s capacity to capture fine
details in local regions. While this strategy improves overall
performance, it struggles with efficiently distributing Gaussians, leading to blurred regions from too few primitives or
redundancy from too many.

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Zhangkai Ni
<zkni@tongji.edu.cn>.

To enhance the densification capabilities of 3DGS in local
regions, numerous studies (Mallick et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024; Deng et al., 2024; Lyu et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2025; Liu et al., 2025) have proposed various strategies
for improving its performance. Many approaches refine
calculating average gradients to more effectively identify
Gaussians requiring densification, while others introduce
additional metrics for the same purpose. However, these
methods often struggle to balance reconstruction quality
and computational efficiency, since the number of Gaussian primitives is closely tied to perceptual metrics such as
LPIPS (Fang & Wang, 2024). To address this challenge,
our research explores whether 3D scenes can be represented
with higher perceptual quality using a constrained number of
Gaussians. Specifically, we integrate insights from human
perception into the training process of 3DGS, adaptively
distributing Gaussian primitives according to perceptual
sensitivity across different local regions of the scene.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

The human visual system (HVS) exhibits characteristics
such as contrast sensitivity (Campbell & Robson, 1968),
masking effects (Ross & Speed, 1991), and just noticeable

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis, which generates images from new
viewpoints based on known multi-view images, has been
a long-standing focus in computer vision and is further
driven by increasing demand from applications such as
VR/AR and digital twins. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) (Kerbl et al., 2023) has gained significant attention
for its exceptional performance, explicitly representing 3D
scenes as collections of ellipsoidal Gaussian primitives. Unlike traditional deep learning models, the number of Gaus1

1

