Propagate and Inject: Revisiting Propagation-Based Feature Imputation for
Graphs with Partially Observed Features
Daeho Um 1 Sunoh Kim 2 Jiwoong Park 3 Jongin Lim 1 Seong Jin Ahn 4 Seulki Park 5

Abstract

ten include missing features for various reasons (e.g., private
information in social networks and measurement failure),
which hinders the direct application of GNNs to real-world
data. This challenge is especially prevalent in industries,
where severe feature missing rates of 97.5%, 99.9%, and
99.98% have been reported in real-world applications (Park
et al., 2023; Chai et al., 2020; Kim & Chi, 2018). Consequently, applying GNNs to graphs with missing features has
received great attention as a task termed graph learning task
with missing features (Chen et al., 2020; Jiang & Zhang,
2020; Taguchi et al., 2021).

In this paper, we address learning tasks on graphs
with missing features, enhancing the applicability of graph neural networks to real-world graphstructured data. We identify a critical limitation
of existing imputation methods based on feature
propagation: they produce channels with nearly
identical values within each channel, and these
low-variance channels contribute very little to
performance in graph learning tasks. To overcome this issue, we introduce synthetic features
that target the root cause of low-variance channel production, thereby increasing variance in
these channels. By preventing propagation-based
imputation methods from generating meaningless feature values shared across all nodes, our
synthetic feature propagation scheme mitigates
significant performance degradation, even under
extreme missing rates. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
across various graph learning tasks with missing
features, ranging from low to extremely high missing rates. Additionally, we provide both empirical
evidence and theoretical proof to validate the lowvariance problem. The source code is available at
https://github.com/daehoum1/fisf.

Recently, propagation-based imputation methods (Rossi
et al., 2022; Um et al., 2023; 2024; 2025), which impute missing features by diffusing observed features along
edges in a channel-wise manner, have shown promising
results. The diffused features, derived from observed
features, provide sufficient information for GNNs to perform downstream graph learning tasks (Um et al., 2023).
The propagation-based methods offer two key advantages
over conventional neural network-based imputation methods (Monti et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020): superior performance and fast imputation without learnable parameters.
In this paper, we reveal an inherent limitation of the
propagation-based methods: when all observed feature values within a channel are nearly identical, the diffusion process fills all missing features in the channel with values
that are likewise nearly identical. We refer to such channels, where the feature values are nearly identical across
nodes (i.e., low-variance), as low-variance channels. As
illustrated in Figure 1a, we observe that the majority of
channels in the outputs of state-of-the-art propagation-based
methods (Rossi et al., 2022; Um et al., 2023) tend to be
low-variance channels. Furthermore, we provide theoretical proof that propagation-based methods produce a zerovariance channel when the observed features within a channel have identical values. Due to their nearly identical values
across nodes, low-variance channels contribute minimally
to graph learning tasks that require distinct representations
of nodes or node pairs, as demonstrated in Figure 1b.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved significant
success in graph learning tasks such as node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2016a; Veličković et al., 2017) and
link prediction (Kipf & Welling, 2016b; Salha et al., 2019).
Since a wide range of data contain entities with relations,
these data can be represented in graphs and many problems
are formulated as graph learning tasks (Wu et al., 2022; Liao
et al., 2021). However, real-world graph-structured data of1
AI Center, Samsung Electronics 2 Computer Engineering,
Dankook University 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University 4 KAIST 5 University of Michigan.
Correspondence to: Daeho Um <daeho.um@samsung.com>.

To address the aforementioned low-variance channel problem, we propose a new propagation-based imputation
scheme called Feature Imputation with Synthetic Features
(FISF). Specifically, FISF consists of two diffusion stages.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

