Random Feature Representation Boosting

Nikita Zozoulenko 1 Thomas Cass * 1 Lukas Gonon * 1 2

Abstract

and speed across various tasks (Bolager et al., 2023; Dempster et al., 2023; Gattiglio et al., 2024; Prabhu et al., 2024).

We introduce Random Feature Representation
Boosting (RFRBoost), a novel method for constructing deep residual random feature neural networks (RFNNs) using boosting theory. RFRBoost
uses random features at each layer to learn the
functional gradient of the network representation,
enhancing performance while preserving the convex optimization benefits of RFNNs. In the case
of MSE loss, we obtain closed-form solutions to
greedy layer-wise boosting with random features.
For general loss functions, we show that fitting
random feature residual blocks reduces to solving
a quadratically constrained least squares problem.
Through extensive numerical experiments on tabular datasets for both regression and classification,
we show that RFRBoost significantly outperforms
RFNNs and end-to-end trained MLP ResNets in
the small- to medium-scale regime where RFNNs
are typically applied. Moreover, RFRBoost offers
substantial computational benefits, and theoretical
guarantees stemming from boosting theory.

Recent theoretical work on Fourier RFNNs has shown that
deep residual RFNNs can achieve lower generalization errors than their single-layer counterparts (Kammonen et al.,
2022). Current theory and algorithms for training deep
RFNNs, however, are limited to the Fourier activation function (Davis et al., 2024), and uses ideas from control theory
to sample from optimal weight distributions. While skip
connections have been crucial to the success of deep endto-end-trained ResNets (He et al., 2015), introducing them
into general RFNNs is not straightforward, as naively stacking random layers may degrade performance. In this paper,
we introduce random feature representation boosting
(RFRBoost), a novel method for constructing deep ResNet
RFNNs. Our approach not only significantly improves performance, but also retains the highly tractable convex optimization framework inherent to RFNNs, with theoretical
guarantees stemming from boosting theory.
ResNets have traditionally been studied from two primary
perspectives. The first views a ResNet Φt , defined by
Φt (x) = Φt−1 (x) + gt (Φt−1 (x)),

(1)

as an Euler discretization of a dynamical system dΦt (x) =
gt (Φt )dt (E, 2017). Here gt represents a residual block at
layer t, often expressed as gt (x) = Aσ(Bx+b). This framework was later generalized to the setting of neural ODEs
(Chen et al., 2018; Dupont et al., 2019; Kidger et al., 2020;
2021; Walker et al., 2024). The second point of view is
that of gradient boosting, where a ResNet can be seen as an
ensemble of
shallow neural networks of varying sizes,
Pweak,
T
ΦT (x) = t=1 gt (Φt−1 (x)), derived by unravelling equation (1) (Veit et al., 2016). This led to the development of
gradient representation boosting (Nitanda & Suzuki, 2018;
Suggala et al., 2020), which studies residual blocks via functional gradients in the space of square integrable random
vectors LD
2 (µ), where µ is the distribution of the data.

1. Introduction
Random feature neural networks (RFNNs) are singlehidden-layer neural networks where all model parameters
are randomly initialized or sampled, with only the linear
output layer being trained. This approach presents a computationally efficient alternative to neural networks trained via
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), avoiding the challenges
associated with non-convex optimization and vanishing/exploding gradients. Despite their simplicity, RFNNs and
related random feature models have strong provable generalization guarantees (Rahimi & Recht, 2008b; Rudi &
Rosasco, 2017; Lanthaler & Nelsen, 2023; Cheng et al.,
2023), and have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance

A key challenge in extending RFNNs to deep ResNet architectures lies in the crucial role of the residual blocks gt when
they are composed of random features. If the magnitude of
gt is too small, the initial representation Φ0 dominates, rendering the added random features ineffective. Conversely,
if gt is too large, information from previous layers can be
lost. This problem is not merely one of scale; ideally each

∗
Equal last authors. 1 Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, UK 2 School of Computer Science, University of
St. Gallen, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Nikita Zozoulenko
<n.zozoulenko23@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

