QLASS: Boosting Language Agent Inference via Q-Guided Stepwise Search

Zongyu Lin

1*

Yao Tang

2*

Xingcheng Yao

1*

Da Yin

Abstract

1*

Ziniu Hu

1

Yizhou Sun

1. Behavior Cloning
SFT Dataset

Language agents have become a promising solution to complex interactive tasks. One of the key
ingredients to the success of language agents is
the reward model on the trajectory of the agentic workflow, which provides valuable guidance
during training or inference. However, due to
the lack of annotations of intermediate interactions, most existing works use an outcome reward
model to optimize policies across entire trajectories. This may lead to sub-optimal policies and
hinder the overall performance. To address this,
we propose QLASS (Q-guided Language Agent
Stepwise Search), to automatically generate annotations by estimating Q-values in a stepwise
manner for open language agents. By introducing
a exploration tree and performing process reward
modeling, QLASS provides effective intermediate
guidance for each step. With the stepwise guidance, we propose a Q-guided generation strategy
to enable language agents to better adapt to longterm value, resulting in significant performance
improvement during model inference on complex
interactive agent tasks. Notably, even with almost
half the annotated data, QLASS retains strong
performance, demonstrating its efficiency in handling limited supervision. We also empirically
show that QLASS can lead to more effective deci1
sion making through qualitative analysis.

1†

Kai-Wei Chang

1†

4. Q-guided Generation

a1

QNet

2. Self-Generation & Tree Construction

Environment

LLM Agent
u: task
s: state
a: action
q: Q-value

a1

s1 0
a3

u

a2

a3

0.1

0.8

...

a2
a4

a1
0.9

s2 0.9
a5

s3

s4

s5

0

0.5

0.9

3. Train QNet
(s1,a1,q1)
(s2,a2,q2)
...

QNet

Figure 1. QLASS pipeline overview. QLASS involves mainly four
stages: 1) Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on expert data. 2) Leverage
SFT agent to explore the environment and construct an exploration
tree for each task. After construction, estimate the Q-value of each
tree node based on Equation 7. 3) Train QNet on the estimated
Q-values. 4) Use the trained QNet to provide inference guidance
at each step.

et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2024). However, the substantial human annotations required to collect training data present a
significant bottleneck, limiting both performance and scalability. This challenge is particularly pronounced in agent
tasks (Yao et al., 2022; Shridhar et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2022a), where data scarcity is a critical issue due to the
inherent complexity and diversity of real-world interactions.
To overcome this challenge, self-improvement techniques
have shown to be a promising area of research, enabling
LLMs to learn from self-generated data without extensive
human intervention (Wang et al., 2022b; Singh et al., 2023;
Hosseini et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), and most recently,
enable LLMs to improve their outputs by scaling up their
test-time computation in a more intelligent way (Wang et al.,
2024; Shinn et al., 2023; Snell et al., 2024). Inspired by
this, we focus on improving the inference-time search for
language agents, which is a crucial technique for the success
of more generalizable agents in real-world environments.

1. Introduction
Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is commonly employed to
make base LLMs perform effective reasoning and planning
in complex agent tasks by imitating expert trajectories (Chen
1

* Equal contribution. † Equal advising. University of Califor2
nia, Los Angeles, USA Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Yizhou Sun <yizhou.sun@ucla.edu>,
Kai-Wei Chang <kaiwei.chang@ucla.edu>.

An essential component of inference-time scaling methods
is the reward model (Snell et al., 2024), which evaluates the
quality of self-explored data. Many existing works derive a
single outcome reward based on ground-truth (Wang et al.,
2024; Shinn et al., 2023). Although this approach is straightforward, it falls short in handling complex agent tasks, since
an outcome-reward model cannot accurately score each step
within a long trajectory in intricate scenarios. In addition, a

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
We will release our code and data in https://github.
com/Rafa-zy/QLASS

1

