Unlocking the Power of Rehearsal in Continual Learning:
A Theoretical Perspective

Junze Deng 1 Qinhang Wu 2 Peizhong Ju 3 Sen Lin 4 Yingbin Liang 1 Ness Shroff 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Continual learning (CL) (Parisi et al., 2019) seeks to build an
agent that can learn a sequence of tasks continuously without
access to old task data, resembling human’s capability of
lifelong learning. One of the major challenges therein is the
so-called catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017),
i.e., the agent can easily forget the knowledge of old tasks
when learning new tasks. A large amount of studies have
been proposed to address this issue, among which rehearsalbased approaches (Rolnick et al., 2019) have demonstrated
the state-of-the-art performance. The main idea behind is
to store a subset of old task data in the memory and revisit
them for new task learning, where a widely adopted strategy
for training is concurrent rehearsal (Goldfarb et al., 2024),
i.e., train the model concurrently on new data and past data.

Rehearsal-based methods have shown superior
performance in addressing catastrophic forgetting
in continual learning (CL) by storing and training
on a subset of past data alongside new data in
current task. While such a concurrent rehearsal
strategy is widely used, it remains unclear if this
approach is always optimal. Inspired by human
learning, where sequentially revisiting tasks helps
mitigate forgetting, we explore whether sequential
rehearsal can offer greater benefits for CL compared to standard concurrent rehearsal. To address
this question, we conduct a theoretical analysis of
rehearsal-based CL in overparameterized linear
models, comparing two strategies: 1) Concurrent
Rehearsal, where past and new data are trained
together, and 2) Sequential Rehearsal, where new
data is trained first, followed by revisiting past
data sequentially. By explicitly characterizing
forgetting and generalization error, we show that
sequential rehearsal performs better when tasks
are less similar. These insights further motivate
a novel Hybrid Rehearsal method, which trains
similar tasks concurrently and revisits dissimilar
tasks sequentially. We characterize its forgetting
and generalization performance, and our experiments with deep neural networks further confirm
that the hybrid approach outperforms standard
concurrent rehearsal. This work provides the first
comprehensive theoretical analysis of rehearsalbased CL.

While the concurrent rehearsal strategy seems very natural
and has shown successful performance to address catastrophic forgetting, it is indeed questionable whether this
strategy is always the right way for rehearsal in CL as we
consider the following aspects. 1) From the perspective of
human learning. In daily life, a common strategy to prevent
forgetting is to review old knowledge. For example, suppose
a student needs to learn a series of topics over a semester before taking an exam, and each topic corresponds to one task
in CL. Intuitively, if these topics are highly related to each
other, incorporating the knowledge of old topics into learning a new topic can be an effective strategy to strengthen the
new learning and simultaneously reduce the forgetting of
old knowledge, which is analogous to concurrent rehearsal.
However, if the topics are very different from each other, a
common practice is to learn new topics first and then go over
old topics to mitigate forgetting. Here, such a sequential
rehearsal may lead to better outcome in the exam. 2) From
the perspective of multi-task learning. Learning multiple
tasks all at once may lead to poor learning performance due
to the potential interference among gradients of different
tasks (Yu et al., 2020), whereas standard CL without regularization and rehearsal may even achieve less forgetting for
more dissimilar tasks (Lin et al., 2023). Thus motivated, an
interesting and open question to ask is:

1

Department of ECE, Ohio State University, Columbus, USA
Department of CSE, Ohio State University, Columbus, USA
3
Department of CS, University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA
4
Department of CS, University of Houston, Houston, USA. Correspondence to: Junze Deng <deng.942@osu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Question: Whether sequential rehearsal will serve as an
appealing rehearsal strategy to complement the standard
1

