Competing Bandits in Matching Markets via Super Stability

Soumya Basu 1

Abstract

However, this preference order is unknown a-priori, and
must be elicited from noisy feedback by matching with the
other side through repeated interactions. A stable matching
is a matching among the users and arms, where there is no
blocking pair of user i and arm j such that i and j prefer
each other compared to their current partner. The objective
of the system is to converge to one of multiple possible
stable matching with low regret.

We study bandit learning in matching markets
with two-sided reward uncertainty, extending
prior research primarily focused on single-sided
uncertainty. Leveraging the concept of ‘superstability’ from Irving (1994), we demonstrate the
advantage of the Extended Gale-Shapley (GS)
algorithm over the standard GS algorithm in
achieving true stable matchings under incomplete information. By employing the Extended
GS algorithm, our centralized algorithm attains
a logarithmic pessimal stable regret dependent
on an instance-dependent admissible gap parameter. This algorithm is further adapted to a decentralized setting with a constant regret increase.
Finally, we establish a novel centralized instancedependent lower bound for binary stable regret,
elucidating the roles of the admissible gap and
super-stable matching in characterizing the complexity of stable matching with bandit feedback.

Unlike most prior works, except a select few (Pagare &
Ghosh, 2024; Zhang & Fang), which are limited to user side
uncertainty we consider two-sided uncertainty, where all
users and arms need to learn their respective preferences.
Our work also considers general matching markets. In another direction, the existing literature has been limited to
combining bandit learning methods with the standard GaleShapley algorithm. One major shortcoming of this approach
is the need to learn the top N ranks for a general matching
market with N users and K arms where N ≤ K. This does
not capture the intrinsic complexity of the underlying stable
matching problem. We move beyond the standard GaleShapley algorithm, and harness a seminal work of Irving
(1994) to construct an algorithm with regret that grows with
the intrinsic complexity of the problem.

1. Introduction

In order to understand the weakness of Gale-Shapley algorithm let us first review the task at hand. Given the history, at
each round users and arms can construct their respective partially recovered rankings, and require to find a stable match
using these partial rankings. However, using Gale-Shapley
algorithm over a partially recovered ranking, breaking ties
in a uncertain manner, the system arrives at a weakly stable
matching. This is a concept of stability defined in Irving
(1994) for partial rankings, where a matching is weakly stable if there is no blocking pair of user i and arm j such that
i and j strictly prefers each other compared to their current
partner. The problem with weakly stable matching is as
ties in preferences are resolved a weakly stable matching
can turn out to have blocking pairs. Therefore, it is not
stable under the true full-rankings. The only way to ensure
exploration is complete is by resolving the top N ranks for
all the agents and ensure that a weakly stable matching is
indeed stable under the true full-rankings.

The problem of finding a stable matching in a two-sided
matching market has gained considerable attention in the
past few years (Das & Kamenica, 2005; Liu et al., 2020;
Sankararaman et al., 2021; Basu et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2021; Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Hosseini et al., 2024; Ghosh
et al., 2024). A major motivation is the two-sided matching
market provides a model to study multiple real world systems - such as crowd-sourcing markets like UpWork or Task
Rabbit (Li et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2023), ride-sharing
systems (Johari et al., 2021) as well as classical markets like
matching students in college programs (Gale & Shapley,
1962), matching organ donors with recipients (Reddy et al.,
2013). In a two-sided market there are two types of agents,
demand side (users) and supply side (arms). Each agent
has an implicit preference order for the other side agents.
1
Google, New York. Correspondence to: Soumya Basu <basusoumya@google.com>.

Interestingly, in Irving (1994) we can also find a way to
circumvent this issue leveraging the concept of super stable

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

