Online Episodic Convex Reinforcement Learning

Bianca Marin Moreno * 1 2 3 Khaled Eldowa * 4 5 Pierre Gaillard 1 Margaux Brégère 2 6 Nadia Oudjane 2 3

Abstract

a sequence of probability transition kernels p :“ ppn qnPrN s ,
such that for each px, aq P X ˆA, pn p¨|x, aq P ∆X , the simplex over the state space. Formally, the RL problem involves
finding a policy π that, under a transition kernel p, induces
a state-action distribution sequence µπ,p P p∆X ˆA qN minimizing the inner product with a loss vector ℓ :“ pℓn qnPrN s ,
with ℓn P RX ˆA , i.e.: minπPp∆A qX ˆN xℓ, µπ,p y. A large
body of literature is devoted to solving the RL problem efficiently and with theoretical guarantees in many challenging
environments (Bertsekas, 2019; Sutton & Barto, 2018).

We study online learning in episodic finitehorizon Markov decision processes (MDPs) with
convex objective functions, known as the concave
utility reinforcement learning (CURL) problem.
This setting generalizes RL from linear to convex
losses on the state-action distribution induced by
the agent’s policy. The non-linearity of CURL
invalidates classical Bellman equations and requires new algorithmic approaches. We introduce
the first algorithm achieving near-optimal regret
bounds for online CURL without any prior knowledge on the transition function. To achieve this,
we use an online mirror descent algorithm with
varying constraint sets and a carefully designed
exploration bonus. We then address for the first
time a bandit version of CURL, where the only
feedback is the value of the objective function on
the state-action distribution induced by the agent’s
policy. We achieve a sub-linear regret bound for
this more challenging problem by adapting techniques from bandit convex optimization to the
MDP setting.

However, numerous practical problems entail more intricate
objectives, such as those encountered within the Concave
Utility Reinforcement Learning (CURL) framework (Hazan
et al., 2019; Zahavy et al., 2021) (also known as convex
RL). The CURL problem consists in minimizing a convex
function (or maximizing a concave function) on the stateaction distributions induced by an agent’s policy:
minπPp∆A qX ˆN F pµπ,p q.

(1)

In addition to RL, other examples of machine learning
problems that can be written as CURL are pure exploration (Hazan et al., 2019; Mutti et al., 2021; 2022b),
where F pµπ,p q “ xµπ,p , logpµπ,p qy; imitation learning
(Ghasemipour et al., 2020; Lavington et al., 2022) and
apprenticeship learning (Zahavy et al., 2019; Abbeel &
Ng, 2004), where F pµπ,p q “ Dg pµπ,p , µ˚ q, with Dg representing a Bregman divergence induced by a function g
and µ˚ being a behavior to be imitated; certain instances
of mean-field control (Bensoussan et al., 2013), where
F pµπ,p q “ xℓpµπ,p q, µπ,p y; mean-field games with potential rewards (Lavigne & Pfeiffer, 2023); risk-averse RL
(Garcıa & Fernández, 2015; Pan et al., 2019; Greenberg
et al., 2022), among others. The non-linearity of CURL alters the additive structure inherent in standard RL, invalidating the classical Bellman equations. Consequently, dynamic
programming approaches become infeasible, necessitating
the development of novel methodologies.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the problem where an
agent interacts with an environment over time, adhering to
a probabilistic policy that maps states to actions and aiming
to minimize the cumulative expected losses. The environment’s dynamics are represented by a Markov decision process (MDP), assumed here to be episodic, with episodes of
length N , a finite state space X , a finite action space A, and
*
Equal contribution 1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS,
Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France. 2 EDF Lab, 7 bd
Gaspard Monge, 91120 Palaiseau, France 3 FiME (Laboratoire
de Finance des Marchés de l’Energie - Dauphine, CREST, EDF
R&D) 4 Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy 5 Politecnico
di Milano, Milan, Italy 6 Sorbonne Université LPSM, Paris,
France. Correspondence to: Bianca Marin Moreno <bianca.marinmoreno@inria.fr>.

A natural extension of CURL is the online scenario, wherein
a sequence of policies pπ t qtPrT s is computed over T
episodes, aimed at minimizing a cumulative loss LT :“
ř
T
t π t ,p
q, where the objective F t can change arbit“1 F pµ
trarily (known as the adversarial scenario (Even-Dar et al.,
2009)), and the MDP probability kernel p is unknown. Most
existing approaches to CURL fail to address the challenges

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

