CoMemo: LVLMs Need Image Context with Image Memory

Shi Liu * 1 Weijie Su * †

1

Xizhou Zhu 2 1 Wenhai Wang 3 1 Jifeng Dai 2 1

Abstract

parameters. Building upon this foundation, large visionlanguage models (LVLMs) have emerged as powerful multimodal systems that align visual representations with LLM
embedding spaces to enable cross-modal reasoning (Liu
et al., 2024b; Alayrac et al., 2022). Current methodologies
for visual information injection predominantly follow two
architectural paradigms.

Recent advancements in Large Vision-Language
Models built upon Large Language Models have
established aligning visual features with LLM
representations as the dominant paradigm. However, inherited LLM architectural designs introduce suboptimal characteristics for multimodal
processing. First, LVLMs exhibit a bimodal distribution in attention allocation, leading to the
progressive neglect of middle visual content as
context expands. Second, conventional positional encoding schemes fail to preserve vital 2D
structural relationships when processing dynamic
high-resolution images. To address these limitations, we propose CoMemo - a dual-path architecture that combines a Context image path
with an image Memory path for visual processing, effectively alleviating visual information neglect. Additionally, we introduce RoPE-DHR,
a novel positional encoding mechanism that employs thumbnail-based positional aggregation to
maintain 2D spatial awareness while mitigating
remote decay in extended sequences. Evaluations
across seven benchmarks,including long-context
comprehension, multi-image reasoning, and visual question answering, demonstrate CoMemo’s
superior performance compared to conventional
LVLM architectures. Project page is available at
https://lalbj.github.io/projects/CoMemo/.

The first paradigm (referred to as LVLM-X, e.g.,
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022)) employs cross-attention
mechanisms to integrate visual features into textual representations. While this approach offers flexible modality
interaction, recent studies (Laurençon et al., 2024) have revealed its suboptimal performance compared to alternative
approaches when using identical LLM backbones and training data - a finding corroborated by our studies in Figure 1.
The second paradigm (referred to as LVLM-S, e.g.,
LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024b)) aligns visual tokens into text
token embeddings space and then performs autoregressive
processing. This paradigm is more compatible with LLM
architectures; however, the preservation intrinsic mechanisms such as attention bimodality (Xiao et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2025a) and the linearly increasing position encoding
leads to critical limitations: (1) the “lost in the middle” (Liu
et al., 2024c; Song et al., 2024) phenomenon degrades performance with increasing context length, and (2) positional
encoding sparsity induces remote decay and 2d-dimensional
lost in high-resolution image processing.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for LVLM,
named CoMemo. Our key idea is to introduce an additional image-processing mechanism that is unaffected by
context, without modifying the internal mechanisms of the
LLM. Specifically, we concatenate image tokens with text
tokens as the input sequence for fully autoregressive processing, while simultaneously feeding the image tokens
into a mixin layer for cross-attention computation. Crossattention retrieves image information based on text, avoiding
the issue of image neglect that can occur in causal selfattention. However, simply combining these two structures,
as in NVLM-H (Dai et al., 2024), does not work well. To
address this, we first investigated a balanced scheme for
visual representation inputs. Then, we introduced a threestage training technique to prevent overreliance on the crossattention path, effectively transforming it into a “memory

1. Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs)
have demonstrated unprecedented generative capabilities (Ouyang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023), primarily
driven by the exponential scaling of training data and model
*
Equal contribution † Project lead 1 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Tsinghua University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Weijie Su <suweijie@pjlab.org.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

