GTR: A General, Multi-View, and Dynamic Framework for Trajectory
Representation Learning

Xiangheng Wang 1 Ziquan Fang 1 Chenglong Huang 1 Danlei Hu 2 Lu Chen 2 Yunjun Gao 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the widespread use of GPS devices and location-based
services, large volumes of trajectory data have been collected (Wang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2024). A trajectory
is typically represented as a sequence of spatio-temporal
points, capturing the movement of a mobile object (e.g., a
person or vehicle) and enabling various applications (Jeong
et al., 2014; LOU et al., 2021), such as similarity search (Li
et al., 2018), and transportation mode classification (Hu
et al., 2024). Traditional approaches often rely on manually extracted features for these analyses (Wang et al.,
2020), overlooking hidden correlations between trajectories and thereby limit performance. Recently, trajectory
representation learning has emerged (Chen et al., 2021;
Fu & Lee, 2020; Jiang et al., 2023a), aiming to transform
high-dimensional trajectories into low-dimensional vectors
(i.e., trajectory embeddings) that retain essential information
from the original data and capture hidden features. These
vectors are then fed into a range of trajectory analysis tasks.

Trajectory representation learning aims to transform raw trajectory data into compact and lowdimensional vectors that are suitable for downstream analysis. However, most existing methods adopt either a free-space view or a roadnetwork view during the learning process, which
limits their ability to capture the complex, multiview spatiotemporal features inherent in trajectory data. Moreover, these approaches rely on
task-specific model training, restricting their generalizability and effectiveness for diverse analysis tasks. To this end, we propose GTR, a general, multi-view, and dynamic Trajectory Representation framework built on a pre-train and
fine-tune architecture. Specifically, GTR introduces a multi-view encoder that captures the intrinsic multi-view spatiotemporal features. Based
on the pre-train and fine-tune architecture, we
provide the spatio-temporal fusion pre-training
with a spatio-temporal mixture of experts to dynamically combine spatial and temporal features,
enabling seamless adaptation to diverse trajectory
analysis tasks. Furthermore, we propose an online
frozen-hot updating strategy to efficiently update
the representation model, accommodating the dynamic nature of trajectory data. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate that
GTR consistently outperforms 15 state-of-the-art
methods across 6 mainstream trajectory analysis
tasks. All source code and data are available at
https://github.com/ZJU-DAILY/GTR.

Existing trajectory representation learning studies can be
divided into two categories: (i) free-space settings and (ii)
road-network settings. In free-space settings, early studies (Fang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2018) treat trajectories as
pure point sequences, disregarding road network constraints.
Thus, they typically apply sequential models like LSTMs
and RNNs to capture the spatio-temporal dependencies in
trajectory data. Since moving objects, such as people and
vehicles, are constrained by road networks, road-networkbased trajectory representation learning methods have been
developed. These approaches (Fang et al., 2022; Fu & Lee,
2020; Han et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2022) typically begin by
learning embeddings for road segments using graph neural
networks (GNNs) with road network graphs as input. Subsequently, hidden spatio-temporal relations can be captured
by feeding the road segment embeddings into sequential
models, which are trained on task-specific objectives. Recently, state-of-the-art methods, including START (Jiang
et al., 2023a) and JGRM (Ma et al., 2024), have adopted
self-supervised learning paradigms to improve the generalization of trajectory representation learning across various
tasks. More detailed works can be found in Appendix A.
However, there are still some unsolved challenges in devel-

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Software, Zhejiang University,
Ningbo, China 2 College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Ziquan Fang <zqfang@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

