Position: Don’t Use the CLT in LLM Evals With Fewer Than a Few Hundred
Datapoints

Sam Bowyer 1 Laurence Aitchison * 1 Desi R. Ivanova * 2

Abstract

the validity of and confidence in the reported results (Marie
et al., 2021; Reuel et al., 2024; Biderman et al., 2024).

Rigorous statistical evaluations of large language
models (LLMs), including valid error bars and significance testing, are essential for meaningful and
reliable performance assessment. Currently, when
such statistical measures are reported, they typically rely on the Central Limit Theorem (CLT).
In this position paper, we argue that while CLTbased methods for uncertainty quantification are
appropriate when benchmarks consist of thousands of examples, they fail to provide adequate
uncertainty estimates for LLM evaluations that
rely on smaller, highly specialized benchmarks.
In these small-data settings, we demonstrate that
CLT-based methods perform very poorly, usually
dramatically underestimating uncertainty (i.e. producing error bars that are too small). We give
recommendations for alternative frequentist and
Bayesian methods that are both easy to implement and more appropriate in these increasingly
common scenarios. We provide a simple Python
library for these Bayesian methods at https://
github.com/sambowyer/bayes_evals.

Recent works have recognized the importance of statistical
rigour in LLM evals and the need to improve it, for instance,
through the inclusion of error bars (Dror et al., 2018; Miller,
2024; Madaan et al., 2024; Hermann et al., 2024). When
such uncertainty estimates are reported at all, they are most
often asymptotic, based on Central Limit Theorem (CLT).
In this position paper, we take it as read that LLM evals
should come with error bars. Instead, we ask about the best
way to compute those error bars. Here, we argue that while
CLT-based methods work well in LLM evals with thousands of examples, they systematically fail to provide
valid uncertainties for smaller, specialized benchmarks,
which are becoming increasingly common. In these settings, accurate uncertainty quantification requires more
appropriate frequentist or Bayesian methods.
Many prominent LLM benchmarks such as Big Bench (Srivastava et al., 2023), MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a),
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), have large evaluation sets,
on the order of hundreds to thousands. Such benchmarks
focus on relatively straightforward tasks that many LLMs
have largely saturated (e.g. high school science questions),
and generally do not accurately represent the tasks LLMs
are used for in practical real-world applications (Raji et al.,
2021; Hardy et al., 2025). In contrast, both industry practitioners developing proprietary benchmarks, and researchers
evaluating advanced capabilities of frontier models, such as
advanced reasoning, multi-turn tool use or tasks involving
specialized domain expertise, increasingly focus on more
targeted and representative benchmarks with very high quality labels. These benchmarks are much more expensive to
construct and therefore tend to involve far fewer examples,
often on the order of tens to hundreds per task.

1. Introduction
Benchmarks provide a systematic way for measuring the
capabilities and risks of large language models (LLMs), for
tracking progress over time as well as enabling performance
comparison across different models. Such language model
evaluations (“LLM evals”) inform critical decisions about
model selection and deployment. However, current benchmarking practices rarely quantify the inherent statistical uncertainty in these evals, which can substantially undermine

There are plenty of examples that illustrate this trend. For
instance, CUAD (Hendrycks et al., 2021b) is a specialized
contract understanding dataset that consists of 510 labelled
documents across 25 contract types. It required extensive
annotation efforts from law students and reviews from experienced attorneys, with an estimated cost of around $2
million. FrontierMath (Glazer et al., 2024; Pillay, 2024)—

*

1
Equal contribution
University of Bristol, UK
University of Oxford, UK. Correspondence to:
Sam
Bowyer <sam.bowyer@bristol.ac.uk>, Laurence Aitchison <laurence.aitchison@gmail.com>, Desi R. Ivanova
<desi.ivanova@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

