A Sharper Global Convergence Analysis for Average Reward Reinforcement
Learning via an Actor-Critic Approach

Swetha Ganesh 1 2 Washim Uddin Mondal 3 Vaneet Aggarwal 1

Abstract

munication networks (Agarwal et al., 2022), and healthcare
(Tamboli et al., 2024). Model-based algorithms (Jaksch
et al., 2010; Agrawal & Jia, 2017; Agarwal & Aggarwal,
2023) that learn the state transition kernel from Markovian
trajectories, are well-known approaches for solving RL problems. However, these methods are typically limited to small
state spaces. Policy Gradient (PG) methods, a cornerstone
of RL, offer a model-free alternative that naturally supports
function approximation (FA), making them well-suited for
large state-action spaces. When the size of the state-action
space, SA, is large or infinite, the framework of FA (also
known as general parameterization) indexes the candidate
policies by a d-dimensional parameter, θ, where d ≪ SA.
Recently, some works have established global convergence
guarantees for the average-reward setting with general policy parametrization, which we discuss below.

This work examines average-reward reinforcement learning with general policy parametrization.
Existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) guarantees for
this problem are either suboptimal or hindered
by several challenges, including poor scalability
with respect to the size of the state-action space,
high iteration complexity, and a significant dependence on knowledge of mixing times and hitting times. To address these limitations, we propose a Multi-level Monte Carlo-based Natural
Actor-Critic (MLMC-NAC) algorithm. Our work
is the first
√ to achieve a global convergence rate
of Õ(1/ T ) for average-reward Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (where T is the horizon
length), using an Actor-Critic approach. Moreover, the convergence rate does not scale with
the size of the state space, therefore even being
applicable to infinite state spaces.

There are two main approaches in this context. The first is
the direct PG method, where value functions are estimated
directly from sampled trajectories (Bai et al., 2024; Ganesh
et al., 2025b). The second is the Temporal Difference (TD)based policy evaluation approach, commonly known as the
Actor-Critic (AC) method (Patel et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2024). Currently, the order-optimal Õ(T −1/2 ) convergence
rate result, where T is the horizon length, exists for direct
PG method (Ganesh et al., 2025b). However, these methods
face key limitations, including poor scalability to large stateaction spaces and a strong reliance on precise knowledge
of mixing and hitting times to decorrelate samples, an assumption that is often impractical. In contrast, existing AC
algorithms circumvent these issues but are generally more
challenging to analyze. More specifically, AC methods employ a TD-based critic to estimate the value function, which
helps in reducing the variance. However, this reduction
comes at the cost of introducing a bias, in addition to the
inherent bias arising due to Markovian sampling. Direct PG
methods using Markovian sampling leverage knowledge of
mixing time to obtain nearly i.i.d. samples, whereas this
would not suffice for AC methods due to the additional bias
from the critic. As a result, the state-of-the-art bounds for
AC is Õ(1/T 1/4 ), which is suboptimal. This raises the
following question:

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a framework where an
agent interacts with a Markovian environment and maximizes the total reward it receives. The temporal dependence
of the state transitions makes the problem of RL much more
challenging than ordinary stochastic optimization, where
data are selected in an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) manner. RL problems are typically analyzed
via three setups: episodic, discounted reward with an infinite horizon, and average reward with an infinite horizon.
The average reward framework is particularly significant
for real-world applications, including robotics (Gonzalez
et al., 2023), transportation (Al-Abbasi et al., 2019), com1

School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India 3 Department of
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India. Correspondence to: Vaneet Aggarwal <vaneet@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

