Revealing Weaknesses in Text Watermarking Through Self-Information Rewrite
Attacks
Yixin Cheng 1 2 Hongcheng Guo 3 Yangming Li 4 Leonid Sigal 1 2 5 6

Abstract

demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating coherent, human-like text. However, while these advances significantly expand AI’s potential in content creation, they
have concurrently heightened concerns regarding their misuse (Deshpande et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024), including
the spread of misinformation (Monteith et al., 2024) and
threats to academic integrity (Stokel-Walker, 2022).

Text watermarking aims to subtly embeds statistical signals into text by controlling the Large
Language Model (LLM)’s sampling process, enabling watermark detectors to verify that the output was generated by the specified model. The
robustness of these watermarking algorithms has
become a key factor in evaluating their effectiveness. Current text watermarking algorithms embed watermarks in high-entropy tokens to ensure
text quality. In this paper, we reveal that this
seemingly benign design can be exploited by attackers, posing a significant risk to the robustness
of the watermark. We introduce a generic efficient paraphrasing attack, the Self-Information
Rewrite Attack (SIRA), which leverages the vulnerability by calculating the self-information of
each token to identify potential pattern tokens
and perform targeted attack. Our work exposes
a widely prevalent vulnerability in current watermarking algorithms. The experimental results
show SIRA achieves nearly 100% attack success
rates on seven recent watermarking methods with
only $0.88 per million tokens cost. Our approach
does not require any access to the watermark algorithms or the watermarked LLM and can seamlessly transfer to any LLM as the attack model
even mobile-level models. Our findings highlight
the urgent need for more robust watermarking.
The source code is available at SIRA.

To mitigate risks associated with LLM-generated content,
text watermarking has emerged as a promising countermeasure (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Aaronson & Kirchner,
2022). This technique subtly alters the LLM’s generation
process to embed imperceptible patterns in the output text,
the pattern is invisible to human readers and can be reliably
detected using specialized algorithms. This generate-detect
framework enables the differentiation between AI-generated
and human-authored content and allows tracking of the text
back to the specific LLM that generates the text (Li et al.,
2024). Consequently, this mechanism promotes accountability and helps mitigate LLM misuse, providing a reliable
means to ensure transparency and integrity in AI-generated
content.
Recent studies have demonstrated that watermarking techniques exhibit significant robustness against simple manipulations, including word deletions (Welbl et al., 2020) and
emoji attacks (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023). However, traditional NLP attack strategies, such as word deletion and
insertion, are increasingly insufficient for thoroughly evaluating the robustness of advanced watermarking algorithms.
As LLMs continue to advance, there is a growing need for
more sophisticated testing methodologies that account for
complex manipulation tactics, ensuring that watermarking
techniques remain resilient against emerging threats.

1. Introduction

To provide a more rigorous evaluation of watermarking robustness, paraphrasing attacks have been proposed. Despite
their potential, these approaches face several limitations.
First, current paraphrasing attacks rely on a naive and bruteforce approach, where they simply instruct LLMs to rewrite
watermarked text. This process is both inefficient and inconsistent in its results. The modifications to text are untargeted
and random, dictated by the LLM, often leaving portions of
the watermark intact causing the attack to fail. For newer
and more robust watermarking algorithms like SIR (Liu

Large language models (LLMs), exemplified by ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2024) and Claude (Anthropic, 2024), have
1
University of British Columbia 2 Vector Institute for AI 3 Fudan
University 4 University of Cambridge 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair
6
NSERC CRC Chair. Correspondence to: Yixin Cheng <yixinch@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

