Directly Forecasting Belief for Reinforcement Learning with Delays

Yixuan Wang

3

Qingyuan Wu * 1 Yuhui Wang * 2 Simon Sinong Zhan * 3
Chung-Wei Lin 4 Chen Lv 5 Qi Zhu 3 Jürgen Schmidhuber 2 6 Chao Huang 1

Abstract

world applications, particularly the delays that occur in
the interaction between the agent and the environment due
to physical distance, computational processing, and signal
transmission. Otherwise, delays fundamentally affect the
system’s safety (Mahmood et al., 2018), performance (Cao
et al., 2020) and efficiency (Hwangbo et al., 2017). Unlike rewards-delays-arising credit assignment issues that
have been well studied (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2024), observation-delays and action-delays disrupt
the Markovian property of the Markov Decision Process
(MDP), posing more challenges in RL. Most of the literature (Kim et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Wu et al.,
2024b) mainly focuses on observation-delays, which has
been proved as a superset of action-delays (Katsikopoulos &
Engelbrecht, 2003; Nath et al., 2021). Therefore, this work
mainly focuses on the RL with delays ∆ in observation: at
time step t, the agent can not observe the real environment
state st but only the history state st−∆ ∆ steps ago.

Reinforcement learning (RL) with delays is challenging as sensory perceptions lag behind the
actual events: the RL agent needs to estimate
the real state of its environment based on past
observations. State-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
typically employ recursive, step-by-step forecasting of states. This can cause the accumulation of compounding errors. To tackle this
problem, our novel belief estimation method,
named Directly Forecasting Belief Transformer
(DFBT), directly forecasts states from observations without incrementally estimating intermediate states step-by-step. We theoretically
demonstrate that DFBT greatly reduces compounding errors of existing recursively forecasting methods, yielding stronger performance guarantees. In experiments with D4RL offline datasets,
DFBT reduces compounding errors with remarkable prediction accuracy. DFBT’s capability to
forecast state sequences also facilitates multistep bootstrapping, thus greatly improving learning efficiency. On the MuJoCo benchmark,
our DFBT-based method substantially outperforms SOTA baselines. Code is available at
https://github.com/QingyuanWuNothing/DFBT.

To enable RL in environments with delayed observations,
it is essential to restore the Markovian property (Altman & Nain, 1992; Katsikopoulos & Engelbrecht, 2003).
Augmentation-based methods (Bouteiller et al., 2020; Kim
et al., 2023) are based on an observation that the information state xt = {st−∆ , at−∆:t−1 }, augmented from the
last observable state and the sequential actions, carries the
equivalent information with st (Bertsekas, 2012). Thus, the
policy learning over the original state space S can be transferred to the policy learning over the augmented state space
X , which is memoryless and can be addressed by nominal
RL. However, as delays ∆ increase, the dimensionality of
the augmented state space X expands significantly, leading to a drastic deterioration in learning efficiency due to
the exponentially increased sample complexity (Wu et al.,
2024b).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive success in various scenarios, including board games (Silver
et al., 2016; Schrittwieser et al., 2020), video games (Mnih
et al., 2013; Berner et al., 2019) and cyber-physical systems (Wei et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2023b;c; Zhan et al.,
2024). The timing factor is critical to enable RL in real-

To improve learning efficiency in augmentation-based methods, belief-based methods (Walsh et al., 2009; Chen et al.,
2021a) propose to conduct RL in the original state space
S, by estimating the instant unobservable state st from the
information state xt , of which the mapping is referred to
as belief. The belief function is commonly forecasted recursively (Chen et al., 2021a; Karamzade et al., 2024): for
i = 1, . . . , ∆, st−∆+i is estimated by applying approximate
dynamic function with the previous state st−∆+i−1 and the

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Southampton 2 GenAI, King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology 3 Northwestern
University 4 National Taiwan University 5 Nanyang Technological
University 6 The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI. Correspondence
to: Chao Huang <chao.huang@soton.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

