Provable Maximum Entropy Manifold Exploration via Diffusion Models

Riccardo De Santi * 1 2 Marin Vlastelica * 1 2 Ya-Ping Hsieh 1 Zebang Shen 1 Niao He 1 2 Andreas Krause 1 2

Abstract
Exploration is critical for solving real-world
decision-making problems such as scientific
discovery, where the objective is to generate
truly novel designs rather than mimic existing
data distributions. In this work, we address
the challenge of leveraging the representational
power of generative models for exploration
without relying on explicit uncertainty quantification. We introduce a novel framework that
casts exploration as entropy maximization over
the approximate data manifold implicitly defined
by a pre-trained diffusion model. Then, we
present a novel principle for exploration based on
density estimation, a problem well-known to be
challenging in practice. To overcome this issue
and render this method truly scalable, we leverage
a fundamental connection between the entropy
of the density induced by a diffusion model and
its score function. Building on this, we develop
an algorithm based on mirror descent that solves
the exploration problem as sequential fine-tuning
of a pre-trained diffusion model. We prove its
convergence to the optimal exploratory diffusion
model under realistic assumptions by leveraging
recent understanding of mirror flows. Finally,
we empirically evaluate our approach on both
synthetic and high-dimensional text-to-image
diffusion, demonstrating promising results.

Figure 1: A diffusion model π pre pre-trained on a set of
points (white) implicitly learns a set Ωpre (orange) approximating the true low-dimensional data manifold M ⊆ Rm
(black) with m ≪ d. The approximate data manifold Ωpre
can be significantly smaller than Rd (yellow).

et al., 2023). Traditionally, generative models have been
employed to capture the underlying data distribution in highdimensional spaces, facilitating processes such as molecule
generation or material synthesis (Bilodeau et al., 2022; Zeni
et al., 2023). However, simply approximating the data distribution is insufficient for real-world discovery, where exploration beyond high (data) density regions is essential.
Nonetheless, as illustrated in Figure 1, these models excel
at capturing complex data manifolds that are often significantly lower-dimensional than the ambient space (Stanczuk
et al., 2024; Kamkari et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023), and
can synthesize realistic novel samples that satisfy intricate
constraints (e.g., valid drug molecules or materials). Yet,
when the goal shifts to exploring novel regions within that
manifold, a fundamental question remains:

1. Introduction
How can we leverage the representational power of
generative models to guide exploration?

Recent progress in generative modeling, particularly the
emergence of diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020), has achieved unprecedented success in generating high-quality samples
across diverse domains, including chemistry (Hoogeboom
et al., 2022), biology (Corso et al., 2022), and robotics (Chi

Our approach In this work, we tackle this challenge by
first introducing the maximum entropy manifold exploration
problem (Section 3). This involves learning a continuoustime reinforcement learning policy (Doya, 2000; Zhao et al.,
2024) that governs a new diffusion model to optimally explore the approximate data manifold implicitly captured by
a pre-trained model. To this end, we present a theoretically
grounded algorithmic principle that enables self-guided exploration via a diffusion model’s own representational power
of the density it induces (Section 4). This turns exploration

*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Riccardo De Santi <rdesanti@ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

