Linear Q-Learning Does Not Diverge in L2 :
Convergence Rates to a Bounded Set

Xinyu Liu * 1 Zixuan Xie * 1 Shangtong Zhang 1

Abstract

(1989) uses a look-up table for representing the action-value
function. To improve generalization and work with large
or even infinite state spaces, linear function approximation
is used to approximate the action value function, yielding
linear Q-learning.

Q-learning is one of the most fundamental reinforcement learning algorithms. It is widely believed that Q-learning with linear function approximation (i.e., linear Q-learning) suffers from
possible divergence until the recent work Meyn
(2024) which establishes the ultimate almost sure
boundedness of the iterates of linear Q-learning.
Building on this success, this paper further establishes the first L2 convergence rate of linear
Q-learning iterates (to a bounded set). Similar to
Meyn (2024), we do not make any modification
to the original linear Q-learning algorithm, do not
make any Bellman completeness assumption, and
do not make any near-optimality assumption on
the behavior policy. All we need is an ϵ-softmax
behavior policy with an adaptive temperature. The
key to our analysis is the general result of stochastic approximations under Markovian noise with
fast-changing transition functions. As a side product, we also use this general result to establish
the L2 convergence rate of tabular Q-learning
with an ϵ-softmax behavior policy, for which we
rely on a novel pseudo-contraction property of the
weighted Bellman optimality operator.

Linear Q-learning is, however, widely believed to suffer
from possible divergence (Baird, 1995; Sutton & Barto,
2018). In other words, the weights of linear Q-learning can
possibly diverge to infinity as learning progresses. However,
Meyn (2024) recently proves that when an ϵ-softmax behavior policy with an adaptive temperature is used, linear
Q-learning does not diverge. Instead, the weights are eventually bounded almost surely. Or more specifically, let {wt }
be the weights of linear Q-learning. Meyn (2024) proves
that lim supt ∥wt ∥ < C almost surely for some deterministic constant C. Building on this success, we further provide
a nonasymptotic analysis of linear Q-learning by establishing the first L2 convergence rate of linear Q-learning to
a bounded set. Specifically, we establish the rate at which
2
E[∥wt ∥ ] diminishes to a bounded set. Notably, this work
differs from many previous analyses of linear Q-learning
(prior to Meyn (2024)) in that, except for the aforementioned behavior policy, we do not make any modification
to the original linear Q-learning algorithm (e.g., no target
network, no weight projection, no experience replay, no i.i.d.
data, no regularization). We also use the weakest possible
assumptions (e.g., no Bellman completeness assumption, no
near-optimality assumption on the behavior policy). Table 1
summarizes the improvements.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto (2018))
emerges as a powerful paradigm for training agents to make
decisions sequentially in complex environments. Among
various RL algorithms, Q-learning (Watkins, 1989; Watkins
& Dayan, 1992) stands out as one of the most celebrated
(Mnih et al., 2015). The original Q-learning in Watkins
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia. Correspondence to:
Xinyu Liu <xinyuliu@virginia.edu>,
Zixuan Xie <xie.zixuan@email.virginia.edu>,
Shangtong Zhang <shangtong@virginia.edu>.

Our L2 convergence rate is made possible by a novel result
concerning the convergence of stochastic approximations
under fast-changing time-inhomogeneous Markovian
noise, where the transition function of the Markovian noise
evolves as fast as the stochastic approximation weights,
i.e., there is only a single timescale. By contrast, Zhang
et al. (2022) obtain similar results only with a two-timescale
framework, where the transition function of the Markovian
noise evolves much slower than the stochastic approximation weights.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

As a side product, we also use this general stochastic approximation result to establish the L2 convergence rate of
tabular Q-learning with an ϵ-softmax behavior policy. To

*

1

