Faster and Stronger: When ANN-SNN Conversion Meets
Parallel Spiking Calculation

Zecheng Hao 1 Qichao Ma 1 Kang Chen 1 Yi Zhang 2 Zhaofei Yu 1 3 Tiejun Huang 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Spiking Neural Network (SNN), as the third generation of
neural networks (Maass, 1997), has become an academic
focus in the domain of brain-inspired intelligence. Unlike
traditional Artificial Neural Network (ANN), the network
backbone of SNN is composed of alternating synaptic layers and neuron layers. Due to the superior biological plasticity and unique firing mechanism of the spiking neuron
models, SNNs have great potential in the field of neuromorphic computing and the internal spike triggering events
are extremely sparse. At present, SNNs can be effectively
deployed on multiple neuromorphic hardwares and have
demonstrated significant advantages in inference power consumption (Merolla et al., 2014; Davies et al., 2018; DeBole
et al., 2019; Pei et al., 2019).

Spiking Neural Network (SNN), as a braininspired and energy-efficient network, is currently
facing the pivotal challenge of exploring a suitable and efficient learning framework. The predominant training methodologies, namely SpatialTemporal Back-propagation (STBP) and ANNSNN Conversion, are encumbered by substantial training overhead or pronounced inference
latency, which impedes the advancement of SNNs
in scaling to larger networks and navigating intricate application domains. In this work, we propose a novel parallel conversion learning framework, which establishes a mathematical mapping
relationship between each time-step of the parallel spiking neurons and the cumulative spike
firing rate. We theoretically validate the lossless
and sorting properties of the conversion process,
as well as pointing out the optimal shifting distance for each step. Furthermore, by integrating
the above framework with the distribution-aware
error calibration technique, we can achieve efficient conversion towards more general activation functions or training-free circumstance. Extensive experiments have confirmed the significant performance advantages of our method for
various conversion cases under ultra-low time latency. To our best knowledge, this is the first work
which jointly utilizes parallel spiking calculation
and ANN-SNN Conversion, providing a highly
promising approach for SNN supervised training.
Code is available at https://github.com/
hzc1208/Parallel_Conversion.

How to train effective spiking models remains a core topic
faced by researchers in the SNN community. The current
two mainstream training methods, Spatial-Temporal Backpropagation (STBP) (Wu et al., 2018; Neftci et al., 2019)
and ANN-SNN Conversion (Cao et al., 2015; Bu et al.,
2022), each have their own advantages and deficiencies,
as described in Tab.1. Among them, one can obtain SNN
models under ultra-low time latency (e.g. ≤ 4 ∼ 6 timesteps) through STBP training, but it requires significant
costs in terms of training speed and GPU memory overhead
(Yao et al., 2022). Therefore, STBP will struggle greatly for
network backbones with larger parameter scale and training
time-steps. In addition, when STBP does not fuse global
information in the time dimension or adopts fewer timesteps, the performance upper-bound of the trained SNNs
still have a gap with that of the pretrained ANNs (Hao et al.,
2024b).
The idea of ANN-SNN Conversion is to establish a mathematical mapping relationship between the activation layer
of ANNs and the neuron layer of SNNs, so as to replace
the activation function modules in pretrained ANNs with
corresponding spiking neurons layer by layer, then obtain
the converted SNNs. Under this learning framework, the
calculation of SNNs only involve the model inference stage,
resulting in less training burden and superior performance
consistent with pretrained ANNs. But the drawback is that
the converted SNN usually requires higher time latency to

1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing, China 3 Institute
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhaofei Yu <yuzf12@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

