Leveraging Randomness in Model and Data Partitioning for
Privacy Amplification

Andy Dong 1 Wei-Ning Chen 2 Ayfer Ozgur 1

Abstract

leakage, offering strong protections even against adversaries
with auxiliary information. The standard way to achieve
DP is to inject randomness into the training process, typically by adding noise—such as in DP-SGD (Abadi et al.,
2016)—which provides formal privacy guarantees. However, this comes at a cost: injecting more noise strengthens
privacy protections but often degrades model performance.

We study how inherent randomness in the training process—where each sample (or client in federated learning) contributes to only a randomly
selected portion of training—can be leveraged for
privacy amplification. This includes (1) model
partitioning, where a sample updates only a subset of the model parameters, and (2) data partitioning, where a sample participates in only a
subset of training iterations. We apply our framework to model parallelism in federated learning,
where each client updates a randomly selected
subnetwork to reduce memory and computational
overhead, and show that existing methods, e.g.
model splitting or dropout, provide a significant
privacy amplification gain not captured by previous privacy analysis techniques. Additionally,
we introduce Balanced Iteration Subsampling, a
new data partitioning method where each sample (or client) participates in a fixed number of
training iterations. We show that this method
yields similar or stronger privacy amplification
than Poisson (i.i.d.) sampling of data (or clients).
Our results demonstrate that randomness in the
training process, which is structured rather than
i.i.d. and interacts with data in complex ways, can
be systematically leveraged for significant privacy
amplification.

In this paper, we ask: instead of relying solely on large
noise injections to achieve strong privacy guarantees, can
we leverage the inherent randomness already present in the
training process? Many widely used techniques, such as
dropout (which helps mitigate overfitting) and model parallelism (which reduces memory and computational overhead), naturally introduce randomness or can be modified
to incorporate randomness without fundamentally altering
the training process. However, this kind of structured randomness interacts with data in complex ways, making the
associated privacy gains difficult to quantify.
The idea of leveraging randomness for privacy amplification—to reduce the amount of noise required—has been
previously explored, primarily in two specific settings. The
first is random subsampling, where each data point (or client
in federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2021)) is randomly
selected to participate in each training iteration (independently across iterations) (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011; Li
et al., 2012; Bassily et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2015; Balle
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Zhu & Wang, 2019; Balle
et al., 2020). The second is shuffling, where client data is
individually privatized and then randomly reordered to amplify privacy (Erlingsson et al., 2019; Girgis et al., 2021b;a;
Feldman et al., 2022; 2023; Chua et al.). More recently,
random gradient compression has also been shown to provide privacy amplification (Chen et al., 2024b;a). However,
amplification by model parallelism techniques has not been
studied before.

1. Introduction
Ensuring user privacy in machine learning is critical, especially in applications involving sensitive data such as
healthcare, finance, and social networks. Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006; Dwork, 2006) provides a
rigorous mathematical framework to quantify and limit data

In this paper, we investigate privacy amplification in a more
general context: whenever each sample (or client in the FL
setting) contributes to only a randomly selected portion of
the training process, this randomness—if kept secret—can
be leveraged to enhance privacy. This includes data partitioning, where a sample (or user) participates in only a subset of
the training iterations, or model partitioning, where a sam-

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University,
California, USA 2 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Andy Dong
<dxa@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

