Linear Bandits with Partially Observable Features

Wonyoung Kim * 1 Sungwoo Park * 2 Garud Iyengar 3 Assaf Zeevi 3 Min-hwan Oh 2

Abstract

advertising without personalization—i.e., when serving general users—each advertisement is associated not only with
observable features such as its category, format, or display
time, but also with unobservable factors such as emotional
appeal, creative design quality, and brand familiarity. These
latent factors influence users’ click-through rates, yet they
are not directly quantifiable. Similarly, in clinical trials,
treatment outcomes depend not only on observable features
like dosage and formulation, but also on unobserved factors such as manufacturing variability and potential side
effect risks. Hence, accurately incorporating latent features
is essential for providing precise recommendations.

We study the linear bandit problem that accounts
for partially observable features. Without proper
handling, unobserved features can lead to linear
regret in the decision horizon T , as their influence
on rewards is unknown. To tackle this challenge,
we propose a novel theoretical framework and an
algorithm with sublinear regret guarantees. The
core of our algorithm consists of (i) feature augmentation, by appending basis vectors that are
orthogonal to the row space of the observed features; and (ii) the introduction of a doubly robust
estimator.
p Our approach achieves a regret bound
e (d + dh )T ), where d is the dimension of
of O(
the observed features and dh depends on the extent to which the unobserved feature space is contained in the observed one, thereby capturing the
intrinsic difficulty of the problem. Notably, our algorithm requires no prior knowledge of the unobserved feature space, which may expand as more
features become hidden. Numerical experiments
confirm that our algorithm outperforms both noncontextual multi-armed bandits and linear bandit
algorithms depending solely on observed features.

To address latent features, Park & Faradonbeh (2022; 2024);
Kim et al. (2023a); Zeng et al. (2025) typically assume
that the true features follow a specific distribution, such
as a Gaussian distribution. Establishing a sublinear regret
bound in the decision horizon without such structural assumptions on the latent features remains a significant challenge and has not been accomplished yet. Key challenges
in the bandit problem with partially observable features
arise from the complete lack of information about the latent
features—indeed, the agent does not even know whether
the features are partially observed. We tackle these challenges by proposing a novel linear bandit algorithm that is
agnostic to partial observability. Despite having no knowledge of the unobserved features, our algorithm achieves
a tighter regret bound than both linear bandit algorithms
that consider only observed features and multi-armed bandit
(MAB) algorithms that ignore features entirely. For brevity,
we will refer to linear bandit algorithms relying solely on
observed features as “OLB algorithms” henceforth.
Specif√
ically, our proposed algorithm achieves a T -rate regret
bound, without requiring any prior knowledge of the unobserved features, where T is the decision horizon.

1. Introduction
We consider a linear bandit problem where the learning
agent has access to only a subset of the features, while the
reward is determined using the complete set of features,
including both observed and unobserved elements. Conventional linear bandit problems rely on the assumption that
the rewards are linear in only observed features, without
accounting for the potential presence of unobserved features.
However, in many real-world applications, rewards are often affected by the unobserved—hence latent—features that
are not observable by the agent. For example, in online

The key idea of our proposed algorithm can be summarized
in the following two procedures: (i) reconstructing feature
vectors via feature augmentation to capture the influence
of unobserved features on rewards, and (ii) introducing a
novel doubly robust (DR) estimator to mitigate information
loss due to partial observability. For (i), we decompose the
reward into two additive components: one projected onto the
row space spanned by the observed features, and the other
projected onto its orthogonal complement. The former term
maximally captures the effect of observed features, while

*
Equal contribution 1 Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 3 Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

