Position: Solve Layerwise Linear Models First to Understand Neural Dynamical
Phenomena (Neural Collapse, Emergence, Lazy/Rich Regime, and Grokking)

Yoonsoo Nam * 1 Seok Hyeong Lee * 2 Clementine Carla Juliette Domine 3 Yeachan Park 4 Charles London 5
Wonyl Choi 6 Niclas Alexander Goring 1 Seungjai Lee 7

Abstract

enable tractable analysis while preserving the core principles of the system. A good model not only allows analytical
solutions but also captures the underlying principle, often
providing insights and extending their utility beyond their
formal limits.

In physics, complex systems are often simplified
into minimal, solvable models that retain only the
core principles. In machine learning, layerwise
linear models (e.g., linear neural networks) act
as simplified representations of neural network
dynamics. These models follow the dynamical
feedback principle, which describes how layers
mutually govern and amplify each other’s evolution. This principle extends beyond the simplified
models, successfully explaining a wide range of
dynamical phenomena in deep neural networks,
including neural collapse, emergence, lazy and
rich regimes, and grokking. In this position paper, we call for the use of layerwise linear models
retaining the core principles of neural dynamical phenomena to accelerate the science of deep
learning.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are complex dynamical systems, with non-linear activations (e.g., ReLU) posing major challenges in analysis. Without non-linear activations,
DNNs become layerwise linear models (e.g., linear neural
networks), often underappreciated as simple product of matrices for their lack of expressivity. However, the dynamics
of layerwise linear models are non-linear (Saxe et al.,
2014), allowing them to explain key DNN phenomena such
as emergence (Nam et al., 2024) observed in large language
models (Brown et al., 2020), neural collapse (Mixon et al.,
2020) observed in image classification tasks (Papyan et al.,
2020), lazy/rich regimes (Dominé et al., 2025) observed in
extreme limits (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat et al., 2019), and
grokking (Kunin et al., 2024) observed in algorithmic tasks
(Power et al., 2022), and more as dynamical phenomena
of layerwise structure.

1. Introduction

Contrary to most non-linear models, the dynamics of layerwise linear models, under suitable assumptions, are exactly
solvable (e.g., Baldi & Hornik (1989); Saxe et al. (2014);
and Braun et al. (2022)). These solutions allow mathematical interpretations that extend beyond the limits of the
models. In this paper, we propose the dynamical feedback
principle (Section 3) as a unified principle for understanding
layerwise linear models, and review how they accurately
represent DNN dynamics to argue our position:

Physicists often build intuition about complex natural phenomena by abstracting away intricate details—for instance,
modeling a cow as a sphere (Kaiser, 2014), linearizing pendulum motion (Huygens, 1966), or using simplified frameworks like Hopfield networks to explore associative memory
and network dynamics (Hopfield, 2007). These abstractions
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom 2 Center for Quantum Structures in Modules and Spaces, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 3 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience
Unit, University College London, London, United Kingdom
4
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Sejong University,
Seoul, South Korea 5 Department of Computer Science, University
of Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom 6 Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Massachusetts, United States
of America 7 Department of Mathematics, Incheon National University, Incheon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Seungjai Lee
<seungjai.lee@inu.ac.kr>.

Position: We call for new studies to prioritize the dynamics of layerwise structure as the key feature over the
non-linear activations, until its limits are fully explored.
Layerwise linear models help identify whether the dynamics
of layerwise structure drives a phenomenon, demystifying
perceptions of the complex roles of datasets, logic, and nonlinear activations. Their solvability enables a theoretical
approach, while their simplicity makes them accessible to a
broader audience, accelerating the science of deep learning.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

