Vulnerability-Aware Alignment:
Mitigating Uneven Forgetting in Harmful Fine-Tuning

Liang Chen 1 Xueting Han 2 Li Shen 3 Jing Bai 2 Kam-Fai Wong 1

Abstract

searchers and developers to customize these models using
their own datasets. However, recent studies (Qi et al., 2024;
Yang et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023) reveal a new critical
safety challenge: fine-tuning aligned models can undermine
their safety alignment. This issue manifests in two ways:
first, LLMs’ safety alignment can be broken by harmful finetuning (HFT) on datasets containing even a small number
of harmful examples; second, safety performance also compromises even when fine-tuned on entirely benign datasets.

Harmful fine-tuning (HFT), performed directly
on open-source LLMs or through Fine-tuningas-a-Service, breaks safety alignment and poses
significant threats. Existing methods aim to mitigate HFT risks by learning robust representation
on alignment data or making harmful data unlearnable, but they treat each data sample equally,
leaving data vulnerability patterns understudied.
In this work, we reveal that certain subsets of
alignment data are more prone to forgetting during HFT across different fine-tuning tasks and
exhibit lower robustness compared to other subsets. Inspired by these findings, we propose
Vulnerability-Aware Alignment (VAA), which
estimates data vulnerability, partitions data into
”vulnerable” and ”invulnerable” groups, and encourages balanced learning using a group distributionally robust optimization (Group DRO)
framework. Specifically, VAA learns an adversarial sampler that samples examples from the
currently underperforming group and then applies
group-dependent adversarial perturbations to the
data during training, aiming to encourage a balanced learning process across groups. Experiments across four fine-tuning tasks demonstrate
that VAA significantly reduces harmful scores
while preserving downstream task performance,
outperforming baselines. The code is available at
https://github.com/ChanLiang/VAA.

Prior approaches to mitigating harmful fine-tuning can be
categorized into three classes: (a) alignment-stage methods that enhance the model’s safety robustness during the
alignment stage before HFT (Huang et al., 2024d; Rosati
et al., 2024a); (b) fine-tuning methods that regulate the finetuning process during HFT (Mukhoti et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2024c); and (c) post-fine-tuning methods that repair
compromised models after HFT (Yi et al., 2024; Hsu et al.,
2024). Among these, alignment-stage methods are more
controllable and computationally efficient, as they only need
to be applied once. Existing alignment-stage methods aim
to mitigate HFT risks by learning robust representation on
alignment data (Huang et al., 2024d) or making harmful
data unlearnable to reduce their impact (Huang et al., 2024b;
Rosati et al., 2024a). Nevertheless, these methods fail to
investigate the different vulnerabilities of alignment data
under HFT scenarios and treat all data uniformly, limiting
their overall effectiveness. To address this limitation, we
aim to answer the following questions:
Are certain subsets of alignment data more easily compromised during harmful fine-tuning? If
so, how can we leverage their characteristics to
design better alignment-stage methods against
harmful fine-tuning?

1. Introduction
The open-source availability of large language models
(LLMs) and Fine-tuning-as-a-Service platforms enables re1

We first investigate how different alignment examples behave during the HFT process. Our analysis reveals uneven
vulnerability among alignment examples: Some subsets of
alignment data are highly susceptible to compromise during HFT, while others remain robust. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that this uneven vulnerability persists across various fine-tuning tasks and different
proportions of harmful data, with a significant overlap in

2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong Microsoft Research
Asia 3 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University. Correspondence to: Xueting Han <chrihan@microsoft.com>, Kam-Fai
Wong <kfwong@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

