Mitigating Local Cohesion and Global Sparseness in
Graph Contrastive Learning with Fuzzy Boundaries

Yuena Lin * 1 Haichun Cai * 2 Jun-Yi Hang 3 Haobo Wang 4 Zhen Yang 1 Gengyu Lyu † 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recent years have seen the rapid development of selfsupervised graph representation learning (SSGRL) (You
et al., 2021), which expects to extract critical features by
mining intrinsic characteristics from raw graph data, such
as commonalities and discriminalities (Wang & Liu, 2022;
Jiang et al., 2021). Graph contrastive learning (GCL) as one
of the most well-known SSGRL paradigms, learns discriminalities by dispersing negatives and mines commonalities
by closing the positives (Xu et al., 2024a; Zou & Liu, 2023).
Unfortunately, the learned distribution in the embedding
space only reflects local similarities within each cluster, and
fails to showcase global structural distribution with high
intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separateness.
As a matter of fact, the problem can be traced to two ingrained shortcomings in GCL, namely local cohesion and
global sparseness.

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims at narrowing positives while dispersing negatives, often
causing a minority of samples with great similarities to gather as a small group. It results in two latent shortcomings in GCL: 1) local cohesion that
a class cluster contains numerous independent
small groups, and 2) global sparseness that these
small groups (or isolated samples) dispersedly
distribute among all clusters. These shortcomings make the learned distribution only focus on
local similarities among partial samples, which
hinders the ability to capture the ideal global
structural properties among real clusters, especially high intra-cluster compactness and intercluster separateness. Considering this, we design
a novel fuzzy boundary by extending the original cluster boundary with fuzzy set theory, which
involves fuzzy boundary construction and fuzzy
boundary contraction to address these shortcomings. The fuzzy boundary construction dilates
the original boundaries to bridge the local groups,
and the fuzzy boundary contraction forces the dispersed samples or groups within the fuzzy boundary to gather tightly, jointly mitigating local cohesion and global sparseness while forming the
ideal global structural distribution (Zhang et al.,
2024). Extensive experiments demonstrate that
a graph auto-encoder with the fuzzy boundary
significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art
GCL models in both downstream tasks and quantitative analysis.

To shed light on the shortcomings intuitively, we present the
t-SNE visualization (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) from
three cornerstone models in Figure 1, where DGI (Velickovic et al., 2019) views nodes in the raw graph as positives
and those in the corrupt graph are negatives; GRACE (Zhu
et al., 2020) treats corresponding nodes between two congruent views as positives while other nodes are negatives;
BGRL (Thakoor et al., 2022) selects positives in the same
way as GRACE but scatters the negatives in a latent fashion. The t-SNE of these models reveals the two common
shortcomings in GCL: 1) Local cohesion results in numerous small groups. The sample selection strategies in GCL
tend to gather a minority of samples with great similarities,
which leads to numerous independent small groups in a real
cluster. 2) Global sparseness across cluster distributions.
These small groups (or isolated samples) are discretely distributed in each cluster, which only occupy part locations
while leaving considerable blank space in each cluster. The
crux of the shortcomings may be attributed to the fact that
existing GCL models have no access to label supervision
for building reliable boundaries. Unreliable boundaries,
such as excessive boundaries that incur samples from other
clusters, or limited boundaries that are unable to involve
sufficient samples from the same cluster, are harmful to the
structural distribution (Chen et al., 2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science, Beijing
University of Technology, Beijing, China 2 School of Computer
and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China 3 School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 4 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Gengyu Lyu <lyugengyu@bjut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

