Differential Privacy Under Class Imbalance:
Methods and Empirical Insights

Lucas Rosenblatt 1 Yuliia Lut 2 Ethan Turok 2 Marco Avella-Medina 3 Rachel Cummings 3

Abstract

fraudulent transactions (Makki et al., 2019), medical diagnostics for rare diseases (Singh et al., 2020; Yuan et al.,
2018), or predicting natural disasters (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). Applying standard machine learning algorithms
without adjustment can lead to poor predictions on rare
events because these methods are designed for training data
that are approximately balanced, or assume that false positives and false negatives have equal misclassification costs.

Imbalanced learning occurs in classification settings where the distribution of class-labels is
highly skewed in the training data, such as when
predicting rare diseases or in fraud detection. This
class imbalance presents a significant algorithmic
challenge, which can be further exacerbated when
privacy-preserving techniques such as differential privacy are applied to protect sensitive training data. In this paper, we formalize approachspecific privacy challenges faced by standard imbalanced learning remedies and develop algorithmic adaptations with proven DP guarantees.
We consider DP variants of pre-processing methods that privately augment the original dataset to
reduce the class imbalance, alongside DP variants of in-processing techniques, which adjust
the learning algorithm to account for the imbalance. For each method, we either adapt an existing imbalanced learning technique to the private
setting or demonstrate its incompatibility with
differential privacy. Finally, we empirically evaluate these privacy-preserving imbalanced learning
methods under various data and distributional settings. We find that private synthetic data methods
perform well as a data pre-processing step, while
class-weighted ERMs are an alternative in higherdimensional settings where private synthetic data
suffers from the curse of dimensionality.

In the machine learning community, the problem of imbalanced learning has been widely studied in non-private
settings (He & Garcia, 2009; Sun et al., 2009; Chawla et al.,
2004). This issue can be tackled with two main approaches.
The first approach is to use pre-processing techniques to
balance the training dataset, such as oversampling (Chawla
et al., 2002) or other data augmentation based methods.
The second approach is to use in-processing techniques to
modify the machine learning model itself to account for
the imbalance, such as bagging (Breiman, 1996) or loss
re-weighting (Karakoulas & Shawe-Taylor, 1998; Rigollet
& Tong, 2011; Scott, 2012; Tong, 2013; Xu et al., 2020b).
In applications when data are both sensitive and imbalanced
– for instance, in the detection of rare diseases (Ficek et al.,
2021) – we need machine learning tools that preserve privacy while maintaining high accuracy. Differential privacy
(abbreviated DP) has emerged as a powerful technical definition in machine learning and theoretical computer science
to address privacy concerns using formal algorithmic tools.
Many traditional machine learning algorithms have DP implementations (Gong et al., 2020; Chaudhuri et al., 2011;
Abadi et al., 2016; Fletcher & Islam, 2017). However, extending such approaches to private data augmentation methods for imbalanced settings encounters two main challenges.
Firstly, it has been shown that private classifiers can amplify
minority group loss, magnifying bias and unfairness (Tran
et al., 2021; Pujol et al., 2020; Rosenblatt et al., 2024b).
Secondly, pre-processing techniques such as oversampling
run the risk of increasing sensitivity of the learning task,
thus increasing privacy loss. One must therefore be careful
when designing privacy-preserving techniques for imbalanced learning that improve performance with respect to the
minority class without over-inflating the privacy budget.

1. Introduction
The problem of imbalanced learning typically refers to
classification tasks where one of the label-classes is substantially underrepresented in the training data. This occurs commonly in real-world applications, such as detecting
*

Equal contribution 1 New York University 2 Work completed
while Y.L. and E.T. were at Columbia University. 3 Columbia University. Correspondence to: Lucas Rosenblatt <lr2872@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

