Theoretically Unmasking Inference Attacks Against LDP-Protected Clients in
Federated Vision Models
Quan Nguyen * 1 Minh N. Vu * 2 Truc Nguyen 3 My T. Thai 1

Abstract

or weights) can still reveal sensitive information about the
training data (Fang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023). A prominent attack against FL is the membership inference attack
(MIAs) (Shokri et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2022b) in which the
server seeks to determine whether a particular record was
part of the model’s training dataset.

Federated Learning enables collaborative learning among clients via a coordinating server while
avoiding direct data sharing, offering a perceived
solution to preserve privacy. However, recent
studies on Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
have challenged this notion, showing high success
rates against unprotected training data. While local differential privacy (LDP) is widely regarded
as a gold standard for privacy protection in data
analysis, most studies on MIAs either neglect
LDP or fail to provide theoretical guarantees for
attack success rates against LDP-protected data.

To mitigate such privacy risks, local differential privacy
(LDP) (Dwork et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2020) emerged as
a prominent solution to limit the privacy leakage of local
training data. Under LDP, individuals perturb their data
locally before sharing it with the server, thereby eliminating
the need for a trusted centralized curator. However, recent
studies (Nguyen et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021) demonstrated that tackling active membership inference attacks
(AMI) conducted by dishonest FL servers requires adding
large privacy-preserving noise that would also damage FL
utility. In AMI, the server actively poisons the global model
before distributing it to clients, enabling them to infer private information. Such attacks typically require multiple
training iterations or the use of shadow models, resulting
in non-trivial time complexity, and provide no theoretical
privacy risks to FL. Building on this, (Vu et al., 2024) proposed a low-polynomial-time attack, presenting two active
membership inference attacks on LLMs with guaranteed
theoretical success rates on unprotected data.

To address this gap, we derive theoretical lower
bounds for the success rates of low-polynomialtime MIAs that exploit vulnerabilities in fully connected or self-attention layers. We establish that
even when data are protected by LDP, privacy
risks persist, depending on the privacy budget.
Practical evaluations on federated vision models
confirm considerable privacy risks, revealing that
the noise required to mitigate these attacks significantly degrades models’ utility.

Despite these advancements, most existing works rely heavily on empirical validation and lack a robust theoretical foundation or guarantees for attack success rates, especially under LDP. This challenge arises from the randomness of noise
introduced by privacy mechanisms, which varies across iterations and clients, making it challenging to analyze the
effectiveness of attacks in a theoretical framework.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a decentralized machine learning paradigm where multiple devices
or nodes (e.g., smartphones, edge devices, or distributed
servers) collaboratively train a shared model while keeping their data localized. Due to this property, it has long
been heralded as a robust solution for privacy-preserving
machine learning. However, FL itself does not provide formal privacy guarantees, as the model updates (gradients

This paper takes a step back and establishes a broader view
of the principle of privacy risk imposed by dishonest servers
in federated vision models under LDP from both theoretical
and practical perspectives. Our study focuses on the active adversary setting, where the FL server acts dishonestly
by manipulating the trainable weights of a vision model to
breach privacy. Specifically, we aim to demonstrate that
clients’ data, even under LDP protection, are fundamentally
vulnerable to AMI attacks carried out by dishonest servers.
For that purpose, we analyze attacks that exploit the train-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of CISE, University of
Florida, USA. 2 Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Lab, USA 3 Computational Science Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA. Correspondence to: My T. Thai
<mythai@cise.ufl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

