Observation Interference in Partially Observable Assistance Games

Scott Emmons * 1 Caspar Oesterheld * 2 Vincent Conitzer 2 Stuart Russell 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

We study partially observable assistance games
(POAGs), a model of the human-AI value alignment problem which allows the human and the AI
assistant to have partial observations. Motivated
by concerns of AI deception, we study a qualitatively new phenomenon made possible by partial
observability: would an AI assistant ever have
an incentive to interfere with the human’s observations? First, we prove that sometimes an optimal assistant must take observation-interfering actions, even when the human is playing optimally,
and even when there are otherwise-equivalent actions available that do not interfere with observations. Though this result seems to contradict the
classic theorem from single-agent decision making that the value of information is nonnegative,
we resolve this seeming contradiction by developing a notion of interference defined on entire
policies. This can be viewed as an extension of the
classic result that the value of information is nonnegative into the cooperative multiagent setting.
Second, we prove that if the human is simply making decisions based on their immediate outcomes,
the assistant might need to interfere with observations as a way to query the human’s preferences.
We show that this incentive for interference goes
away if the human is playing optimally, or if we
introduce a communication channel for the human
to communicate their preferences to the assistant.
Third, we show that if the human acts according
to the Boltzmann model of irrationality, this can
create an incentive for the assistant to interfere
with observations. Finally, we use an experimental model to analyze tradeoffs faced by the AI
assistant in practice when considering whether or
not to take observation-interfering actions.

Assistance games provide a formalization of the human-AI
value alignment problem (Shah et al., 2020). They are based
on Hidden Goal MDPs (Fern et al., 2014) and Cooperative
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (CIRL) (Hadfield-Menell
et al., 2016), an extension of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng & Russell, 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004). In
assistance games, a single human and a single AI assistant
share the same reward function, but this reward function is
only known to the human; the assistant must learn it. In
assistance games, desirable properties, such as teaching by
the human and learning by the assistant, emerge as optimal
solutions to the game (Shah et al., 2020). (This contrasts
with prior work on algorithms where teaching is an explicit
objective (Cakmak & Lopes, 2012; Goldman & Kearns,
1995; Balbach & Zeugmann, 2009).) For example, Woodward et al. (2020) find that deep neural networks solving an
assistance game invent strategies that involve information
sharing, information seeking, and question answering.
Past analysis of assistance games was done assuming that
the state of the world is fully observed by both the human
and the assistant (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; 2017). While
Shah et al.’s (2020) definition of an assistance game allows
for partial observability, they do not study its implications.
In this work, we introduce the notion of a partially observable assistance game (POAG) to study the more general
case faced in reality: when the world is only partially observable. Partial observability raises new issues surrounding
the communication of private information. A priori, we
might hope that AI assistants never take any action that obstructs information. Yet our analysis will show that even
assistants which perfectly share our goals must sometimes
obstruct information to communicate other, more important
information.
This tension connects to broader work on AI deception,
which recent research approaches from multiple angles.
Park et al. (2024) provide a philosophical definition and
empirical survey of AI deception, while Ward et al. (2023)
define deception in structural causal games. Of particular
relevance is work analyzing how reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF)—which can be seen as an
algorithm for solving assistance games—can lead to deception. Lang et al. (2024) prove that partial observability in

*
Equal contribution 1 Center for Human-Compatible AI, University of California, Berkeley 2 Foundations of Cooperative AI Lab,
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Scott Emmons
<emmons@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

