Improving Compositional Generation with Diffusion Models Using Lift Scores

Chenning Yu 1 Sicun Gao 1

Abstract

diffusion model to improve its ability to generate samples
that satisfy complex prompts (Huang et al., 2023; Bao et al.,
2024), and (2) training-free methods, which either refine
the sampling process, or apply rejection sampling to refine
the generated samples without modifying the underlying
model (Feng et al., 2022; Chefer et al., 2023). These 2 categories of methods are not necessarily mutually exclusive,
and they can be combined to achieve better performance.

We introduce a novel resampling criterion
using lift scores, for improving compositional
generation in diffusion models. By leveraging
the lift scores, we evaluate whether generated
samples align with each single condition and then
compose the results to determine whether the
composed prompt is satisfied. Our key insight is
that lift scores can be efficiently approximated
using only the original diffusion model, requiring
no additional training or external modules. We develop an optimized variant that achieves relatively
lower computational overhead during inference
while maintaining effectiveness.
Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
lift scores significantly improved the condition
alignment for compositional generation across
2D synthetic data, CLEVR position tasks, and
text-to-image synthesis. Our code is available at
rainorangelemon.github.io/complift.

We introduce CompLift, a training-free rejection criterion
for improving compositional generation in diffusion models.
The concept of lift score (Brin et al., 1997) builds on a simple observation: if a generated sample truly satisfies a condition, the model should perform better at denoising it when
given that condition compared to unconditional denoising.
This insight leads to an efficient criterion for accepting or
rejecting samples. Similar to Diffusion Classifier (Li et al.,
2023), we show that lift scores can be efficiently approximated using only the original diffusion model’s predictions,
requiring no additional training or external modules. By decomposing the satisfaction of a complex prompt into the satisfaction of multiple simpler sub-conditions using lift scores,
our approach can boost the model’s alignment with complex
prompts without changing the sampling process. Through
extensive experiments on 2D synthetic data, CLEVR position tasks, and text-to-image generation, we demonstrate
that CompLift significantly improves compositional generation while maintaining computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of diffusion models in generating highquality images (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020;
Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Song et al., 2020), they sometimes fail to produce coherent and consistent results when
the condition is complex or involves multiple objects (Huang
et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2022; Chefer et al., 2023). This limitation is particularly evident in tasks that generate the images
with specific combinations of attributes or objects, where the
generated samples may only partially satisfy the conditions
or exhibit inconsistencies across different attributes.

Contributions. Our contributions are threefold: ❶ We introduce CompLift, as a novel resampling criterion using lift
scores for compositional generation, requiring no additional
training (Section 3). ❷ We explore the design space of
CompLift, including noise sampling strategies, timestep selection, and caching techniques to optimize computational
efficiency (Section 4). ❸ We scale our approach to text-toimage generation, demonstrating its effectiveness in improving compositional generation in this challenging domain
(Sections 5 and 6).

To mitigate this issue, several methods have been proposed
to improve the compositional generation with diffusion models. These methods can be described as 2 main categories:
(1) training-based methods, which train or finetune the
1

2. Related Work

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC
San Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence to: Chenning Yu
<chy010@ucsd.edu>, Sicun Gao <sicung@ucsd.edu>.

Recent studies have revealed significant limitations in diffusion models (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) for handling compositional generation, particularly as missing objects, incorrect
spatial relationships, and attribute inconsistencies (Huang

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

