Flow-of-Options: Diversified and Improved LLM Reasoning by Thinking
Through Options

Lakshmi Nair 1 Ian Trase 1 J. Mark Kim 1

Abstract

Update

We present a novel reasoning approach called
Flow-of-Options (FoO), designed to address intrinsic biases in Large Language Models (LLMs).
Flow-of-Options enables LLMs to systematically
explore a diverse range of possibilities in their reasoning, as demonstrated by an FoO-based agentic
framework developed for autonomously solving
Machine Learning (ML) tasks. FoO enforces
diversity in LLM solutions through compressed
and interpretable task representations, resulting in
improvements of 38.2% – 69.2% on standard data
science tasks, and 37.4% – 47.9% on therapeutic
chemistry tasks, as compared to state-of-the-art
baselines. With an overall operation cost under
$1 per task, our framework is well-suited for
cost-sensitive applications. Going beyond tabular
classification and regression, we show the broader
applicability of our FoO-based agentic system to
tasks such as reinforcement learning and image
generation. Our code is open-sourced at: https:
//github.com/flagshippioneering/
Flow-of-Options.

Input task

Planner

Option
Generator

[Explore new options]
Develop

Flow-of-Options

Plan
Executor

[CBR]
Deploy

Figure 1: Overview of our Flow-of-Options based agentic
framework incorporating Case-Based Reasoning (CBR).

(FoO)1 . Given a task, FoO enables LLMs to “think through”
the options available for executing each step in the task,
prior to the actual execution. Broadly, FoO is a network
data structure that explicitly enumerates options for each
step in the task, as nodes in the network. Thus, FoO forces
the LLM to be aware of, and to explore, a broader spectrum
of possibilities for completing the task. We show the practical value of FoO by incorporating it in an agentic framework
for automating Machine Learning (ML) tasks (Figure 1).
Recent studies show that existing agentic frameworks, such
as AutoGPT (Significant Gravitas, 2023) and LangChain
(Chase, 2022), often struggle with ML tasks when compared
to the base LLMs (Huang et al., 2023). Alternatives involving fine-tuning LLMs (Carta et al., 2023; Christianos et al.,
2023), although promising, incur significant computational
effort making it challenging to adapt to broader tasks the
same way that a reasoning strategy like CoT or ToT can.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have impacted automation
on a wide spectrum of tasks, motivating a growing body
of work in agentic system design, e.g., web-browsing (Yu
et al., 2025), idea generation (Li et al., 2024b), and data
science (Guo et al., 2024; Grosnit et al., 2024). Other approaches have focused on improving the inherent reasoning
capabilities of the LLMs, through Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT)
(Yao et al., 2024) or Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) (Wei et al.,
2022). This paper seeks to bridge the two areas, exploring
how “thought-based” approaches can be extended to improve agentic systems. Hence, we propose Flow-of-Options

Recent OpenAI models have focused on improving outputs
by increasing test-time compute; fine-tuning the LLMs to
“think deeper” through CoT-style reasoning (OpenAI, 2024).
However, LLMs show strong biases towards options favored
in their pre-training data when proposing solutions to tasks,
thus impacting the agentic systems built on top of them. In
Figure 2, we see that zero-shot GPT-4o and o1 have a bias
towards random forest when using the Scikit-learn (Sklearn)
package (Pedregosa et al., 2011), limiting the diversity of
the solutions and preventing the LLMs from exploring better
options for the task. Our experiments further confirm this

1
Flagship Pioneering, Cambridge MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Lakshmi Nair <lnair@flagshippioneering.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1
Similar to flow-of-thought, i.e. stream of consciousness
(Chafe, 2017)

1

