CACTI: Leveraging Copy Masking and Contextual Information to Improve
Tabular Data Imputation

Aditya Gorla 1 2 Ryan Wang 3 Zhengtong Liu 3 Ulzee An 1 3 Sriram Sankararaman 1 3 4

Abstract

ness can arise due to a variety of mechanisms. Existing
methods either explicitly or implicitly make simplifying
assumptions about these mechanisms motivated by inferential tractability (see Section 2.1 and Jarrett et al. (2022)).
These assumptions rarely hold in real-world settings and
practitioners often lack prior knowledge on the underlying
missingness mechanism. Consider a medical survey where
questions are hierarchically structured, with more specific
inquiries contingent upon affirmative responses to general
ones so that a patient is only asked about specific symptoms
if they report a broader health issue. In this example, entries
pertaining to more specific health issues will be missing
depending on the observed values or missingness status of
entries relevant to broader health status. We hypothesize
that the missingness patterns in the data could potentially
be leveraged to improve imputation accuracy.

We present CACTI, a masked autoencoding approach for imputing tabular data that leverages
the structure in missingness patterns and contextual information. Our approach employs a novel
median truncated copy masking training strategy
that encourages the model to learn from empirical
patterns of missingness while incorporating semantic relationships between features – captured
by column names and text descriptions – to better
represent feature dependence. These dual sources
of inductive bias enable CACTI to outperform
state-of-the-art methods – an average R2 gain of
7.8% over the next best method (13.4%, 6.1%,
and 5.3% under missing not at random, at random and completely at random, respectively) –
across a diverse range of datasets and missingness conditions. Our results highlight the value
of leveraging dataset-specific contextual information and missingness patterns to enhance imputation performance. Code is publicly available at
github.com/sriramlab/CACTI

Additionally, existing methods underutilize the rich contextual information in the data. While they allow for the
inclusion of fully observed covariates, they lack a straightforward mechanism to effectively incorporate unstructured
knowledge about the relatedness between or the context of
the features being imputed. In the medical surveys example, the answer to the broader question can constrain the
answers to more specific questions. We hypothesize that
imputation models can use this prior information to inform
their imputation.

1. Introduction
Missingness is a pervasive problem in real-world tabular
datasets with the potential to adversely affect downstream
inferential tasks (Rubin, 1987; Schafer & Graham, 2002).
While many techniques to estimate or impute missing entries have been proposed (see Section 2.1), missing data
imputation remains a challenging problem.

Contributions In this work, we present Context Aware
Copy masked Tabular Imputation (CACTI), a transformerbased architecture that leverages inductive biases from observed missingness patterns and textual information about
features to address existing gaps in tabular data imputation.
CACTI makes several novel contributions to tabular imputation. First, we introduce median truncated copy masking (MT-CM), a novel training strategy that enables the
effective application of copy masking (An et al., 2023) to
transformer-based Masked Autoencoders (MAE) (He et al.,
2021). Unlike existing approaches which use complete data
or random masks (Du et al., 2024), MT-CM uses empirical
missingness patterns to guide the learning process. Our results demonstrate that a naive application of copy masking
to transformer-based MAE architectures leads to suboptimal performance while MT-CM addresses this gap. Second,

A primary reason underlying this challenge is that missing1

Department of Computational Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Bioinformatics
Interdepartmental Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
USA 4 Department of Human Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
USA. Correspondence to: Aditya Gorla <adityagorla@ucla.edu>,
Sriram Sankararaman <sriram@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

