Position: Current Model Licensing Practices are Dragging Us into
a Quagmire of Legal Noncompliance

Moming Duan * 1 Mingzhe Du * 1 Rui Zhao 2 Mengying Wang 3 Yinghui Wu 3 Nigel Shadbolt 2 Bingsheng He 4

Abstract

(PTMs) (Jiang et al., 2023) to address various downstream
tasks at an affordable computational and data resources.
By the end of 2024, over 1.2 million models have been
publicly published on Hugging Face (HF), distributed and
used under various licenses (or aggrements). These licenses can be grouped into three categories: 1) Open Source
Software (OSS) licenses (Rosen, 2005), such as Apache,
MIT, and GPL; 2) Free-content (or dataset) licenses, such
as CCs (Commons, 2024) and PDDL; 3) Model-specific
licenses, such as OpenRAILs (Contractor et al., 2022),
Llama2 Community License (Meta Platforms, 2024), and
Gemma Terms of Use (Google, 2024). In current licensing practices, publishers are free to declare any of these
licenses based purely on personal preference. For example, C4AI Command R7B adopts CC-BY-NC-4.0 license,
which prohibits commercial use of licensed materials and
their derivatives. CKIP-Transformers uses GPL-3.0 license
to align with its accompanying code repository. However,
upon closer review of the terms and conditions in these licenses, we have identified the following important issues
about model licensing.

The Machine Learning (ML) community has witnessed explosive growth, with millions of ML
models being published on the Web. Reusing ML
model components has been prevalent nowadays.
Developers are often required to choose a license
to publish and govern the use of their models.
Popular options include Apache-2.0, OpenRAIL
(Responsible AI Licenses), Creative Commons
Licenses (CCs), Llama2, and GPL-3.0. Currently,
no standard or widely accepted best practices exist for model licensing. But does this lack of
standardization lead to undesired consequences?
Our answer is Yes. After reviewing the clauses
of the most widely adopted licenses, we take the
position that current model licensing practices
are dragging us into a quagmire of legal noncompliance. To support this view, we explore the current practices in model licensing and highlight the
differences between various model licenses. We
then identify potential legal risks associated with
these licenses and demonstrate these risks using
examples from real-world repositories on Hugging Face. To foster a more standardized future
for model licensing, we also propose a new draft
of model licenses, ModelGo Licenses (MGLs),
to address these challenges and promote better
compliance. https://www.modelgo.li/

The first issue is License Mismatch, OSS and free-content
licenses were not designed for model publishing. This
means their definitions and clauses may not be well-suited
for the context of ML. For example, CC licenses explicitly
state that “Licensed Material is a musical work, performance, or sound recording”. Thus, when applying CC
licenses to model weights (or code1 ), it becomes ambiguous to interpret concepts like translated, altered, arranged,
transformed. On the other hand, these mismatched licenses also lack governance over ML technologies such
as knowledge transfer (You et al., 2021) and Mix-of-Experts
(MoE) (Jacobs et al., 1991), and fail to provide dispute resolution mechanisms regarding the ownership of Intellectual
Property (IP) rights for derivatives and generated content.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) (Hu et al., 2022; Pfeiffer et al., 2020) technologies, developers can now customize Pre-Trained Models
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore 2 Department of Computer Science, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, USA 4 School
of Computing, National University of Singapore. Correspondence
to: Moming Duan <moming@nus.edu.sg>.

The second issue is License Proliferation. Legal noncompliance can occur if developers create derivatives (e.g., via
quantization or fine-tuning) based on a model under copy1

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

Can I apply a Creative Commons license to software?

