Learning-Order Autoregressive Models
with Application to Molecular Graph Generation

Zhe Wang 1 2 Jiaxin Shi 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Arthur Gretton 1 2 Michalis K. Titsias 1

Abstract

high-dimensional data distribution using the product-rule
factorization of conditionals. They have become the standard approach for generating text (Brown et al., 2020).

Autoregressive models (ARMs) have become the
workhorse for sequence generation tasks, since
many problems can be modeled as next-token prediction. While there appears to be a natural ordering for text (i.e., left-to-right), for many data types,
such as graphs, the canonical ordering is less obvious. To address this problem, we introduce a
variant of ARM that generates high-dimensional
data using a probabilistic ordering that is sequentially inferred from data. This model incorporates
a trainable probability distribution, referred to as
an order-policy, that dynamically decides the autoregressive order in a state-dependent manner.
To train the model, we introduce a variational
lower bound on the log-likelihood, which we optimize with stochastic gradient estimation. We
demonstrate experimentally that our method can
learn meaningful autoregressive orderings in image and graph generation. On the challenging domain of molecular graph generation, we achieve
state-of-the-art results on the QM9 and ZINC250k
benchmarks, evaluated across key metrics for distribution similarity and drug-likeless.

A key limitation of traditional ARMs is their reliance on a
predefined, canonical ordering for factorizing the probability
distribution over data dimensions. While text data possesses
a natural left-to-right ordering, many other data types, such
as images and graphs, lack such an obvious or universally
applicable ordering. Indeed, the optimal ordering may vary
even between individual data points, and the best generation
order is often context-dependent. Therefore, it is desirable
to derive extensions of ARMs that do not treat the ordering
as fixed, but rather as a latent random variable that follows
a probability distribution that adapts to the evolving state of
the generation process.
One basic way to extend ARMs with probabilistic orderings
is any order ARMs (AO-ARMs, Uria et al., 2014), where the
ordering follows a uniform distribution over all possible permutations of data dimensions. Such models can be thought
of as order-agnostic, and also connect with the masked or
absorbing discrete diffusion models (Austin et al., 2021;
Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2024; Sahoo et al., 2024;
Ou et al., 2024). However, in practice such models are less
effective in terms of likelihood scores compared to ARMs
(Yang et al., 2019; Hoogeboom et al., 2022). A possible
reason is that these models try to solve an extremely challenging training problem, which requires fitting a neural
network to adequately match all possible conditional distributions over all orderings of the data dimensions, without
learning any preference towards particular orderings.

1. Introduction
Artists draw paintings in their own styles stroke by stroke,
and chemists synthesize stable molecules step by step following the procedure of chemical reactions. What is common in both cases is that the next data component to be
generated is dynamically determined by the current state of
the creation process. In machine learning, autoregressive
models (ARMs) can encode such sequential dependencies
between data dimensions. In general, ARMs represent a

To address the limitations of fixed order and any order
ARMs, we introduce an ARM variant which can flexibly
learn probabilistic orderings for generating the data dimensions. Our main contributions and findings include:
• We introduce the Learning-Order Autoregressive Models (LO-ARMs), a novel generative model that learns
context-dependent generation orders from data. Specifically, we extend AO-ARMs to incorporate a trainable
probability distribution that dynamically decides the
sampling order of the data dimensions. We derive a
variational lower bound on the exact log-likelihood for

1

Google DeepMind 2 University College London. Correspondence to: Zhe Wang <zhewang@google.com>, Jiaxin Shi <jiaxins@google.com>, Michalis K. Titsias <mtitsias@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

