Constrained Pareto Set Identification with Bandit Feedback
Cyrille Kone 1 Emilie Kaufmann 1 Laura Richert 2

Abstract

jective (or a marginal) c for which arm k is in expectation
preferable to k ′ (i.e. µck ⩾ µck′ ). Each arm in the Pareto
Set satisfies an optimal trade-off between different objectives in the sense that no other arm can improve over it for
all objectives. This setting extends the well-studied Best
Arm Identification framework (e.g., Even-Dar et al. (2006);
Audibert & Bubeck (2010); Jamieson & Nowak (2014)) to
problems where multiple metrics need to be optimized simultaneously with no clear preference.

In this paper, we address the problem of identifying the Pareto Set under feasibility constraints
in a multivariate bandit setting. Specifically,
given a K-armed bandit with unknown means
µ1 , . . . , µK ∈ Rd , the goal is to identify the set
of arms whose mean is not uniformly worse than
that of another arm (i.e., not smaller for all objectives), while satisfying some known set of linear
constraints, expressing, for example, some minimal performance on each objective. Our focus
lies in fixed-confidence identification, for which
we introduce an algorithm that significantly outperforms racing-like algorithms and the intuitive
two-stage approach that first identifies feasible
arms and then their Pareto Set. We further
prove an information-theoretic lower bound on
the sample complexity of any algorithm for constrained Pareto Set identification, showing that
the sample complexity of our approach is nearoptimal. Our theoretical results are supported by
an extensive empirical evaluation on a series of
benchmarks.

PSI has diverse applications, including recommender systems where multiple performance metrics are considered
(Lin et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019; Mehrotra et al., 2020),
or hardware or software design optimization (Almer et al.,
2011; Zuluaga et al., 2013), which frequently involves
trade-offs between metrics such as energy consumption and
performance. We are particularly interested in potential
applications to clinical trials, in which multiple biological
markers may be tracked to assess the efficacy of a treatment
(Munro et al., 2021), or in which efficacy and safety may
be jointly monitored (Jennison & Turnbull, 1993).
In the literature on PSI, no particular constraints are imposed on the arms in the Pareto Set, allowing for situations
where an arm may exhibit very low expected performance
on one objective but still be in the Pareto Set due to its
good performance on another. This lack of constraints may
be undesirable in practice. For instance, in clinical trials,
it may be important to identify good candidate drugs having some minimal performance level on some indicator of
efficacy (e.g., a minimal antibody response in the case of
vaccine development) or avoiding exceeding some maximal toxicity threshold (Mark C et al., 2013). Similarly,
in multi-objective recommender systems or material design
optimization, one might be interested in finding the Pareto
Set of items that satisfy some minimal performance metrics or dimensions constraints (Kumar et al., 2021; Afshari
et al., 2019). Existing PSI algorithms are unable to handle such constraints. To fill this gap, we introduce a novel
active testing problem termed constrained Pareto Set Identification. In this setting, the learner is given a polyhedron
P := {x ∈ Rd | Ax ⩽ b} describing solutions to a set
of linear constraints with A ∈ Rm,d and b ∈ Rm (i.e., m
linear constraints). Any arm k such that µk ∈ P is called
feasible. The goal of the learner is to identify the Pareto Set
of the feasible arms.

1. Introduction
Pareto Set Identification (PSI) is a fundamental active testing problem in which a learner sequentially queries samples from a multi-variate multi-armed bandit to identify
– as efficiently as possible – the arms whose average return satisfies optimal trade-offs among possibly competing objectives (Zuluaga et al., 2013; Auer et al., 2016).
In this framework, a K-armed bandit is denoted ν :=
(ν1 , . . . , νK ), where each arm νk is a multi-variate distribution with mean µk ∈ Rd and d ⩾ 1. Given a bandit model
with means µ := (µ1 , . . . , µK ), its Pareto Set is the set of
arms k such that for any other arm k ′ , there exists an ob1
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France 2 Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, Inria,
BPH, U1219, Sistm, F-33000 Bordeaux, France. Correspondence
to: Cyrille Kone <cyrille.kone@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

