VTGaussian-SLAM: RGBD SLAM for Large Scale Scenes with Splatting
View-Tied 3D Gaussians
Pengchong Hu 1 Zhizhong Han 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
SLAM is an important task in computer vision (Keetha
et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2022), 3D reconstruction (Wang
et al., 2023; Hu & Han, 2023), and robotics (Adamkiewicz
et al., 2022). SLAM methods resolve the computational
problem of mapping unknown environments while tracking
camera locations. Traditional SLAM methods usually use
RGB or RGBD images to sense 3D surroundings and track
spatial relationships among different frames. The resulting
3D maps are usually represented by 3D point clouds, which
are discrete and not friendly to downstream applications
that require continuous geometry representations, such as
geometry modeling, editing, and virtual reality.

Jointly estimating camera poses and mapping
scenes from RGBD images is a fundamental
task in simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM). State-of-the-art methods employ 3D
Gaussians to represent a scene, and render these
Gaussians through splatting for higher efficiency
and better rendering. However, these methods
cannot scale up to extremely large scenes, due
to the inefficient tracking and mapping strategies
that need to optimize all 3D Gaussians in the
limited GPU memories throughout the training
to maintain the geometry and color consistency
to previous RGBD observations. To resolve this
issue, we propose novel tracking and mapping
strategies to work with a novel 3D representation,
dubbed view-tied 3D Gaussians, for RGBD
SLAM systems. View-tied 3D Gaussians is a
kind of simplified Gaussians, which is tied to
depth pixels, without needing to learn locations,
rotations, and multi-dimensional variances. Tying
Gaussians to views not only significantly saves
storage but also allows us to employ many more
Gaussians to represent local details in the limited
GPU memory. Moreover, our strategies remove
the need of maintaining all Gaussians learnable
throughout the training, while improving rendering quality, and tracking accuracy. We justify
the effectiveness of these designs, and report
better performance over the latest methods on the
widely used benchmarks in terms of rendering
and tracking accuracy and scalability. Please
see our project page for code and videos at
https://machineperceptionlab.github.io/VTGaussian-SLAM-Project.

Due to the continuity and the ability to represent arbitrary topology and appearance, neural representations have
been employed with differentiable rendering in SLAM systems (Zhang et al., 2023; Xinyang et al., 2023; Teigen et al.,
2023; Sandström et al., 2023b; Sucar et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2023). Previous methods (Zhang et al., 2023; Xinyang
et al., 2023; Teigen et al., 2023; Hu & Han, 2023) learn
neural radiance fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020), a
continuous implicit function modeling scene geometry and
appearance, enabling image rendering for scene mapping
and camera tracking. More recently, 3DGS (Kerbl et al.,
2023) was proposed for high-quality and real-time rendering,
which also provides a novel perspective for time-sensitive
SLAM problems (Matsuki et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024b;
Yan et al., 2024; Yugay et al., 2023; Sandström et al., 2024).
3DGS can efficiently render 3D Gaussians that model radiance fields explicitly using differentiable rasterization which
is faster than the ray tracing in NeRF. However, maintaining
numerous 3D Gaussians to cover the whole scene while
ensuring color and geometry consistency across previous
frames often leads to poor rendering in tracking and mapping. This obstacle makes 3DGS still hard to scale up to
extremely large scenes in SLAM, remaining the challenge of
improving the rendering quality, tracking accuracy, and scalability of 3DGS in tracking cameras and mapping scenes.

1
Machine Perception Lab, Wayne State University, Detroit,
USA. Correspondence to: Zhizhong Han <h312h@wayne.edu>.

To overcome this challenge, we propose an RGBD SLAM
system with splatting view-tied 3D Gaussians. Our method
introduces a novel point-based volume representation,
dubbed view-tied 3D Gaussians, to represent the color and

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

