LLM Enhancers for GNNs: An Analysis from the Perspective of Causal
Mechanism Identification
Hang Gao * 1 2 Wenxuan Huang * 1 2 3 Fengge Wu 1 2 3 Junsuo Zhao 1 2 3 Changwen Zheng 1 2 3 Huaping Liu 4

Abstract

2024). One category of methods employs LLMs as feature
enhancers to optimize node representations (Chen et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2024a), which are then used as inputs
for GNNs to build a unified model. Such methods leverage
the pre-trained knowledge of LLMs to generate richer and
more semantically coherent features, addressing the limitations of traditional GNNs while incorporating domain
knowledge from LLMs into the features (Yu et al., 2023).
They also demonstrate strong generalization capabilities in
heterogeneous graph representation learning scenarios (Li
et al., 2025). Numerous recent methods (Chen et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024) have adopted this
LLM-enhancer-plus-GNN framework, achieving excellent
results across various graph representation learning tasks.

The use of large language models (LLMs) as feature enhancers to optimize node representations,
which are then used as inputs for graph neural
networks (GNNs), has shown significant potential in graph representation learning. However,
the fundamental properties of this approach remain underexplored. To address this issue, we
propose conducting a more in-depth analysis of
this issue based on the interchange intervention
method. First, we construct a synthetic graph
dataset with controllable causal relationships, enabling precise manipulation of semantic relationships and causal modeling to provide data for
analysis. Using this dataset, we conduct interchange interventions to examine the deeper properties of LLM enhancers and GNNs, uncovering
their underlying logic and internal mechanisms.
Building on the analytical results, we design a
plug-and-play optimization module to improve
the information transfer between LLM enhancers
and GNNs. Experiments across multiple datasets
and models validate the proposed module. Codes
can be found in https://github.com/
WX4code/LLMEnhCausalMechanism.

However, despite their broad applications, there is a noticeable lack of dedicated research examining the fundamental
framework of the LLM-enhancer-plus-GNN paradigm. The
deeper properties and mechanisms underlying this framework remain largely unexplored. This paper aims to address
this gap. Meanwhile, achieving this is far from straightforward. Since both the LLM enhancer and GNN are composed
of neural networks, each is inherently challenging to model
formally (Lu et al., 2024). When these two complex networks are combined, conducting a unified analysis becomes
even more difficult.
To address this issue, we
introduce the interchange
High- Level Causal
Neural Network
Model
intervention approach (Wu
Variable 1
et al., 2023a; Huang et al.,
2023a) from causality theVariable 2
h
ory (Pearl, 2022) to perc
t
Ma
form the analysis. SpecifiVariable 3
cally, we construct a novel
synthetic graph dataset
Figure 1. A simple illustration
with controllable causal reof variable alignment achieved
by interchange intervention.
lationships. Here, causal
relationships refer to the
ground-truth cause-and-effect connections, which can be
utilized to evaluate the model’s ability to accurately capture
and represent key underlying information. While synthetic
graph datasets are often used to analyze the properties of
graph representation learning algorithms (Wu et al., 2022),
our dataset is further enhanced to enable precise manipula-

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of LLMs (Brown et al., 2020;
Devlin et al., 2019; Dubey et al., 2024), their semantic understanding and feature generation capabilities have demonstrated significant potential across various fields (Tian et al.,
2024; Mustapha, 2025; Liu et al., 2025). In the domain of
graph representation learning, recent studies have integrated
LLMs with GNNs to enhance performance (Mao et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Software, Chinese Academy
of Sciences 2 National Key Laboratory of Space Integrated Information System 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Fenge Wu
<fengge@iscas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

