Implicit Regularization for Tubal Tensor Factorizations via Gradient Descent

Santhosh Karnik * 1 Anna Veselovska * 2 3 Mark Iwen 4 5 Felix Krahmer 2 3

Abstract

overparametrization can give rise to superior generalization
capability and lead to strong overall NN performance. Consequently, there has been a recent surge in research aimed at
explaining how gradient-based methods interact with overparameterized models under nonconvex losses (see, e.g.,
(Ma et al., 2018; Ling & Strohmer, 2019)). Notably, recent empirical and theoretical studies have suggested that
gradient-based methods with small random initializations
exhibit a bias towards low-rank solutions in a variety of
models.

We provide a rigorous analysis of implicit regularization in an overparametrized tensor factorization problem beyond the lazy training regime. For
matrix factorization problems, this phenomenon
has been studied in a number of works. A particular challenge has been to design universal initialization strategies which provably lead to implicit regularization in gradient-descent methods.
At the same time, it has been argued by (Cohen
et al., 2016) that more general classes of neural
networks can be captured by considering tensor
factorizations. However, in the tensor case, implicit regularization has only been rigorously established for gradient flow or in the lazy training
regime. In this paper, we prove the first tensor
result of its kind for gradient descent rather than
gradient flow. We focus on the tubal tensor product and the associated notion of low tubal rank,
encouraged by the relevance of this model for image data. We establish that gradient descent in an
overparametrized tensor factorization model with
a small random initialization exhibits an implicit
bias towards solutions of low tubal rank. Our theoretical findings are illustrated in an extensive set
of numerical simulations show-casing the dynamics predicted by our theory as well as the crucial
role of using a small random initialization.

For matrix factorization models which represent linear neural networks, a rigorous analysis of implicit bias is available
for both gradient descent (Gunasekar et al., 2018; Stöger &
Soltanolkotabi, 2021) and gradient flow (its asymptotic limit
for small step size) (Bah et al., 2022; Chou et al., 2024).
In contrast, for neural networks with nonlinear activation,
there has been a good deal of work done showing that fully
connected layers can be represented by, e.g., tensor train factorizations in (Novikov et al., 2015; Razin et al., 2021). As
a consequence, it has been argued that tensor factorizations
should be considered instead of matrix factorizations (see,
e.g., (Cohen et al., 2016)). For tensor factorization models,
however, results predating 2024 were only available for the
asymptotic regime, i.e., gradient flow. This is perhaps due to
the many additional complications in the tensor setting beyond those in the matrix setting including, e.g, that there are
many different valid notions of tensor rank, each of which
motivates its own equally valid class of tensor factorizations.
For gradient descent applied to the tensor recovery problem,
only a very recent partial analysis by (Liu et al., 2024) currently exists for the tubal factorization model. This analysis
requires that the initialization already well approximates
the solution, only after which the convergence of gradient
descent toward a low tubal-rank solution is shown. Herein
we also focus on the tubal factorization, but establish the
corresponding implicit regularization result without needing
such a strong initialization assumption.

1. Introduction
Analyzing implicit regularization during Neural Network
(NN) training is considered crucial for understanding why
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Northeastern University, Boston, USA 2 Department of Mathematics and
Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany 4 Department of Mathematics, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, USA 5 Department of Computational
Mathematics Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA. Correspondence to: Anna Veselovska
<anna.veselovska@tum.de>.

Our work is motivated by recent research showing that the
way neural networks are trained, especially with gradient descent, can lead to solutions with useful structure, even without adding explicit regularization terms. This phenomenon,
known as implicit regularization, has been studied in contexts such as sparse recovery (Vaskevicius et al., 2019) and
low-rank matrix completion (Li et al., 2020), where specific

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

