Organize the Web: Constructing Domains Enhances
Pre-Training Data Curation

Alexander Wettig 1 2 Kyle Lo 2 Sewon Min 3 2 Hannaneh Hajishirzi 2 4 Danqi Chen 1 Luca Soldaini 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Modern language models are trained on large,
unstructured datasets consisting of trillions of tokens and obtained by crawling the web. The
unstructured nature makes it difficult to reason
about their contents and develop systematic approaches to data curation. In this paper, we unpack monolithic web corpora by developing taxonomies of their contents and organizing them
into domains. We introduce WebOrganizer, a
framework for organizing web pages in terms of
both their topic and format. Using these two
complementary notions of domains, we automatically annotate pre-training data by distilling annotations from a large language model into efficient classifiers. This allows us to study how data
from different domains should be mixed to improve models on downstream tasks, and we show
that we can combine insights about effective topics and formats to further boost performance.
We demonstrate that our domain mixing also improves existing methods that select data based on
quality. Furthermore, we study and compare how
quality-based methods will implicitly change the
domain mixture. Overall, our work demonstrates
that constructing and mixing domains provides a
valuable complement to quality-based data curation methods, opening new avenues for effective
and insightful pre-training data curation.
Website
Artifacts
Code

Curating good training data is crucial for enhancing the capabilities of language models. Early pre-training datasets,
like the Pile (Gao et al., 2020) or RedPajama (TogetherAI, 2023), were created by curating data from multiple
sources—such as Wikipedia, Reddit, or BookCorpus (Zhu
et al., 2015)—giving rise to the research problem of how to
balance these domains2 (Xie et al., 2023a). However, as the
demand for data has grown to trillions of tokens, the majority of data is now obtained from crawling the web, and the
importance of curating domains has diminished.
Recent efforts in data curation, such as FineWeb (Penedo
et al., 2024) and DCLM (Li et al., 2024), produce multitrillion-token datasets with CommonCrawl as the singular
source, offering no summary of their contents. In the absence of domains, the focus has shifted to cleaning corpora
using heuristic rules (Raffel et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021;
Penedo et al., 2023) and quality filters (Wettig et al., 2024;
Sachdeva et al., 2024; Penedo et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024).
In this paper, we propose WebOrganizer, a framework
to construct meaningful domains for monolithic web corpora. Our approach consists of designing taxonomies for
unstructured web content, and scaling automatic labeling
of documents according to these taxonomies by distilling a large language model classifier (Llama-3.1-405BInstruct) to small and efficient models (140M parameters).
WebOrganizer establishes a rich, two-dimensional structure for pre-training data by introducing two complementary domain taxonomies—topic and format—which classify web pages into 24 categories based on subject matter
and style, respectively. This paper, for instance, would fall
under the Science & Technology topic and the Academic
Writing format. Figure 1 provides an overview of these domains and demonstrates how WebOrganizer shines a light
on the composition of different types of internet content
in a cleaned pre-training corpus derived from CommonCrawl. We also compare our domains to k-means clustering of document embeddings, and find that the clusters

weborganizer.allen.ai
hf.co/WebOrganizer
CodeCreator/WebOrganizer

1

Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3 University of California, Berkeley 4 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Alexander Wettig <awettig@cs.princeton.edu>.
2

2
Throughout the paper, we use the term domain to denote
dataset partitions, rather than conventional web domains, which
we will refer to as URL domains.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

