PyTDC: A multimodal machine learning training, evaluation, and inference
platform for biomedical foundation models

Alejandro Velez-Arce 1 2 Marinka Zitnik 3 4 5 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

The application of transfer learning in biology has gained
momentum, marking a pivotal shift toward harnessing the
wealth of biological measurements available today. Foundation models pre-trained on structural, genomic, and network
biology data have demonstrated remarkable potential in
improving predictions in data-limited scenarios and accelerating biological discoveries (Theodoris, 2024). These
models capture fundamental patterns in biological systems,
creating a foundation for tasks ranging from disease modeling to therapeutic development. As this field advances,
the need for robust strategies to benchmark these models
becomes increasingly important. (Liu et al., 2023) illustrate
the importance of diverse downstream task evaluations in
assessing the utility of network biology foundation models.
However, to be useful in therapeutics, benchmarking must
also align with biomedical goals. Focusing benchmarks
solely on canonical biology tasks such as cell type clustering and annotation neglects deeper biological insights,
such as understanding disease mechanisms. Therefore, developing benchmarks prioritizing therapeutic relevance is
essential to guide the evolution of models and ensure they
address the challenges at the heart of biomedical research.

Existing biomedical benchmarks do not provide
end-to-end infrastructure for training, evaluation,
and inference of models that integrate multimodal
biological data and a broad range of machine
learning tasks in therapeutics. We present PyTDC,
an open-source machine-learning platform providing streamlined training, evaluation, and inference software for multimodal biological AI
models. PyTDC unifies distributed, heterogeneous, continuously updated data sources and
model weights and standardizes benchmarking
and inference endpoints. This paper discusses the
components of PyTDC’s architecture and, to our
knowledge, the first-of-its-kind case study on the
introduced single-cell drug-target nomination ML
task. We find state-of-the-art methods in graph
representation learning and domain-specific methods from graph theory perform poorly on this task.
Though we find a context-aware geometric deep
learning method that outperforms the evaluated
SoTA and domain-specific baseline methods, the
model is unable to generalize to unseen cell types
or incorporate additional modalities, highlighting PyTDC’s capacity to facilitate an exciting avenue of research developing multimodal, contextaware, foundation models for open problems in
biomedical AI.

Single-cell genomics has enabled the study of cellular processes with remarkable resolution, offering insights into
cellular heterogeneity and dynamics (Luecken et al., 2023).
Progress in data generation and computational methods designed for single-cell analysis (CZI Single-Cell Biology, et
al., 2023) has facilitated context-aware machine learning
models that incorporate cell-type-specific data across various therapeutic areas (Chen et al., 2024). Despite these
advances, there remains a need for datasets, benchmarks,
and tools for reproducible development and benchmarking
of out-of-distribution generalization (OOD) (Ektefaie et al.,
2024) and domain-specific metric (Velez-Arce et al., 2024)
performance of methods that integrate single-cell analysis
with diverse therapeutic approaches. Given key problems
in genomics intrinsically involve multiple modalities and
adapting general-purpose sequence models for these tasks
remains unclear (Garau-Luis et al., 2024), any system facilitating method development in single-cell therapeutics must
incorporate numerous biomedical modalities.

1

2
ArcellAI Inc.
calculus.house, The Residency Inc.
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA 4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA 5 Harvard Data Science Initiative, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA 6 Kempner Institute for the
Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Alejandro
Velez-Arce <alejandro.velez.arce@@gmail.com>, Marinka Zitnik <marinka@hms.harvard.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

