Cost-efficient Collaboration Between On-device and Cloud Language Models

Avanika Narayan * 1 Dan Biderman * 1 2 Sabri Eyuboglu * 1 Avner May 3
Scott Linderman 2 James Zou 4 Chris Ré 1

Abstract

standard million-token code repository with OpenAI’s o1
API costs > $15 per query. At the same time, smaller LMs
(1-8B parameters) are rapidly improving and can now run on
personal computers (Ollama, llama.cpp) and smartphones
(Mehta et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024). Yet, today, these small, on-device LMs are used mostly for simple
tasks such as tone adjustment and text completion (Gunter
et al., 2024). They do not play a role in data-intensive
reasoning tasks.

We investigate an emerging setup in which a small,
on-device language model (LM) with access to
local data communicates with a frontier, cloudhosted LM to solve real-world tasks involving
financial, medical, and scientific reasoning over
long documents. Can a local-remote collaboration reduce cloud inference costs while preserving
quality? First, we consider a naı̈ve collaboration
protocol where the local and remote models simply chat back and forth. Because only the local
model ingests the full context, this protocol reduces cloud costs by 30.4×, but recovers only
87% of the performance of the frontier model.
We identify two key limitations of this protocol:
the local model struggles to (1) follow multiple
instructions at once and (2) reason over long contexts. Motivated by these observations, we propose M INIONS, a protocol in which the remote
model decomposes the task into easier subtasks
over shorter chunks of the document, that are executed locally in parallel. M INIONS reduces costs
by 5.7× on average while recovering 97.9% of the
remote-only performance. Our analysis reveals
several key design choices that influence the tradeoff between cost and performance in local-remote
systems.

Inspired by the growing literature on multi-agent systems (Wang et al., 2024a; Guo et al., 2024), in this work
we ask: how can a small, on-device LM collaborate with
a frontier LM in the cloud to reduce inference costs on
data-intensive reasoning tasks? In particular, we study the
communication protocols that govern how the two LMs talk
to each other, focusing on the tradeoff between cost and
accuracy. To mimic realistic use cases, we study tasks that
involve varying levels of reasoning over large volumes of
medical, financial, and academic data (Islam et al., 2023;
Adams et al., 2024; Dasigi et al., 2021).
As our first attempt, we study a simple communication
protocol we call M INION: an unconstrained chat between
the local and remote models. M INION reduces cloud costs
by only “reading” the data locally, and communicating a
compressed version of the context to the remote model.
We show that while M INION achieves a 30.4× reduction in
remote model costs, it trails behind the remote-only baseline
by 9.4 accuracy points on average (with an 8B local model;
see Section 4 for details). In isolated ablations, we identify
two key limitations of small LMs that hinder M INION’s
performance (Section 4):

1. Introduction
Today’s cloud-hosted frontier Language Models (LMs) can
perform data-intensive reasoning: they can generate and
refactor code across entire repositories and make decisions
based on financial, legal, and medical documents. However, accessing these models is expensive: processing a

• Small LMs struggle to follow multiple instructions at
once. Large LMs often dispatch complex instructions.
We find that splitting complex instructions into separate
requests improves performance by 56%.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Statistics, Stanford University 3 Together AI 4 Department of Biomedical Data Science,
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Sabri Eyuboglu
<eyuboglu@stanford.edu>.

• Small LMs get confused by long contexts. Increasing
context length from < 1K to > 65K decreases performance by 13% on a simple extraction task.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Motivated by these limitations, we propose M INIONS, an
extension of M INION where the remote LM decomposes
1

