Clipping Improves Adam-Norm and AdaGrad-Norm
when the Noise Is Heavy-Tailed

Savelii Chezhegov 1 2 3 Yaroslav Klyukin 1 Andrei Semenov 4 Aleksandr Beznosikov 1 2 5 6
Alexander Gasnikov 5 1 7 Samuel Horváth 8 Martin Takáč 8 Eduard Gorbunov 8

Abstract

1. Introduction
Stochastic first-order optimization methods such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951) are
the methods of choice in training modern Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) models (Shalev-Shwartz
& Ben-David, 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2016). There are
multiple reasons for that, including but not limited to their
simplicity, computation cost, memory usage, and generalization. However, standard SGD is rarely used due to
its sensitivity to the choice of stepsize. Therefore, methods such as AdaGrad (Streeter & McMahan, 2010; Duchi
et al., 2011) and Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), which use
adaptive1 stepsizes, are much more popular in the DL community (Vaswani et al., 2017; You et al., 2019; Nikishina
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Abdukhakimov et al., 2024;
2023; Li et al., 2024; Schaipp et al., 2023; Loizou et al.,
2021; Moskvoretskii et al., 2024a;b; Shi et al., 2023). In
particular, Adam-type methods are not just easier to tune
but they also achieve better results in terms of the model
performance than SGD in the training of Large Language
Models (LLMs) (Devlin et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020).

Methods with adaptive stepsizes, such as AdaGrad and Adam, are essential for training modern Deep Learning models, especially Large Language Models. Typically, the noise in the stochastic gradients is heavy-tailed for the later ones.
Gradient clipping provably helps to achieve good
high-probability convergence for such noises.
However, despite the similarity between AdaGrad/Adam and Clip-SGD, the current understanding of the high-probability convergence of
AdaGrad/Adam-type methods is limited in this
case. In this work, we prove that AdaGrad/Adam
(and their delayed version) can have provably
bad high-probability convergence if the noise is
heavy-tailed. We also show that gradient clipping fixes this issue, i.e., we derive new highprobability convergence bounds with polylogarithmic dependence on the confidence level for
AdaGrad-Norm and Adam-Norm with clipping
and with/without delay for smooth convex/nonconvex stochastic optimization with heavy-tailed
noise. We extend our results to the case of
Clip-AdaGrad/Clip-Adam with delayed stepsizes. Our empirical evaluations highlight the superiority of clipped versions of AdaGrad/Adam
in handling the heavy-tailed noise.

In the attempt to explain the later phenomenon, Zhang et al.
(2020) consider the noise distribution in the stochastic gradients appearing in the pre-training of the BERT model
(Devlin et al., 2019) and show that (i) the gradient noise
is heavy-tailed in this case, (ii) Adam significantly outperforms SGD (with momentum), (iii) Clip-SGD (Pascanu et al., 2013) also converges better than SGD for such
problems, and (iv) Clip-SGD is provably convergent (inexpectation) when the noise has bounded α-th moment for
some α ∈ (1, 2] while SGD can diverge for α < 2. Moreover, gradient clipping also plays a central role in the recent
advances on the high-probability convergence of stochastic
methods under the heavy-tailed noise (Gorbunov et al., 2020;
Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021; Sadiev et al., 2023; Nguyen et al.,
2023). Taking into account the similarities between Adam

1

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
Ivannikov Institute for System Programming RAS, Russia 3 Sber
AI Lab, Russia 4 Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory
(MLO), EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 5 Innopolis University, Russia 6 The Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and
Public Administration, Russia 7 Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology, Russia 8 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial
Intelligence, UAE. Correspondence to: Eduard Gorbunov <eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
2

1
Throughout the paper, we use the word “adaptivity” in its
general meaning: stepsizes are adaptive if they depend on the
(stochastic) gradients or function values. We emphasize that, in
this sense, an adaptive method can still have parameters affecting
its convergence.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

