Scalable Sobolev IPM for Probability Measures on a Graph
Tam Le * 1 Truyen Nguyen * 2 Hideitsu Hino 1 Kenji Fukumizu 1

Abstract

et al., 2003; Yurochkin et al., 2019). In computer vision and
graphics, 3D objects are often represented as point clouds,
which are distributions of 3D data points (Achlioptas et al.,
2018; Hua et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019;
Nguyen et al., 2021). In topological data analysis (TDA),
persistence diagrams (PD) are used to represent complex
structural objects (Le & Yamada, 2018; Rieck et al., 2019;
Zhao & Wang, 2019; Divol & Lacombe, 2021). Specifically,
PDs can be regarded as distributions of 2D data points,
where each point characterizes the birth and death time of a
particular topological feature (Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2008).

We investigate the Sobolev IPM problem for probability measures supported on a graph metric
space. Sobolev IPM is an important instance of
integral probability metrics (IPM), and is obtained
by constraining a critic function within a unit ball
defined by the Sobolev norm. In particular, it
has been used to compare probability measures
and is crucial for several theoretical works in machine learning. However, to our knowledge, there
are no efficient algorithmic approaches to compute Sobolev IPM effectively, which hinders its
practical applications. In this work, we establish
a relation between Sobolev norm and weighted
Lp -norm, and leverage it to propose a novel regularization for Sobolev IPM. By exploiting the
graph structure, we demonstrate that the regularized Sobolev IPM provides a closed-form expression for fast computation. This advancement addresses long-standing computational challenges,
and paves the way to apply Sobolev IPM for practical applications, even in large-scale settings. Additionally, the regularized Sobolev IPM is negative definite. Utilizing this property, we design positive-definite kernels upon the regularized Sobolev IPM, and provide preliminary evidences of their advantages for comparing probability measures on a given graph for document
classification and topological data analysis.

Integral probability metrics (IPMs) are a powerful class
of distances for comparing probability measures (Müller,
1997). Essentially, IPMs identify a critic function (or witness function) that maximizes the discrimination between
data points sampled from two input probability measures.
IPMs have been applied in numerous theoretical studies and
practical applications (Sriperumbudur et al., 2009; Gretton
et al., 2012; Peyré & Cuturi, 2019; Liang, 2019; Uppal et al.,
2019; 2020; Nadjahi et al., 2020; Kolouri et al., 2020).
In this work, we study Sobolev IPM problem for probability measures supported on a graph. Sobolev IPM is an
important instance of IPM, and is obtained by constraining
the critic function within a unit ball defined by the Sobolev
norm (Adams & Fournier, 2003). Sobolev IPM plays a
crucial role in several theoretical works, such as analyzing
convergence rates of density estimation with generative adversarial networks (GANs) and studying error bounds for
deep ReLU discriminator networks in GANs (Liang, 2017;
2021; Singh et al., 2018). However, to our knowledge, a
long-standing challenge for Sobolev IPM is that there are
no efficient algorithmic approaches to compute it effectively
which limits its applications in practice. To address this
issue, we propose a novel regularization for the Sobolev
IPM problem. By leveraging the graph structure, we demonstrate that the regularized Sobolev IPM yields a closed-form
expression for fast computation, thereby paving the way
for its application in various domains, even for large-scale
settings.

1. Introduction
Probability measures are widely used to represent objects
of interest across various research fields. For instance, in
natural language processing, documents can be viewed as
distributions over words (Sparck Jones, 1972; Kusner et al.,
2015; Le et al., 2019), or distributions over topics (Blei
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Advanced Data Science,
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics (ISM), Tokyo, Japan 2 The
University of Akron, Ohio, US. Correspondence to: Tam Le
<tam@ism.ac.jp>.

Contribution. Our contributions are three-fold as follows:

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

• We propose a novel regularization for Sobolev IPM that
provides a closed-form expression for fast computation,
1

