How Much Can We Forget about Data Contamination?

Sebastian Bordt 1 Suraj Srinivas 2 Valentyn Boreiko 1 Ulrike von Luxburg 1

Abstract

their training data and the benchmark questions used for
evaluation (Brown et al., 2020; Dubey et al., 2024). What
is more, research on memorization (Carlini et al., 2019;
2021) shows that text sequences from the training data are
sometimes encoded within the model, including machine
learning datasets (Grynbaum & Mac, 2023; Liang et al.,
2023; Nasr et al., 2023; Bordt et al., 2024).

The leakage of benchmark data into the training
data has emerged as a significant challenge for
evaluating the capabilities of large language models (LLMs). In this work, we challenge the common assumption that small-scale contamination
renders benchmark evaluations invalid. First, we
experimentally quantify the magnitude of benchmark overfitting based on scaling along three dimensions: The number of model parameters (up
to 1.6B), the number of times an example is seen
(up to 144), and the number of training tokens (up
to 40B). If model and data follow the Chinchilla
scaling laws, minor contamination indeed leads to
overfitting. At the same time, even 144 times of
contamination can be forgotten if the training data
is scaled beyond five times Chinchilla, a regime
characteristic of many modern LLMs. Continual
pre-training of OLMo-7B corroborates these results. Next, we study the impact of the weight
decay parameter on example forgetting, showing
that empirical forgetting occurs faster than the cumulative weight decay. This allows us to gauge
the degree of example forgetting in large-scale
training runs, indicating that many LLMs, including Llama 3 405B, have forgotten the data seen at
the beginning of training.

While the fact that data contamination can lead to invalid
performance evaluations is now well-established (Magar &
Schwartz, 2022; Li & Flanigan, 2024; Yang et al., 2023;
Jiang et al., 2024), little is known about the precise conditions under which this is the case. The main reason for
this is that the training data is usually unknown, and contamination identified via clever research designs that work
around this restriction (Golchin & Surdeanu, 2023; Oren
et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024). Because modern foundation
models are sometimes trained for over a million gradient
steps (Dubey et al., 2024), it is unclear whether a single
update on contaminated data at some point during training
necessarily impacts downstream evaluations. And indeed,
there is quite some evidence that language models need
to see samples repeatedly to have any impact on the final
model. For example, many papers on memorization have
found that it occurs only when a sample is frequently repeated in the training data (Carlini et al., 2022; Biderman
et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024b). The same is true for
research on knowledge acquisition, where a fact needs to be
paraphrased many times before it is finally remembered by
the model (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023; Cao et al., 2024; Chang
et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
A core principle of machine learning is that a model should
not be trained on the test set used for evaluation (Donoho,
2017). For foundation models trained on Internet-scale
data, there are increasing concerns that this principle is
violated due to the leakage of benchmark evaluation data
into the training data (Xu et al., 2024; Oren et al., 2024).
Indeed, many LLM developers have found overlap between

In this work, we study the impact of data contamination in
a controlled setting.1 This means we train language models
from scratch on datasets where we explicitly insert contaminated examples (Jiang et al., 2024). We begin by quantifying
how the overall magnitude of benchmark overfitting (or the
cross-entropy loss of an observed sample) changes as we
scale along three critical dimensions: (1) the number of
model parameters, (2) the number of training tokens, and (3)
the number of repetitions of an example in the training data
(Section 4.1). Holding the other two dimensions fixed, we
find that the effect of scaling is monotone in each dimension.

1
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Germany 2 Bosch
Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
(BCAI), Sunnyvale, USA. Correspondence to: Sebastian Bordt
<sebastian.bordt@uni-tuebingen.de>.

1

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Code is available at https://github.com/
tml-tuebingen/forgetting-contamination/.

1

