Sample, Scrutinize and Scale:
Effective Inference-Time Search by Scaling Verification

Eric Zhao 1 2 Pranjal Awasthi 1 Sreenivas Gollapudi 1

Abstract

Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Akyürek et al., 2024).
There are many methods for increasing test-time compute
usage, including implicitly encouraging longer responses
via reinforcement learning (OpenAI, 2024; Team, 2025)
or explicitly via prompting (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al.,
2023). However, sampling-based search—an instance of
the generate-and-test approach where a model generates
many responses in parallel, e.g. via random sampling or
delegation, and selects what the model guesses to be the
best one—remains one of the most natural and fundamental
paradigms. In addition to being complementary with other
test-time compute scaling strategies, it also has the unique
advantage of being embarrassingly parallel and allowing for
arbitrarily scaling: simply sample more responses (Cobbe
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023).

Sampling-based search, a simple paradigm for
utilizing test-time compute, involves generating
multiple candidate responses and selecting the
best one—typically by having models self-verify
each response for correctness. In this paper,
we study the scaling trends governing samplingbased search. Among our findings is that simply scaling up a minimalist implementation of
sampling-based search, using only random sampling and direct self-verification, provides a practical inference method that, for example, elevates
the reasoning capabilities of Gemini v1.5 Pro
above that of o1-Preview on popular benchmarks.
We partially attribute the scalability of samplingbased search to a phenomenon of implicit scaling,
where sampling a larger pool of responses in turn
improves self-verification accuracy. We further
identify two useful principles for improving selfverification capabilities with test-time compute:
(1) comparing across responses provides helpful
signals about the locations of errors and hallucinations, and (2) different model output styles are
useful for different contexts—chains of thought
are useful for reasoning but harder to verify. We
also find that, though accurate verification can
be elicited, frontier models demonstrate remarkably weak out-of-box verification capabilities and
introduce a benchmark to measure progress on
these deficiencies.

Though recent works demonstrate the benefits of samplingbased search (Cobbe et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Xue
et al., 2023), many questions remain as to what scaling
trends govern this fundamental test-time compute scaling
strategy. In particular, the practical utility of sampling-based
search is limited by verification. Whereas prior work have
shown that parallel scaling of test-time compute via Pass@k
can be remarkably effective (Brown et al., 2024), sampling
remains fundamentally bottlenecked by the availability of
external verification or the model’s ability to self-verify. We
are interested in understanding how this bottleneck evolves
with scale and how much of the Pass@k - Pass@1 gap can
actually be attained in practice.
To develop this understanding, we study a minimalist—
yet remarkably effective—instantiation of sampling-based
search that uses a language model (Gemini Team, 2024) to
both generate a set of candidate responses via random sampling and select the best one by self-verifying each response
with natural language. Specifically, we consider the case
where models must self-verify their responses to select the
best answer, and do not make the strong assumption that

1. Introduction
Recent advances in language models highlight the importance of test-time compute scaling wherein one uses more
compute during inference to enhance reasoning capabilities (OpenAI, 2024; Team, 2025; Agarwal et al., 2024;
1

2
The o1-preview-2024-09-12 numbers in Table 1 use public
figures, with MATH and AIME figures sourced from the OpenAI
blog post (OpenAI, 2024), and LiveBench figures sourced from
the LiveBench leaderboard (livebench.ai). We found o1-Preview
performance through the OpenAI API to slightly differ with publicly reported figures, e.g. scoring 26% not 44% on AIME, and
scoring 77% not 67% on LiveBench Reasoning.

2

Google Research UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Eric
Zhao <eric.zh@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

