Local Pan-Privacy for Federated Analytics

Vitaly Feldman * 1 Audra McMillan * 1 Guy N. Rothblum * 1 Kunal Talwar * 1

Abstract

butions from the server computing the aggregate (Bonawitz
et al., 2017; Corrigan-Gibbs and Boneh, 2017). Finally, the
aggregate itself protects individual contributions by noise
addition to provide a differential privacy guarantee.

Pan-privacy was proposed by (Dwork et al., 2010)
as an approach to designing a private analytics system that retains its privacy properties in the face of
intrusions that expose the system’s internal state.
Motivated by federated telemetry applications, we
study local pan-privacy, where privacy should be
retained under repeated unannounced intrusions
on the local state. We consider the problem of
monitoring the count of an event in a federated
system, where event occurrences on a local device
should be hidden even from an intruder on that device. We show that under reasonable constraints,
the goal of providing information-theoretic differential privacy under intrusion is incompatible
with collecting telemetry information. We then
show that this problem can be solved in a scalable
way using standard cryptographic primitives.

In some applications, one may want to additionally protect
against an attacker that has access to the device. For example, a computer in a public library may be accessed by
one user, and later by another. In such a case, we would
want to ensure that the second user cannot learn about the
activity of the first user by inspecting the internal state of
the device. In this work, we initiate the study of estimating
population statistics while ensuring privacy against an ondevice intruder. We call this model local pan-privacy, as it
aims to protect against an intrusion at the local device, much
as pan-privacy protects against an intrusion at the server.
We study locally pan-private algorithms for some fundamental statistical tasks in a simple streaming setting. There are
n devices in total. For each device, at each time step, an
event of interest, such as an application crash while using
a feature, may or may not occur. Thus, each device’s input
is a sequence of T bits. The device can communicate with
the server at the end of the T time steps, and we require
that the protocol retains its privacy properties in the face
of multiple intrusions on device (c.f. Remark 4). The first
statistic we study is C OUNT N ON Z ERO, which counts the
number of devices on which the event occurred in at least
one of the T time steps. In the standard local privacy model,
this task can be accomplished by each device sending a
randomized response of a bit corresponding to whether on
not the event occurred at any of the T steps. Such a protocol can also lead to near-optimal central privacy guarantees
via shuffling or aggregation (Feldman et al., 2020), when
the responses are aggregated by a trusted server, or by a
secure aggregation system. In this work, we focus on the
setting where we either have a trusted server, or where the
secure aggregation system uses a two-server architecture as
in PRIO (Corrigan-Gibbs and Boneh, 2017).

1. Introduction
Private federated telemetry systems allow for collection
of aggregate statistics from a population, while ensuring
a strong privacy guarantee for individuals. For example,
private federated learning and statistics have been used
to collect webpage and search engine popularities from
Chrome browsers (Erlingsson et al., 2014), learn popular
emojis (Apple’s Differential Privacy Team, 2017), collect
Covid epedimiological metrics (Apple and Google, 2021),
collect browser performance metrics (Helmer et al., 2018),
collect operating system telemetry (Ding et al., 2017), and
train keyboard models (Xu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023).
These systems typically rely on the client device storing
information about usage on device, and periodically, at appropriate times, taking part in a protocol that computes an
aggregate. These protocols use encryption to protect this
data from an eavesdropper. In some cases, additional cryptographic protocols are used to protect the individual contri-

We also study two additional statistics of the event count
distribution: the mean number of occurrences per device,
and a histogram of the number of occurrences, appropriately
bucketed. As with the C OUNT N ON Z ERO, these tasks also
admit simple and commonly-used algorithms in the local
privacy model, based on the Laplace mechanism (Dwork

*
Equal contribution 1 Apple, Cupertino, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Kunal Talwar <ktalwar@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

