Relating Misfit to Gain in Weak-to-Strong Generalization
Beyond the Squared Loss

Abhijeet Mulgund * 1 Chirag Pabbaraju * 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Weak-to-strong generalization (Burns et al., 2024) posits
that strong AI models can outperform weaker supervisors
when trained on data labeled by them. By virtue of being
larger and more complex models that have presumably also
seen more data in their pretraining lifecycle, the hope is
that strong models will invariably know how to push past
the performance ceiling of their weak supervisors. This
phenomenon is central towards the eventual goal of superalignment (OpenAI, 2023), where we expect AI models to
exhibit superhuman skills aligned with human principles
from human supervision. Perhaps encouragingly, recent
studies (Burns et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024; Ji et al., 2024;
Sun et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Liu
& Alahi, 2024) have affirmed that such a phenomenon can
in fact be elicited. Given the extent to which emergent AI
would appear to influence our future going forward, it becomes imperative to theoretically understand when and how
weak-to-strong generalization may provably be exhibited.

The paradigm of weak-to-strong generalization
constitutes the training of a strong AI model on
data labeled by a weak AI model, with the goal
that the strong model nevertheless outperforms
its weak supervisor on the target task of interest. For the setting of real-valued regression with
the squared loss, recent work quantitatively characterizes the gain in performance of the strong
model over the weak model in terms of the misfit
between the strong and weak model. We generalize such a characterization to learning tasks
whose loss functions correspond to arbitrary Bregman divergences when the strong class is convex.
This extends the misfit-based characterization of
performance gain in weak-to-strong generalization to classification tasks, as the cross-entropy
loss can be expressed in terms of a Bregman divergence. In most practical scenarios, however,
the strong model class may not be convex. We
therefore weaken this assumption and study weakto-strong generalization for convex combinations
of k strong models in the strong class, in the concrete setting of classification. This allows us to
obtain a similar misfit-based characterization of
performance gain, up to an additional error term
that vanishes as k gets large. Our theoretical findings are supported by thorough experiments on
synthetic as well as real-world datasets.

Towards this, Charikar et al. (2024) recently provided a
mathematical characterization of weak-to-strong generalization for real-valued regression. They consider finetuning
the final linear layer of a strong model (keeping other parameters fixed) to minimize the squared loss on labels given
by a weak model. Using a geometric argument involving
projections onto a convex set, Charikar et al. (2024) show
that a strong model trained in this manner provably attains
smaller loss than the weak model on the target task. Moreover, the quantitative reduction in loss (performance “gain”)
is at least as much as the loss of the strong model on the
weakly labeled data (“misfit” between the strong and weak
model). However, their results are limited to regression,
leaving open whether such a misfit-based characterization
can also be formally shown for other tasks like classification,
one of the primary subjects of study in Burns et al. (2024).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Statistics,
and Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Abhijeet Mulgund <mulgund2@uic.edu>, Chirag Pabbaraju <cpabbara@stanford.edu>.

Drawing on the theory of information geometry (Amari,
2016; Ay et al., 2017), we significantly extend the misfitbased characterization of weak-to-strong generalization beyond regression tasks. Our main observation is that the

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
Code is available at https://github.com/abhmul/
general-misfit-gain.

This notion of misfit is also referred to as “student-supervisor
disagreement” in Burns et al. (2024).

1

