Gradient Aligned Regression via Pairwise Losses

Dixian Zhu 1 Tianbao Yang 2 Livnat Jerby 1

Abstract

of the proposed GAR compared to existing methods with pairwise regularization or contrastive
learning in the latent feature space. Additionally,
ablation studies confirm the effectiveness of each
component of GAR. The code is open sourced at
https://github.com/DixianZhu/GAR.

Regression is a fundamental task in machine learning that has garnered extensive attention over the
past decades. The conventional approach for regression involves employing loss functions that
primarily concentrate on aligning model prediction with the ground truth for each individual
data sample. Recent research endeavors have
introduced novel perspectives by incorporating
label similarity into regression through the imposition of additional pairwise regularization or
contrastive learning on the latent feature space,
demonstrating their effectiveness. However, there
are two drawbacks to these approaches: (i) their
pairwise operations in the latent feature space
are computationally more expensive than conventional regression losses; (ii) they lack theoretical
insights behind these methods. In this work, we
propose GAR (Gradient Aligned Regression) as
a competitive alternative method in label space,
which is constituted by a conventional regression
loss and two pairwise label difference losses for
gradient alignment including magnitude and direction. GAR enjoys: i) the same level efficiency as
conventional regression loss because the quadratic
complexity for the proposed pairwise losses can
be reduced to linear complexity; ii) theoretical
insights from learning the pairwise label difference to learning the gradient of the ground truth
function. We limit our current scope as regression
on the clean data setting without noises, outliers
or distributional shifts, etc. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method practically
on two synthetic datasets and on eight extensive
real-world tasks from six benchmark datasets with
other eight competitive baselines. Running time
experiments demonstrate the superior efficiency

1. Introduction
As one of the most fundamental tasks in Machine Learning (ML) field, regression stands out as a powerful tool for
understanding and modeling the relationships from complex data features to continuous data labels. Regression
techniques have been widely utilized in many areas, such
as computer vision (Moschoglou et al., 2017; Niu et al.,
2016), drug discovery (Dara et al., 2022), economics and
finances (Benkraiem & Zopounidis, 2021), environmental
forecast (Zhu et al., 2018), material science (Stanev et al.,
2018). For centuries, Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) have been adopted to measure the
distance from the ML model predictions to the ground truths.
Consequently, researchers have naturally proposed to optimize the least squared error and least absolute error (Legendre, 1806; Dodge, 2008). Since the last century, to improve
model stability and control model complexity, researchers
have proposed various model regularizations based on MSE
loss, resulting in multiple variants such as Ridge Regression,
LASSO, and Elastic Net (Tikhonov et al., 1943; Tibshirani,
1996; Zou & Hastie, 2005). Along this line, the Huber loss
was proposed to trade off between MAE and MSE, aiming
to mitigate the issue of MSE being sensitive to outliers (Huber, 1992). All these conventional loss functions and many
of their variants focus on minimizing the difference between
model prediction and ground truth for each individual data
sample pointwisely, but do not explicitly model and capture
the relationships for multiple data samples.
Recent research has proposed incorporating label pairwise
similarities into regression across different data samples,
addressing part of the gap left by conventional loss functions that focus solely on individual prediction errors (Gong
et al., 2022; Keramati et al., 2023; Zha et al., 2023). Those
latent-space-based pairwise regression methods define an
‘anchor data point’, which either acts as a reference point
for calculating the relative ranks to the anchor for the other

1

Department of Genetics, Stanford University, CA, USA
Department of Computer Science, Texas A&M University, TX,
USA. Correspondence to: Dixian Zhu <dixian-zhu@stanford.edu>,
Livnat Jerby <ljerby@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

