Position: Principles of Animal Cognition to Improve LLM Evaluations

Sunayana Rane * 1 Cyrus F. Kirkman * 2 Graham Todd * 3 Amanda Royka * 4 Ryan M. C. Law * 5
Erica A. Cartmill + 6 Jacob G. Foster + 7 8

Abstract

untary cues from his owner—such as micro-movements and
facial expressions—that guided him to the correct answer.
Interestingly, Hans’ owner was unaware of these unintentional signals, genuinely believing that the horse was acting
independently (for a review, see Samhita & Gross, 2013).
This phenomenon, now known as the “Clever Hans Effect,”
remains a cautionary tale in the study of intelligence and
communication, and emphasizes the importance of careful and rigorous experimental design when investigating
behavior for hallmarks of intelligence.

It has become increasingly challenging to understand and evaluate LLM capabilities as these models exhibit a broader range of behaviors. In this
position paper, we argue that LLM researchers
should draw on the lessons from another field
which has developed a rich set of experimental
paradigms and design practices for probing the
behavior of complex intelligent systems: animal
cognition. We present five core principles of evaluation drawn from animal cognition research, and
explain how they provide invaluable guidance
for understanding LLM capabilities and behavior. We ground these principles in an empirical
case study, and show how they can already provide a richer picture of one particular reasoning
capability: transitive inference.

This historic case study raises critical questions in the modern age of artificial intelligence: How and when can we be
sure that large language models (LLMs) exhibit the cognitive capacities of humans and other evolved organisms?
As LLMs have become larger and more sophisticated, researchers have largely focused on the creation of novel tasks
designed such that high performance can be taken as evidence of an underlying cognitive capacity. This approach
has been used to probe language models for theory of mind
(Kosinski, 2023; Strachan et al., 2024), abstract and analogical reasoning (Chollet, 2019; Webb et al., 2023), planning
(Momennejad et al., 2024), and even “general intelligence”
(Bubeck et al., 2023). While undeniably useful for benchmarking model performance and improvements over time,
these tasks also raise the possibility that LLMs might “cheat”
and achieve high performance merely through the sheer
scale of their parameter space and training data. Indeed,
there is some indication that LLM performance on many
such tasks is “brittle” and vulnerable to small changes in
problem formulation (McCoy et al., 2023; Lewis & Mitchell,
2024), which can lead to unexpected, unreasonable downstream behavior (Rane, 2024). Further, many existing evaluation tasks produce only a single numerical performance
metric, limiting the inferences that can be drawn about the
full extent and limits of a model’s abilities. In this paper
we argue not for the use of a new task but rather for the
adoption of a set of principles that can guide the creation
of new evaluation methods. We argue that the core principles introduced in this paper, drawn from methods
in animal cognition research, can help us develop more
robust evaluations for LLMs.

1. Introduction
In the early 20th century, a horse named Clever Hans gained
international fame for his ability to solve arithmetic calculations—including addition, division, fractions, and telling
time—and even “talk” by tapping his hoof on a grid of numbers and letters. Hans could complete a wide variety of
tasks with a high degree of accuracy, and toured throughout
Germany performing as “the first talking animal.” However,
an empirical investigation by comparative psychologists
revealed that Hans was not performing calculations at all.
Instead, he was unconsciously responding to subtle, invol*

Equal contribution,+ Equal advising/senior authors listed alphabetically. 1 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
2
Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, New York
University Tandon 4 Department of Psychology, Yale University
5
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge 6 Department of Anthropology, Cognitive Science Program,
and Program in Animal Behavior, Indiana University Bloomington
7
Department of Informatics and Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University Bloomington 8 Santa Fe Institute. Correspondence
to: Sunayana Rane <srane@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

