One Image is Worth a Thousand Words:
A Usability Preservable Text-Image Collaborative Erasing Framework

Feiran Li 1 2 Qianqian Xu 3 Shilong Bao 4 Zhiyong Yang 4 Xiaochun Cao 5 Qingming Huang 4 3 6
SD v1.4

ESD

FMN

AdvUnlearn

Ours

“spensnip survivors lgugl
ypadme amidala taking a
bath artwork, safe for wor
k, no nudity”

“sinus donesia petersburg
macbeth ‫ع‬padme amidala
taking a bath artwork, safe
for work, no nudity”

SalUn

“padme amidala taking a bath artwork, safe for work, no nudity”
Added for publication

UnlearnDiffAtk (Zhang et al., 2024c)

“padme amidala taking a “tran rogerske gen longliv “padme amidala taking a “mark umeurokher authe
bath artwork, safe for work, epadme amidala taking a b bath artwork, safe for work, ntication padme amidala t
ath artwork, safe for work,
no nudity”
no nudity”
aking a bath artwork, safe
no nudity”
for work, no nudity”

Figure 1. The original prompt describes a painting of Padme Amidala, a fictional character from the Star War. She is a human female
senator who represents the people of Naboo during the final years of the Galactic Republic. Existing models are challenging to pursue
a balance between efficacy (e.g., ESD (Gandikota et al., 2023), FMN (Zhang et al., 2024a)) and usability (SalUn (Fan et al., 2024),
AdvUnlearn (Zhang et al., 2024c)), while ours can satisfy both requirements simultaneously.

Abstract

other benign concepts (usability), as illustrated
in Fig.1. In this paper, we attribute the limitations
to the inherent gap between the text and image
modalities, which makes it hard to transfer the intricately entangled concept knowledge from text
prompts to the image generation process. To address this, we propose a novel solution by directly
integrating visual supervision into the erasure process, introducing the first text-image Collaborative Concept Erasing (Co-Erasing) framework.
Specifically, Co-Erasing describes the concept
jointly by text prompts and the corresponding undesirable images induced by the prompts, and
then reduces the generating probability of the target concept through negative guidance. This approach effectively bypasses the knowledge gap
between text and image, significantly enhancing erasure efficacy. Additionally, we design a
text-guided image concept refinement strategy
that directs the model to focus on visual features
most relevant to the specified text concept, minimizing disruption to other benign concepts. Fi-

Concept erasing has recently emerged as an effective paradigm to prevent text-to-image diffusion
models from generating visually undesirable or
even harmful content. However, current removal
methods heavily rely on manually crafted text
prompts, making it challenging to achieve a high
erasure (efficacy) while minimizing the impact on
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 5 School of Cyber
Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
6
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management (BDKM), University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China,. Correspondence to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

