Fairness on Principal Stratum: A New Perspective on Counterfactual Fairness

Haoxuan Li 1 Zeyu Tang 2 Zhichao Jiang 3 Zhuangyan Fang 4 Yue Liu 5 Zhi Geng 6 Kun Zhang 2 7

Abstract

1. Introduction
Addressing the fairness of automated algorithms is critical to
making safe decisions in areas such as criminal justice (Brennan et al., 2009; Dieterich et al., 2016), education (Reardon
& Owens, 2014), and social welfare (Chouldechova et al.,
2018). To achieve fair machine learning, many associationbased fairness notions have been proposed to constrain the
statistical independence between protected attributes and decisions, e.g., statistical parity (Dwork et al., 2012), equalized
odds (Hardt et al., 2016), and predictive parity (Chouldechova, 2017). In addition, the algorithmic fairness can also
be approached from a causal perspective (Kusner et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2017a;b; 2018a;b; Zhang & Bareinboim,
2018; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Wu et al., 2019a;b; Chiappa,
2019; Imai & Jiang, 2020; Mishler et al., 2021; Zuo et al.,
2022). Among them, counterfactual fairness (Kusner et al.,
2017) has garnered considerable attention recently. This
criterion demands that any alterations made to the values of
protected attributes do not result in changes to individual
decision-making.

Fairness in human and algorithmic decisionmaking is crucial in areas such as criminal justice,
education, and social welfare. Recently, counterfactual fairness has drawn increasing research
interest, suggesting that decision-making for individuals should remain the same when intervening
with different values on protected attributes. Nevertheless, the question of "which attributes and individuals should be protected" is rarely discussed
in the existing counterfactual fairness literature.
For example, when considering leg disability as
a protected attribute, the algorithms should not
treat individuals with leg disabilities differently
in college admissions, but one may naturally consider this factor when selecting runner athletes.
In other words, when and how to enforce fairness is expected to depend on the causal relation
between the protected attribute and the outcome
of interest. Formally, this paper proposes principal counterfactual fairness using the concept of
principal stratification from the causal inference
literature, focusing on whether an algorithm is
counterfactually fair for individuals whose protected attribute has no individual causal effect on
the outcome of interest. To examine whether an
algorithm satisfies principal counterfactual fairness, we derive the statistical bounds and propose
a post-processing approach to achieving principal
counterfactual fairness with minimal individual
decision changes. Experiments are conducted using synthetic and real-world datasets to verify the
effectiveness of our methods.

Nevertheless, as Chouldechova & Roth (2020) pointed out,
the question of "which attributes and individuals should
be protected" is rarely discussed in the existing counterfactual fairness literature. Should counterfactual fairness hold
for all sensitive attributes on all individuals? For example,
when considering leg disability as a protected attribute, it is
reasonable to require that the algorithms should not treat individuals with disabilities differently in college admissions,
but should the algorithms also be required to make the same
decisions for individuals with disabilities when selecting
runner athletes? In such cases, it is clear that it is not appropriate to select individuals with disabilities as running
athletes. But what if the sensitive attribute is gender or race
instead? How to reflect the differences between disability
and gender as sensitive attributes?
To tackle the above issues, we summarize relevant studies
in Table 1, which can be broadly divided into two branches.
On one hand, instead of requiring fairness to hold on all
individuals as in demographic parity (Darlington, 1971),
equalized odds (Hardt et al., 2016) constrains the examination of demographic parity to subgroups with the same
observed outcome. By considering the effect of decisionmaking on the observed outcomes, counterfactual equalized

1

Peking University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Sun Yatsen University 4 Xiaomi 5 Renmin University of China 6 Beijing
Technology and Business University 7 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Yue Liu
<liuyue_stats@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

