Optimizing Noise Distributions for Differential Privacy

Atefeh Gilani 1 Juan Felipe Gomez 2 Shahab Asoodeh 3 Flavio P. Calmon 4 Oliver Kosut 1 Lalitha Sankar 1

Abstract

(Abowd et al., 2022) publishes demographic statistics such
as population density or employment rates for each state, requiring repeated applications of privacy-preserving methods.
On the other hand, the large composition regime involves
thousands of sequential applications of privacy mechanisms,
such as during the training of a machine learning model.

We propose a unified optimization framework for
designing continuous and discrete noise distributions that ensure differential privacy (DP) by
minimizing Rényi DP, a variant of DP, under a
cost constraint. Rényi DP has the advantage that
by considering different values of the Rényi parameter α, we can tailor our optimization for any
number of compositions. To solve the optimization problem, we reduce it to a finite-dimensional
convex formulation and perform preconditioned
gradient descent. The resulting noise distributions
are then compared to their Gaussian and Laplace
counterparts. Numerical results demonstrate that
our optimized distributions are consistently better, with significant improvements in (ε, δ)-DP
guarantees in the moderate composition regimes,
compared to Gaussian and Laplace distributions
with the same variance.

The most widely used noise distributions incorporated into
privacy mechanisms for achieving DP are Laplace noise
(Dwork et al., 2006b), typically employed when pure DP is
desired, and Gaussian noise (Abadi et al., 2016), often used
for approximate DP (i.e., (ε, δ)-DP). However, these distributions may not necessarily be optimal across all settings
in which they are applied. For example, while the Gaussian
distribution is commonly used to ensure approximate DP
in the large composition regime, the parametrized Cactus
distribution has been shown to be optimal in this regime for
a fixed sensitivity s > 0 (Alghamdi et al., 2022). Moreover,
the Schrödinger distribution has been demonstrated to be
optimal for vanishing sensitivity (s → 0+ ), and it only recovers the Gaussian distribution as a special case under a
quadratic cost function (Alghamdi et al., 2023). Additionally, in (Geng et al., 2015), it was shown that the Staircase
distribution is optimal for ε-DP in the single composition
regime. In this paper, we focus on designing optimal noise
distributions tailored to a fixed number of compositions
and sensitivity. We demonstrate that the resulting optimal
Rényi DP noise distribution significantly outperforms both
Laplace and Gaussian distributions in the moderate composition regime.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006a;b) provides
strong privacy protections by ensuring that information released from queries on sensitive data does not reveal whether
any individual is included in the dataset. This is achieved
through privacy mechanisms that add noise to query responses, effectively masking any private information.
In practice, privacy mechanisms are rarely applied only
once to sensitive data. Instead, they are often used sequentially, with the frequency depending on the specific use case.
In what we call the moderate composition regime, privacy
mechanisms are applied a limited number of times to release aggregated data. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau

Discrete noise distributions also hold significant value for
DP. This is because finite precision implementations that
generate continuous random variables can result in naive
floating-point approximations which have been shown to
compromise their de facto privacy guarantees (Mironov,
2012). Restricting noise distributions to integer support
offers resilience against floating-point attacks and better
suits applications involving integer-valued queries, such as
population counts in the US Census. To address these challenges, the discrete Gaussian distribution (Canonne et al.,
2020) and the discrete Laplace distribution (Ghosh et al.,
2012; Balcer & Vadhan, 2017) have been proposed. These
distributions, supported on integer values, serve as natural
discrete analogues to the continuous Gaussian and Laplace
distributions.

1

School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA 2 Department of Physics,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Department of Computing and Software, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada 4 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Atefeh
Gilani <agilani2@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

