Is Complex Query Answering Really Complex?

Cosimo Gregucci 1 Bo Xiong 2 Daniel Hernández 1 Lorenzo Loconte 3
Pasquale Minervini 3 4
Steffen Staab 1 5
Antonio Vergari 3

Abstract

over a KG such as FreeBase (Bollacker et al., 2008), one
would need to first intersect the set of movies found on
Blue Ray and the ones shot in New York City, and then
link these intermediate candidate answers to another entity,
i.e., an actor participating in it. However, if some links
are missing in the KG, not all relevant actor entities can be
immediately reachable. To deal with the unavoidable incompleteness of real-world KGs, ML methods were developed
to solve CQA in the presence of missing links. The current
state-of-the-art (SoTA) for CQA are neural query answering
models (Arakelyan et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Arakelyan
et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2023; Galkin et al., 2024b), mapping
queries and KGs (i.e., entities and relation names) into a
unified latent space. Performance measured on de-factostandard benchmarks such as FB15k237 (Toutanova & Chen,
2015) and NELL995 (Xiong et al., 2017) suggests impressive
progress achieved in recent years on CQA on queries having
different structures, and hence posing apparently different
levels of difficulty to be answered.

Complex query answering (CQA) on knowledge
graphs (KGs) is gaining momentum as a challenging reasoning task. In this paper, we show that
the current benchmarks for CQA might not be as
complex as we think, as the way they are built distorts our perception of progress in this field. For
example, we find that in these benchmarks, most
queries (up to 98% for some query types) can be
reduced to simpler problems, e.g. link prediction,
where only one link needs to be predicted.The
performance of state-of-the-art CQA models decreases significantly when such models are evaluated on queries that cannot be reduced to easier
types. Thus, we propose a set of more challenging benchmarks composed of queries that require
models to reason over multiple hops and better
reflect the construction of real-world KGs. In a
systematic empirical investigation, the new benchmarks show that current methods leave much to
be desired from current CQA methods.

The difficulty of a benchmark relates to the size and structural complexity1 of its queries, and several query “types”
have been proposed (Ren et al., 2020), each involving a
different combination of logical operators—conjunctions,
disjunctions, and requiring to traverse a number of missing
links that generally increases with the number of logical
conditions imposed (Figures 1 and 2). For instance, the
query q1 is an example of a “2i1p” query type, since it
comprises an intersection of two entity sets (2i) followed
by a path2 of length one (1p). In this paper, we argue that
the perception of progress on CQA benchmarks has been
distorted by implicit assumptions in these benchmarks. We
start by noting how both in FB15k237 and NELL995, the
vast majority of queries of a complex type simplify to one
simpler type, thanks to the fact that to answer them, one can
leverage links already appearing in the training data. Figure 1 shows an example of how answers to the query q1 on
FB15k237– which should require predicting three missing
links – require the same effort associated with simpler types
involving fewer links. In fact, in FB15k237, the answer “K.
Dunst” can be retrieved by predicting just one missing link

1. Introduction
A crucial challenge in AI and ML is learning to perform
complex reasoning, i.e., solving tasks that involve several
intermediate steps and sub-goals to be completed. Complex
query answering (CQA; Hamilton et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2021; Arakelyan et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022) emerged as a
way to measure complex reasoning over external knowledge
bases, encoded as knowledge graphs (KGs; Hogan et al.,
2021). For instance, to answer the query:
“Which actor performed in a movie filmed in
New York City and distributed on Blue Ray?”

(q1 )

Shared supervision 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University of Stuttgart, Germany 2 Stanford University 3 School of
Informatics University of Edinburgh Edinburgh, UK 4 Miniml.AI
5
University of Southampton, UK. Correspondence to: Cosimo
Gregucci <cosimo.gregucci@ki.uni-stuttgart.de>.

1

Not to be confused with the computational complexity of
query answering (Dalvi & Suciu, 2012).
2
Also known as projection in related works (Ren et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

