GLGENN: A Novel Parameter-Light Equivariant Neural Networks
Architecture Based on Clifford Geometric Algebras

Ekaterina Filimoshina 1 2 Dmitry Shirokov 1 3

Abstract

protein structures (Townshend et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024;
Satorras et al., 2021; Pepe et al., 2024; Fuchs et al., 2020),
estimating arterial wall-shear stress (Brehmer et al., 2023),
processing tasks involving point clouds (Thomas et al., 2018;
Fuchs et al., 2020), motion capture (Liu et al., 2024), robotic
planning (Brehmer et al., 2023), etc. Early works addressing
equivariance with respect to pseudo-orthogonal transformations (pseudo-orthogonal groups) include Cohen & Welling,
2016; 2017; Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Thomas et al., 2018;
Weiler et al., 2018; Anderson et al., 2019; Finzi et al., 2021.

We propose, implement, and compare with competitors a new architecture of equivariant neural
networks based on geometric (Clifford) algebras:
Generalized Lipschitz Group Equivariant Neural Networks (GLGENN). These networks are
equivariant to all pseudo-orthogonal transformations, including rotations and reflections, of a vector space with any non-degenerate or degenerate
symmetric bilinear form. We propose a weightsharing parametrization technique that takes into
account the fundamental structures and operations
of geometric algebras. Due to this technique,
GLGENN architecture is parameter-light and has
less tendency to overfitting than baseline equivariant models. GLGENN outperforms or matches
competitors on several benchmarking equivariant
tasks, including estimation of an equivariant function and a convex hull experiment, while using
significantly fewer optimizable parameters.

1. Introduction
Equivariant neural networks are a class of neural networks
that explicitly incorporate symmetries into their architecture, making them well-suited for tasks that inherently require equivariance to transformations with respect to some
group’s action (e.g., rotations, permutations, translations,
etc.). Equivariant neural networks were introduced in Cohen
& Welling, 2016 and have since been extensively developed
and applied in a wide range of tasks in computer and natural
sciences. These applications include modeling dynamical
systems (Finzi et al., 2021), particle physics (Ruhe et al.,
2023; Finzi et al., 2021), analyzing molecular properties and

Figure 1. GLGENN is an architecture of neural networks equivariant with respect to any pseudo-orthogonal transformation. Inputs
and outputs are represented as multivectors (elements of geometric algebras), which encode various geometric quantities such as
scalars, vectors, oriented areas (bivectors) and volumes (trivectors),
and higher-dimensional objects (4-vectors, etc.). GLGENN are
parameter-light, since they operate in a unified manner across 4
fundamental subspaces of geometric algebras defined by the grade
involution (b) and reversion (e); they processes geometric objects
in groups with a step size of 4.

1
HSE University, Moscow, Russia 2 Skolkovo Institute of
Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 3 Institute for Information Transmission Problems of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to: Ekaterina Filimoshina <filimoshinaek@gmail.com>, Dmitry Shirokov
<dm.shirokov@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

