CALM: Consensus-Aware Localized Merging for Multi-Task Learning

Kunda Yan * 1 Min Zhang * 2 Sen Cui † 1 Zikun Qu 3 Bo Jiang 2 Feng Liu 4 Changshui Zhang † 1

Abstract

both model efficiency and performance (Liu et al., 2019a;b;
Dong et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2024c; Qiu et al., 2024; Xin
et al., 2024). This approach has been widely applied in
fields such as computer vision (Cai et al., 2024a; Lu et al.,
2020; Qiu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024c; Cai et al., 2024b),
natural language processing (Liu et al., 2019b; Dong et al.,
2015; Audibert et al., 2023; Xin et al., 2024), and so on.
However, in the context of large foundational models, traditional MTL methods often require the centralized collection
and processing of vast amounts of data, leading to high costs
in data labeling and computational resources. At the same
time, with the widespread use of pre-trained models, downstream tasks typically fine-tune the same pre-trained model
(e.g., ViT (Dosovitskiy, 2020) or BERT (Devlin, 2018)) independently, and the fine-tuned models are usually released
without disclosing the specifics of the original training data
to protect privacy. In recent years, researchers have changed
their focus towards exploring how to effectively integrate
multiple independently trained models to achieve MTL without re-training on the original data.

Model merging aims to integrate the strengths of
multiple fine-tuned models into a unified model
while preserving task-specific capabilities. Existing methods, represented by task arithmetic,
are typically classified into global- and localaware methods. However, global-aware methods inevitably cause parameter interference, while
local-aware methods struggle to maintain the effectiveness of task-specific details in the merged
model. To address these limitations, we propose
a Consensus-Aware Localized Merging (CALM)
method which incorporates localized information aligned with global task consensus, ensuring its effectiveness post-merging. CALM consists of three key components: (1) class-balanced
entropy minimization sampling, providing a
more flexible and reliable way to leverage unsupervised data; (2) an efficient-aware framework, selecting a small set of tasks for sequential
merging with high scalability; (3) a consensusaware mask optimization, aligning localized binary masks with global task consensus and merging them conflict-free. Experiments demonstrate
the superiority and robustness of our CALM, significantly outperforming existing methods and
achieving performance close to traditional MTL.

In response, model merging (or fusion) methods have been
employed to address challenges in traditional MTL (Yang
et al., 2024b; Yadav et al., 2023; Ilharco et al., 2023; Tang
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2024; He et al.,
2024; Chen & Kwok, 2024). A key approach in this field is
task arithmetic (Ilharco et al., 2023), which introduces the
task vector to represent task-specific weight adjustments.
A task vector is created by subtracting task-specific weights
from pre-trained weights, producing a unique representation
for each task. Research has demonstrated that by strategically merging multiple task vectors and incorporating them
into a pre-trained model, a new model can be created to
effectively support MTL. As a result, most model merging
methods rely on task vectors to construct integrated models.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) facilitates knowledge transfer
across different tasks through a shared backbone, improving
*

Equal contribution † Corresponding author 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI), Beijing National
Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
P.R.China 2 East China Normal University (ECNU) 3 The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne. Correspondence
to: Sen Cui <cuis@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Changshui Zhang
<zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Task vector-based model merging methods can currently be
categorized into two groups based on the information focus
between task vectors: global-aware methods (as illustrated
in Figure 1(a)) and localized-aware methods (as illustrated
in Figure 1(b)). Global-aware methods, such as those utilizing arithmetic mean (Ilharco et al., 2023) and learned
merging weights (Yang et al., 2024b), process the models
in a global manner, performing arithmetic operations on
all the parameters of the fine-tuned models. However,
parameters from different fine-tuned models inevitably inter-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

