Position: Human Baselines in Model Evaluations Need Rigor and Transparency
(With Recommendations & Reporting Checklist)

Kevin L. Wei * 1 2 Patricia Paskov * 1 3 Sunishchal Dev * 1 4 Michael J. Byun * 1 3 Anka Reuel 2 5
Xavier Roberts-Gaal 2 Rachel Calcott 2 Evie Coxon 6 Chinmay Deshpande 7

1. Introduction

Abstract
In this position paper, we argue that human
baselines in foundation model evaluations must
be more rigorous and more transparent to enable meaningful comparisons of human vs. AI
performance, and we provide recommendations and a reporting checklist towards this
end. Human performance baselines are vital for
the machine learning community, downstream
users, and policymakers to interpret AI evaluations. Models are often claimed to achieve
“super-human” performance, but existing baselining methods are neither sufficiently rigorous nor
sufficiently well-documented to robustly measure
and assess performance differences. Based on a
meta-review of the measurement theory and AI
evaluation literatures, we derive a framework with
recommendations for designing, executing, and
reporting human baselines. We synthesize our recommendations into a checklist that we use to systematically review 115 human baselines (studies)
in foundation model evaluations and thus identify
shortcomings in existing baselining methods; our
checklist can also assist researchers in conducting human baselines and reporting results. We
hope our work can advance more rigorous AI
evaluation practices that can better serve both the
research community and policymakers. Data is
available at: https://github.com/kevin
lwei/human-baselines.

Artificial intelligence (AI) systems, foundation models in
particular, have increasingly achieved superior performance
on benchmarks in natural language understanding, general
reasoning, coding, and other domains (Maslej et al., 2024).
These results are frequently compared to human baselines—
reference sets of metrics intended to represent human performance on specific tasks—which has led to claims about
models’ “super-human” performance (Bikkasani, 2024).
Human baselines are crucial for evaluating AI systems
and for understanding AI’s societal impacts. For the machine learning (ML) research community, human baselines
help improve benchmarks, provide context for interpreting
system performance, and demonstrate concurrent validity
(Hardy et al., 2024; Bowman & Dahl, 2021). For downstream users, comparisons to human performance may inform decisions about AI adoption (cf. Luo et al. 2019). And
for policymakers, human baselines facilitate risk assessments (OSTP, 2022; NIST, 2023; Goemans et al., 2024; US
AISI & UK AISI, 2024) and predictions of AI’s economic
impacts (Hatzius et al., 2023; Shrier et al., 2023). Valid
and reliable human baselines thus contribute greatly to the
operational value of AI evaluations.
However, despite widespread recognition in the ML community about the importance of human baselines (Reuel et al.,
2024; Ibrahim et al., 2024; Tedeschi et al., 2023; Nangia &
Bowman, 2019; Bender, 2015), existing human baselines
used currently to assess human performance on a wide array
of AI evaluation tasks (including reasoning, coding, visual
perception, etc.) are neither sufficiently rigorous nor sufficiently transparent to enable reliable claims about (the
magnitude of) differences between human and AI performance. For instance, human baselines in many evaluations
have small or biased samples (Liao et al., 2021; McIntosh
et al., 2024), apply different instruments than those used in
AI evaluation (Tedeschi et al., 2023), or fail to control for
confounding variables (Cowley et al., 2022). In addition,
published evaluations commonly omit study details necessary for assessing baseline validity, such as how participants
were recruited or how questions were administered (Section
4.5). Measurement theory, a methodological field in the so-

*

Equal contribution 1 Technology & Security Policy Fellow,
RAND, Santa Monica, CA, USA. Views, opinions, findings,
conclusions, & recommendations contained herein are the authors’ alone and not those of RAND or its research sponsors,
clients, or grantors. 2 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Independent 4 Algoverse 5 Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
6
Max Planck School of Cognition, Leipzig, Germany 7 Center for
Democracy & Technology, Washington, D.C., USA. Correspondence to: Kevin L. Wei <kevinwei@acm.org>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

