The Perils of Optimizing Learned Reward Functions:
Low Training Error Does Not Guarantee Low Regret

Lukas Fluri * 1 Leon Lang * 2 Alessandro Abate 3 Patrick Forré 2 David Krueger 4 Joar Skalse 3

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, specifying reward functions that capture the intended task can be very
challenging. Reward learning aims to address this
issue by learning the reward function. However, a
learned reward model may have a low error on the
data distribution, and yet subsequently produce
a policy with large regret. We say that such a
reward model has an error-regret mismatch. The
main source of an error-regret mismatch is the
distributional shift that commonly occurs during
policy optimization. In this paper, we mathematically show that a sufficiently low expected test
error of the reward model guarantees low worstcase regret, but that for any fixed expected test
error, there exist realistic data distributions that
allow for error-regret mismatch to occur. We then
show that similar problems persist even when using policy regularization techniques, commonly
employed in methods such as RLHF. We hope
our results stimulate the theoretical and empirical study of improved methods to learn reward
models, and better ways to measure their quality
reliably.

Figure 1. Reward models (red function) are commonly trained by
supervised learning to approximate some latent, true reward (blue
function). Given enough data, one can hope that the reward model
is close to the true reward function on average over the training
data distribution (upper gray layer) — the expected error is low.
However, low expected error only guarantees a good approximation to the true reward function in areas with high coverage by
the data distribution! Optimizing an RL policy to maximize the
learned reward model then induces a distribution shift which can
lead the policy to exploit uncertainties of the learned reward model
in low-probability areas of the transition space (lower gray layer).
In the worst case, this can lead to high regret. We refer to this
phenomenon as error-regret mismatch.

algorithms (e.g. Ng & Russell (2000); Tung et al. (2018);
Brown & Niekum (2019); Palan et al. (2019)), with one of
the most popular being reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
To solve a sequential decision problem with reinforcement
learning (RL), we must first formalize that decision problem
using a reward function (Sutton & Barto, 2018). However,
for complex tasks, reward functions are often hard to specify correctly (Krakovna, 2020). To solve this problem, it is
increasingly popular to learn reward functions with reward
learning algorithms, instead of specifying the reward functions manually. There are many different reward learning

For any learning algorithm, it is a crucial question whether
or not that learning algorithm is guaranteed to converge to
a “good” solution. For example, in the case of supervised
learning for classification, it can be shown that a learning
algorithm that produces a model with a low empirical error
(i.e., training error) is likely to have a low expected error
(i.e., test error), given a sufficient amount of training data
and assuming that both the training data and the test data
is drawn i.i.d. from a single stationary distribution (Kearns
& Vazirani, 1994). In the case of supervised learning and
standard assumptions, we can therefore be confident that a
learning algorithm will converge to a good model, provided
that it is given a sufficient amount of training data.

*
Equal contribution 1 ETH Zurich 2 University of Amsterdam 3 Oxford University 4 University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Lukas Fluri <lukas.fluri@inf.ethz.ch>, Leon Lang
<l.lang@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Since reward models are also typically learned by supervised
1

