Discovering a Zero
(Zero-Vector Class of Machine Learning)

Harikrishna Metta 1 R. Venkatesh Babu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

There are many techniques in Machine learning that allow
data classification, one such contraption is the Neural Network. A general technique used in the data classification
is the following. Find a separating hyper-surface between
classes such that functional value of data points belong to
same class when substituted in the hyper-surface equations
resulting in a ‘similar’ sets of values. In Neural Networks
those set of values are called logits. The general technique,
with respect to Neural Networks, can be understood by
thinking the logit equations of a Neural Network as hypersurface equations, those logit values are passed though the
Sigmoid or Softmax layer. The similarity of the logits of
data points belonging to the same class is enforced by the
cross entropy loss.

In Machine learning, separating data into classes
is a very fundamental problem. A mathematical framework around the classes is presented in
this work to deepen the understanding of classes.
The classes are defined as vectors in a Vector
Space, where addition corresponds to the union
of classes, and scalar multiplication resembles
set complement of classes. The Zero-Vector in
the vector space corresponds to a class referred
to as the Metta-Class. This discovery enables
numerous applications. One such application,
termed ‘clear learning’ in this work, focuses on
learning the true nature (manifold) of the data instead of merely learning a boundary sufficient
for classification. Another application, called
‘unary class learning’, involves learning a single
class in isolation rather than learning by comparing two or more classes. Additionally, ‘set
operations on classes’ is another application highlighted in this work. Furthermore, Continual
Learning of classes is facilitated by smaller networks. The Metta-Class enables neural networks
to learn only the data manifold; therefore, it can
also be used for generation of new data. Results for the key applications are shown using the
MNIST dataset. To further strengthen the claims,
some results are also produced using the CIFAR10 and ImageNet-1k embeddings. The code supporting these applications is publicly available at:
github.com/hm-4/Metta-Class.

An example of decision boundaries of a neural network is
shown in the far-left subfigure of Figure 1. The feature
space in that subfigure is divided into two decision regions:
the lower half is classified as Class−2, indicated by the
green region, while the upper half is classified as Class−1,
represented by the red region. However, this dichotomization of the entire feature space into these two classes is not
accurate, as only a small portion of the space genuinely
belongs to Class−1 or Class−2. Therefore, the decision
regions depicted in the far-left subfigure of Figure 1 do not
accurately represent the true nature of the classes. A more
realistic representation of the decision regions can be seen
in the mid-subfigure of Figure 1.
If a neural network exhibits the decision regions as shown
in the mid-subfigure of Figure 1, these regions have particularly notable set properties. One such property is the
union of the regions: the union of the decision regions accurately represents the true nature of the combined class’s
decision region. Another property is the complement of the
decision region: as illustrated in the far-right subfigure of
Figure 1, the complement of a decision region accurately
represents the true complement of the class. These properties are essential, as they reflect the true characteristics
of the classes. Consequently, neural networks with such
well-defined decision regions for each class are desirable.

1

Vision and AI Lab (val.cds.iisc.ac.in), Department
of Computational and Data Sciences, Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore, INDIA. Correspondence to: Harikrishna Metta <hm.iisc.iitb@gmail.com>, R. Venkatesh Babu
<venky@iisc.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this work, classes are characterized in terms of the logit

1

