Attributes Shape the Embedding Space of Face Recognition Models

Pierrick Leroy* 1 Antonio Mastropietro* 2 Marco Nurisso* 1 3 Francesco Vaccarino 1

Abstract

space representing images such that pictures of the same
identity are closer in the embedding domain (Chopra et al.,
2005). Second, the usage of a triplet-loss, as in FaceNet
(Schroff et al., 2015), where anchors and negative samples
are compared to a target image to obtain the gradient driving
the embedding map training (Sankaranarayanan et al., 2016).
The third consists in equipping the embedding space of an
angular dissimilarity, so that it can be assimilated to a hypersphere, e.g., AM-Softmax (Wang et al., 2018a), SphereFace
(Liu et al., 2017), CosFace (Wang et al., 2018b), ArcFace
(Deng et al., 2019a), AdaFace (Kim et al., 2022).

Face Recognition (FR) tasks have made significant progress with the advent of Deep Neural Networks, particularly through margin-based
triplet losses that embed facial images into highdimensional feature spaces. During training, these
contrastive losses focus exclusively on identity
information as labels. However, we observe a
multiscale geometric structure emerging in the
embedding space, influenced by interpretable facial (e.g., hair color) and image attributes (e.g.,
contrast). We propose a geometric approach to
describe the dependence or invariance of FR models to these attributes and introduce a physicsinspired alignment metric. We evaluate the proposed metric on controlled, simplified models and
widely used FR models fine-tuned with synthetic
data for targeted attribute augmentation. Our findings reveal that the models exhibit varying degrees
of invariance across different attributes, providing insight into their strengths and weaknesses
and enabling deeper interpretability. Code available here: https://github.com/mantonios107/attrsfr-embs.

However, our understanding and interpretation of the
structure of the embedding space learned by an FR
model remain significantly underdeveloped. Unlike interpretable attributes, deep face representations exist in a highdimensional space, making it difficult to discern the specific
properties they encode (O’Toole et al., 2018). The problem
is further aggravated by the potential high risks associated
with the social impact of FR technologies. The black-box
nature of these embeddings raises concerns about bias, fairness, and security vulnerabilities (Mery, 2022; Gong et al.,
2020). Previous studies have attempted to analyze these
embeddings from different perspectives: Yin et al. (2019)
introduced a spatial activation diversity loss to encourage the
network to learn structured face representations, ensuring
that different filters respond to semantically meaningful facial parts such as the eyes, nose, and jaw; On the other hand,
Lin et al. (2021) proposed the xCos metric, which provides
spatially interpretable similarity maps for face verification,
whereas (Diniz & Schwartz, 2020) investigates how well
the attribute is implicitly learned by neural network layers.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) models have achieved state-of-the-art
performance for Face Recognition (FR) tasks, due to increased availability of curated datasets (Deng et al., 2019b)
and improved recognition architectures and losses (Deng
et al., 2022). In the challenging open-set scenario, novel
face identities can appear at testing time, hence the problem
is framed as a metric learning task (Liu et al., 2017). There
are three main innovation to reach outstanding FR results in
this scenario. The first consists of learning an embedding

A more recent line of research focuses on reconstructing
facial attributes from embeddings to understand what information is retained in the learned representations. Ren et al.
(2024) developed a two-stage attribute recovery framework,
which reconstructs facial images from the embedding space
and then quantifies the significance of facial attributes within
the representation. Their analysis indicates that FR models prioritize encoding shape-related attributes (i.e., jawline
and facial proportions) over transient factors like expression
and head pose. This aligns with findings that deep models
tend to discard non-essential variations in favor of stable,
identity-specific features (Yin et al., 2019). Other studies
focus on the best camera angle to avoid bias in facial im-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy 3 CENTAI Institute,
Turin, Italy. Correspondence to: Antonio Mastropietro <antonio.mastropietro@di.unipi.it>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

