Contour Integration Underlies Human-Like Vision

Ben Lonnqvist 1 Elsa Scialom * 1 Abdulkadir Gokce * 1 Zehra Merchant 1 Michael H. Herzog 1
Martin Schrimpf 1

Abstract
Despite the tremendous success of deep learning
in computer vision, models still fall behind humans in generalizing to new input distributions.
Existing benchmarks do not investigate the specific failure points of models by analyzing performance under many controlled conditions. Our
study systematically dissects where and why models struggle with contour integration – a hallmark
of human vision – by designing an experiment
that tests object recognition under various levels
of object fragmentation. Humans (n=50) perform
at high accuracy, even with few object contours
present. This is in contrast to models which exhibit substantially lower sensitivity to increasing
object contours, with most of the over 1,000 models we tested barely performing above chance.
Only at very large scales (∼ 5B training dataset
size) do models begin to approach human performance. Importantly, humans exhibit an integration bias – a preference towards recognizing objects made up of directional fragments over directionless fragments. We find that not only do models that share this property perform better at our
task, but that this bias also increases with model
training dataset size, and training models to exhibit contour integration leads to high shape bias.
Taken together, our results suggest that contour
integration is a hallmark of object vision that underlies object recognition performance, and may
be a mechanism learned from data at scale.

Figure 1. Human and DNN categorization of (left): a standard
RGB image. (Middle): a contour-extracted image. (Right): a
fragmented image requiring contour integration. The vast majority
of over 1,000 tested models catastrophically fail at a categorization
task the moment object contours are fragmented.

ments. You would most likely have no trouble recognizing
the drawing as a pan – after all, your visual systems ”fills
in the blanks” and allows you to see the pan regardless of
its fragmentation (Figure 1). This is an example of contour
integration, a well-established mechanism in the primate
brain, whereby disconnected elements are integrated into a
continuous form, enabling recognition. Contour integration
is highly relevant to naturalistic vision due to the number of
occlusions in the natural environment, and it yet remains unclear as to why the human brain is so robust to this particular
type of image perturbation.
While deep neural networks (DNNs) reach superhuman performance at standard image recognition benchmarks like
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), their generalization capabilities to unseen image distribution shifts lags behind human generalization capabilities (Geirhos et al., 2021; Baker
et al., 2018; Bowers et al., 2023; Biscione & Bowers, 2023;
Malhotra et al., 2022; Muttenthaler et al., 2023; Malhotra
et al., 2023). Despite this large body of evidence suggesting
differences between human and model generalization capabilities, the causes behind the differences remain unclear.

1. Introduction
Picture a simple drawing of a pan where most of its contours are erased, leaving only a set of disconnected frag*

Equal second authors 1 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ben Lonnqvist
<benhlonnqvist@gmail.com>.

A key reason for the difficulty in understanding model failures is a lack of systematic studies that investigate individual
well-established mechanisms in the primate brain. By lack
of systematicity we mean that studies typically fall short
on one of two axes: first, they may not investigate a set

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

