One Leaf Reveals the Season: Occlusion-Based Contrastive Learning with
Semantic-Aware Views for Efficient Visual Representation

Xiaoyu Yang 1 Lijian Xu 1 2 Hongsheng Li 3 Shaoting Zhang 2 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a key approach for building world models, especially for pre-training vision models
(Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2022; Bao et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b).
Its strength lies in learning versatile visual representations
without relying on human annotations. Currently, the two
main paradigms in visual SSL are Masked Image Modeling (MIM) (He et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Kong
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2023) and
Contrastive Learning (CL) (Chen et al., 2020a). Both have
shown strong scalability, particularly for Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).

This paper proposes a scalable and straightforward pre-training paradigm for efficient visual
conceptual representation called occluded image
contrastive learning (OCL). Our OCL approach
is simple: we randomly mask patches to generate different views within an image and contrast
them among a mini-batch of images. The core
idea behind OCL consists of two designs. First,
masked tokens have the potential to significantly
diminish the conceptual redundancy inherent in
images, and create distinct views with substantial fine-grained differences on the semantic concept level instead of the instance level. Second,
contrastive learning is adept at extracting highlevel semantic conceptual features during the pretraining, circumventing the high-frequency interference and additional costs associated with image
reconstruction. Importantly, OCL learns highly
semantic conceptual representations efficiently
without relying on hand-crafted data augmentations or additional auxiliary modules. Empirically, OCL demonstrates high scalability with
Vision Transformers, as the ViT-L/16 can complete pre-training in 133 hours using only 4 A100
GPUs, achieving 85.8% accuracy in downstream
fine-tuning tasks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/XiaoyuYoung/OCL.

Despite the success of existing methods, both MIM and
CL struggle to achieve efficient visual representation. MIM
focuses heavily on pixel-level reconstruction, which often
prioritizes local details over high-level semantic concepts.
Similarly, CL suffers from conceptual redundancy, where
transformed images may lack meaningful differences. This
raises a critical question: How can we bridge the gap between efficient visual representation and effective conceptual pre-training, overcoming the limitations of current MIM
and CL approaches?
To address this question, we first revisit the two main pretraining paradigms: MIM and CL. MIM learns visual representations by reconstructing masked image patches (see
Fig.1b). Notable examples include BEiT (Bao et al., 2021)
and MAE (He et al., 2022). MAE highlights that images
contain significant semantic redundancy, meaning only a basic understanding of objects and scenes is needed to predict
missing patches from their surroundings. However, pixellevel reconstruction is too detailed for pre-training vision
models. It focuses excessively on high-frequency details
and local features, conflicting with the goal of pre-training:
learning high-level semantic concepts. While this detailed
task helps models learn visual representations, it comes at
the cost of pre-training efficiency.

Xiaoyu Yang conducted this work during an internship at Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. 1 Shenzhen University
of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence, the Chinese University of Hong
Kong, China 3 Department of Electronic Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China 4 SenseTime
Research, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Lijian Xu
<bmexlj@gmail.com>.

In CL, the core idea is simple: maximize agreement between different views of the same image (see Fig.1a). Popular methods like SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a;b), MoCo
v3 (Chen et al.), and DINO (Caron et al., 2021) use com-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

