Scaling Laws in Patchification: An Image Is Worth 50,176 Tokens And More

Feng Wang 1 Yaodong Yu 2 Wei Shao 3 Yuyin Zhou 4 Alan Yuille 1 Cihang Xie 4

Abstract

a series of visual foundation models learned with this plain
architecture achieving highly competitive performance and
establishing effective connections to other modalities such
as natural language (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Caron et al.,
2021; Radford et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022a; Rombach et al.,
2022; Kirillov et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). A key insight
behind the ViT-like architectures lies in a compressive encoding paradigm: instead of directly processing raw pixels
that introduces significant complexity, these architectures
leverage a patchification layer to compress images into spatially smaller feature maps, making the representation space
of an image roughly equivalent to that of a medium-length
text consisting of a few hundred tokens.

Since the introduction of Vision Transformer
(ViT), patchification has long been regarded as
a de facto image tokenization approach for plain
visual architectures. By compressing the spatial size of images, this approach can effectively
shorten the token sequence and reduce the computational cost of ViT-like plain architectures. In
this work, we aim to thoroughly examine the information loss caused by this patchification-based
compressive encoding paradigm and how it affects visual understanding. We conduct extensive patch size scaling experiments and excitedly
observe an intriguing scaling law in patchification: the models can consistently benefit from
decreased patch sizes and attain improved predictive performance, until it reaches the minimum
patch size of 1×1, i.e., pixel tokenization. This
conclusion is broadly applicable across different
vision tasks, various input scales, and diverse architectures such as ViT and the recent Mamba
models. Moreover, as a by-product, we discover
that with smaller patches, task-specific decoder
heads become less critical for dense prediction. In
the experiments, we successfully scale up the visual sequence to an exceptional length of 50,176
tokens, achieving a competitive test accuracy of
84.6% with a base-sized model on the ImageNet1k benchmark. We hope this study can provide
insights and theoretical foundations for future
works of building non-compressive vision models.
Code is available at https://github.com/
wangf3014/Patch_Scaling.

However, we argue that this operation often incurs irreversible information loss to visual inputs. For example, intuitively, we believe the information contained in a 224×224
resolution image is generally much richer than that in a text
consisting of 196 words; however they have nearly the same
size of representation space under a ViT encoder with patch
size 16×16 (we suppose the vision and language encoders
share the same embedding dimension). The difference in
information content between visual and textual data can also
be directly reflected in their storage requirements: storing an
uncompressed 24-bit, 224×224 resolution image requires
approximately 147KB, whereas storing a 196-word text only
needs about 1.15KB. Empirically, if we manually reduce the
compression rate, for example, by changing the patch size
of DeiT-Base from 16×16 to 8×8, we can observe a significant accuracy improvement from 81.8% to 83.5% on the
ImageNet-1k classification benchmark (Deng et al., 2009).
Nonetheless, since the computation of self-attention scales
quadratically with sequence length, ViT architectures are
sensitive to the patch size. At the time when ViT was first
introduced in late 2020, it needed to ensure that its computational cost was comparable to that of the CNN counterparts;
and given the computational capacity at that time, the models had to be computationally manageable in terms of memory consumption and training time, especially when trained
with the medium-resolution, medium-scale ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009) and beyond (Sun et al., 2017). As a result, the
architectural design of ViT had to compromise with a compressive encoding paradigm achieved through patchification.
The success of this design, patchification with a typical
16×16-pixel kernel, has led to its widespread adoption as

1. Introduction
In the past few years, we have witnessed the great success of
Vision Transformers (ViTs) in representation learning, with
1

Johns Hopkins University 2 UC Berkeley 3 University of
Florida 4 UC Santa Cruz. Correspondence to: Cihang Xie
<cixie@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

