Flexible Tails for Normalizing Flows

Tennessee Hickling * 1 Dennis Prangle * 1

Abstract
Normalizing flows are a flexible class of probability distributions, expressed as transformations of a
simple base distribution. A limitation of standard
normalizing flows is representing distributions
with heavy tails, which arise in applications to
both density estimation and variational inference.
A popular current solution to this problem is to
use a heavy tailed base distribution. We argue this
can lead to poor performance due to the difficulty
of optimising neural networks, such as normalizing flows, under heavy tailed input. We propose
an alternative, “tail transform flow” (TTF), which
uses a Gaussian base distribution and a final transformation layer which can produce heavy tails.
Experimental results show this approach outperforms current methods, especially when the target
distribution has large dimension or tail weight.

Figure 1: Our method models extremes in the final layer,
not the base distribution.

Modelling distributions with heavy tails is critical in many
applications such as climate (Zscheischler et al., 2018), contagious diseases (Cirillo & Taleb, 2020) and finance (Gilli
& Këllezi, 2006). Indeed, in the context of density estimation, results from extreme value theory (EVT) (Coles, 2001;
Embrechts et al., 2013) show distributional tails can often
be modelled using a particular heavy tailed distribution, the
generalized Pareto distribution (GPD). Heavy tailed targets
can also arise naturally in Bayesian inference, requiring
heavy tailed approximate distributions in variational inference (Liang et al., 2022) —and providing challenges for
MCMC methods (see e.g. Yang et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
A normalizing flow (NF) expresses a complex probability
distribution as a parameterised transformation of a simpler
base distribution. A NF sample is
x = T (z; θ),

(1)

where z is a sample from the base distribution, typically
N (0, I). A number of transformations have been proposed
which produce flexible and tractable distributions. Typically
multiple transformations are composed to form T with the
desired level of flexibility. Applications include density
estimation (fitting a transformation to observed data points)
and variational inference (fitting a transformation to a target
distribution). In either case θ, the parameters controlling T ,
can be optimised using stochastic gradient methods for a
suitable objective function. For reviews of NFs see Kobyzev
et al. (2020) and Papamakarios et al. (2021).

However standard NFs do not model heavy tails well. In
particular, Jaini et al. (2020) prove that Gaussian tails cannot
be mapped to GPD tails under Lipschitz transformations.
(This is a special case of their main result, which we include
as Theorem 1.2 below.) Many NFs use Lipschitz transformations of Gaussian base distributions, implying they
produce distributions poorly approximating heavy tailed
distributions.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics, University of
Bristol, Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Tennessee Hickling <tennessee.hickling@bristol.ac.uk>.

Based on this result, several authors have proposed using
heavy tailed base distributions. This includes the tail adaptive flow (TAF) methods of Laszkiewicz et al. (2022) for
density estimation, and similar methods for variational inference (Liang et al., 2022). We argue that using heavy tailed

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

