Understanding and Improving Length Generalization in Recurrent Models

Ricardo Buitrago Ruiz 1 2 Albert Gu 1 2

Abstract

tion to matching the performance of Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) across many tasks, the recurrent mechanism
brings two benefits: the ability to efficiently process long
sequences thanks to its linear complexity, and the capacity
to easily process tokens beyond their training context by
simply rolling out the state. Nevertheless, in practice these
benefits are often unrealized, given that their performance
can drop considerably when the sequence length exceeds
their training context (Waleffe et al., 2024; Ben-Kish et al.,
2024; Ye et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2024). This naturally leads
to two questions: (1) why do these models fail to length
generalize? and (2) how can we efficiently enable length
generalization across several recurrent models?

Recently, recurrent models such as state space
models and linear attention have become popular due to their linear complexity in the sequence
length. Thanks to their recurrent nature, in principle they can process arbitrarily long sequences,
but their performance sometimes drops considerably beyond their training context lengths—i.e.
they fail to length generalize. In this work, we
provide comprehensive empirical and theoretical
analysis to support the unexplored states hypothesis, which posits that models fail to length generalize when during training they are only exposed
to a limited subset of the distribution of all attainable states (i.e. states that would be attained
if the recurrence was applied to long sequences).
Furthermore, we investigate simple training interventions that aim to increase the coverage of
the states that the model is trained on, e.g. by
initializing the state with Gaussian noise or with
the final state of a different input sequence. With
only 500 post-training steps (∼ 0.1% of the pretraining budget), these interventions enable length
generalization for sequences that are orders of
magnitude longer than the training context (e.g.
2k −→ 128k) and show improved performance
in long context tasks, thus presenting a simple and
efficient way to enable robust length generalization in general recurrent models.

Recently, some works have studied the length generalization
of Mamba (Dao & Gu, 2024) and have proposed solutions
such as forcing the model to forget previous context (Chen
et al., 2024b) or skipping tokens in the state update to reduce
the effective context of the processed sequence (Ye et al.,
2025; Ben-Kish et al., 2024). However, these methods require changing the internal mechanism of Mamba and might
not be easily transferable to other architectures. Other works
have linked length generalization to state capacity and overfitting (Wang, 2024; Chen et al., 2024b), proposing training
on longer sequences and with Truncated Backpropagation
Through Time (TBTT) (Williams & Peng, 1990; Sutskever,
2013) as a way to enable length generalization. In this work,
we reason about the distribution of states that the model is
trained on to introduce a precise hypothesis that explains
why recurrent models fail to length generalize. Moreover,
we perform comprehensive interventions that elucidate on
what distributions recurrent models need to be trained to
enable length generalization.

1. Introduction

More concretely, we propose the unexplored states hypothesis, which suggests that models fail to length generalize
when their recurrence applied to long sequences produces state distributions that have not been explored
during training. We support this hypothesis through several experiments and additionally introduce Effective Remembrance, a novel metric that measures the impact of
previous parts of the context in the output of the model. We
find out that models that fail to length generalize are disproportionately impacted by the initial tokens of the sequence,
suggesting that these models overfit to states produced early
in the sequence when they are trained on short contexts with

Recurrent architectures like state space models (Gu et al.,
2022; Smith et al., 2023; Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024)
and linear attention variants (Katharopoulos et al., 2020;
Peng et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024b;c) compress the previous context of a sequence into a state, with each output
depending on previous tokens only through the state. In addi1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Cartesia AI. Correspondence to:
Ricardo Buitrago Ruiz <ricardobuitragoruiz@hotmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

