Hyperbolic-PDE GNN: Spectral Graph Neural Networks in the Perspective of
A System of Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations

Juwei Yue 1 2 Haikuo Li 1 2 Jiawei Sheng 1 2 Xiaodong Li 1 2 Taoyu Su 1 2 Tingwen Liu 1 2 Li Guo 1 2

Abstract

Table 1. Comparison between traditional MP-based (Line 1) and
hyperbolic PDE-based (Line 2) paradigm, where e is the unit
vector, λ and u are the eigenvalue and eigenvector of Laplacian.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) leverage message
passing mechanisms to learn the topological features of graph data. Traditional GNNs learns node
features in a spatial domain unrelated to the topology, which can hardly ensure topological features.
In this paper, we formulates message passing as a
system of hyperbolic partial differential equations
(hyperbolic PDEs), constituting a dynamical system that explicitly maps node representations into
a particular solution space. This solution space is
spanned by a set of eigenvectors describing the
topological structure of graphs. Within this system, for any moment in time, a node features can
be decomposed into a superposition of the basis
of eigenvectors. This not only enhances the interpretability of message passing but also enables
the explicit extraction of fundamental characteristics about the topological structure. Furthermore, by solving this system of hyperbolic partial differential equations, we establish a connection with spectral graph neural networks (spectral
GNNs), serving as a message passing enhancement paradigm for spectral GNNs. We further introduce polynomials to approximate arbitrary filter functions. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the paradigm of hyperbolic PDEs not only
exhibits strong flexibility but also significantly
enhances the performance of various spectral
GNNs across diverse graph tasks. Our code is released at https://github.com/YueAWu/
Hyperbolic-GNN.

(1)
(2)

Paradigm




(l)
(l)
(l)
= Ui hi , Aj Mij hi , hj , eij


In
0
∂2X
l
= a2 b
LX → dw
=
dt
∂t2
b wl
0 a2 L

Bases of Solution Space

(l+1)

hi

e1 , e2 , . . . , ed
′

′

′

eλ1 t u′1 , eλ2 t u′2 , . . . , eλ2n t u′2n

1. Introduction
Currently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2021)
have experienced rapid development due to the widespread
usage of graph data. They have not only achieved significant
advancements in artificial intelligence fields such as recommendation systems (Wu et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2025),
social networks (Lin et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2023), and
anomaly detection (Ma et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023), but
have also promoted progress in various other domains such
as particle physics (Shlomi et al., 2021) and drug discovery (Gaudelet et al., 2021).
Mainstream methods are spectral GNNs represented by
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017). The key idea of these methods is to utilize message passing (MP) (Gilmer et al., 2017)
to explore the topological features of the graphs. Specifically, MP aggregates information from neighbors based on
the topology of graphs. The essence of MP involves mapping node features into the spatial domain to the spectral
domain through Fourier transformation, performing graph
convolutions in the spectral domain, and then inversely transforming them back into the spatial domain. However, the
issue lies in the fact that, even if node features learn the
topology of the graph, they are still mapped back to a spatial
domain unrelated to the topology. As shown in Table 1,
traditional MP-based GNNs obtain node feature vectors that
are actually situated in the Euclidean space with unit vector
bases, which can hardly ensure topological feature therein,
potentially learning redundant information. (In contrast,
our hyperbolic PDE-based model derives node feature vectors with bases stemmed from Laplacian, incorporating the
underlying topological information. Detailed later.)

1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School of Cyber Security, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Jiawei Sheng <shengjiawei@iie.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Current researches (Rusch et al., 2022; Chamberlain et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2024) model MP using differential equa1

