Shielded Diffusion: Generating Novel and Diverse Images
using Sparse Repellency

Michael Kirchhof 1 2 James Thornton 1 Louis Béthune 1 Pierre Ablin 1 Eugene Ndiaye 1 Marco Cuturi 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Diffusion models (Song et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020) are
by now widely used for engineering and scientific tasks, to
generate realistic signals (Esser et al., 2024) or structured
data (Jo et al., 2022; Chamberlain et al., 2021). Diffusion
models build upon a strong theoretical foundation used to
guide parameter tuning (Kingma & Gao, 2023) and network architectures (Rombach et al., 2022), and are widely
adopted thanks to cutting-edge open-source implementations. As these models gain applicability to a wide range
of problems, their deployment reveals important challenges.
In the specific area of text-to-image diffusion (Nichol et al.,
2022; Saharia et al., 2022), these challenges can range from
an expensive compute budget (Salimans & Ho, 2022) to a
lack of diversity (Ho & Salimans, 2022; Shipard et al., 2023)
and/or fairness (Cho et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2024).

The adoption of text-to-image diffusion models
raises concerns over reliability, drawing scrutiny
under the lens of various metrics like calibration,
fairness, or compute efficiency. We focus in this
work on two issues that arise when deploying
these models: a lack of diversity when prompting images, and a tendency to recreate images
from the training set. To solve both problems, we
propose a method that coaxes the sampled trajectories of pretrained diffusion models to land on
images that fall outside of a reference set. We
achieve this by adding repellency terms to the diffusion SDE throughout the generation trajectory,
which are triggered whenever the path is expected
to land too closely to an image in the shielded reference set. Our method is sparse in the sense that
these repellency terms are zero and inactive most
of the time, and even more so towards the end
of the generation trajectory. Our method, named
SPELL for sparse repellency, can be used either
with a static reference set that contains protected
images, or dynamically, by updating the set at
each timestep with the expected images concurrently generated within a batch, and with the images of previously generated batches. We show
that adding SPELL to popular diffusion models
improves their diversity while impacting their FID
only marginally, and performs comparatively better than other recent training-free diversity methods. We also demonstrate how SPELL can ensure
a shielded generation away from a very large set
of protected images by considering all 1.2M images from ImageNet as the protected set.

Controllable Generation. We focus on the problem of ensuring that images obtained from a model are sufficiently
different from a reference set. This covers two important
use-cases: (i) the purveyor of the model wants images generated with its model to fall outside of a reference set of protected images; (ii) the end-user wants high diversity when
generating multiple images with the same prompt, in which
case the reference set could consist of all previously generated images, or even other images generated concurrently in
a batch. While the problem of avoiding generating images in
a protected training set (Carlini et al., 2023) originates naturally when deploying products, that of achieving diversity
within a batch of generated images with the same prompt
should not arise, in theory, if diffusion models were perfectly trained. However, as shown for instance by Sadat et al.
(2024), state-of-the-art models that incorporate classifierfree guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022, CFG) do a very good
job at outputting a first picture when provided with a prompt,
but will typically resort to slight variations of that same image when re-prompted multiple times. This phenomenon
is illustrated in Figure 1 for three popular diffusion models, Stable Diffusion 3 (Esser et al., 2024), Simple Diffusion
(Hoogeboom et al., 2023) and MDTv2 (Gao et al., 2023).

1
Apple 2 University of Tübingen. Correspondence to: Michael
Kirchhof <Contact info see website>.

Contributions. We propose a guidance mechanism coined
sparse repellency (SPELL), which repels the backward diffusion at generation time away from a reference set of images.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

