Test-Time Multimodal Backdoor Detection by Contrastive Prompting

Yuwei Niu * 1 Shuo He * 2 Qi Wei 2 Zongyu Wu 3 Feng Liu 4 Lei Feng 5

Abstract

served as foundation models in various vision-language
fields due to their strong ability to effectively align representations from different modalities, such as open-vocabulary
object detection (Wu et al., 2023), text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022), and video understanding (Xu
et al., 2021). However, recent research has revealed that
a small proportion of backdoor samples poisoned into the
pre-training data can cause a backdoored CLIP after the multimodal contrastive pre-training procedure (Carlini & Terzis,
2021; Carlini et al., 2023; Bansal et al., 2023). In the inference stage, a backdoored CLIP would produce tampered
image representations for images with a trigger, close to
the text representation of the target attack class in zero-shot
classification. This exposes a serious threat when deploying
CLIP in real-world applications.

While multimodal contrastive learning methods
(e.g., CLIP) can achieve impressive zero-shot classification performance, recent research has revealed that these methods are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. To defend against backdoor attacks
on CLIP, existing defense methods focus on either the pre-training stage or the fine-tuning stage,
which would unfortunately cause high computational costs due to numerous parameter updates
and are not applicable in black-box settings. In
this paper, we provide the first attempt at a computationally efficient backdoor detection method to
defend against backdoored CLIP in the inference
stage. We empirically find that the visual representations of backdoored images are insensitive to
benign and malignant changes in class description
texts. Motivated by this observation, we propose
BDetCLIP, a novel test-time backdoor detection
method based on contrastive prompting. Specifically, we first prompt a language model (e.g.,
GPT-4) to produce class-related description texts
(benign) and class-perturbed random texts (malignant) by specially designed instructions. Then,
the distribution difference in cosine similarity between images and the two types of class description texts can be used as the criterion to detect
backdoor samples. Extensive experiments validate that our proposed BDetCLIP is superior to
state-of-the-art backdoor detection methods, in
terms of both effectiveness and efficiency.

To overcome this issue, effective defense methods have been
proposed recently, which can be divided into three kinds
of defense paradigms, as shown in Figure 1: including (a)
robust anti-backdoor contrastive learning in the pre-training
stage (Yang et al., 2023b), (b) counteracting the backdoor
in a pre-trained CLIP in the fine-tuning stage (Bansal et al.,
2023), (c) leveraging trigger inversion techniques to decide
if a pre-trained CLIP is backdoored (Sur et al., 2023; Feng
et al., 2023a). Overall, these defense methods have a high
computational cost due to the need for additional learning or
optimization procedures. In contrast, we advocate test-time
backdoor sample detection (Figure 1(d)), which is a more
computationally efficient defense against backdoored CLIP,
as there are no parameter updates in the inference stage.
Intuitively, it could be feasible to directly adapt existing unimodal test-time detection methods (Gao et al., 2019; Guo
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) to detect backdoored images in
CLIP, since they can differentiate backdoored and clean images generally based on the output consistency in the visual
representation space by employing specific image modifications, e.g, corrupting (Liu et al., 2023), amplifying (Guo
et al., 2023), and blending (Gao et al., 2019). However, the
performance of these unimodal detection methods is suboptimal, because of lacking the utilization of the text modality
in CLIP to assist backdoor sample detection. Hence we can
expect that better performance could be further achieved if
we leverage both image and text modalities simultaneously.

1. Introduction
Multimodal contrastive learning methods (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)) have shown impressive zero-shot classification performance in various downstream tasks and
*
Equal contribution 1 Chongqing University 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Penn State University 4 University of Melbourne 5 Southeast University. Correspondence to: Lei Feng <fenglei@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we provide the first attempt at a computationally efficient backdoor detection method to defend against
1

