Adaptive Flow Matching for Resolving Small-Scale Physics

Stathi Fotiadis∗ 1 Noah D Brenowitz 2 Tomas Geffner 2 Yair Cohen 2 Michael Pritchard 2 Arash Vahdat† 2
Morteza Mardani† 2
∗

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
†
Equal advising.

Abstract

has recently been extended to super-resolving small-scale
physics (Aich et al., 2024; Ling et al., 2024). However, this
task faces significant challenges: (C1) Input and target data
are often spatially misaligned due to distinct PDE solutions operating at various resolutions, leading to divergent
trajectories. For instance, the eye-of-typhoon is spatially
misaligned between low and high resolution in CWA data
due to different dynamical models used to simulate each
scale (see Figure 1). Additionally, the input and target variables (channels) often represent different physical quantities, causing further misalignment. (C2) the data exhibit
multiscale dynamics, where certain large-scale processes
are more deterministic (e.g. the propagation of midlatitude
storms), while small-scale physics, such as thunderstorms,
are highly stochastic; and (C3) the record of Earth observations is limited compared to natural image datasets.

Conditional diffusion and flow-based models
can super-resolve small-scale details in natural images, but weather and other physical domains face three unique challenges: (i) spatially misaligned inputs and outputs (different
PDE resolutions yield divergent trajectories), (ii)
mismatched and distinct input-output channels
(channel synthesis), and (iii) channel-dependent
stochasticity. To address these challenges, we
first encode the inputs into a latent base distribution that reconstructs the large-scale and
more deterministic parts of the target. Next,
we handle the remaining uncertainty by injecting noise via an adaptive noise scaling mechanism, informed by maximum-likelihood estimates of the encoder’s RMSE. Finally, we apply Flow Matching to refine the latent state and
add fine-scale physics. Experiments on realworld weather data (e.g., 25 km to 2 km superresolution in Taiwan) and synthetic Kolmogorov
flow indicate that our Adaptive Flow Matching
(AFM) framework provides improvements over
prior baselines—particularly for more stochastic channels—and consistently achieves bettercalibrated ensembles.

Few efforts have been made to directly address these challenges in generative learning. Prior work typically relies
on residual learning approaches (Mardani et al., 2023). For
instance, the method proposed in (Mardani et al., 2023) introduces a two-stage process where the deterministic component is first learned through regression, followed by applying diffusion on the residuals to capture the small-scale
physics. While this approach offers a way to separate deterministic and stochastic components, it poses a significant
risk of overfitting. The initial regression stage may overfit the training data, and thus fails to adequately represent
the variability of the small-scale dynamics when training
the diffusion model in the second stage (see Appendix A).
Additionally, this two-stage method lacks a principled way
to handle the uncertainty inherent in both the deterministic
and stochastic components.

1. Introduction
Resolving small-scale physics is crucial in many scientific
applications (Wilby et al., 1998; Rampal et al., 2022; 2024).
For instance, in atmospheric sciences, accurately capturing
small-scale dynamics is essential for local planning and
disaster mitigation. The success of conditional diffusion
models in super-resolving natural images and videos (Song
et al., 2021; Batzolis et al., 2021; Hoogeboom et al., 2023)

To address these limitations, we propose an end-to-end approach based on Flow Matching. The key elements of our
method are as follows: First, an encoder maps the coarseresolution input data to a latent space that is closer to the
target fine-resolution distribution. Flow matching is then
applied starting from this encoded distribution to generate
the target distribution. The encoder captures the deterministic component, which is then augmented with noise to in-

1
Imperial College London 2 NVIDIA. Correspondence to:
Morteza Mardani <mmardani@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

