Adaptive Median Smoothing: Adversarial Defense for
Unlearned Text-to-Image Diffusion Models at Inference Time

Xiaoxuan Han 1 2 Songlin Yang 3 Wei Wang 1 Yang Li 1 2 Jing Dong 1

Abstract

(

added
by authors)

“girl
romantic
boudope
guereau”

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have raised
concerns about generating inappropriate content,
such as “nudity”. Despite efforts to erase undesirable concepts through unlearning techniques,
these unlearned models remain vulnerable to adversarial inputs that can potentially regenerate
such content. To safeguard unlearned models, we
propose a novel inference-time defense strategy
that mitigates the impact of adversarial inputs.
Specifically, we first reformulate the challenge of
ensuring robustness in unlearned diffusion models
as a robust regression problem. Building upon the
naive median smoothing for regression robustness,
which employs isotropic Gaussian noise, we develop a generalized median smoothing framework
that incorporates anisotropic noise. Based on this
framework, we introduce a token-wise Adaptive
Median Smoothing method that dynamically adjusts noise intensity according to each token’s relevance to target concepts. Furthermore, to improve
inference efficiency, we explore implementations
of this adaptive method at the text-encoding stage.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach enhances adversarial robustness while preserving model utility and inference efficiency, outperforming baseline defense techniques.

Benign
Input

Original
Model
Unlearning

Unlearned
Model

Unlearned
Model

“girl
erotic
boudope
guereau”
Adversarial
Input

Defense

Unlearned
Model

Figure 1. Introduction to task setting: concept unlearning and adversarial vulnerability in unlearned text-to-image diffusion models.

images since the training datasets contain unfiltered unsafe
images, which enables the model to learn and reproduce
such content. For example, they can generate Not Safe For
Work (NSFW) content, such as nudity and violence. The
ease of generating and disseminating such unsafe images
via the Internet poses societal concerns.
To eliminate harmful content, a straightforward approach is
to retrain the model from scratch using filtered data. However, this is impractical due to the substantial computational
resources required. As an alternative, machine unlearning
techniques (Gandikota et al., 2023; Kumari et al., 2023) have
emerged as a promising way to erase target concepts from
model parameters without retraining. The unlearned model
can hardly generate the target concepts (as illustrated in the
left part of Figure 1). However, recent works (Chin et al.,
2024; Tsai et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024c) have shown that
these unlearned models remain vulnerable to adversarial
inputs (as shown in the right part of Figure 1). Therefore,
enhancing the adversarial robustness of unlearned models is
important for advancing their reliability.

1. Introduction

To enhance unlearning robustness, a mainstream approach
is to apply adversarial erasing (Kim et al., 2024; Gong et al.,
2024) during the unlearning process, akin to adversarial
training (Madry et al., 2018) in image classification tasks.
This method involves iteratively searching for and erasing
adversarial inputs, which increases computational costs and
can degrade the model’s utility for generating non-target
concepts. While adversarial erasing aims to identify and
erase inputs that restore the target concept, it cannot cover
all potential cases that may arise during inference, leaving a
possibility that some inputs could still recover the target concept. These limitations motivate us to explore an alternative
approach: incorporating defense mechanisms at inference

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Nichol et al.,
2022; Gu et al., 2022) have achieved remarkable progress
in generating diverse, high-quality images based on user
input prompts. But these models can generate inappropriate
1
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University.
Correspondence to: Wei Wang <wwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

