Behavior-Regularized Diffusion Policy Optimization
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Chen-Xiao Gao 1 Chenyang Wu 1 Mingjun Cao 1 Chenjun Xiao 2 Yang Yu 1 Zongzhang Zhang 1

Abstract

Deterministic Policy
Dataset
Actor Policy
Behavior Policy
Penalty

Behavior regularization, which constrains the policy to stay close to some behavior policy, is widely
used in offline reinforcement learning (RL) to
manage the risk of hazardous exploitation of unseen actions. Nevertheless, existing literature
on behavior-regularized RL primarily focuses on
explicit policy parameterizations, such as Gaussian policies. Consequently, it remains unclear
how to extend this framework to more advanced
policy parameterizations, such as diffusion models. In this paper, we introduce BDPO, a principled behavior-regularized RL framework tailored
for diffusion-based policies, thereby combining
the expressive power of diffusion policies and
the robustness provided by regularization. The
key ingredient of our method is to calculate the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization analytically
as the accumulated discrepancies in reverse-time
transition kernels along the diffusion trajectory.
By integrating the regularization, we develop an
efficient two-time-scale actor-critic RL algorithm
that produces the optimal policy while respecting
the behavior constraint. Comprehensive evaluations conducted on synthetic 2D tasks and continuous control tasks from the D4RL benchmark validate its effectiveness and superior performance.
The code and experiment results of BDPO are
available on the project webpage.

𝑄↓

𝑄↑

Diffusion Policy (BDPO)

𝑄↑

Dataset
Actor Diffusion Path
Actor Diffusion Direction
Behavior Diffusion Direction
Penalty

𝑄↓

Figure 1. Illustration of the behavior-regularized RL framework
with different policy parameterizations. Unimodal policies, such
as deterministic policies (left), compute the behavior as the center
of mass and therefore lead to misleading regularizations; while our
method (right) harnesses the flexibility of diffusion models, and
the regularization is calculated as the accumulated discrepancies
in diffusion directions of the actor and the behavior diffusion.

and generative model fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022), reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms typically require millions of online interactions with the environment to achieve
meaningful optimization (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Schulman
et al., 2017). Given that online interaction can be hazardous
and costly in certain scenarios, offline RL, which focuses
on optimizing policies with static datasets, emerges as a
practical and promising avenue (Levine et al., 2020).
However, without access to the real environment, RL algorithms tend to yield unrealistic value estimations for actions
that are absent from the dataset (Levine et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). Since RL necessitates querying the values of unseen actions to further refine its policy beyond the
dataset, it is prone to exploiting the values of those unseen
actions, leading to serious overestimation in value function.
To manage this risk, one predominant approach is to employ
behavior regularization (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2019; Tarasov et al., 2023), which augments
the usual RL objectives by incorporating penalty terms that
constrain the policy to remain close to the behavior policy
that collects the datasets. In this way, the policy is penalized
for choosing unreliable out-of-distribution (OOD) actions
and thus exercises the principle of pessimism in the face of
uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Despite its huge success in industrial applications such as
robotics (Kumar et al., 2021), game AI (Vinyals et al., 2019),
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China & School of Artificial Intelligence,
Nanjing University, China 2 The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Zongzhang Zhang
<zzzhang@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Most preliminary works in offline RL assume explicit policy distributions (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Haarnoja et al.,
1

