System-Aware Unlearning Algorithms:
Use Lesser, Forget Faster

Linda Lu 1 Ayush Sekhari 2 Karthik Sridharan 1

Abstract

personal information. Thus, concerns surrounding privacy
and data protection have become increasingly prominent
(Yao et al., 2024). These models, due to their high capacity to memorize patterns in the training data, may inadvertently retain and expose information about individual data
points (Carlini et al., 2021). This presents significant challenges in the context of privacy regulations such as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (2016)
(GDPR), California Consumer Privacy Act (2018) (CCPA),
and Canada’s proposed Consumer Privacy Protection Act,
all of which emphasize the “right to be forgotten”. As a
result, there is a growing need for methods that enable the
selective removal of specific training data from models that
have already been trained, a process commonly referred to
as machine unlearning (Cao & Yang, 2015). Beyond privacy, unlearning can be used to combat undesirable model
behavior after deployment, such as copyright violations
(Dou et al., 2024).

Machine unlearning addresses the problem of updating a machine learning model/system trained
on a dataset S so that the influence of a set of
deletion requests U ⊆ S on the unlearned model
is minimized. The gold standard definition of unlearning demands that the updated model, after
deletion, be nearly identical to the model obtained
by retraining. This definition is designed for a
worst-case attacker (one who can recover not only
the unlearned model but also the remaining data
samples, i.e., S ∖ U ). Such a stringent definition
has made developing efficient unlearning algorithms challenging. However, such strong attackers are also unrealistic. In this work, we propose
a new definition, system-aware unlearning, which
aims to provide unlearning guarantees against an
attacker that can at best only gain access to the
data stored in the system for learning/unlearning
requests and not all of S ∖ U . With this new
definition, we use the simple intuition that if a system can store less to make its learning/unlearning
updates, it can be more secure and update more
efficiently against a system-aware attacker. Towards that end, we present an exact system-aware
unlearning algorithm for linear classification using a selective sampling-based approach, and we
generalize the method for classification with general function classes. We theoretically analyze
the tradeoffs between deletion capacity, accuracy,
memory, and computation time.

Machine unlearning addresses the need to remove data from
a model’s knowledge base without the need to retrain the
model from scratch each time there is a deletion request,
since this can be computationally expensive and often impractical for large-scale systems. The overarching objective
is to ensure that, post-unlearning, a model “acts” as if the
removed data were never part of the training process. Traditionally, this has been defined through notions of exact
(or approximate) unlearning, wherein the model’s hypothesis after unlearning should be identical (or probabilistically
equivalent) to the model obtained by retraining from scratch
on the entire dataset after removing only the deleted points
(Sekhari et al., 2021; Ghazi et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2019).
While such definitions offer rigorous guarantees even in
the most pessimistic scenarios, they often impose stringent
requirements, limiting the practical applicability of machine
unlearning. This is evidenced by the lack of efficient certified exact or approximate unlearning algorithms beyond the
simple case of convex loss functions. Furthermore, Cherapanamjeri et al. (2025) proved that under the traditional
definition of unlearning, there exist simple model classes
with finite VC dimension, such as linear classifiers, where
traditional exact unlearning requires the storage of the entire
dataset in order to unlearn. For large datasets, this makes
unlearning under the traditional definitions impractical.

1. Introduction
Today’s large-scale Machine Learning (ML) models are
often trained on extensive datasets containing sensitive or
1
Cornell University 2 Boston University. Correspondence to:
Linda Lu <lulinda@cs.cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

