Does Low Rank Adaptation Lead to Lower Robustness
against Training-Time Attacks?

Zi Liang 1 Haibo Hu 1 Qingqing Ye 1 Yaxin Xiao 1 Ronghua Li 1

Abstract

To compare LoRA with full fine-tuning across various dimensions, recently many studies have emerged. For example, researchers have investigated LoRA’s expressive
capacity (Zeng & Lee, 2024), the smoothness (Jang et al.,
2024) of its convergence, the asymmetry (Zhu et al., 2024)
in its submatrices, the impact of initialization (Hayou et al.,
2024), and so on (Wang et al., 2024a; Koubbi et al., 2024;
Mao et al., 2024).

Low rank adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as
a prominent technique for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) thanks to its superb efficiency gains over previous methods. While extensive studies have examined the performance
and structural properties of LoRA, its behavior
upon training-time attacks remain underexplored,
posing significant security risks. In this paper, we
theoretically investigate the security implications
of LoRA’s low-rank structure during fine-tuning,
in the context of its robustness against data poisoning and backdoor attacks. We propose an analytical framework that models LoRA’s training dynamics, employs the neural tangent kernel to simplify the analysis of the training process, and applies information theory to establish connections
between LoRA’s low rank structure and its vulnerability against training-time attacks. Our analysis indicates that LoRA exhibits better robustness to backdoor attacks than full fine-tuning,
while becomes more vulnerable to untargeted
data poisoning due to its over-simplified information geometry. Extensive experimental evaluations have corroborated our theoretical findings.

While these analyses have shed light on many properties
of LoRA, one important aspect, i.e., its potential security
risks, remains largely overlooked. Existing studies in this
area either use LoRA as a tool to facilitate backdoor attacks (Yin et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), adversarial attacks (Ji et al., 2024), and model stealing attacks (Horwitz
et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2025), or focus merely on the benefits (Xu et al., 2024b) of LoRA in differential privacy and
federated learning. None of these works directly investigate the security vulnerabilities inherent in LoRA itself,
which leaves behind potential hazards and vulnerabilities in
LoRA-fine-tuned LLMs that are deployed across millions
of devices (Gunter et al., 2024).
To fill this gap, in this paper, we attempt to answer the
question whether LoRA-based fine-tuning is more vulnerable than full fine-tuning (FF) under mainstream
training-time attacks (e.g., data poisoning (Fan et al.,
2022; Ramirez et al., 2022; He et al., 2024)). We introduce
the concept of training-time robustness (TTR) for characterizing a model’s resistance to training-time attacks and
propose an analytical framework to theoretically examine
the security implications of LoRA’s low-rank structure. The
main challenges are two-folded. First, the TTR of a model
significantly depends on the specific training tasks and the
complex dynamics of the training process. Second, the effectiveness of attacks is heavily influenced by hyperparameters
(e.g., learning rate) and attack strategies (e.g., poisoning rate
or backdoor triggers), both of which increase the complexity
of analysis.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth in the parameter size of large language
models (LLMs), parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) (Xu
et al., 2023; Han et al., 2024) has gained increasing attention
in both research and industry communities. Among various
PEFT strategies, low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al.,
2021) has emerged as the de facto standard for fine-tuning
LLMs thanks to its computational efficiency and minimal
performance degradation.

To address these challenges, we introduce two novel simplifications when modeling the training dynamics of LoRA.
First, we reformulate TTR by measuring the similarity of
gradients before and after data poisoning, which enables
a neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2021) (NTK)-based

1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China.
Correspondence to: Haibo Hu <haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

