Towards Global-level Mechanistic Interpretability: A Perspective of Modular
Circuits of Large Language Models

Yinhan He 1 Wendy Zheng 2 Yushun Dong 3 Yaochen Zhu 1 Chen Chen 2 Jundong Li 1
in/output

Abstract

…

…

Mechanistic interpretability (MI) research aims
to understand large language models (LLMs) by
identifying computational circuits—subgraphs of
model components with associated functional interpretations (FIs)—that explain specific model
behaviors. Current MI research mainly focus
on discovering task-specific circuits, which have
two key limitations: (1) low generalization ability
across diverse language tasks and (2) high costs
due to the need for human or advanced LLMs to
interpret each computational node. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel modular
circuit (MC) vocabulary of task-agnostic functional units, each containing a small computational subgraph with its interpretation obtained by
examining the subgraph’s behavior on extensive
corpora. By allowing different language tasks to
share common MCs, our approach enables global
interpretability while reducing costs by reusing
established interpretations for new tasks. Besides,
we propose five criteria for characterizing the MC
vocabulary and present ModCirc, a novel globallevel MI framework for discovering MC vocabularies in LLMs. We demonstrate ModCirc’s effectiveness by showing that it can identify modular
circuits that perform well on various metrics. 1

…

att. head
MLP neuron

SCS 1

hidden state

…

Components
& edges
in circuits

…

…

…

Common MC

comp. edge

SCS k

(a) MCs provide cross-task insight.
…
MC vocabulary

New unseen SCS

…

…

…

FI: this MC is
match capturing patients’
symptoms.

(b) Func. interpretations (FI) are extracted from MC vocab.
Figure 1. Advantages of modular circuits (MC) as an LLM mechanistic interpretation tool. (a) Common MCs (shown in sky blue)
shared across significant computational subgraphs (SCSs) of different language tasks reveal cross-task interpretability insights. (b)
MCs identified in new tasks can be matched against a vocabulary
of known MCs, allowing direct reuse of existing functional interpretations (FI) rather than generating new ones.

2023; Chang et al., 2024; Wei & Liu, 2025) has triggered the interest to understand their internal mechanisms
and decision-making processes. Mechanistic interpretability (Wang et al., 2022; Lieberum et al., 2023; Cunningham et al., 2023; Nanda et al., 2023; Conmy et al., 2023;
Bereska & Gavves, 2024; Rai et al., 2024; Nainani et al.,
2024; Nainani, 2024), which aims to reverse engineer how
these models process information and make decisions, has
emerged as a promising approach. For various language
tasks such as indirect object identification (IOI) (Wang et al.,
2022), modular sum (Nanda et al., 2023), and subject-verb
agreement (Marks et al., 2024), current research has successfully identified many computational circuits, i.e., the
significant computational subgraph (SCS) of the LLM that
contributes the most to the LLM’s output, along with the
nodes’ functional interpretations (FIs). Specifically, the
nodes in these computational subgraphs are LLM components such as attention heads and feed-forward neurons,
with edges representing direct computational flow between

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2024; Team et al.,
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. Correspondence to: Jundong Li
<jl6qk@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The code project is available at https://github.com/
YinhanHe123/ModCirc.

1

