A Non-isotropic Time Series Diffusion Model with Moving Average Transitions

Chenxi Wang 1 2 Linxiao Yang 2 Zhixian Wang 1 2 Liang Sun 2 Yi Wang 1

Abstract

time series analysis (Yang et al., 2024). So far, pioneer
works have accommodated the diffusion model for time series forecasting (Rasul et al., 2021; Shen & Kwok, 2023; Li
et al., 2022), missing value imputation (Tashiro et al., 2021;
Alcaraz & Strodthoff, 2023), uncertainty quantification (Li
et al., 2024) and so on.

Diffusion models, known for their generative ability, have recently been adapted to time series analysis. Most pioneering works rely on the standard
isotropic diffusion, treating each time step and
the entire frequency spectrum identically. However, it may not be suitable for time series, which
often have more informative low-frequency components. We empirically found that direct application of standard diffusion to time series may cause
gradient contradiction during training, due to the
rapid decrease of low-frequency information in
the diffusion process. To this end, we proposed
a novel time series diffusion model, MA-TSD,
which utilizes the moving average, a natural lowfrequency filter, as the forward transition. Its backward process is accelerable like DDIM and can be
further considered a time series super-resolution.
Our experiments on various datasets demonstrated
MA-TSD’s superior performance in time series
forecasting and super-resolution tasks.

Despite the initial success of these works, most of them
still relied on the classical standard isotropic diffusion
model, namely the Denosing Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020). It treats each time step independently and applies the same diffusion schedule. In the frequency domain, both low and high-frequency components
are also degraded identically (see Figure 1). However, lowfrequency components are usually more informative than
high-frequency ones in time series analysis (Xu et al., 2024).
We found that decreasing the low-frequency components
identically to the high-frequency ones during the diffusion
process may cause a drastic reduction of the essential time
series information. It may further lead to contradictions
on the gradient directions of DDPM at different diffusion
steps, impeding the training convergence (see Section 3).
Therefore, it’s inappropriate to handle all the frequencies
with the same diffusion process, and the classical design of
the DDPM doesn’t fully fit the inductive bias of time series
data.

1. Introduction
Time series data is widely adopted in the real world. Extensive examples include electricity consumption in power
systems, stock prices in financial markets, traffic flows in
transportation systems, etc. Over the past decade, remarkable time series models have been developed with versatile
deep neural networks to perform various time series analyses (Wang et al., 2024).

To tackle such inequality in the frequency domain of time
series, we utilized moving average operation, a natural lowpass filter, to build a non-isotropic time series diffusion
model, Moving Average Time Series Diffusion (MA-TSD).
In the forward process, moving averages are set by smallto-large kernel sizes, gradually coarsening the time series
until zero-frequency components. The corresponding transition matrices are no longer diagonal like standard diffusion
models. A corresponding dataset-based noise schedule is
provided alongside. Similar to Denosing Diffusion Implicit
Models (DDIM) (Song et al., 2021a), we give an accelerable
backward process with a customized strategy to select backward steps. Naturally, with the coarse-to-fine philosophy,
the backward process of MA-TSD can also be viewed as
time series super-resolution. Empirically, we show on diverse datasets that MA-TSD has outstanding performances
over time series forecasting and super-resolution tasks.

In recent years, the diffusion model (Ho et al., 2020) has
risen as a shining generative model, showing remarkable performance for image and video synthesis. Such supercity in
modeling complex data distributions also drives the community to seek how to adapt it to time series, and thus empower
1
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR 2 DAMO Academy,
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yi Wang
<yiwang@eee.hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

Contributions: 1) We empirically disclosed the training

1

