Chaos Meets Attention: Transformers for Large-Scale Dynamical Prediction

Yi He * 1 Yiming Yang * 1 2 Xiaoyuan Cheng * 1 Hai Wang 2 Xiao Xue 3 Boli Chen 4 Yukun Hu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Generating long-term trajectories of dissipative
chaotic systems autoregressively is a highly challenging task. The inherent positive Lyapunov
exponents amplify prediction errors over time.
Many chaotic systems possess a crucial property
— ergodicity on their attractors, which makes
long-term prediction possible. State-of-the-art
methods address ergodicity by preserving statistical properties using optimal transport techniques. However, these methods face scalability challenges due to the curse of dimensionality
when matching distributions. To overcome this
bottleneck, we propose a scalable transformerbased framework capable of stably generating
long-term high-dimensional and high-resolution
chaotic dynamics while preserving ergodicity.
Our method is grounded in a physical perspective, revisiting the Von Neumann mean ergodic
theorem to ensure the preservation of long-term
statistics in the L2 space. We introduce novel
modifications to the attention mechanism, making the transformer architecture well-suited for
learning large-scale chaotic systems. Compared
to operator-based and transformer-based methods,
our model achieves better performances across
five metrics, from short-term prediction accuracy
to long-term statistics. In addition to our methodological contributions, we introduce new chaotic
system benchmarks: a machine learning dataset
of 140k snapshots of turbulent channel flow and
a processed high-dimensional Kolmogorov Flow
dataset, along with various evaluation metrics for
both short- and long-term performances. Both
are well-suited for machine learning research on
chaotic systems.

Predicting and modeling the behavior of chaotic systems is
crucial for various applications, including weather forecasting (Lorenz & Haman, 1996), climate modeling (Trevisan
& Palatella, 2011), and understanding turbulent flows (Ottino et al., 1990). In recent years, the use of autoregressive
models to predict the long-term behavior of chaotic systems
has presented a significant challenge to the ML/DL community (Gilpin, 2021; Mikhaeil et al., 2022). This challenge
stems from the presence of positive Lyapunov exponents,
a hallmark of chaotic systems. These exponents amplify
small perturbations in the initial state, leading to exponential
accumulation of errors over time (Holden, 2014). Consequently, accurately predicting the long-term behavior of
chaotic systems remains a formidable task. To address these
challenges, two primary methods and one emerging trend
have been reviewed for learning chaotic systems: a) sequence models that excel in learning temporal patterns; b)
operator-based models, which learn operators in function
spaces without knowing the prior differential equations; and
c) the transformer-based models, with recent advancements
in synthesizing sequence and operator-based methods.
Sequence models. Sequence models have shown notable
success in short-term predictions by minimizing temporal
mean squared errors (MSEs). Prominent methods include
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Madondo & Gibbons,
2018; Dudukcu et al., 2023), long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) (Sangiorgio & Dercole, 2020; Langeroudi
et al., 2022), and reservoir computing methods (Pathak et al.,
2018; Yan et al., 2024). These approaches have been applied
to classic 1-D examples, such as the Lorenz 63, Lorenz 96,
and Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equations. However, due to the
inherent instability of chaotic systems, these methods often
experience exponential error accumulation over time.
To address this issue, recent advances leverage ergodicity, a
key property of many chaotic systems on strange attractors
(Eckmann & Ruelle, 1985; Young, 2002), to stabilize the
method performance in long-term predictions by aligning
predicted distributions with ground-truth distributions. Two
notable approaches utilize optimal transport theory (Jiang
et al., 2024; Schiff et al., 2024) to improve long-term prediction accuracy, i.e. incorporating a regularized transport
term to penalize discrepancies between the predicted and

*

Equal contribution 1 Dynamic Systems, University College
London, United Kingdom 2 Statistical Science, University College London, United Kingdom 3 Center for Computational Science,
University College London, United Kingdom 4 Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Yukun Hu <yukun.hu@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

