N O L I M A: Long-Context Evaluation Beyond Literal Matching

Ali Modarressi 1 2 * Hanieh Deilamsalehy 3 Franck Dernoncourt 3 Trung Bui 3 Ryan Rossi 3 Seunghyun Yoon 3
Hinrich Schütze 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Recent large language models (LLMs) support
long contexts ranging from 128K to 1M tokens. A
popular method for evaluating these capabilities
is the needle-in-a-haystack (NIAH) test, which
involves retrieving a “needle” (relevant information) from a “haystack” (long irrelevant context).
Extensions of this approach include increasing
distractors, fact chaining, and in-context reasoning. However, in these benchmarks, models can
exploit existing literal matches between the needle and haystack to simplify the task. To address
this, we introduce N O L I M A, a benchmark extending NIAH with a carefully designed needle set,
where questions and needles have minimal lexical
overlap, requiring models to infer latent associations to locate the needle within the haystack.
We evaluate 13 popular LLMs that claim to support contexts of at least 128K tokens. While
they perform well in short contexts (<1K), performance degrades significantly as context length
increases. At 32K, for instance, 11 models drop
below 50% of their strong short-length baselines.
Even GPT-4o, one of the top-performing exceptions, experiences a reduction from an almostperfect baseline of 99.3% to 69.7%. Our analysis
suggests these declines stem from the increased
difficulty the attention mechanism faces in longer
contexts when literal matches are absent, making
it harder to retrieve relevant information. Even
models enhanced with reasoning capabilities or
CoT prompting struggle to maintain performance
in long contexts. We publicly release the dataset
and evaluation code at https://github.com/adoberesearch/NoLiMa.1

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have made
remarkable advancements in handling long-context inputs
(Chen et al., 2023; Xiong et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2024).
This capability has unlocked new possibilities in various
NLP tasks that require understanding or generating content
over extended documents. Examples include long- or multidocument question answering (QA), summarization, and
many-shot in-context learning (Lee et al., 2024; Chang et al.,
2024; Agarwal et al., 2024). To evaluate these models’ effectiveness in handling long contexts, several benchmarks have
been developed. One prominent benchmark is Needle-in-aHaystack (NIAH), which tests a model’s ability to search
for and retrieve a specific fact (the “needle”) hidden within
irrelevant information (the “haystack”) (Kamradt, 2023; Mohtashami & Jaggi, 2023). While the baseline NIAH task
assesses surface-level retrieval capabilities, recent adaptations have increased its complexity. These enhancements include introducing multiple needles, incorporating additional
distractor material, and interconnecting facts to necessitate
in-context reasoning (e.g., fact-chaining) (Hsieh et al., 2024;
Levy et al., 2024; Kuratov et al., 2024). Other benchmarks,
such as long-, multi-document QA, and long conversation
understanding, have also been proposed to evaluate longcontext comprehension in a more downstream task manner
(Liu et al., 2024; Yen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Dong
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Maharana et al., 2024).
Arguably, these tasks share a common foundation: the ability to recall previously seen information (Goldman et al.,
2024). This broader category, termed association recall
tasks, has been extensively studied in machine learning
(Graves et al., 2014; Ba et al., 2016). A key argument is
that the attention mechanism, which is the underlying foundation of many LLMs, is inherently adept at identifying
and recalling associations present in the input (Olsson et al.,
2022; Arora et al., 2024). However, this raises an important
question: Long-context benchmarks feature tasks where the
queried input (e.g., a question or a task) has literal matches

*

Work done during an internship at Adobe Research. 1 Center
for Information and Language Processing, LMU Munich, Germany
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML) 3 Adobe Research.
Correspondence to: Ali Modarressi <amodaresi@cis.lmu.de>.

(such as GPT-4.1) have improved long-context performance. However, the main finding of this paper also holds for these newer
models: performance on N O L I M A starts declining rapidly on contexts that are relatively short compared to their claimed context
length. See Appendix E for detailed results.

nd

Proceedings of the 42 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Recent models not covered in the main body of this paper

1

