Smoothed Preference Optimization via ReNoise Inversion for Aligning
Diffusion Models with Varied Human Preferences
Yunhong Lu 1 Qichao Wang 1 Hengyuan Cao 1 Xiaoyin Xu 2 Min Zhang 1 3

Abstract

several challenges remain, such as limited text rendering
capabilities (Chen et al., 2023a), unrealistic spatial layouts
(Lin et al., 2024) and improper illumination (Ren et al.,
2024). Current approaches to addressing these challenges
primarily focus on optimizing training strategies (Esser et al.,
2024), improving network architectures (Peebles & Xie,
2022), augmenting datasets (Gadre et al., 2023) and incorporating richer semantic conditions (Chen et al., 2024; Pernias
et al., 2023). Nevertheless, these improvements typically
necessitate retraining the models from scratch, making them
unsuitable for enhancing pre-existing models. Inspired by
reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) methods used in large language models (LLMs) (Wang et al.,
2024), aligning T2I models with human preferences has
emerged as a promising direction to improve model performance (Liu et al., 2024), though it is currently under active
exploration and holds significant potential.

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) aligns textto-image (T2I) generation models with human
preferences using pairwise preference data. Although substantial resources are expended in collecting and labeling datasets, a critical aspect is often neglected: preferences vary across individuals
and should be represented with more granularity.
To address this, we propose SmPO-Diffusion, a
novel method for modeling preference distributions to improve the DPO objective, along with a
numerical upper bound estimation for the diffusion optimization objective. First, we introduce
a smoothed preference distribution to replace the
original binary distribution. We employ a reward
model to simulate human preferences and apply
preference likelihood averaging to improve the
DPO loss, such that the loss function approaches
zero when preferences are similar. Furthermore,
we utilize an inversion technique to simulate the
trajectory preference distribution of the diffusion
model, enabling more accurate alignment with
the optimization objective. Our approach effectively mitigates issues of excessive optimization
and objective misalignment present in existing
methods through straightforward modifications.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance in preference evaluation tasks, surpassing baselines across
various metrics, while reducing the training costs.

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University. 2 College of Biomedical Engineering and Instrument Science, Zhejiang University. 3 Shanghai Institute for Advanced
Study-Zhejiang University. Correspondence to: Min Zhang
<min zhang@zju.edu.cn>.

Current research primarily focuses on two directions. The
first involves collecting human-labeled preference images
to train models (Lee et al., 2023b; Liang et al., 2023; Dai
et al., 2023). These datasets typically assume a binary preference distribution (Kirstain et al., 2023), which not only
requires substantial human resources but also neglects the
inherent variability of human preferences, often resulting
in excessive optimization. The second direction focuses
on designing methods to fine-tune T2I models using human
feedback data. Many previous approaches propagate reward
maximization through reward models (Clark et al., 2023;
Prabhudesai et al., 2023), leading to reward hacking. Alternatively, some approaches model the sampling process of
diffusion models as a Markov chain and employ reinforcement learning (RL) objectives based on reward feedback
(Black et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b; Li
et al., 2024b). However, these methods require extensive
online evaluations and suffer from training instability. Moreover, DPO methods (Wallace et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023;
2024) optimize the RL objective toward the optimal trajectory strategy for diffusion models. Nevertheless, estimation
based on the forward process often results in misalignment
between the optimization objective and the desired outcome.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

To address these issues, we propose an adaptive (with imagedependent loss), and efficient approach for preference alignment of T2I diffusion models. Our insight is that, within

1

Introduction

T2I diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2021; Podell et al.,
2023) have recently gained widespread popularity. However,
1

1

