Minimalist Concept Erasure in Generative Models

Yang Zhang * 1 Er Jin * 2 Yanfei Dong 1 3 Yixuan Wu 4 Philip Torr 5 Ashkan Khakzar 5 Johannes Stegmaier 2
Kenji Kawaguchi 1
NSFW: Erasing Nudity
Original
Ours

Removing Art Style: Van Gogh
Original
Ours

Object Removal: Gun
Original
Ours

IP Character: Hulk
Original
Ours

*

*

*

Artifact Added for Publication

Figure 1: Minimalist concept erasure results on FLUX, the latest rectified flow model with 12 billion parameters. We
propose minimalist concept erasure, an approach that applies just enough changes to unwanted concepts, so they become
unrecognizable. We can effectively remove inappropriate content like NSFW, weapons, and tackle copyright issues by
removing protected IPs and art styles while maintaining the model performance.

Abstract

cal connections with other models and methods.
To improve the robustness of the erasure, we incorporate neuron masking as an alternative to model
fine-tuning. Empirical evaluations on state-of-theart flow-matching models demonstrate that our
method robustly erases concepts without degrading overall model performance, paving the way
for safer and more responsible generative models.

Recent advances in generative models have
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in producing high-quality images, but their reliance on
large-scale unlabeled data has raised significant
safety and copyright concerns. Efforts to address
these issues by erasing unwanted concepts have
shown promise. However, many existing erasure methods involve excessive modifications that
compromise the overall utility of the model. In
this work, we address these issues by formulating a novel minimalist concept erasure objective
based only on the distributional distance of final
generation outputs. Building on our formulation,
we derive a tractable loss for differentiable optimization that leverages backpropagation through
all generation steps in an end-to-end manner. We
also conduct extensive analysis to show theoreti-

CAUTION: This paper includes model-generated
content that may contain offensive material.

1. Introduction
Recent generative models, such as FLUX and SD3.5 (Labs,
2024; Esser et al., 2024), have achieved remarkable success in producing realistic and visually appealing images, partially due to their large-scale training on massive
datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2022; Byeon et al., 2022). However, the absence of labels in the vast training data makes it
difficult to effectively filter out harmful or potentially inappropriate content. Moreover, if new unwanted concepts are
identified, the high cost of pretraining on large-scale datasets
makes it impractical to remove them from the dataset and
retrain the model. As a result, numerous concerns have
emerged about these models’ ability to generate undesir-

*
Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore
RWTH Aachen University 3 PayPal Inc. 4 Zhejiang University 5 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Yang Zhang
<yang.zhang@u.nus.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

