A Selective Learning Method for Temporal Graph Continual Learning

Hanmo LIU 1 2 Shimin DI 3 Haoyang LI 4 Xun JIAN 5 Yue WANG 6 Lei CHEN 2 1

Abstract

Old
Classes

Node classification is a key task in temporal graph
learning (TGL). Real-life temporal graphs often
introduce new node classes over time, but existing
TGL methods assume a fixed set of classes. This
assumption brings limitations, as updating models
with full data is costly, while focusing only on new
classes results in forgetting old ones. Graph continual learning (GCL) methods mitigate forgetting
using old-class subsets but fail to account for their
evolution. We define this novel problem as temporal graph continual learning (TGCL), which focuses on efficiently maintaining up-to-date knowledge of old classes. To tackle TGCL, we propose
a selective learning framework that substitutes the
old-class data with its subsets, Learning Towards
the Future (LTF). We derive an upper bound on
the error caused by such replacement and transform it into objectives for selecting and learning
subsets that minimize classification error while
preserving the distribution of the full old-class
data. Experiments on three real-world datasets
validate the effectiveness of LTF on TGCL.

New
Classes

Past
Period

Ignored New
Class Data

Current
Period

Graph Continual Learning
Static Old
Class Data

Temporal Graph Learning
Evolving Old
Class Data

Emerging New
Class Data

Temporal Graph Continual Learning
Evolving Old
Class Data

Emerging New
Class Data

Static
Current
Period

Current
Period

Figure 1: The differences in temporal graph learning (TGL),
graph continual learning (GCL) and temporal graph continual learning (TGCL). At a new period, TGL assumes
no data of new classes appear, while GCL assumes static
old-class data. TGCL holds neither of these assumptions,
thus is more suitable to real-life temporal graphs.
beddings (Kumar et al., 2019; Rossi et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
2020; Cong et al., 2023; Wen & Fang, 2022; Li & Chen,
2023; Li et al., 2023). The current approaches for processing both structural and temporal information in these graphs
utilize a range of model architectures, including messagepassing mechanisms (Rossi et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020;
Wen & Fang, 2022), multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) (Cong
et al., 2023; Gardner & Dorling, 1998), and transformers
(Yu et al., 2023; Vaswani et al., 2017). A key application
of TGL methods is node classification, which is a critical
task in the analysis of temporal graphs (Rossi et al., 2020;
Xu et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2023). For example, in social networks, TGL methods classify normal and malicious users
based on their interactions.

1. Introduction
Temporal graphs are essential data structures for real-world
applications, such as social networks (Baumgartner et al.,
2020) and online shopping (Ni et al., 2019). In temporal graphs, the edges and/or nodes change over time, with
these additions or deletions captured as a sequence of events
(Yang et al., 2023; de Barros et al., 2023). In recent years,
various temporal graph learning (TGL) methods have been
developed to extract insights from temporal graphs by incorporating temporal-neighbor information into node em1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
China 3 Southeast University, China 4 Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, China 5 Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
6
Shenzhen Institute of Computing Sciences, China. Correspondence to: Shimin DI <shimin.di@seu.edu.cn>.

While TGL methods are effective at classifying nodes, they
face a significant limitation: they assume a static set of node
classes, which does not reflect the dynamic reality of these
environments. This static assumption is illustrated in Fig. 1,
where node classes under the TGL setting remain unchanged
over time. However, real-world scenarios often exhibit an
open class setting, where new classes frequently emerge.
Like in social networks, new malicious behaviours contin-

2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

