Equivariant Neural Tangent Kernels

Philipp Misof 1 Pan Kessel 2 Jan E. Gerken 1
Schütt et al., 2021; Unke et al., 2021). Other application
areas include particle physics (Bogatskiy et al., 2020), cosmology (Perraudin et al., 2019) and even fairness in large
language models (Basu et al., 2023).

Abstract
Little is known about the training dynamics of
equivariant neural networks, in particular how
it compares to data augmented training of their
non-equivariant counterparts. Recently, neural
tangent kernels (NTKs) have emerged as a powerful tool to analytically study the training dynamics of wide neural networks. In this work,
we take an important step towards a theoretical
understanding of training dynamics of equivariant models by deriving neural tangent kernels for
a broad class of equivariant architectures based
on group convolutions. As a demonstration of
the capabilities of our framework, we show an interesting relationship between data augmentation
and group convolutional networks. Specifically,
we prove that they share the same expected prediction over initializations at all training times
and even off the data manifold. In this sense, they
have the same training dynamics. We demonstrate
in numerical experiments that this still holds approximately for finite-width ensembles. By implementing equivariant NTKs for roto-translations
in the plane (G = Cn ⋉ R2 ) and 3d rotations
(G = SO(3)), we show that equivariant NTKs
outperform their non-equivariant counterparts as
kernel predictors for histological image classification and quantum mechanical property prediction.

Recently, there has been a number of works which avoid
equivariant architectures but rely on data augmentation
to approximately learn equivariance, most notably AlphaFold3 (Abramson et al., 2024). This has the potential advantage that non-equivariant architectures may offer better
training dynamics, for example favorable scaling capabilities. There has been a vigorous debate on this subject with
some empirical works claiming superiority of equivariant architectures (Gerken et al., 2022; Brehmer et al., 2024) while
others suggest the opposite (Wang et al., 2024; Abramson
et al., 2024). One challenging aspect to conclusively settle
the matter is that there is no good theoretical understanding
of how the equivariant and the purely augmentation-based
training dynamics compare.
Motivated by this observation, this paper derives equivariant
neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory (Jacot et al., 2018) for
group convolutional architectures. The NTK provides a
powerful tool to analytically study the training dynamics of
neural networks in the large width limit by analyzing the
behavior of the kernel, in particular its trace, eigenvalues and
other properties (Geiger et al., 2020; Mok et al., 2022; Engel
et al., 2024; Tsai et al., 2023). A particularly important
feature of the NTK is the fact that in the infinite width limit,
it becomes constant throughout training (Jacot et al., 2018).
Furthermore, at infinite width, the NTK can be computed by
layer-wise recursion relations. These simplifications allow
for complete analytic control over the training dynamics. In
particular, the network output of an arbitrary input and at
an arbitrary point in training time converges to a Gaussian
process over initializations whose mean- and covariance
functions can be computed analytically. This result has led
to a number of theoretical and practical insights (Geiger
et al., 2020; Jacot et al., 2020; Yang & Hu, 2021; Yang et al.,
2021; Franceschi et al., 2022; Day et al., 2023) into the
initialization and training of neural networks.

1. Introduction
Equivariant neural networks (Weiler et al., 2023; Gerken
et al., 2023) are widely used in many applications of great
practical importance, for example in medical image analysis
in two and three dimensions (Bekkers et al., 2018; Winkels
& Cohen, 2019; Müller et al., 2021; Pang et al., 2023) and in
quantum chemistry (Duval et al., 2023; Batzner et al., 2022;
1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of
Technology and the University of Gothenburg, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden 2 Prescient Design, Genentech Roche, Basel, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Jan Gerken <gerken@chalmers.se>.

We derive recursive relations which determine the NTK of
an equivariant neural networks for the first time. In particular, we study the NTK of group convolutional layers (Cohen
& Welling, 2016). These layers are in some sense universal.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

