CAT: Contrastive Adversarial Training for Evaluating the Robustness of
Protective Perturbations in Latent Diffusion Models
Sen Peng 1 Mingyue Wang 1 Jianfei He 1 Jijia Yang 1 Xiaohua Jia 1

Abstract

et al., 2023), image editing (Kawar et al., 2023), and image
inpainting (Lugmayr et al., 2022). By utilizing the opensource LDM such as Stable Diffusion (Stability.ai, 2024) as
the pre-trained model, users can customize image generation models on their datasets at a significantly lower cost
than training from scratch. Despite their prominence and
popularity, the customization of LDMs also raises significant concerns regarding privacy and intellectual property
rights (Dixit, 2023; LLP, 2023). It can be misused to generate fake human face images of a specific identity (Li et al.,
2022) or mimic the style of a specific artist by utilizing unauthorized data. Undoubtedly, such malicious customization
severely compromises the rights of data owners and raises
ethical concerns across the community.

Latent diffusion models have recently demonstrated superior capabilities in many downstream
image synthesis tasks. However, customization of
latent diffusion models using unauthorized data
can severely compromise the privacy and intellectual property rights of data owners. Adversarial
examples as protective perturbations have been developed to defend against unauthorized data usage
by introducing imperceptible noise to customization samples, preventing diffusion models from
effectively learning them. In this paper, we first reveal that the primary reason adversarial examples
are effective as protective perturbations in latent
diffusion models is the distortion of their latent
representations, as demonstrated through qualitative and quantitative experiments. We then propose the Contrastive Adversarial Training (CAT)
utilizing lightweight adapters as an adaptive attack
against these protection methods, highlighting
their lack of robustness. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our CAT method significantly
reduces the effectiveness of protective perturbations in customization, urging the community to
reconsider and improve the robustness of existing
protective perturbations. The code is available at
https://github.com/senp98/CAT.

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to: Sen Peng
<senpeng2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>.

Several protective perturbation methods (Salman et al.,
2023; Liang et al., 2023; Shan et al., 2023; Le et al., 2023;
Liang & Wu, 2023; Xue et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024) have
been proposed to address these concerns. These methods
introduce imperceptible perturbations to image samples in
the customization dataset, creating adversarial examples
that effectively degrade the performance of downstream customization tasks. Although significant progress has been
made in developing perturbation methods, the robustness of
these protection techniques has received limited attention.
Recent studies (Zhao et al., 2024; Cao et al., 2024; Hönig
et al., 2025) have investigated the resilience of protective
perturbations against purification-based adaptive attacks. By
purifying the protected images before customization, these
methods effectively compromise the robustness of existing protective perturbation. However, existing purificationbased adaptive attacks depend on optimization, resulting in
high computational costs. Without an efficient mechanism
to detect the protected perturbed images, purification must
be applied to every sample in the customization dataset,
increasing resource demand. Furthermore, purification without prior knowledge of the original data distribution introduces uncertainty, potentially altering the learned distribution. In extreme cases, optimization-based purification may
entirely replace the original image content if the substituted
one achieves a lower loss for the optimization objective.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

In this paper, we introduce Contrastive Adversarial Training
(CAT) from a novel perspective, focusing on model adaptation rather than purification as an adaptive attack. We

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based image generation models, especially the
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) (Rombach et al., 2022),
have exhibited strong capabilities across various downstream image generation tasks, including text-to-image synthesis (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022),
image-to-image translation (Saharia et al., 2022; Zhang
1

1

