Position: Spectral GNNs Rely Less on Graph Fourier Basis than Conceived

Yuhe Guo 1 Huayi Tang 1 Jiahong Ma 1 Hongteng Xu 1 Zhewei Wei 1

Abstract
Spectral graph learning builds upon two foundations: Graph Fourier basis as its theoretical cornerstone, with polynomial approximation to enable
practical implementation. While this framework
has led to numerous successful designs, we argue that its effectiveness might stem from mechanisms different from its preconceived theoretical
foundations.
In this paper, we identify two fundamental issues
that challenge our current understanding: (1) The
graph Fourier basis U1 faces too many questions
to truly serve its intended role, particularly in preserving its semantic properties of Fourier analysis;
(2) The limitations preventing expressive filters
are not merely practical constraints, but fundamental barriers that naturally protect stability and
generalization.

Figure 1. Organization of our position paper.

Importantly, the two issues entangle with each
other. The second obscured the first: the natural avoidance of complex filters has prevented us
from fully confronting the questions about U’s
role as a Fourier basis. This observation leads to
our position: the effectiveness of spectral GNNs
relies less on Graph Fourier basis than originally
conceived, or, in other words, spectral GNNs
might not be so spectral. The position leads us
to at least two potential research interests: to incorporate a more semantically meaningful graph
dictionary other than U, and to re-examine the
theoretical role of the introduced polynomial techniques.

Neural Networks (GNNs). With lightweight parameters and
simple architectures, Spectral GNNs have proven highly
effective in node classification tasks. The appeal of this research branch stems from the underlying signal processing
theory and polynomial fitting techniques. These methodologies and concepts not only hold a prominent place in current
research trends but also have the potential to flow into advanced technologies like Kolmogorov–Arnold Networks
(KAN) (Liu et al., 2024b; Bozorgasl & Chen, 2024; Liu
et al., 2024a), and networks using Fourier features (Wang
et al., 2021), thereby driving further innovation within these
fields.
However, as spectral GNNs evolve and find applications in
diverse scenarios, we identify two fundamental issues that
challenge our understanding of their success (Figure 1):

1. Introduction
Spectral Graph Neural Networks (Spectral GNNs) represent
a niche yet vibrant branch within the broader field of Graph

• The questionable but widely-accepted Fourier basis. Do graph Laplacian eigenvectors truly serve as
a Fourier basis? While the mathematical formalism
can be systematically carried over, the semantic properties that make Fourier analysis powerful may not be
preserved in this transition.

1

Gaoling School of Articial Intelligence, Renmin University of
China. Correspondence to: Zhewei Wei <zhewei@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Eigenvectors of the normalized graph Laplacian.

• The inherent limitations in the filtering polynomial.
Why must we stay far from expressive filters despite
1

