An Improved Clique-Picking Algorithm for Counting Markov Equivalent DAGs
via Super Cliques Transfer

Lifu Liu * 1 Shiyuan He * 2 Jianhua Guo 2

Abstract

d-separation properties of the identified DAG correspond to
the conditional independencies observed in the data (Pearl,
2009; Verma & Pearl, 1992; Spirtes et al., 2001). However,
observational data alone is often insufficient to uniquely
determine the true DAG. Instead, it can identify a set of
DAGs that encode the same conditional independencies,
collectively known as a Markov equivalence class (MEC).
This limitation has driven extensive research into learning
MECs from both observational and interventional data (Perlman, 2001; Geiger & Heckerman, 2002; Chickering, 2002;
Castelo & Perlman, 2004; Maathuis et al., 2009).

Efficiently counting Markov equivalent directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs) is crucial in graphical
causal analysis. Wienöbst et al. (2023) introduced a polynomial-time algorithm, known as the
Clique-Picking algorithm, to count the number of
Markov equivalent DAGs for a given completed
partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG). This
algorithm iteratively selects a root clique, determines fixed orientations with outgoing edges from
the clique, and generates the unresolved undirected connected components (UCCGs). In this
work, we propose a more efficient approach to
UCCG generation by utilizing previously computed results for different root cliques. Our
method introduces the concept of super cliques
within rooted clique trees, enabling their efficient
transfer between trees with different root cliques.
The proposed algorithm effectively reduces the
computational complexity of the Clique-Picking
method, particularly when the number of cliques
is substantially smaller than the number of vertices and edges.

A MEC can be uniquely represented by an essential graph
(Andersson et al., 1997), also known as the completed partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG). They use both directed and undirected edges to represent causal relationships
that are consistent across all DAGs in the equivalence class,
with directed edges indicating fixed causal directions and
undirected edges reflecting ambiguous dependencies unresolved by conditional independence constraints. The size
of a MEC, defined as the number of DAGs within the class,
plays a critical role in the design of causal intervention experiments (He & Geng, 2008) and average causal effect
estimation (Maathuis et al., 2009).
Exhaustive search for all Markov equivalent DAGs is only
computationally feasible for small graphs (Madigan et al.,
1996; Gillispie & Perlman, 2002). Generally, the size of
a MEC grows superexponentially in the number of its vertices. He et al. (2015) addressed the counting challenge
by introducing five special MECs with explicit size formulas, and exploiting recursive partitioning into the respective
subclasses for efficient counting. A modified approach by
Ghassami et al. (2019) leverages the clique tree representation to decompose the essential graph into smaller components. More recently, dynamic programming enhancements
(Ganian et al., 2022) and iterative methods over possible interventional essential graphs (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2020)
have been proposed.

1. Introduction
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are widely used to represent
multivariate causal structures across diverse fields, including epidemiology, biology, and economics (Pearl, 1988;
Pingault et al., 2018). In a DAG, nodes represent variables,
and directed edges denote causal relationships (Koller &
Friedman, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2001). Under the Markov
condition and faithfulness assumption, the causal structure
can be inferred from statistical data to identify a DAG. The
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematics and Statistics,
Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China 2 School of
Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jianhua Guo
<jhguo@btbu.edu.cn>.

Notably, Wienöbst et al. (2023) introduces the CliquePicking (CP) algorithm, which is a polynomial-time algorithm for determining the size of a MEC. This method
partitions the MEC into subclasses by fixing a clique as
a root and avoids overcounting using minimal separators

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

