Demystifying the Paradox of Importance Sampling with an Estimated
History-Dependent Behavior Policy in Off-Policy Evaluation

Hongyi Zhou 1 Josiah P. Hanna 2 Jin Zhu 3 Ying Yang 1 Chengchun Shi 3

Abstract

healthcare (Murphy et al., 2001; Hirano et al., 2003), recommendation systems (Chapelle & Li, 2011) and robotics
(Levine et al., 2020).

This paper studies off-policy evaluation (OPE)
in reinforcement learning with a focus on behavior policy estimation for importance sampling.
Prior work has shown empirically that estimating
a history-dependent behavior policy can lead to
lower mean squared error (MSE) even when the
true behavior policy is Markovian. However, the
question of why the use of history should lower
MSE remains open. In this paper, we theoretically demystify this paradox by deriving a biasvariance decomposition of the MSE of ordinary
importance sampling (IS) estimators, demonstrating that history-dependent behavior policy estimation decreases their asymptotic variances while
increasing their finite-sample biases. Additionally, as the estimated behavior policy conditions
on a longer history, we show a consistent decrease
in variance. We extend these findings to a range
of other OPE estimators, including the sequential IS estimator, the doubly robust estimator and
the marginalized IS estimator, with the behavior policy estimated either parametrically or nonparametrically.

One widely used OPE method is importance sampling (IS,
see e.g., Precup et al., 2000), which employs a reweighting approach to handle the distribution shift between the
target policy and the behavior policy. This approach is
straightforward: returns generated by the behavior policy
are re-weighted based on the ratio of the probability of
selecting actions under the target policy to that under the
behavior policy. The re-weighted returns are then averaged
to produce an unbiased estimator of the target policy’s value.
In the limit, as the number of trajectories increases, this
estimator converges to the true value of the target policy.
However, with finite samples, IS may exhibit high variance,
causing considerable estimation error. Consequently, more
advanced estimators have been proposed to lower its variance, including the doubly robust (DR) estimator (Jiang &
Li, 2016; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016) and marginalized IS
estimator (MIS, Liu et al., 2018). Despite its limitation,
IS serves as a foundation for many OPE methods and is
particularly valued in practice for its unbiasedness. It is also
frequently used in off-policy learning algorithms, such as
the proximal policy optimization algorithm (Schulman et al.,
2017), which is widely used for fine-tuning large language
models (Ouyang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

In practice, the behavior policy might be unknown and must
be estimated from the historical data to construct the IS
ratio. Paradoxically, IS with an estimated behavior policy
results in an estimator with lower asymptotic variance and
often lower finite-sample mean-squared error (MSE) compared to IS using the true behavior policy. This result has
been shown in the statistics (Henmi et al., 2007), causal
inference (Hirano et al., 2003; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983),
multi-armed bandit (Xie et al., 2019a), and Markov decision process (MDP) policy evaluation (Hanna et al., 2021)
literature. Furthering the paradox, Hanna et al. showed empirically that in MDPs where the true behavior policy is a
first-order Markov-policy (action selection is conditioned
only on the current state), the IS estimator’s MSE could be
lowered by estimating a higher-order Markov-policy where
action selection is conditioned on a history of preceding

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) focuses on estimating the average return (sum of discounted rewards) of a specific decision policy, referred to as the target policy, by leveraging
historical data collected under a potentially different policy,
known as the behavior policy. OPE is vital in numerous
domains where direct experimentation is impractical due to
high costs, potential risks, or ethical concerns, such as in
1

Department of Mathematical Science, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 Computer Sciences Department, University of
Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, WI, USA 3 London School of
Economics and Political Science, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Chengchun Shi <c.shi7@lse.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

