Prediction-Powered E-Values
Daniel Csillag 1 Claudio José Struchiner 1 Guilherme Tegoni Goedert 1

Abstract

to ‘compensate’ for the missing expensive data. Classical
works in this direction include single imputation and multiple imputation methods (Little & Rubin, 2019), but they
generally lack any strong guarantee of correctness. More
recently, (Angelopoulos et al., 2023a) proposed predictionpowered inference, which allow for versatile procedures that
benefit from strong correctness guarantees, notably including unbiasedness and type-I error control under very light
assumptions.

Quality statistical inference requires a sufficient
amount of data, which can be missing or hard to
obtain. To this end, prediction-powered inference
has risen as a promising methodology, but existing approaches are largely limited to Z-estimation
problems such as inference of means and quantiles. In this paper, we apply ideas of predictionpowered inference to e-values. By doing so, we
inherit all the usual benefits of e-values – such as
anytime-validity, post-hoc validity and versatile
sequential inference – as well as greatly expand
the set of inferences achievable in a predictionpowered manner. In particular, we show that every
inference procedure that can be framed in terms
of e-values has a prediction-powered counterpart,
given by our method. We showcase the effectiveness of our framework across a wide range of inference tasks, from simple hypothesis testing and
confidence intervals to more involved procedures
for change-point detection and causal discovery,
which were out of reach of previous techniques.
Our approach is modular and easily integrable
into existing algorithms, making it a compelling
choice for practical applications.

At its heart, the idea of prediction-powered inference is
simple: we leverage a predictive model (which can be arbitrarily complex, e.g., large neural networks) to predict the
expensive data from the cheap data. We can then use our
whole dataset to perform our inference by imputing missing
expensive data with predictions from our model, while leveraging the available expensive data to quantify our model’s
inaccuracies, debiasing our inference.
Prediction-powered inference has already inspired a large
amount of literature, both methodology-wise (e.g., (Zrnic &
Candes, 2024; Angelopoulos et al., 2023b; Zrnic & Candès,
2023; Gu & Xia, 2024)), as well as in applications such as
language model evaluations (Chatzi et al., 2024; Boyeau
et al., 2024), genome-wide association studies (Miao et al.,
2024) and more. However, throughout, the inference tasks
considered are fairly limited; previous works are essentially
restricted to problems that can be framed in terms of Zestimation,1 which includes many common tasks such as
inference of means, quantiles and regression coefficients,
but not much more. In this paper, we significantly expand
this frontier by applying prediction-powered inference to
e-values.

1. Introduction
Statistical inference is ubiquitous in many critical areas of
application, such as medicine and economics. Central to
their use is the availability of moderate amounts of data
to empower our inferences. However, such data can be
expensive to obtain, which complicates matters.

E-values are a recent enticing alternative to p-values. Formally, an e-value for a null hypothesis H0 is a nonnegative real random variable E such that, if H0 holds, then
E[E] ≤ 1; by Markov’s inequality, it is then unlikely that
the e-value E is high under the null, and thus a high evalue (≫ 1) provides evidence against the null hypothesis. Though simple, this is a very powerful notion: evalues allow for powerful procedures under very lax assumptions (e.g., not even i.i.d., nonparametric and nonasymp-

A common strategy is to simply collect a smaller amount of
data, in order to minimize costs. Unfortunately, this generally leads to more uncertain inferences. Alternatively, there
are methods that leverage auxiliary cheap-to-obtain data
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Applied Mathematics, Getulio
Vargas Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Correspondence to:
Daniel Csillag <daniel.csillag@fgv.br>.

1
A Z-estimation problem is one in which we seek to infer a
parameter θ⋆ ∈ Θ such that EZ [ψ(Z; θ⋆ )] = 0, for some known
function ψ.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

