AutoStep: Locally adaptive involutive MCMC

Tiange Liu 1 Nikola Surjanovic 1 Miguel Biron-Lattes 1 Alexandre Bouchard-Côté 1 Trevor Campbell 1

Abstract

often rejected, while too small a choice leads to nearby proposals that do not explore the state space quickly; either
case results in slow convergence of the chain. For certain
multiscale targets (e.g. Bayesian posteriors with scale priors
(Polson & Scott, 2012)) there may not even be a single good
choice of step size throughout the whole state space.

Many common Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) kernels can be formulated using a deterministic involutive proposal with a step size
parameter. Selecting an appropriate step size is often a challenging task in practice; and for complex
multiscale targets, there may not be one choice of
step size that works well globally. In this work,
we address this problem with a novel class of involutive MCMC methods—AutoStep MCMC—that
selects an appropriate step size at each iteration
adapted to the local geometry of the target distribution. We prove that under mild conditions
AutoStep MCMC is π-invariant, irreducible, and
aperiodic, and obtain bounds on expected energy
jump distance and cost per iteration. Empirical
results examine the robustness and efficacy of our
proposed step size selection procedure, and show
that AutoStep MCMC is competitive with stateof-the-art methods in terms of effective sample
size per unit cost on a range of challenging target
distributions.

Existing methods for selecting step size parameters fall
generally into three categories: adaptive MCMC, discrepancy minimization, and locally-adaptive kernels. Adaptive
MCMC algorithms (Haario et al., 2001; Atchadé, 2006; Andrieu & Thoms, 2008; Marshall & Roberts, 2012) tune the
proposal distribution using previous draws from the chain,
often targeting a particular acceptance rate derived from
high-dimensional asymptotics (Roberts et al., 1997; Roberts
& Rosenthal, 1998). Obtaining theoretical guarantees on
estimates produced by adaptive MCMC targeting a distribution π is technically difficult and often requires strict
conditions on the adaptation process, such as increasingly
infrequent adaptation (Chimisov et al., 2018). Discrepancy
minimization (Neklyudov et al., 2018; Coullon et al., 2023)
involves tuning using a divergence between the empirical
distribution of draws and the target π, which requires multiple MCMC runs to estimate the divergence for each candidate step size. Both approaches also identify only a single
step size value, which may not be appropriate for the whole
state space.

1. Introduction
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Metropolis et al.,
1953; Hastings, 1970) is an effective tool for approximating
integrals arising in Bayesian inference problems. The performance of MCMC is often sensitive to the choice of tuning
parameters in the Markov kernel. In particular, methods
that propose a new state followed by an accept/reject step—
e.g., random-walk Metropolis–Hastings (RWMH) (Hastings, 1970), the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm
(MALA) (Rossky et al., 1978), and Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987; Neal, 1996)—often involve a scalar step size parameter θ ≥ 0 that governs the
distance of the proposed next state from the current state.
Too large a choice of θ results in distant proposals that are

Locally-adaptive kernels, in contrast, select a value for the
step size at each iteration based on the current state. Because the step size depends on the current state, these kernels
can adapt to the local shape of the target π; and because they
depend only on the current state, they are Markovian and
one can use standard tools to prove π-invariance. There are
many approaches to locally adaptive step size selection in
the literature. Mixture kernels with state-dependent weights
(Maire & Vandekerkhove, 2022) and delayed-rejection (Tierney & Mira, 1999; Green & Mira, 2001) are both general
approaches, but each requires a prespecified maximum number of step sizes to consider at each iteration. There are also
numerous methods specific to certain samplers, e.g., HMC
and MALA (Girolami & Calderhead, 2011; Nishimura &
Dunson, 2016; Kleppe, 2016; Modi et al., 2024; BironLattes et al., 2024; Turok et al., 2024), RWMH (see Livingstone, 2021), or slice sampling (Neal, 2003). Of these,
the method most related to the present work is autoMALA

1

Department of Statistics, University of British
Columbia, Canada. Correspondence to: Trevor Campbell
<trevor@stat.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

