Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration

Andreas Kontogiannis * 1 2 Konstantinos Papathanasiou * 3 Yi Shen 4
Giorgos Stamou 1 Michael M. Zavlanos 4 George Vouros 5

Abstract

learning agents in order to maximize their shared utility function. Many real-world applications can be modeled as fully
cooperative MARL problems, including multi-robot cooperation (Alami et al., 1998), wireless network optimization
(Lin et al., 2019), self-driving cars (Valiente et al., 2022),
air traffic management (Kontogiannis & Vouros, 2023), and
search & rescue (Rahman et al., 2022).

Learning to cooperate in distributed partially observable environments with no communication
abilities poses significant challenges for multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MARL). This
paper addresses key concerns in this domain, focusing on inferring state representations from individual agent observations and leveraging these
representations to enhance agents’ exploration
and collaborative task execution policies. To this
end, we propose a novel state modelling framework for cooperative MARL, where agents infer meaningful belief representations of the nonobservable state, with respect to optimizing their
own policies, while filtering redundant and less informative joint state information. Building upon
this framework, we propose the MARL SMPE2 algorithm. In SMPE2 , agents enhance their own policy’s discriminative abilities under partial observability, explicitly by incorporating their beliefs
into the policy network, and implicitly by adopting an adversarial type of exploration policies
which encourages agents to discover novel, highvalue states while improving the discriminative
abilities of others. Experimentally, we show that
SMPE2 outperforms state-of-the-art MARL algorithms in complex fully cooperative tasks from
the MPE, LBF, and RWARE benchmarks.

In most real-world applications, agents, acting in a decentralized setting, have access to the environment state through
mere observations. However, collaborating under partial
observability is a challenging problem, inherent from the
non-stationary nature of the multi-agent systems. To address
this problem, different approaches have been proposed; e.g.,
approaches which aim agents to model other agents (e.g., in
(Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019)), to communicate effectively
with others (e.g., in (Guan et al., 2022b)), or to leverage
advanced replay memories (e.g., in (Yang et al., 2022)).
This paper draws motivation from fully cooperative MARL
real-world applications (Papadopoulos et al., 2025) and focuses on the celebrated CTDE schema (Lowe et al., 2017a),
where agents aim to learn effective collaborative policies.
During training, agents share information about their observations, but in execution time they must solve the task
given only their own local information. Specifically, we
are interested in settings where agents lack explicit communication channels during execution. Such settings are
of particular interest, because, while communication-based
methods leverage inexpensive simulators for training, they
may incur substantial computational overhead when executed in real-world environments (Zhu et al., 2022; Zhang &
Lesser, 2013). This paper aims agents to infer meaningful
beliefs about the unobserved state and leverage them for
enhanced cooperation with others.

1. Introduction
Background and Motivation. In cooperative multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning (MARL), the goal is to train the
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NTUA, Greece 2 Archimedes, Athena Research Center,
Greece 3 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich 4 Dept. of Mechanical Engineering & Materials Science, Duke University 5 Dept.
of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, Greece. Correspondence
to: Andreas Kontogiannis <andreaskontogiannis@mail.ntua.gr>.

Agent modelling (AM) (Albrecht & Stone, 2017), also referred to as opponent modelling (He et al., 2016; Foerster
et al., 2018a), has been proposed as a solution to infer beliefs about the global state, or the joint policy, under partial
observability. Applications of AM in MARL have been
extensively explored (Papoudakis et al., 2021; Raileanu
et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2024; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019;
Nguyen et al., 2023; Tan & Chen, 2023; Gupta & Kahou,

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

