The Value of Prediction in Identifying the Worst-Off

Unai Fischer-Abaigar 1 2 Christoph Kern 1 2 Juan Carlos Perdomo 3

Abstract

without reference to the broader social context. The value
of a risk predictor is ultimately determined by its impact
on bottom-line welfare (e.g., graduation rates) and how
these welfare impacts compare to those of other bureaucratic alternatives (Johnson & Zhang, 2022). For example,
to understand whether investments in prediction are truly
valuable in Wisconsin, we need to assess how much better
the risk predictor is at identifying at-risk students relative
to existing policies. We also need to understand whether
sophisticated prediction systems yield higher graduation
rates amongst the underserved than structural investments
in teacher training or better facilities.

Machine learning is increasingly used in government programs to identify and support the most
vulnerable individuals, prioritizing assistance for
those at greatest risk over optimizing aggregate
outcomes. This paper examines the welfare impacts of prediction in equity-driven contexts, and
how they compare to other policy levers, such as
expanding bureaucratic capacity. Through mathematical models and a real-world case study on
long-term unemployment amongst German residents, we develop a comprehensive understanding
of the relative effectiveness of prediction in surfacing the worst-off. Our findings provide clear
analytical frameworks and practical, data-driven
tools that empower policymakers to make principled decisions when designing these systems.

Equity-driven programs are pervasive in applications like
social housing, poverty targeting, and unemployment assistance. In these contexts, many government agencies are
exploring how algorithmic prediction systems may be an
improvement over their current profiling processes (Körtner
& Bonoli, 2023). Yet, due to the absence of an overarching
framework that allows the systematic assessment of the relative impacts of different design decisions, efforts to improve
predictive accuracy are rarely studied in concert with other
policy levers such as expanding screening capacity.

1. Introduction
Faced with pressure to modernize, large bureaucracies are
increasingly adopting risk prediction tools to improve efficiency and better serve their populations. Beyond optimizing aggregate outcomes, investments in these programs
often aim to address historical inequities and prioritize the
needs of the worst-off. For instance, in 2012, Wisconsin launched a risk prediction system to explicitly address
deep racial disparities in academic achievement and improve high school graduation rates amongst underserved
students. More broadly, such systems are particularly relevant in settings where normative considerations demand
prioritizing those at the greatest risk of adverse outcomes,
and where well-established downstream interventions can
meaningfully benefit these vulnerable individuals.

Building on recent work in a budding area of learning in
resource allocation contexts, we develop tools to evaluate
the design and broader impact of prediction systems that
aim to identify the worst-off members of a population. We
develop a holistic understanding of the value of statistical
prediction in these contexts through theoretical insights into
foundational statistical models and a real-world case study
on identifying long-term unemployment. Our results establish clear theoretical and empirical criteria characterizing
the relative value of core design decisions within these problems. Specifically, we identify when improving prediction
provides a higher marginal benefit in helping an institution
identify the worst-off. This is compared to alternative strategies, such as keeping prediction accuracy fixed, expanding
bureaucratic capacity and screening a larger population.

From a design perspective, these risk predictors are challenging to evaluate because their value cannot be assessed
1
Department of Statistics, University of Munich (LMU), Munich, Germany 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany
3
Harvard University, Boston, MA, US. Correspondence to: Unai
Fischer-Abaigar <Unai.FischerAbaigar@stat.uni-muenchen.de>.

Interestingly, we show that prediction is a first and last-mile
effort. The impacts of improving prediction are always
outweighed by those of expanded screening capacity, except
for when the system explains either none or almost all of the
variance in outcomes. While this relationship is moderated
by costs, it still largely holds when prediction improvements

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

