Blink of an eye: a simple theory for feature localization in generative models

Marvin Li 1 Aayush Karan 2 Sitan Chen 2

Abstract
Large language models can exhibit unexpected
behavior in the blink of an eye. In a recent computer use demo, a language model switched from
coding to Googling pictures of Yellowstone, and
these sudden shifts in behavior have also been observed in reasoning patterns and jailbreaks. This
phenomenon is not unique to autoregressive models: in diffusion models, key features of the final
output are decided in narrow “critical windows”
of the generation process. In this work we develop a simple, unifying theory to explain this
phenomenon. Using the formalism of stochastic
localization for generative models, we show that
it emerges generically as the generation process
localizes to a sub-population of the distribution it
models. While critical windows have been studied
at length in diffusion models, existing theory heavily relies on strong distributional assumptions and
the particulars of Gaussian diffusion. In contrast
to existing work our theory (1) applies to autoregressive and diffusion models; (2) makes very
few distributional assumptions; (3) quantitatively
improves previous bounds even when specialized
to diffusions; and (4) requires basic mathematical
tools. Finally, we validate our predictions empirically for LLMs and find that critical windows
often coincide with failures in problem solving
for various math and reasoning benchmarks.

Figure 1. Examples of critical windows for different data modalities and samplers, including reasoning (Abdin et al., 2024; Qi
et al., 2024) and certain jailbreaks (Haize Labs, 2024b) for language models and image class for diffusion models (Georgiev
et al., 2023).

• The Phi-4 team reported that the probability of correctly
answering a math problem can plummet with a single
token (Abdin et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024).
• Gemini abruptly threatened a student who was using it to
study (Gemini, 2024).
• Llama models can be jailbroken by manipulating the first
handful of generated tokens (Qi et al., 2024; Haize Labs,
2024b).
These abrupt shifts are not unique to autoregressive models. In diffusion models, it has been observed that certain
properties like the presence of an object in the background
or the image class emerge in narrow time intervals, sometimes called critical windows, of the generation process (Ho
et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2022; Raya &
Ambrogioni, 2023; Georgiev et al., 2023; Sclocchi et al.,
2024; 2025; Biroli et al., 2024; Li & Chen, 2024).

1. Introduction

Critical windows, more broadly characterizable as a few
steps of the sampling procedure during which features of
the final output appear, arise in many different generative
models and data modalities (Figure 1). They are extremely
useful from an interpretability perspective as they represent
the steps of the sampler responsible for a given property
of the output (Georgiev et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2024), and
have also been used to provide richer stepwise rewards for
preference optimization and finetuning (Abdin et al., 2024;
Lin et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024). As the applications of generative models proliferate, it is crucial from interpretability,
safety, and capability perspectives to understand how and

In large language models (LLMs), undesirable behavior can
often emerge very suddenly. For example,
• Claude transitioned from coding to browsing pictures of
Yellowstone while using a computer (Anthropic, 2024).
1
Harvard College, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 John A. Paulson
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Marvin Li <marvinli@college.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

