Sidechain conditioning and modeling for full-atom protein sequence design with
FAMPNN
Talal Widatalla * 1 2 Richard W. Shuai * 1 Brian L. Hie † 2 3 4 Po-Ssu Huang † 5

Abstract

task as a backbone-conditioned sequence generation task.
These models typically use a graph neural network (GNN) to
encode the backbone structure, then generate the sequence
either autoregressively or through a masked language modeling objective (Dauparas et al., 2022; Hsu et al., 2022;
Ingraham et al., 2019; Ruffolo et al., 2024; Zheng et al.,
2023; Gao et al., 2022a; Akpinaroglu et al.). Because these
methods do not model sidechains during sequence design,
they must implicitly reason about sidechain interactions
through the limited perspective of backbone structure and
sequence identity alone.

Leading deep learning-based methods for fixedbackbone protein sequence design do not model
protein sidechain conformation during sequence
generation despite the large role the threedimensional arrangement of sidechain atoms play
in protein conformation, stability, and overall
protein function. Instead, these models implicitly reason about crucial sidechain interactions
based on backbone geometry and known amino
acid sequence labels. To address this, we present
FAMPNN (Full-Atom MPNN), a sequence design
method that explicitly models both sequence identity and sidechain conformation for each residue,
where the per-token distribution of a residue’s
discrete amino acid identity and its continuous
sidechain conformation are learned with a combined categorical cross-entropy and diffusion loss
objective. We demonstrate that learning these distributions jointly is a highly synergistic task that
both improves sequence recovery while achieving
state-of-the-art sidechain packing. Furthermore,
benefits from full-atom modeling generalize from
sequence recovery to practical protein design applications, such as zero-shot prediction of experimental binding and stability measurements.

We summarize our key contributions as follows:
• We introduce a method which models the per-token
distribution of a residue’s discrete sequence identity
and continuous sidechain structure with a combined
cross-entropy and diffusion loss objective.
• We implement a lightweight, iterative sampling method
for generating samples from this joint distribution.
• We demonstrate that modeling this joint distribution
allows for improved sequence design and experimental
protein fitness prediction.

2. Related work
2.1. Fixed-backbone sequence design
The task of fixed-backbone sequence design is to design a
protein sequence that will fold into a structure that matches
the given protein backbone (Dauparas et al., 2022). Traditional physics-based approaches use energy functions to
combinatorially optimize sequence identity and sidechain
conformation to find low-energy configurations (Holm &
Sander, 1992; Dahiyat & Mayo, 1997).

1. Introduction
Most existing methods for designing protein sequences
for a given structure do not explicitly model or encode
sidechains. Instead, they formulate the sequence design
*
Equal contribution. Either may be listed first on a CV.
Co-corresponding authors. 1 Department of Biophysics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 2 Arc Insitute, Palo Alto, CA
3
Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 4 Stanford Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 5 Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA. Correspondence to: Po-Ssu Huang <possu@stanford.edu>,
Brian L. Hie <brianhie@stanford.edu>.
†

Recently, deep learning-based approaches have proven
highly successful at this task (Jing et al., 2020; Norn et al.,
2021; Hsu et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2022b;a; Zheng et al.,
2023; Anand et al., 2022; Akpinaroglu et al.; Ruffolo et al.,
2024; Ingraham et al., 2023). In addition to being able to
recover the sequence of natural proteins given their backbone, these models are surprisingly capable of also guiding
improvements in binding affinity (Shanker et al., 2024) and
improving protein expression, solubility, and stability (Sum-

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

