Efficient Fine-Grained Guidance for Diffusion Model Based Symbolic Music
Generation
Tingyu Zhu * 1 Haoyu Liu * 1 Ziyu Wang 2 Zhimin Jiang 3 Zeyu Zheng 1

Abstract

details, leading to artifacts or distortions in the generated
content, such as noticeable inconsistencies or distortions in
videos. (2) Limited controllability: Obtaining precise control over the generated content to align it with the intent
of the user remains a significant challenge. For instance,
correcting specific distortions in a generated video while
keeping the rest of the scene unchanged is difficult with
current diffusion model frameworks.

Developing generative models to create or conditionally create symbolic music presents unique
challenges due to the combination of limited data
availability and the need for high precision in
note pitch. To address these challenges, we introduce an efficient Fine-Grained Guidance (FGG)
approach within diffusion models. FGG guides
the diffusion models to generate music that aligns
more closely with the control and intent of expert composers, which is critical to improve the
accuracy, listenability, and quality of generated
music. This approach empowers diffusion models to excel in advanced applications such as improvisation, and interactive music creation. We
derive theoretical characterizations for both the
challenges in symbolic music generation and the
effects of the FGG approach. We provide numerical experiments and subjective evaluation to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
We have published a demo page 1 to showcase
performances, which enables real-time interactive generation.

These limitations are exacerbated in situations where data
is scarce, which is often the case in domains like symbolic
music generation, where symbolic music data is limited
due to copyright constraints and the effort needed to create
data. Additionally, unlike image generation, where the inaccuracy of a single pixel may not significantly affect overall quality, symbolic music generation demands high precision, especially in terms of pitch. In many musical and
tonal contexts, even a single incorrect or inconsistent note
can be glaringly obvious and disturbing.
To provide more contexts, symbolic music generation is a
subfield of music generation that focuses on creating music in symbolic form, typically represented as sequences
of discrete events such as notes, pitches, rhythms, and durations. These representations are analogous to traditional
sheet music or MIDI files, where the structure of the music is defined by explicit musical symbols rather than audio
waveforms. Many recent works in symbolic music generation are based on diffusion models; see Min et al. (2023),
Wang et al. (2024) and Huang et al. (2024) for example.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) have consistently
demonstrated effectiveness across a wide range of generative tasks, particularly in image and video generation
(Rombach et al., 2022). Despite success, diffusion models face some limitations. (1) Imprecise detail generation:
Diffusion models often struggle with accurately producing

Following this branch of work, we address the precision
and controllability challenges in diffusion-based symbolic
music generation by incorporating fine-grained guidance
into the training and sampling processes. While soft control schemes such as providing chord conditions may fail
to ensure detailed pitch correctness, we propose to enhance
chord conditioning with a hard control method integrated
into the sampling process, which guarantees the desired
tonal correctness in every generated sample.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley, USA
New York University, New York, USA 3 Touka Technologies.
Correspondence to: Haoyu Liu <haoyuliu@berkeley.edu>, Zeyu
Zheng <zyzheng@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
The demo page is available at https://huajianduzhuocode.github.io/FGG-diffusion-music/, we also release the
complete source code at https://github.com/huajianduzhuocode/FGG-music-code

Our results in this work are summarized as follows:
• Motivation: We theoretically and empirically characterize the challenge of precision in symbolic music
generation
1

