Raptor: Scalable Train-Free Embeddings for 3D Medical Volumes Leveraging
Pretrained 2D Foundation Models
Ulzee An * 1 Moonseong Jeong * 1 Simon A. Lee 2 Aditya Gorla 2 3 Yuzhe Yang 1 2 Sriram Sankararaman 1 2 4
Adrenal

Abstract
Current challenges in developing foundational
models for volumetric imaging data, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), stem from the
computational complexity of training state-of-theart architectures in high dimensions and curating sufficiently large datasets of volumes. To
address these challenges, we introduce Raptor
(Random Planar Tensor Reduction), a train-free
method for generating semantically rich embeddings for volumetric data. Raptor leverages a
frozen 2D foundation model, pretrained on natural images, to extract visual tokens from individual cross-sections of medical volumes. These
tokens are then spatially compressed using random projections, significantly reducing computational complexity while retaining semantic information. Extensive experiments on ten diverse
medical volume tasks verify the superior performance of Raptor over state-of-the-art methods,
including those pretrained exclusively on medical
volumes (+3% SuPreM, +6% MISFM, +10%
Merlin, +13% VoCo, and +14% SLIViT), while
entirely bypassing the need for costly training.
Our results highlight the effectiveness and versatility of Raptor as a foundation for advancing
deep learning-based methods for medical volumes
(code: github.com/sriramlab/raptor).

Fracture

Vessel

Nodule
100%
(Raptor)
50%
(Raptor)

Synapse

Brain IDPs +

CC-CCII

Merlin
VoCo

Organ

CTRG-C
SLIViT
MISFM

CTRG-B
SuPreM

Raptor

Figure 1. Comparisons between Raptor and state-of-the-art
methods on diverse medical volume tasks. Raptor achieves
superior performance across classification (AUROC↑) and regression (mean r2 ↑, indicated with + ) tasks while remaining entirely
train-free.

human-computer interaction (Jiang et al., 2023), and autonomous systems (Huang et al., 2025). However, learning
from volumetric modalities, represented as 3-dimensional
voxels, meshes or point clouds, continues to pose logistical
challenges compared with 2-D images. For instance, adapting convolutional (Yang et al., 2021) or transformer architectures designed for images (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) to volumes remains computationally challenging as both classes
of architectures incur cubic or higher order costs to learn or
infer with volumes. Overcoming these hurdles generally requires the development of novel training objectives, efficient
architectures, or access to large-scale compute infrastructure (though such infrastructure remains out of reach in
most research settings). Furthermore, significant challenges
remain in acquiring large-scale 3D training datasets relevant to the task of interest: the largest 3D medical datasets
(160K volumes, Wu et al. 2024b) remain several orders of
magnitude smaller than the 2D image datasets (1.2B images,
Oquab et al. 2023) that have allowed researchers to scale
large image models for current state-of-the-art 2D vision
applications. As a result, few works to date have experimentally demonstrated the benefits of scaling large models
for medical volumes (Zhu et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2024; Wu
et al., 2024a), while large models for natural images and
their capabilities are well-established (Radford et al., 2021;

1. Introduction
Understanding volumetric data is essential in a variety of
applications, including healthcare (Milletari et al., 2016),
*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles 2 Department of Computational
Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 3 Bioinformatics Interdepartmental Program,
University of California, Los Angeles 4 Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to:
Ulzee An <ulzee@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

