Targeted Unlearning with Single Layer Unlearning Gradient

Zikui Cai 1 2 * Yaoteng Tan 1 * M. Salman Asif 1

Abstract

tion (Thiel, 2023) and demands for unlearning. Completely
abandoning trained large models and retraining them from
scratch using scrutinized dataset is prohibitively expensive
and wasteful. Machine unlearning (Cao & Yang, 2015;
Nguyen et al., 2022; Chakraborty et al., 2024) is an attractive
alternative, which refers to techniques designed to remove
targeted information from a trained model.

Machine unlearning methods aim to remove sensitive or unwanted content from trained models,
but typically demand extensive model updates at
significant computational cost while potentially
degrading model performance on both related and
unrelated tasks. We propose Single Layer Unlearning Gradient (SLUG) as an efficient method
to unlearn targeted information by updating a single critical layer using a one-time gradient computation. SLUG uses layer importance and gradient
alignment metrics to identify the optimal layer for
targeted information removal while preserving
the model utility. We demonstrate the effectiveness of SLUG for CLIP, Stable Diffusion, and
vision-language models (VLMs) in removing concrete (e.g., identities and objects) and abstract concepts (e.g., artistic styles). On the UnlearnCanvas
benchmark, SLUG achieves comparable unlearning performance to existing methods while requiring significantly less computational resources.
Our proposed approach offers a practical solution
for targeted unlearning that is computationally
efficient and precise. Our code is available at
https://github.com/CSIPlab/SLUG.

1

A good machine unlearning technique should achieve three
main objectives: (1) Computational efficiency. The naïve
approach of re-training models achieves exact unlearning
but at an enormous computational cost. An effective solution must minimize the computational overhead. (2) Effective and robust unlearning. Recent studies have raised
concerns about the robustness of unlearning methods, showing that unlearned concepts can often be recovered through
careful probing or adversarial techniques (Zhang et al., 2025;
Petsiuk & Saenko, 2025; Che et al., 2025). The unlearning process must be robust against such recovery attempts.
(3) Targeted removal with minimal side effects. The interconnected nature of learned representations means that
removing one concept can lead to degraded performance on
(un)related concepts and overall model performance (Amara
et al., 2025). Unlearning should precisely target specific
information while preserving general model capabilities.
Current unlearning methods often fail to meet all three objectives simultaneously. Traditional approaches like finetuning (FT) (Warnecke et al., 2023) and gradient ascent
(GA) (Thudi et al., 2022) struggle to balance between effective forgetting and utility preservation. More recent
techniques such as saliency unlearning (SalUn) (Fan et al.,
2024) and selective synaptic dampening (SSD) (Foster et al.,
2024) attempt to address this by identifying and updating
only salient parameters. While these methods represent the
state-of-the-art, they still face key challenges: (1) High
computational cost, as they typically involve iterative gradient computation and parameter updates across the entire
model. (2) Limited generalizability and flexibility, as
they are often designed for single tasks (e.g. classification,
image generation). (3) Side effects, as parameter updates
spread over the entire model can cause unintended changes
to (un)related concepts and degrade overall model performance. (4) Human engineering, as they require extensive
hyperparameter tuning for learning rate, number of iterations, and thresholds for masking in parameter updates. We

Introduction

Modern large foundation models, including large language
models (LLMs) (Leiter et al., 2024), text-to-image diffusion (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Yang et al., 2023) , and
vision-language models (VLMs) (Zhang et al., 2024b; Liu
et al., 2024b) leverage vast amounts of data for training.
While these large scale datasets enhance performance, they
also raise serious data privacy and legal compliance (gdp,
2016; Thiel, 2023) concerns as unwanted data can influence
the trained models, resulting in harmful content genera*

Equal contribution 1 University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA 2 University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
Correspondence to: M. Salman Asif <sasif@ucr.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

