Near-optimal Sketchy Natural Gradients
for Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Maricela Best McKay 1 Avleen Kaur 2 Chen Greif 2 Brian Wetton 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are fundamental in
mathematical modelling and simulation. However, most
PDEs lack analytical solutions and must be solved numerically. Although there are extensive tools for numerically
solving a variety of PDEs, many problems of scientific interest remain computationally intractable or require significant
simplification.

Natural gradient methods for PINNs have
achieved state-of-the-art performance with errors
several orders of magnitude smaller than those
achieved by standard optimizers such as ADAM
or L-BFGS. However, computing natural gradients for PINNs is prohibitively computationally
costly and memory-intensive for all but small neural network architectures. We develop a randomized algorithm for natural gradient descent for
PINNs that uses sketching to approximate the natural gradient descent direction. We prove that the
change of coordinate Gram matrix used in a natural gradient descent update has rapidly-decaying
eigenvalues for a one-layer, one-dimensional neural network and empirically demonstrate that this
structure holds for four different example problems. Under this structure, our sketching algorithm is guaranteed to provide a near-optimal lowrank approximation of the Gramian. Our algorithm dramatically speeds up computation time
and reduces memory overhead. Additionally, in
our experiments, the sketched natural gradient
outperforms the original natural gradient in terms
of accuracy, often achieving an error that is an
order of magnitude smaller. Training time for a
network with around 5,000 parameters is reduced
from several hours to under two minutes. Training
can be practically scaled to large network sizes;
we optimize a PINN for a network with over a
million parameters within a few minutes, a task
for which the full Gram matrix does not fit in
memory.

The success of deep learning has generated great interest
in combining deep learning techniques with scientific computing (Weinan et al., 2021; Baker et al., 2019). Physicsinformed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019) are
one such technique. PINNs have appealing features for
tackling challenges in scientific computing and modelling,
and have shown a lot of promise across a broad range of
applications; they have been used for data assimilation, to
model multi-scale and multi-physics phenomena, as inverse
problem solvers for parameter estimation, to solve highdimensional systems of PDEs, and to combine incomplete
mechanistic understanding with data (Karniadakis et al.,
2021; Dabrowski et al., 2023).
Despite their demonstrated utility, important limitations
have emerged. PINNs can be notoriously difficult to optimize, particularly for multi-scale problems and problems
that exhibit multiple frequencies (Rohrhofer et al., 2022;
Wong et al., 2022; Krishnapriyan et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; 2022). First-order methods such as ADAM (Kingma
& Ba, 2015), while scalable, are generally unable to achieve
appropriate performance accuracy. While memory-intensive
second-order optimizers such as BFGS or L-BFGS often
fare better (Krishnapriyan et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 1997;
Rathore et al., 2024), PINNs rarely achieve accuracy better
than 1E-03 (Müller & Zeinhofer, 2023).
Recently, another class of optimization methods, natural
energy gradients, has been developed for PINNs to address
these difficulties (Müller & Zeinhofer, 2023). Natural energy gradients take advantage of the underlying geometry
in the function space for the PDE residual related to a PINN
to formulate a better search direction in the parameter space.
These methods show significant promise; they can achieve
state-of-the-art accuracy, often outperforming other opti-

1
Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia,
BC, Canada 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
British Columbia, BC, Canada. Correspondence to: Maricela Best
Mckay <maricela@math.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

