MMInference: Accelerating Pre-filling for Long-Context
Visual Language Models via Modality-Aware Permutation Sparse Attention

Yucheng Li 1 * Huiqiang Jiang 2 § Chengruidong Zhang 2 Qianhui Wu 2 Xufang Luo 2 Surin Ahn 2
Amir H. Abdi 2 Dongsheng Li 2 Jianfeng Gao 2 Yuqing Yang 2 Lili Qiu 2

Abstract
Dynamic Sparse Attention

The integration of long-context capabilities with
visual understanding unlocks unprecedented potential for Vision Language Models (VLMs).
However, the quadratic attention complexity during the pre-filling phase remains a significant obstacle to real-world deployment. To overcome this
limitation, we introduce MMInference (Multimodality Million tokens Inference), a dynamic
sparse attention method that accelerates the prefilling stage for long-context multi-modal inputs.
First, our analysis reveals that the temporal and
spatial locality of video input leads to a unique
sparse pattern, the Grid pattern. Simultaneously,
VLMs exhibit markedly different sparse distributions across different modalities. We introduce a
permutation-based method to leverage the unique
Grid pattern and handle modality boundary issues. By offline search the optimal sparse patterns for each head, MMInference constructs the
sparse distribution dynamically based on the input. We also provide optimized GPU kernels for
efficient sparse computations. Notably, MMInference integrates seamlessly into existing VLM
pipelines without any model modifications or
fine-tuning. Experiments on multi-modal benchmarks—including Video QA, Captioning, VisionNIAH, and Mixed-Modality-NIAH—with stateof-the-art long-context VLMs (LongVila, LlavaVideo, VideoChat-Flash, Qwen2.5-VL) show that
MMInference accelerates the pre-filling stage by
up to 8.3× at 1M tokens while maintaining accuracy. Our code is available at https://aka.
ms/MMInference.

Sparse Pattern

AShape VS

Estimation

Last
Q

(e.g. O(n), O(n^2))

Grid

BlockSparse

Pooling/ Antidia
Compress gonal

Dynamic Sparse Index
Permutation
(Sparse Load)

Column
(back) Block
/Row Grid slash

Tile-wise

Block-sparse Tensor Core

(Dense Compute)

(e.g. WGMMA)

In kernel

Figure 1: Dynamic sparse attention pipelines leverage sparse
loading with dense computation (Zheng et al., 2023) to enable
hardware-efficient acceleration. MMInference adopts a bottom-up
system-algorithm co-design that accounting for both the mathematical equivalence constraints of sparse loading and the locality
properties of real-world attention patterns.

1. Introduction
Scaling the context size of Vision Language Models (VLMs)
allows them to handle extended temporal information from
long video and text inputs, which is crucial for various applications including robotics (Black et al., 2024; Prasad et al.,
2024; Cheang et al., 2024), autonomous driving (Hu et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024c; Gao et al., 2024), and healthcare (Liu et al., 2024b). In addition, Zhang et al. (2024b)
and Chen et al. (2025) show that scaling the context size of
VLMs can improve the resolution in the temporal dimension
and lead to better performance in video understanding tasks.
However, due to the quadratic complexity of attention, processing long multi-modal inputs (i.e., the pre-fill stage) can
take minutes prior to auto-regressive decoding. As shown in
Fig. 2a, this leads to significant Time-to-First-Token latency,
which hinders the wide adoption of long-context VLMs in
real-world applications. Previous work (Child et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2022; 2024a; Yuan et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025) re-

*

Work during internship at Microsoft. 1 University of Surrey
2
Microsoft Corporation. Correspondence to: Huiqiang Jiang
<hjiang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

