Bongard in Wonderland:
Visual Puzzles that Still Make AI Go Mad?
Antonia Wüst 1 Tim Woydt 1 Lukas Helff 1 2 Inga Ibs 3 4 Wolfgang Stammer 1 2 Devendra S. Dhami 5
Constantin A. Rothkopf 2 3 4 Kristian Kersting 1 2 4 6

Abstract
Recently, newly developed Vision-Language
Models (VLMs), such as OpenAI’s o1, have
emerged, seemingly demonstrating advanced reasoning capabilities across text and image modalities. However, the depth of these advances
in language-guided perception and abstract reasoning remains underexplored, and it is unclear
whether these models can truly live up to their
ambitious promises. To assess the progress and
identify shortcomings, we enter the wonderland
of Bongard problems, a set of classic visual reasoning puzzles that require human-like abilities of
pattern recognition and abstract reasoning. With
our extensive evaluation setup, we show that while
VLMs occasionally succeed in identifying discriminative concepts and solving some of the
problems, they frequently falter. Surprisingly,
even elementary concepts that may seem trivial to
humans, such as simple spirals, pose significant
challenges. Moreover, when explicitly asked to
recognize ground truth concepts, they continue to
falter, suggesting not only a lack of understanding
of these elementary visual concepts but also an
inability to generalize to unseen concepts. We
compare the results of VLMs to human performance and observe that a significant gap remains
between human visual reasoning capabilities and
machine cognition. 1

Figure 1: The wonderland of Bongard problems. The
challenging puzzles circle around simple black-and-white
diagrams that picture geometric shapes, patterns, or lines
arranged in various ways. Despite their simple appearance,
the underlying concepts can be abstract and complex.

1. Introduction
Visual reasoning, the ability to understand, interpret, and
reason about the visual world, is a fundamental aspect of
human intelligence (Marr, 2010). It allows us to navigate
our environment, interact with objects, and make sense of
complex visual scenes. In recent years, the field of artificial
intelligence (AI) has advanced rapidly toward replicating aspects of this visual reasoning, with significant focus placed
on Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (Bordes et al., 2024;
Liu et al., 2023; 2024a). These models integrate visual and
textual information to generate descriptive content, aiming
to mimic how humans comprehend and reason about the
physical world. Because of their human-like responses,
VLMs often create the illusion of possessing human-like
perception and intelligence. However, as recent work shows,
VLMs and the Large Language Models (LLM) on which
they are based have dramatic shortcomings in the case of
reasoning (Nezhurina et al., 2024) and visual perception
(Kamath et al., 2023; Rahmanzadehgervi et al., 2024; Geigle et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2024) or their combination (Zhou
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b).

1

AIML Lab, TU Darmstadt 2 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.ai)
Institute of Psychology, TU Darmstadt 4 Centre for Cognitive
Science, TU Darmstadt 5 Uncertainty in AI Group, TU Eindhoven
6
German Center for AI (DFKI). Correspondence to: Antonia Wüst
<antonia.wuest@cs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
3

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
ml-research/bongard-in-wonderland.

Bongard problems (BPs), a class of visual puzzles that require identifying underlying rules based on a limited set of
images, provide a unique and challenging benchmark for assessing visual reasoning abilities in AI (Bongard & Hawkins,
1

