Lightweight-Mark: Rethinking Deep Learning-Based Watermarking

Yupeng Qiu 1 Han Fang 1 * Ee-Chien Chang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Digital watermarking is crucial for protecting the copyright
of various digital assets, including images, videos, and 3D
content. Typically, digital watermarking involves two main
tasks: information hiding and extraction. In this process,
digital media owners conceal secret information within the
digital media, which can later be extracted to authenticate
copyright ownership. In this process, two crucial properties
need to be considered: 1) invisibility, which requires that
the visual quality of the digital media does not significantly
degrade after embedding secret information, and 2) robustness, which ensures that even when watermarked digital
media encounter various distortions, the embedded information can be accurately extracted (Wan et al., 2022; Singh,
2023).

Deep learning-based watermarking models play a
crucial role in copyright protection across various
applications. However, many high-performance
models are limited in practical deployment due to
their large number of parameters. Meanwhile,
the robustness and invisibility performance of
existing lightweight models are unsatisfactory.
This presents a pressing need for a watermarking
model that combines lightweight capacity with
satisfactory performance. Our research identifies a key reason that limits the performance of
existing watermarking frameworks: a mismatch
between commonly used decoding losses (e.g.,
mean squared error and binary cross-entropy loss)
and the actual decoding goal, leading to parameter redundancy. We propose two innovative solutions: (1) Decoding-oriented surrogate loss (DO),
which redesigns the loss function to mitigate the
influence of decoding-irrelevant optimization directions; and (2) Detachable projection head (PH),
which incorporates a detachable redundant module during training to handle these irrelevant directions and is discarded during inference. Additionally, we propose a novel watermarking framework
comprising five submodules, allowing for independent parameter reduction in each component.
Our proposed model achieves better efficiency, invisibility, and robustness while utilizing only 2.2%
of the parameters compared to the state-of-the-art
frameworks. By improving efficiency while maintaining robust copyright protection, our model is
well suited for practical applications in resourceconstrained environments. The DO and PH methods are designed to be plug-and-play, facilitating
seamless integration into future lightweight models.

In recent years, with the development of deep learning, many
deep learning-based watermarking models have emerged,
which utilize complex architectures to improve performance
(Liu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Ma et al.,
2022; Fang et al., 2023). However, these high-performance
models often come with a large number of parameters and
huge computational demands, limiting their practical deployment. As a result, fields such as diffusion models (Fernandez et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023b) and Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) (Luo et al., 2023; Jang et al., 2024) have chosen to adopt lightweight watermarking models like HiDDeN
(Zhu et al., 2018) for copyright protection, as their backbone models are already large and computationally intensive.
Although lightweight models are easy to deploy, they often sacrifice robustness. This limitation impedes effective
and efficient copyright protection in numerous fields, especially where computational resources are limited, highlighting an urgent need for watermarking models that combine
lightweight capacity with satisfactory performance.
This paper aims to design and train a lightweight watermarking model with state-of-the-art performance. To understand the potential reasons limiting the performance of
lightweight watermarking models, we investigate the decoding process. For the decoding task, accuracy serves
as a prevalent evaluation metric. However, the straightforward empirical risk minimization (ERM) formulation for
accuracy includes minimizing the 0-1 loss, which is computationally intractable. Consequently, researchers resort

*Corresponding Author. 1 National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Han Fang <fanghan@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

