ReQFlow: Rectified Quaternion Flow for Efficient and High-Quality Protein
Backbone Generation
Angxiao Yue 1 Zichong Wang 2 Hongteng Xu 1 3 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
De novo protein design (Ingraham et al., 2023; Lin &
Alquraishi, 2023) aims to design rational proteins from
scratch with specific properties or functions, which has
many biological and medical applications, such as developing novel enzymes for biocatalysis (Kelly et al., 2020)
and discovering new drugs for diseases (Teague, 2003; Silva
et al., 2019). This task is challenging due to the extremely
huge design space of proteins. For simplifying the task, the
mainstream de novo protein design strategy takes protein
backbone generation (i.e., generating 3D protein structures
without side chains) as the key step that largely determines
the rationality and basic properties of designed proteins.

Protein backbone generation plays a central role
in de novo protein design and is significant for
many biological and medical applications. Although diffusion and flow-based generative models provide potential solutions to this challenging task, they often generate proteins with undesired designability and suffer computational
inefficiency. In this study, we propose a novel
rectified quaternion flow (ReQFlow) matching
method for fast and high-quality protein backbone generation. In particular, our method generates a local translation and a 3D rotation from
random noise for each residue in a protein chain,
which represents each 3D rotation as a unit quaternion and constructs its flow by spherical linear
interpolation (SLERP) in an exponential format.
We train the model by quaternion flow (QFlow)
matching with guaranteed numerical stability and
rectify the QFlow model to accelerate its inference and improve the designability of generated protein backbones, leading to the proposed
ReQFlow model. Experiments show that ReQFlow achieves on-par performance in protein
backbone generation while requiring much fewer
sampling steps and significantly less inference
time (e.g., being 37× faster than RFDiffusion and
63× faster than Genie2 when generating a backbone of length 300), demonstrating its effectiveness and efficiency. Code is available at https:
//github.com/AngxiaoYue/ReQFlow.

Focusing on protein backbone generation, many deep generative models, especially those diffusion and flow-based
models (Ho et al., 2020; Watson et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024;
Yim et al., 2023b;a; Bose et al., 2024; Huguet et al., 2024;
Lipman et al., 2023), have been proposed as potential solutions. However, these models often generate protein backbones with poor designability (the key metric indicating the
quality of generated protein backbones), especially for proteins with long residue chains. In addition, diffusion or flow
models often require many sampling steps to generate protein backbones, resulting in high computational complexity
and long inference time. As a result, the above drawbacks
on generation quality and computational efficiency limit
these models in practical large-scale applications.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose a novel rectified quaternion flow (ReQFlow) matching method, achieving fast and high-quality protein backbone generation. As
illustrated in Figure 1a, our method learns a model to generate a local 3D translation and a 3D rotation respectively from
random noise for each residue in a protein chain. Different
from existing models, the proposed model represents each
rotation as a unit quaternion and constructs its quaternion
flow in SO(3) by spherical linear interpolation (SLERP) in
an exponential format (Sola, 2017), which can be learned
by our quaternion flow (QFlow) matching strategy. Furthermore, given a trained QFlow model, we leverage the
rectified flow technique in (Liu, 2022), re-training the model
based on the paired noise and protein backbones generated
by the model itself. The rectified QFlow (i.e., ReQFlow)

1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 2 School of Statistics, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 3 Beijing Key Laboratory of Research on Large Models and Intelligent Governance 4 Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search and Recommendation, MOE. Correspondence to:
Hongteng Xu <hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

