Navigating the Social Welfare Frontier:
Portfolios for Multi-objective Reinforcement Learning

Cheol Woo Kim * 1 Jai Moondra * 2 Shresth Verma 1 Madeleine Pollack 3 Lingkai Kong 1 Milind Tambe 1 4
Swati Gupta 3

Abstract

This setting, which is often modeled using multi-objective
reinforcement learning (MORL), arises in many RL applications, such as fair resource allocation in healthcare (Verma
et al., 2024a), cloud computing (Perez et al., 2009; Hao et al.,
2023) and communication networks (Wu et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2021). Recently, with the rise of large language models (LLMs), reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) techniques that reflect the preferences of heterogeneous individuals have also been explored (Chakraborty
et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024).

In many real-world applications of reinforcement
learning (RL), deployed policies have varied impacts on different stakeholders, creating challenges in reaching consensus on how to effectively aggregate their preferences. Generalized
p-means form a widely used class of social welfare functions for this purpose, with broad applications in fair resource allocation, AI alignment, and
decision-making. This class includes well-known
welfare functions such as Egalitarian, Nash, and
Utilitarian welfare. However, selecting the appropriate social welfare function is challenging for
decision-makers, as the structure and outcomes
of optimal policies can be highly sensitive to the
choice of p. To address this challenge, we study
the concept of an α-approximate portfolio in RL,
a set of policies that are approximately optimal
across the family of generalized p-means for all
p ≤ 1. We propose algorithms to compute such
portfolios and provide theoretical guarantees on
the trade-offs among approximation factor, portfolio size, and computational efficiency. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
summarizing the policy space induced by varying
p values, empowering decision-makers to navigate this landscape more effectively.

Preference aggregation in such scenarios is often achieved
by choosing a social welfare function, which takes the
utilities of multiple stakeholders as input and outputs a
scalar value representing the overall welfare (Yu et al., 2024;
Cousins et al., 2024; Verma et al., 2024a; Fan et al., 2022;
Zhong et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024; Chakraborty et al.,
2024). However, selecting the appropriate social welfare
function is a nontrivial task. Different functions encode
distinct fairness criteria, and the resulting policies can lead
to vastly different outcomes for stakeholders depending on
the choice of the social welfare function.
In this work, we focus on a class of social welfare functions known as generalized p-means, a widely used class of
social welfare functions in algorithmic fairness and social
choice theory. Each choice of p represents a distinct notion
of fairness, and the p-means unify commonly used welfare
functions such as Egalitarian welfare (p = −∞), Nash welfare (p = 0) and Utilitarian welfare (p = 1), providing a
smooth transition between these principles. Notably, this is
known to be the only class of social welfare functions that
satisfy several key axioms of social welfare, such as monotonicity, symmetry, and independence of scale (Roberts,
1980; Moulin, 2003; Cousins, 2023; Pardeshi et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study a reinforcement learning (RL) setting where a deployed policy impacts multiple stakeholders
in different ways. Each stakeholder is associated with a
unique reward function, and the goal is to train a policy that
adequately aggregates their preferences.
*

In practice, the right choice of p is often unclear in advance,
and the decision-maker must understand how policies vary
with p in order to make informed choices about which p (and
thus which policy) to adopt. Small changes in p can sometimes lead to dramatically different policies, and selecting
a policy optimized for an arbitrary p can lead to poor outcomes under a different p value. Despite these challenges,
much of the existing work assumes a fixed social welfare

1

Equal contribution Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 3 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 4 Google Deepmind.
Correspondence to: Cheol Woo Kim <cwkim@seas.harvard.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

