Global curvature for second-order optimization of neural networks

Alberto Bernacchia 1

Abstract

first-order approaches (Bottou et al., 2018). These methods face a major challenge: the need to compute and invert
curvature matrices of size p × p, where p is the number
of model parameters. Several studies have explored blockdiagonal and Kronecker-factored approximations for curvature computation in neural networks (Martens & Grosse,
2015; Eschenhagen et al., 2024). Recent advances have
scaled these methods effectively (Ba et al., 2017; Anil et al.,
2021; Kasimbeg et al., 2025), even enabling second-order
pre-training of large language models (Liu et al., 2025).
However, despite their computational efficiency, these approximations lack strong theoretical guarantees for nonlinear problems (Bernacchia et al., 2018; Karakida & Osawa,
2020). Exact second-order optimization, avoiding blockdiagonal approximations, remains tractable only for smallscale models (Cai et al., 2019; Arbel et al., 2023; Korbit
et al., 2024) or specific architectures, e.g. reversible neural
networks (Buffelli et al., 2024).

Second-order optimization methods, which leverage the local curvature of the loss function, have
the potential to dramatically accelerate the training of machine learning models. However, these
methods are often hindered by the computational
burden of constructing and inverting large curvature matrices with O(p2 ) elements, where p is the
number of parameters. In this work, we present
a theory that predicts the exact structure of the
global curvature by leveraging the intrinsic symmetries of neural networks, such as invariance
under parameter permutations. For Multi-Layer
Perceptrons (MLPs), our approach reveals that
the global curvature can be expressed in terms
of O(d2 + L2 ) independent factors, where d is
the number of input/output dimensions and L is
the number of layers, significantly reducing the
computational burden compared to the O(p2 ) elements of the full matrix. These factors can be
estimated efficiently, enabling precise curvature
computations. To evaluate the practical implications of our framework, we apply second-order optimization to synthetic data, achieving markedly
faster convergence compared to traditional optimization methods. Our findings pave the way for
a better understanding of the loss landscape of
neural networks, and for designing more efficient
training methodologies in deep learning. Code:
github.com/mtkresearch/symo notebooks

Most neural network architectures are built on a layered
structure, where the core operations consist of matrix-vector
products combined with relatively simple nonlinearities.
Due to this structural framework, neural networks exhibit
well-known symmetries: for example, permuting the rows of
a parameter matrix while applying the same permutation to
the columns of the matrix in the subsequent layer leaves the
overall computation of the network unchanged, as illustrated
in Figure 1 (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990; Chen et al., 1993). While
all neural networks exhibit symmetries, the specific symmetries vary by architecture. This raises a natural question: can
we harness the unique symmetries of a given neural network
architecture to design a tailored optimization algorithm?
Our key contribution is demonstrating that, by leveraging
the precise symmetries of a model, we can compute the cur-

1. Introduction

W2

Neural network models are commonly trained using adaptive variants of gradient descent and momentum (Schmidt
et al., 2021). Second-order optimization methods, which
exploit the curvature of the loss function, have shown the
potential for significantly faster convergence compared to
1
MediaTek Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to:
Alberto Bernacchia <alberto.bernacchia@mtkresearch.com>.

W1

W2

W1

Figure 1. Illustration of permutation symmetry. The output of
a neural network is invariant for swapping any pair of neurons
within a layer. That corresponds to simultaneously swapping the
rows of incoming and the columns of outgoing weight matrices.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

