The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sublinear Time Approximation of Text Similarity Matrices
Archan Ray, Nicholas Monath† , Andrew McCallum, Cameron Musco
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{ray, nmonath, mccallum, cmusco}@cs.umass.edu

Computing all pairwise similarities for a data set with n
points requires Ω(n2 ) similarity computations. This can be
a major runtime bottleneck, especially when each computation requires the evaluation of a neural network or other
expensive operation. One approach to avoid this bottleneck
is to produce a compressed approximation to the n × n pairwise similarity matrix K for the data set, but avoid ever fully
forming this matrix and run in sub-quadratic time (i.e., with
running time less than O(n2 ), or sublinear in the size of K).
The compressed approximation, K̃, can be used in place of
K to quickly access approximate pairwise similarities, and in
methods for near neighbor search, clustering, and regression,
which would typically involve K.

Abstract
We study algorithms for approximating pairwise similarity
matrices that arise in natural language processing. Generally,
computing a similarity matrix for n data points requires Ω(n2 )
similarity computations. This quadratic scaling is a significant bottleneck, especially when similarities are computed via
expensive functions, e.g., via transformer models. Approximation methods reduce this quadratic complexity, often by using
a small subset of exactly computed similarities to approximate
the remainder of the complete pairwise similarity matrix.
Significant work focuses on the efficient approximation of positive semidefinite (PSD) similarity matrices, which arise e.g.,
in kernel methods. However, much less is understood about
indefinite (non-PSD) similarity matrices, which often arise in
NLP. Motivated by the observation that many of these matrices
are still somewhat close to PSD, we introduce a generalization
of the popular Nyström method to the indefinite setting. Our
algorithm can be applied to any similarity matrix and runs in
sublinear time in the size of the matrix, producing a rank-s
approximation with just O(ns) similarity computations.
We show that our method, along with a simple variant of
CUR decomposition, performs very well in approximating a
variety of similarity matrices arising in NLP tasks. We demonstrate high accuracy of the approximated similarity matrices
in tasks of document classification, sentence similarity, and
cross-document coreference.

1

1.1

Existing Methods

Similarity matrix approximation is very well-studied, especially in the context of accelerating kernel methods and Gaussian process regression. Here, K is typically positive semidefinite (PSD). This structure is leveraged by techniques like
the random Fourier features and Nyström methods (Rahimi
and Recht 2007; Le, Sarlós, and Smola 2013; Williams and
Seeger 2001; Yang et al. 2012), which approximate K via a
rank-s approximation K̃ = ZZT , for s  n and Z ∈ Rn×s .
These methods have runtimes linear in n and sublinear in
the matrix size. They have been very successful in practice
(Huang et al. 2014; Meanti et al. 2020), and often come
with strong theoretical bounds (Gittens and Mahoney 2016;
Musco and Musco 2017; Musco and Woodruff 2017).
Unfortunately, most similarity matrices arising in natural
language processing, such as those based on cross-encoder
transformers (Devlin et al. 2018) or word mover’s distance
(Piccoli and Rossi 2014), are indefinite (i.e., non-PSD). For
such matrices, much less is known. Sublinear time methods
have been studied for certain classes of similarities (Bakshi
and Woodruff 2018; Oglic and Gärtner 2019; Indyk et al.
2019), but do not apply generally. Classic techniques like
low-rank approximation via the SVD or fast low-rank approximation via random sketching (Frieze, Kannan, and Vempala
2004; Sarlos 2006; Drineas, Mahoney, and Muthukrishnan
2008) generally must form all of K to approximate it, and so
run in Ω(n2 ) time. There are generic sublinear time sampling
methods, like CUR decomposition (Drineas, Kannan, and
Mahoney 2006; Wang, Zhang, and Zhang 2016), which are
closely related to Nyström approximation. However, as we

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks center around the computation
of pairwise similarities between data points using an appropriately chosen similarity function. E.g., in kernel methods, a
non-linear kernel inner product is used to measure similarity,
and often to construct a pairwise kernel similarity matrix. In
natural language processing, document or sentence similarity
functions (e.g., cross-encoder models (Devlin et al. 2018) or
word mover’s distance (Piccoli and Rossi 2014; Kusner et al.
2015))) are key components of cross-document coreference
(Cattan et al. 2020) and passage retrieval for question answering (Karpukhin et al. 2020). String-similarity functions
are used to model name aliases (Tam et al. 2019) and for
morphology (Rastogi, Cotterell, and Eisner 2016).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
† Now at Google.

8072

