The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Activation Modulation and Recalibration Scheme
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Jie Qin1,2,3 * , Jie Wu2 , Xuefeng Xiao2 , Lujun Li3 , Xingang Wang3
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
ByteDance Inc 3 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qinjie2019, lilujun2019, xingang.wang}@ia.ac.cn, {wujie.10, xiaoxuefeng.ailab}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) is a fundamental yet challenging computer vision
task facilitating scene understanding and automatic driving.
Most existing methods resort to classification-based Class
Activation Maps (CAMs) to play as the initial pseudo labels, which tend to focus on the discriminative image regions and lack customized characteristics for the segmentation task. To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel activation modulation and recalibration (AMR) scheme, which
leverages a spotlight branch and a compensation branch to
obtain weighted CAMs that can provide recalibration supervision and task-specific concepts. Specifically, an attention
modulation module (AMM) is employed to rearrange the distribution of feature importance from the channel-spatial sequential perspective, which helps to explicitly model channelwise interdependencies and spatial encodings to adaptively
modulate segmentation-oriented activation responses. Furthermore, we introduce a cross pseudo supervision for dual
branches, which can be regarded as a semantic similar regularization to mutually refine two branches. Extensive experiments show that AMR establishes a new state-of-the-art performance on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, surpassing not
only current methods trained with the image-level of supervision but also some methods relying on stronger supervision, such as saliency label. Experiments also reveal that our
scheme is plug-and-play and can be incorporated with other
approaches to boost their performance. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/jieqin-ai/AMR.

Input

Ground truth

Spotlight CAMs Compensation CAMs Weighted CAMs

Figure 1: Visualizations of CAMs in the AMR scheme.
“Spotlight CAMs” focus more on the discriminative regions
similar to conventional CAMs. “Compensation CAMs” help
to dig out the important but easily ignored regions. The spotlight CAMs are recalibrated by the compensation CAMs and
further obtain the “Weighted CAMs”, which contribute to
providing more segmentation-oriented concepts.

vision (Dai, He, and Sun 2015), scribbles supervision (Lin
et al. 2016), points supervision (Bearman et al. 2016), and
image-level supervision (Chang et al. 2020; Ahn and Kwak
2018). Image-level weak supervision is an exceedingly favorable scheme since such coarse annotations are consistent
with reality as such weak labels are more readily available
in practice. In our work, we focus on the image-level weakly
supervised paradigm.
Previous image-level WSSS works (Lee et al. 2019; Singh
and Lee 2017; Wang et al. 2020b; Choe, Lee, and Shim
2020) mostly employ classification networks to generate the
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) (Zhou et al. 2016) as the
initial pseudo labels for segmentation. However, this kind
of CAM is oriented for classification and lacks customized
optimization for the segmentation characteristics. Namely,
the classifiers appear to highlight the most discriminative regions, hence the obtained CAM seeds only cover part of the
target objects that are consistent with the spotlight CAMs
in Fig. 1. To address this issue, some approaches attempt
to expand the discriminative response regions and refine the
initial CAM seeds. SEAM (Wang et al. 2020b) adds equivariance regularization on different transformed images to ac-

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental and crucial task due
to extensive applications in the field of computer vision. It
aims to perform a pixel-level prediction to cluster parts of
an image together that belong to the same object class. Albeit with varying degrees of progress, most of its recent successes (Chen et al. 2017, 2018) are involved in a fully supervised setting. It is still arduous to acquire such granular
pixel-level annotations that require a huge amount of manual effort. To alleviate such expensive and unwieldy annotations, many works tend to resort to weakly supervised manner (Wu et al. 2020, 2021), such as bounding boxes super* This work was done when Jie Qin interned at Bytedance Inc.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2117

