The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sufficient Reasons for Classifier Decisions in the Presence of Domain Constraints
Niku Gorji, Sasha Rubin
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
niku.gorji@sydney.edu.au, sasha.rubin@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

the constraint), then a reason of the form “drug A was prescribed and drug B was not prescribed” is overly redundant;
however, the current methods in the state of the art produce
such overly complicated reasons. We argue that in this situation, it is more parsimonious to supply the reason “drug A
was prescribed”. Although it might be obvious how to process reasons to take such simple constraints into account, it
is by no means obvious how to handle semantic constraints
represented by arbitrarily complex Boolean formulas. It is
the purpose of this work to provide a simple and elegant approach for doing this. More precisely, we address the problem of how to incorporate background knowledge, specifically input (domain) constraints, into supplying reasons behind individual decisions of classifiers.
Our contributions are as follows:

Recent work has unveiled a theory for reasoning about the
decisions made by binary classifiers: a classifier describes a
Boolean function, and the reasons behind an instance being
classified as positive are the prime-implicants of the function that are satisfied by the instance. One drawback of these
works is that they do not explicitly treat scenarios where the
underlying data is known to be constrained, e.g., certain combinations of features may not exist, may not be observable, or
may be required to be disregarded. We propose a more general theory, also based on prime-implicants, tailored to taking
constraints into account. The main idea is to view classifiers
as describing partial Boolean functions that are undefined on
instances that do not satisfy the constraints. We prove that this
simple idea results in more parsimonious reasons. That is, not
taking constraints into account (e.g., ignoring, or taking them
as negative instances) results in reasons that are subsumed by
reasons that do take constraints into account. We illustrate this
improved succinctness on synthetic classifiers and classifiers
learnt from real data.

1. We provide a crisp formalisation of reasons for classifier decisions that takes constraints into account, resulting in reasons that are as least (and sometimes more)
parsimonious, i.e., more general and more succinct, than
not taking constraints into account. The central insight,
both simple and powerful, is to treat a classifier as a partial function that is not defined on input instances that
do not satisfy the constraint, and then to use the classic
definition of prime-implicant on partial functions (Coudert 1994) as the instantiation of the word “reason”. This
immediately and naturally generalises the state of the art
from the unconstrained setting to the constrained setting.
2. We provide a simple reduction of the computational
problem of finding all reasons of a classifier’s decision
for a given instance in the presence of constraints to
the same problem in the unconstrained setting. This allows one to reuse existing algorithms and tools from the
unconstrained setting. The idea is that if the constraint
is given by the Boolean formula κ, and the decisionfunction by φ, then reasons of φ-decisions that take
κ into account are exactly the reasons of pκ Ñ φqdecisions.1 We prove that all other variations, including
the seemingly natural variation pκ^φq, provide no more,
and sometimes less, parsimonious reasons.
3. We show, both theoretically and empirically on syn-

Introduction
A recent line of enquiry for providing reasons for classifier
decisions is on supplying principled reasons for individual
instances with formal guarantees of subset- or cardinalityminimality (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018; Darwiche
and Hirth 2020; Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva
2019a). Contrary to the more scalable heuristic approaches
(Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lakkaraju et al. 2019;
Iyer et al. 2018), these principled approaches guarantee the
quality of produced reasons and therefore can serve to validate, benchmark, and potentially provide insights for improving the solutions of the heuristic approaches.
A noteworthy drawback of these methods however, is that
they do not deal with reasoning in the presence of constraints
or background knowledge.
Constraints may arise from the structure and interdependencies between features present in data (Darwiche
2020). As a simple example, consider a medical setting in
which some combinations of drugs are never prescribed together and thus will not appear in any dataset: if we know
that drug A and drug B are never prescribed together (i.e.,

1

This simple reduction can be done in linear-time for formulas
represented as strings or parse-trees, and in polynomial-time for
formulas represented as OBDDă (Darwiche and Marquis 2002).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5660

