The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GuidedMix-Net: Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation by Using Labeled Images as Reference
Peng Tu* 1, 2 , Yawen Huang* 3 , Zheng Feng†1 , Zhenyu He4 , Liujuan Cao5 , Ling Shao6
1

Southern University of Science and Technolog, Shenzhen, China
Shenzhen Microbt Electronics Technology Co., Ltd, China 3 Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China 5 Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
6
National Center for Artificial Intelligence, Saudi Data and Artificial Intelligence Authority, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
yh.peng.tu@gmail.com, yawenhuang@tencent.com, zfeng02@gmail.com
zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is a challenging problem which
aims to construct a model by learning from limited labeled
examples. Numerous methods for this task focus on utilizing the predictions of unlabeled instances consistency alone
to regularize networks. However, treating labeled and unlabeled data separately often leads to the discarding of mass
prior knowledge learned from the labeled examples. In this
paper, we propose a novel method for semi-supervised semantic segmentation named GuidedMix-Net, by leveraging
labeled information to guide the learning of unlabeled instances. Specifically, GuidedMix-Net employs three operations: 1) interpolation of similar labeled-unlabeled image
pairs; 2) transfer of mutual information; 3) generalization of
pseudo masks. It enables segmentation models can learning
the higher-quality pseudo masks of unlabeled data by transfer the knowledge from labeled samples to unlabeled data.
Along with supervised learning for labeled data, the prediction of unlabeled data is jointly learned with the generated
pseudo masks from the mixed data. Extensive experiments on
PASCAL VOC 2012, and Cityscapes demonstrate the effectiveness of our GuidedMix-Net, which achieves competitive
segmentation accuracy and significantly improves the mIoU
over 7% compared to previous approaches.

(a) Input

(b) GTs

(c) CCT

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Upper(dotted box): The mutual information transfer module selects similar features to transfer knowledge
from the labeled samples to unlabeled images. Lower: Examples of ground-truths (GTs) (b), the pseudo mask of CCT
(c) and ours (d).

Introduction
The past several years have witnessed the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015a; Huang
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2021) for visual
semantic segmentation. Although data-driven deep learning techniques have benefitted greatly from the availability
of large-scale image datasets, they require dense and precise pixel-level annotations for parameter learning. Alternative learning strategies, such as semi-supervision, have thus
emerged as promising approaches to reduce the need for annotations, requiring simpler or fewer labels for image classification (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017a; Takeru et al. 2018;
Sohn et al. 2020).
Recent semi-supervised methods for semantic segmentation, such as (Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020; Luo et al.

2020; French et al. 2020; Olsson et al. 2021), exploit consistency by perturbing the unlabeled samples to regularize
model training. Intuitively, the models are expected to manifest the invariance underlying any small perturbations while
observing the natural properties of the data, especially for
unlabeled data. To address this, numerous semi-supervised
semantic segmentation methods have been proposed against
the perturbations when leveraging unlabeled samples. For
example, CCT (Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020) introduces
random manual perturbations by designing separated, unrelated decoders for each type of perturbation. DTC (Luo et al.
2020) builds a task-level regularization rather than data-level
perturbation. CutMix (French et al. 2020) and ClassMix
(Olsson et al. 2021) follow MixUp (Zhang et al. 2017) and
achieve semi-supervised segmentation by forcing the predictions for the augmented and original data to be consistent.
Although various approaches have been introduced over
the years, a key bottleneck of semi-supervised segmenta-

* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2379

