The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning in Multiple Environments
Mirco Mutti1,2, * , Mattia Mancassola1,∗ , and Marcello Restelli1
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
mirco.mutti@polimi.it, mattia.mancassola@mail.polimi.it, marcello.restelli@polimi.it
2

Restelli 2020), the agent first pre-trains its policy by taking a
large amount of unsupervised interactions with the environment (unsupervised pre-training). Then, the pre-trained policy is transferred to several downstream tasks, each of them
defined through a reward function, and the agent has to learn
an optimal policy by taking additional supervised interactions with the environment (supervised fine-tuning). Whereas
most of the existing works in unsupervised RL (Campos et al.
(2021) make for a notable exception) converged to a straightforward fine-tuning strategy, in which the pre-trained policy
is employed as an exploratory initialization of a standard RL
algorithm, there is lesser consensus on which unsupervised
objective is best suited for the pre-training phase. Traditional
intrinsic motivation bonuses that were originally designed
to address exploration in supervised RL (e.g., Pathak et al.
2017; Burda et al. 2019) can be employed in the unsupervised RL setting as well (Laskin et al. 2021). However, these
bonuses are designed to vanish over time, which makes it
hard to converge to a stable policy during the unsupervised
pre-training. The Maximum State Visitation Entropy (MSVE,
Hazan et al. 2019) objective, which incentives the agent to
learn a policy that maximizes the entropy of the induced state
visitation, emerged as a powerful alternative in both continuous control and visual domains (Laskin et al. 2021). The
intuition underlying the MSVE objective is that a pre-trained
exploration strategy should visit with high probability any
state where the agent might be rewarded in a subsequent
supervised task, so that the fine-tuning to the optimal policy
is feasible. Although unsupervised pre-training methods effectively reduce the reliance on a reward function and lead to
remarkable fine-tuning performances w.r.t. RL from scratch,
all of the previous solutions to unsupervised RL assume the
existence of a single environment.

Abstract
Several recent works have been dedicated to unsupervised reinforcement learning in a single environment, in which a policy
is first pre-trained with unsupervised interactions, and then
fine-tuned towards the optimal policy for several downstream
supervised tasks defined over the same environment. Along
this line, we address the problem of unsupervised reinforcement learning in a class of multiple environments, in which
the policy is pre-trained with interactions from the whole class,
and then fine-tuned for several tasks in any environment of
the class. Notably, the problem is inherently multi-objective
as we can trade off the pre-training objective between environments in many ways. In this work, we foster an exploration
strategy that is sensitive to the most adverse cases within the
class. Hence, we cast the exploration problem as the maximization of the mean of a critical percentile of the state visitation entropy induced by the exploration strategy over the
class of environments. Then, we present a policy gradient
algorithm, αMEPOL, to optimize the introduced objective
through mediated interactions with the class. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the ability of the algorithm in learning to
explore challenging classes of continuous environments and
we show that reinforcement learning greatly benefits from the
pre-trained exploration strategy w.r.t. learning from scratch.

1

Introduction

The typical Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and Barto
2018) setting involves a learning agent interacting with an environment in order to maximize a reward signal. In principle,
the reward signal is a given and perfectly encodes the task. In
practice, the reward is usually hand-crafted, and designing it
to make the agent learn a desirable behavior is often a huge
challenge. This poses a serious roadblock on the way of autonomous learning, as any task requires a costly and specific
formulation, while the synergy between solving one RL problem and another is very limited. To address this crucial limitation, several recent works (Mutti, Pratissoli, and Restelli
2021; Liu and Abbeel 2021b,a; Seo et al. 2021; Yarats et al.
2021) have been dedicated to unsupervised RL. In this framework, originally envisioned in (Hazan et al. 2019; Mutti and

In this work, we aim to push the generality of this framework even further, by addressing the problem of unsupervised
RL in multiple environments. In this setting, during the pretraining the agent faces a class of reward-free environments
that belong to the same domain but differ in their transition
dynamics. At each turn of the learning process, the agent
is drawn into an environment within the class, where it can
interact for a finite number of steps before facing another turn.
The ultimate goal of the agent is to pre-train an exploration
strategy that helps to solve any subsequent fine-tuning task
that can be specified over any environment of the class.

* These authors contributed equally. The appendix of this paper
is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.08746. The αMEPOL algorithm is implemented at https://github.com/muttimirco/alphamepol.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7850

