The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning via
Conservative Model-Based Actor-Critic
Zhihai Wang1 , Jie Wang1,2 * , Qi Zhou1 , Bin Li1 , Houqiang Li1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zhwangx, zhouqida}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jiewangx, binli, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

can mislead the agent into selecting the unreliable actions—
whose values are high in the model but is low in the true
environment with a large probability—and thus degrade the
performance of the learned policy until learning an accurate model from a large number of interactions (Kurutach
et al. 2018; Clavera et al. 2018). Previous methods tackle this
problem by improving the expressive power of the models,
such as using neural networks and ensemble models (Punjani and Abbeel 2015; Nagabandi et al. 2018; Kurutach et al.
2018; Chua et al. 2018). However, efficiently learning accurate models remains challenging, especially in complex and
noisy environments (Janner et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019;
Pan et al. 2020), which creates a hindrance in further improving the sample efficiency of model-based approaches.
To alleviate the strong reliance on accurate models, recent model-based algorithms (Luo et al. 2019; Zhou, Li, and
Wang 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2020) prevent the
agent from exploiting model errors by an uncertainty-based
penalty. Specifically, they explicitly quantify the uncertainty
of the Q-value via the discrepancy of ensemble models and
use it as a penalty to learn a lower bound of the true Q-value.
However, many works have shown that the uncertainty quantification of existing methods can be unreliable, which acts
as a bottleneck to their sample efficiency (Ovadia et al. 2019;
Yu et al. 2021). We also empirically show that many existing
uncertainty quantification methods can not well approximate
the errors of Q-function in Section .
In this paper, we propose the conservative model-based
actor-critic (CMBAC), a novel approach that approximates
a posterior distribution over Q-values based on the ensemble models and uses the average of the left tail of the distribution approximation to optimize the policy. Specifically,
CMBAC alternates between learning multiple estimates of
the Q-value from the ensemble models and uses a conservative estimate, i.e., the average of the bottom-k estimates, to
optimize the policy. CMBAC has two main advantages: (1)
the conservative estimates effectively encourage the agent
to avoid unreliable “promising actions”—whose values are
high in only a small fraction of the models; (2) the distribution approximation over Q-values can produce reasonable
uncertainty estimates of the Q-value. We empirically show
that the uncertainty quantification of CMBAC approximates
the errors of Q-function more accurately than previous uncertainty quantification methods, which plays a crucial role

Model-based reinforcement learning algorithms, which aim
to learn a model of the environment to make decisions, are
more sample efficient than their model-free counterparts.
The sample efficiency of model-based approaches relies on
whether the model can well approximate the environment.
However, learning an accurate model is challenging, especially in complex and noisy environments. To tackle this
problem, we propose the conservative model-based actorcritic (CMBAC), a novel approach that achieves high sample efficiency without the strong reliance on accurate learned
models. Specifically, CMBAC learns multiple estimates of
the Q-value function from a set of inaccurate models and
uses the average of the bottom-k estimates—a conservative
estimate—to optimize the policy. An appealing feature of
CMBAC is that the conservative estimates effectively encourage the agent to avoid unreliable “promising actions”—
whose values are high in only a small fraction of the models. Experiments demonstrate that CMBAC significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in terms of sample efficiency on several challenging tasks, and the proposed method
is more robust than previous methods in noisy environments.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning has achieved great success in
decision-making tasks, ranging from playing video games
(Mnih et al. 2015; Hessel et al. 2018) to controlling robots
in simulators (Lillicrap et al. 2016; Haarnoja et al. 2018).
However, many of these results are achieved by model-free
algorithms and generally require a massive number of samples, which significantly hinders the applications of modelfree methods in real-world tasks (Kurutach et al. 2018; Janner et al. 2019). In contrast, model-based approaches, which
build a model of the environment and generate fictitious
interactions, are more sample-efficient than their modelfree counterparts. Therefore, model-based approaches are
promising candidates for dealing with real-world tasks.
The sample efficiency of model-based approaches crucially relies on learning accurate models efficiently, as
model errors limit the performance of learned policies,
known as the model-bias problem (Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011; Clavera et al. 2018). Specifically, model errors
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8612

