The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Retinomorphic Object Detection in Asynchronous Visual Streams
Jianing Li1∗ , Xiao Wang3∗ , Lin Zhu1 , Jia Li2,3 , Tiejun Huang1 , Yonghong Tian1,3†
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lijianing, linzhu, tjhuang, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, wangx03@pcl.ac.cn, jiali@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to high-speed motion blur and challenging illumination,
conventional frame-based cameras have encountered an important challenge in object detection tasks. Neuromorphic
cameras that output asynchronous visual streams instead of
intensity frames, by taking the advantage of high temporal
resolution and high dynamic range, have brought a new perspective to address the challenge. In this paper, we propose a
novel problem setting, retinomorphic object detection, which
is the first trial that integrates foveal-like and peripheral-like
visual streams. Technically, we first build a large-scale multimodal neuromorphic object detection dataset (i.e., PKUVidar-DVS) over 215.5k spatio-temporal synchronized labels. Then, we design temporal aggregation representations to
preserve the spatio-temporal information from asynchronous
visual streams. Finally, we present a novel bio-inspired unifying framework to fuse two sensing modalities via a dynamic
interaction mechanism. Our experimental evaluation shows
that our approach has significant improvements over the stateof-the-art methods with the single-modality, especially in
high-speed motion and low-light scenarios. We hope that our
work will attract further research into this newly identified,
yet crucial research direction. Our dataset can be available at
https://www.pkuml.org/resources/pku-vidar-dvs.html.

Vidar

Light

DVS

Retina

Retinomorphic
object detector
High-speed
moving object

Figure 1: Retinomorphic object detector, integrating foveallike and peripheral-like asynchronous visual streams from
Vidar and DVS, performs a complementary fusion for object
detection in challenging scenarios.
Event-based cameras (e.g., DVS (Lichtsteiner, Posch, and
Delbruck 2008) and DAVIS (Brandli et al. 2014)) in the former type, mimicking the periphery of the retina, work in
a different way over frame-based cameras: each pixel responds to intensity changes with asynchronous events. Due
to natural motion sensors with a high dynamic range (HDR)
and high temporal resolution, event-based cameras have
been applied in object detection. Although some tasks (Perot
et al. 2020; Ryan et al. 2021) achieve a satisfactory performance via only processing DVS events (i.e., brightness
changes), which is hard to provide static texture (i.e., absolute brightness) and achieve high-precision performance.
Another joint frameworks (Jiang et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020;
Cao et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b) attempt to combine DVS events and frames. However, a major
bottleneck prohibits these joint detectors since conventional
frames with 25 Hz may suffer from high-speed motion blur.
Time-based cameras (e.g., Vidar (Dong, Huang, and Tian
2017)) in the latter type, taking the foveal-like sampling
model, generate a spike when the accumulation of photons
for a pixel reaches a threshold. This frame-free imaging
paradigm brings the ability to reconstruct visual textures using spike frequency or inter-spike interval (Zhu et al. 2020b).
It has a high temporal sampling frequency of 20,000 Hz and
is suitable to deal with high-speed vision tasks. Nevertheless, a slight drawback of Vidar has a lower dynamic range
(70 dB versus 120 dB) over DVS, thus it is difficult to capture an object in challenging illumination scenarios.
According to the sensing preliminary from the human visual system (Stewart, Valsecchi, and Schütz 2020), processing in peripheral and foveal vision is not independent, but
is more directly connected than previously thought. In other

Introduction
Conventional frame-based cameras have presented some
limitations for object detection in challenging scenes (e.g.,
motion blur, over-exposure, and low-light), resulting in a
sharp drop in performance using unusable frames (Sayed
and Brostow 2021). A key question still remains: How does
the human visual system perform information flows and capture an object in extreme challenging scenarios?
Studies (Sinha et al. 2017; Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019)
have revealed that the visual system of primates transforms information flows through discrete action potentials
or “spikes”. Recently, two types of neuromorphic vision sensors (i.e., event-based cameras (Gallego et al. 2020) and
time-based cameras (Chen et al. 2011)) have captured the
interest of the computer vision community owning to the
advantages over conventional frame-based cameras.
∗

First two author contributed equally.
Corresponding author: Yonghong Tian.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1332

