The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adversarial Training for Improving Model Robustness? Look at Both Prediction
and Interpretation
Hanjie Chen, Yangfeng Ji
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
{hc9mx, yangfeng}@virginia.edu

Abstract

et al. 2020; Garg and Ramakrishnan 2020), sentence paraphrasing (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018; Iyyer et al.
2018), and malicious triggers (Wallace et al. 2019). In this
paper, we focus on word substitution-based attacks, as the
generated adversarial examples largely maintain the original
semantic meaning and lexical and grammatical correctness
compared to other attacks (Zhang et al. 2020).
Previous methods on defending this kind of attacks via adversary detection and prevention (Zhou et al. 2019; Mozes
et al. 2021) or certifiably robust training (Jia et al. 2019;
Huang et al. 2019) either circumvent improving model predictions on adversarial examples or scale poorly to complex
neural networks (Shi et al. 2020). Alternatively, adversarial
training (Jin et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021) improves model robustness via two steps—collecting adversarial examples by
attacking a target model, and fine-tuning the model on the
augmented dataset with these adversarial examples. However, existing adversarial training only focuses on making
a model produce the same correct predictions on an original/adversarial example pair, while ignores the consistency
between model decision-makings on the two similar texts.
To illustrate the necessity of maintaining consistent model
decision-makings (reflected by interpretations) during adversarial training, Fig. 1 shows both the predictions and their
corresponding interpretations of different models on original/adversarial example pairs. The interpretations were generated by IG (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017), which visualizes the attribution of each input feature (word/token)
to the model prediction. Figure 1 (1) shows the predictions
and interpretations of model A, B, and C on a POSITIVE
movie review and its adversarial counterpart. Model A is
not robust as its prediction on the adversarial example is
flipped and the interpretation is totally changed. Although
model B makes the same predictions on the original and adversarial examples, its interpretations reveal that these predictions are based on different key features: for the original
example, it is a sentiment word “clever”; for the adversarial example, it is a neutral word “cinema”. The interpretation discrepancy reveals the vulnerability of model B, as
shown in Fig. 1 (2), where we craft another adversarial attack. Model B fails to recognize “dull” and “pesky” as the
same important, and makes a wrong prediction on the NEG ATIVE adversarial example based on “cinema”. Only model
C is robust as it behaves consistently on predicting both orig-

Neural language models show vulnerability to adversarial examples which are semantically similar to their original counterparts with a few words replaced by their synonyms. A common way to improve model robustness is adversarial training which follows two steps—collecting adversarial examples by attacking a target model, and fine-tuning the model
on the augmented dataset with these adversarial examples.
The objective of traditional adversarial training is to make
a model produce the same correct predictions on an original/adversarial example pair. However, the consistency between model decision-makings on two similar texts is ignored. We argue that a robust model should behave consistently on original/adversarial example pairs, that is making the same predictions (what) based on the same reasons
(how) which can be reflected by consistent interpretations. In
this work, we propose a novel feature-level adversarial training method named FLAT. FLAT aims at improving model
robustness in terms of both predictions and interpretations.
FLAT incorporates variational word masks in neural networks to learn global word importance and play as a bottleneck teaching the model to make predictions based on important words. FLAT explicitly shoots at the vulnerability problem caused by the mismatch between model understandings
on the replaced words and their synonyms in original/adversarial example pairs by regularizing the corresponding global
word importance scores. Experiments show the effectiveness
of FLAT in improving the robustness with respect to both
predictions and interpretations of four neural network models
(LSTM, CNN, BERT, and DeBERTa) to two adversarial attacks on four text classification tasks. The models trained via
FLAT also show better robustness than baseline models on
unforeseen adversarial examples across different attacks. 1

Introduction
Neural language models are vulnerable to adversarial examples generated by adding small perturbations to input texts
(Liang et al. 2017; Samanta and Mehta 2017; Alzantot et al.
2018). Adversarial examples can be crafted in several ways,
such as character typos (Gao et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018),
word substitutions (Alzantot et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2019; Jin
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code for this paper is available at https://github.com/UVaNLP/FLAT

10463

