The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Discrete Optimal Transport Algorithm by Accelerated Gradient Descent
Dongsheng An1 , Na Lei2* , Xiaoyin Xu3 , Xianfeng Gu1
1
Stony Brook University, NY, USA
Dalian University of Technology, Liaoning, China
3
Harvard Medical School, MA, USA
{doan, gu}@cs.stonybrook.edu, nalei@dlut.edu.cn, xxu@bwh.harvard.edu
2

Discrete Optimal Transport In discrete OT problem,
where both the source and target measures are discrete,
the Kantorovich functional becomes a convex function defined on a convex domain. Due to the lack of smoothness, conventional gradient descend method can not be applied directly. Instead, it can be optimized with the subdifferential method (Nesterov 2005), in which the gradient is replaced by the sub-differential. To achieve an approximation error less than ε, the sub-differential method
requires O(1/ε2 ) iterations. Recently, several approximation methods have been proposed to improve the computational efficiency. In these methods (Cuturi 2013; Benamou
et al. 2015; Altschuler, Niles-Weed, and Rigollet 2017),
a strongly convex entropy function is added to the prime
Kantorovich problem and thus the regularized problem can
be efficiently solved by the Sinkhorn algorithm. More detailed analysis shows that the computational complexity of
the Sinkhorn algorithm is Õ(n2 /ε2 ) (Dvurechensky, Gasnikov, and Kroshnin 2018) by setting λ = ϵ/4 log n. Also,
a series of primal-dual algorithms are proposed, including
the APDAGD (adaptive primal-dual accelerated gradient descent) algorithm (Dvurechensky, Gasnikov, and Kroshnin
2018) with computational complexity Õ(n2.5 /ϵ), the APDAMD (adaptive primal-dual accelerated mirror descent)
√
algorithm (Lin, Ho, and Jordan 2019) with Õ(n2 r/ϵ)
where r is a complex constant of the Bregman divergence,
and the APDRCD (accelerated primal-dual randomized coordinate descent) algorithm (Guo, Ho, and Jordan 2020)
with Õ(n2.5 /ϵ). But all of the three methods need to build a
matrix with space complexity O(n3 ), making them difficult
to compute when n is large.

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) plays an essential role in various areas
like machine learning and deep learning. However, computing discrete OT for large scale problems with adequate accuracy and efficiency is highly challenging. Recently, methods based on the Sinkhorn algorithm add an entropy regularizer to the prime problem and obtain a trade off between
efficiency and accuracy. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm based on Nesterov’s smoothing technique to further
improve the efficiency and accuracy in computing OT. Basically, the non-smooth c-transform of the Kantorovich potential is approximated by the smooth Log-Sum-Exp function,
which smooths the original non-smooth Kantorovich dual
functional. The smooth Kantorovich functional can be efficiently optimized by a fast proximal gradient method, the fast
iterative shrinkage thresholding algorithm (FISTA). Theoretically, the computational complexity of the proposed method
is lower than current estimation of the Sinkhorn algorithm
in terms of the precision. Experimentally, compared with the
Sinkhorn algorithm, our results demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves faster convergence and better accuracy with
the same parameter.

Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) is a powerful tool to compute
the Wasserstein distance between probability measures and
widely used to model various natural and social phenomena, including economics (Galichon 2016), optics (Glimm
and Oliker 2003), biology (Schiebinger et al. 2019),
physics (Jordan, Kinderlehrer, and Otto 1998) and in other
scientific fields. Recently, OT has been successfully applied
in machine learning and statistics, such as parameter estimation in Bayesian non-parametric models (Nguyen 2013),
computer vision (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017;
Courty et al. 2017; Tolstikhin et al. 2018; An et al. 2020a;
Lei et al. 2020; An et al. 2020b), and natural language processing (Kusner et al. 2015; Yurochkin et al. 2019). In these
areas, the complex probability measures are approximated
by summations of Dirac measures supported on the samples. To obtain the Wasserstein distance between the empirical distributions, we then solve the discrete OT problems.

Our Method In this work, instead of starting from the
prime Kantorovich problem like the Sinkhorn based methods, we directly deal with the dual Kantorovich problem.
The key idea is to approximate the original non-smooth
c-transform of the Kantorovich potential by Nesterov’s
smoothing technique. Specifically, we approximate the max
function by the Log-Sum-Exp function, which has also been
used in (Schmitzer 2019; Peyré and Cuturi 2018), such that
the original non-smooth Kantorovich functional is converted
to an unconstrained (n − 1)-dimensional smooth convex energy. By using the Fast Proximal Gradient Method named
FISTA (Beck and Teboulle 2009), we can quickly optimize

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10119

