The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Un-mix: Rethinking Image Mixtures for Unsupervised Visual
Representation Learning
Zhiqiang Shen1,4 , Zechun Liu2 , Zhuang Liu3 , Marios Savvides1 , Trevor Darrell3 and Eric Xing1,4
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Reality Labs, Meta Inc. 3 University of California, Berkeley
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{zhiqians,zechunl,marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu, zhuangl@berkeley.edu, trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu, epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

and Favaro 2016], etc., and the corresponding labels are
derived from the properties of the transformation on the unlabeled data. Another direction is contrastive learning based
approaches [He et al. 2019, Chen et al. 2020a] in the latent feature space, such as maximizing mutual information
between different views [Bachman, Hjelm, and Buchwalter
2019, Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2019], momentum contrast
learning [He et al. 2019, Chen et al. 2020b] with instance
discrimination task [Wu et al. 2018, Ye et al. 2019], larger
batch sizes and nonlinear transformation [Chen et al. 2020a],
symmetrized distance loss without negative pairs [Grill et al.
2020], contrasting cluster assignment [Caron et al. 2020].
SimSiam [Chen and He 2020] further found stop-gradient
is critical to prevent from collapsing. These methods have
shown great promise on this task, achieving state-of-the-art
accuracy. However, these methods focus more on designing
the training frameworks and loss formulations, ignoring crucial correlations between the input and loss spaces to enable
fine-grained degrees of soft similarities between positive or
negative pairs in the siamese-like unsupervised frameworks.

The recently advanced unsupervised learning approaches use
the siamese-like framework to compare two “views” from
the same image for learning representations. Making the two
views distinctive is a core to guarantee that unsupervised methods can learn meaningful information. However, such frameworks are sometimes fragile on overfitting if the augmentations used for generating two views are not strong enough,
causing the over-confident issue on the training data. This
drawback hinders the model from learning subtle variance
and fine-grained information. To address this, in this work we
aim to involve the soft distance concept on label space in the
contrastive-based unsupervised learning task and let the model
be aware of the soft degree of similarity between positive or
negative pairs through mixing the input data space, to further
work collaboratively for the input and loss spaces. Despite its
conceptual simplicity, we show empirically that with the solution – Unsupervised image mixtures (Un-Mix), we can learn
subtler, more robust and generalized representations from the
transformed input and corresponding new label space. Extensive experiments are conducted on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
STL-10, Tiny ImageNet and standard ImageNet-1K with popular unsupervised methods SimCLR, BYOL, MoCo V1&V2,
SwAV, etc. Our proposed image mixture and label assignment strategy can obtain consistent improvement by 1∼3%
following exactly the same hyperparameters and training procedures of the base methods. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/szq0214/Un-Mix.

The motivation of our work stems from some simple observations of label smoothing in supervised learning [Szegedy
et al. 2016]. Interestingly, it can be observed from visualizations of previous literature [Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton
2019, Shen et al. 2021] that label smoothing tends to force the
output prediction of networks being less confident (i.e., lower
maximum probability of predictions), but the model representation and overall accuracy still increase significantly. The
explanation for this seemingly contradictory phenomenon
is that with label smoothing, the learner is encouraged to
treat each incorrect instance/class as equally probable. Thus,
more patterns are enforced to be explored in latent representations, enabling less variation across predicted instances
and/or across semantically similar samples. This further prevents the network from overfitting on the training data. Otherwise, the network will be biased to produce over-confident
predictions when evaluated on slightly different test samples.
Considering that contrastive learning with InfoNCE loss is
essentially classifying positive congruent and negative incongruent pairs with cross-entropy loss, such an observation
reveals that a typical contrastive-based method can also encounter the over-confidence issue as in supervised learning.
Perspective of input and label spaces on un-/selfsupervised learning. Contrastive learning methods adopt

1. Introduction
Unsupervised visual representation learning has attracted increasing attention [Noroozi and Favaro 2016, Zhang, Isola,
and Efros 2016, Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018, Hjelm et al.
2018, Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018, He et al. 2019,
Chen et al. 2020a, Kim et al. 2020, Grill et al. 2020, Caron
et al. 2020, Kalantidis et al. 2020] due to its enormous potential of being free from human-annotated supervision, i.e.,
its extraordinary capability of leveraging the boundless unlabeled data. Previous studies in this field address this problem
mainly in two directions: one is realized via a heuristic pretext
task design that applies a transformation to the input image,
such as colorization [Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016], rotation [Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018], jigsaw [Noroozi
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2216

