The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Logic Rule Guided Attribution with Dynamic Ablation
∗

†

Jianqiao An1,2 , Yuandu Lai1,2,3, , Yahong Han1,2,
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{anjianqiao, yuandulai, yahong}@tju.edu.cn

2

Abstract
With the increasing demands for understanding the internal
behaviors of deep networks, Explainable AI (XAI) has been
made remarkable progress in interpreting the model’s decision. A family of attribution techniques has been proposed,
highlighting whether the input pixels are responsible for the
model’s prediction. However, the existing attribution methods
suffer from the lack of rule guidance and require further human interpretations. In this paper, we construct the ’if-then’
logic rules that are sufficiently precise locally. Moreover, a
novel rule-guided method, dynamic ablation (DA), is proposed to find a minimal bound sufficient in an input image
to justify the network’s prediction and aggregate iteratively to
reach a complete attribution. Both qualitative and quantitative
experiments are conducted to evaluate the proposed DA. We
demonstrate the advantages of our method in providing clear
and explicit explanations that are also easy for human experts
to understand. Besides, through the attribution on a series of
trained networks with different architectures, we show that
more complex networks require less information to make a
specific prediction.

Figure 1: Guided by the constructed logic rules, our DA
finds the minimal and sufficient part of the input to justify
the classification. The clear part of the middle image (represented by Ppos ) provides the explanation as ‘If the part Ppos
of the input x present, then x is classified as class Boston
bull’. The area of Ppos is minimized by the DA algorithm
iteratively, and the attribution map is generated at the same
time (the rightmost image).

through the attribution maps. Attribution techniques could
also assist the doctor to make a pathological diagnosis and
improve diagnostic accuracy.
The existing methods of visual attribution can be broadly
categorized into gradient-based (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and
Zisserman 2014; Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Springenberg et al.
2014; Smilkov et al. 2017), perturbation-based (Petsiuk,
Das, and Saenko 2018; Fong, Patrick, and Vedaldi 2019),
and CAM-based methods (Selvaraju et al. 2017; Muhammad and Yeasin 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2020).
Gradient-based methods backpropagate the gradient of a target class to the input layer to highlight the image region that
highly influences the prediction. In contrast, CAM-based
methods highlight objects by resorting to the activation of
feature maps. However, Adebayo et al. (Adebayo et al. 2018)
found that a series of gradient-based and CAM-based attribution methods are insensitive to randomizing labels or
model parameters. Thus, they cannot possibly explain mechanisms that depend on the relationship between instances
and labels, such as an edge detector. As gradients are computed just as a direction of the increase on the loss function,
pixels that cause high activation or with large gradients may
not be sufficient enough to represent the ‘necessary part’
for the model to make predictions. Although these methods

Introduction
Deep Neural models like Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have achieved the state-of-the-art performance in
different computer vision tasks. However, it is difficult to explain their predictions due to the lack of interpretability. A
critical issue called attribution is to explain why classification CNNs predict what they predict (Selvaraju et al. 2017).
The attribution result is usually represented as a saliency
map, i.e., a heatmap that highlights the input pixels that are
the evidence for and against the classification outputs (Montavon, Samek, and Müller 2018). Suppose we have a model
that predicts some kinds of lesions from an image of the
organ (e.g., X-ray image or nuclear magnetic resonance image). The attribution maps identify the importance of each
pixel to the prediction. Consequently, we not only get the
diagnosis result but also know which part of the image that
the model considers to be essential to the result. We can debug the model with the intervention of a professional doctor
∗
This work was done during Yuandu Lai’s internship at Peng
Cheng Laboratory.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

77

