The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Causal Inference Look at Unsupervised Video Anomaly Detection
†

†

Xiangru Lin1,2* , Yuyang Chen1* , Guanbin Li1 , Yizhou Yu2
1
Sun Yat-sen University
The University of Hong Kong
lin0111@connect.hku.hk, chenyy567@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org
2

Abstract

unsupervised learning (Giorno, Bagnell, and Hebert 2016;
Ionescu et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Pang et al. 2020). The
key working principle behind such a pipeline is two-fold:
First, the learned representations are biased towards normal
events since abnormal events in real world are rare, making the representations of abnormal events more discriminative; Second, the majority of the pseudo labels generated
by heuristic designs are accurate enough, for example autoencoder based reconstruction in (Wang et al. 2018) and
Sp+iForest in (Pang et al. 2020) etc.

Unsupervised video anomaly detection, a task that requires
no labeled normal/abnormal training data in any form, is challenging yet of great importance to both industrial applications
and academic research. Existing methods typically follow an
iterative pseudo label generation process. However, they lack
a principled analysis of the impact of such pseudo label generation on training. Furthermore, the long-range temporal dependencies also has been overlooked, which is unreasonable
since the definition of an abnormal event depends on the longrange temporal context. To this end, first, we propose a causal
graph to analyze the confounding effect of the pseudo label generation process. Then, we introduce a simple yet effective causal inference based framework to disentangle the
noisy pseudo label’s impact. Finally, we perform counterfactual based model ensemble that blends long-range temporal
context with local image context in inference to make final
anomaly detection. Extensive experiments on six standard
benchmark datasets show that our proposed method significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating our framework’s effectiveness.

Figure 1: The proposed causal graph explaining the causal
effect of noisy pseudo label.

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) refers to the task of detecting anomalous events, such as unusual pedestrian motion patterns, traffic accidents, and thrown objects, etc., in
frames of a video, that divert significantly from the observed
normal routine. The practical importance of the task has attracted extensive research both from industry and academia.
The majority of such research share a typical setting that either a set of labeled abnormal events in the dataset is available or the training dataset must contain normal videos only,
limiting the wide application of such research. Instead, another line of research focuses on designing algorithms following a completely unsupervised setting where no labeled
normal/abnormal training data is provided in any form. In
this paper, we focus on such unsupervised video anomaly
detection (UVAD). To supervise the training, self-training
with iterative pseudo label generation is usually adopted,
a technique that has been extensively studied and used in

Although an anomaly detection model trained with the
aforementioned pseudo labels exhibits competitive performance, its performance gain primarily comes from the correct pseudo labels. Without a principled analysis of the negative impact introduced by the incorrect pseudo labels, further performance improvement is limited. To better understand the noisy pseudo label’s impact and obtain insights
about this phenomenon, we approach this problem from a
causal inference perspective. According to Fig.1, the UVAD
task is to learn a model that could estimate P (Y |X, M ).
The pseudo label generation process (E → S → L) produces noisy pseudo label set L that supervises the training of
anomaly specific feature representation M in P (Y |X, M ).
On the one hand, the correct pseudo labels benefit the
anomaly specific feature representation learning M , leading to a significant performance gain. This is denoted as the
mediation causal path (X → M → Y ) in Fig. 1. On the
other hand, the incorrect pseudo labels confound X and Y
via the backdoor path (X ← E → S → L → M → Y ). A
backdoor path is defined as one end of the path has an arrow
into X and the other end into Y , making X and Y spuri-

* The first two authors have equal contribution. † Corresponding
authors are Guanbin Li and Yizhou Yu.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1620

