The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Information-Theoretic Bias Reduction via Causal View of Spurious Correlation
Seonguk Seo1 , Joon-Young Lee2 , Bohyung Han1
1

ECE & ASRI & IPAI, Seoul National University
2
Adobe Research
{seonguk, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr, jolee@adobe.com

Abstract

Various recognition algorithms based on deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance improvement
by learning useful patterns from a large number of training
examples. Now, they have started to be deployed in various
real-world problems such as autonomous driving, robotics,
visual surveillance, machine inspection, etc. However, the
objective of the optimization problem is mainly concerned
about the final accuracy, which makes trained models vulnerable to unexpected decision rules affected by spurious
correlation. Although such decision rules work well on most
of training examples, they often lead to poor worst-case
generalization performance and make learned models unfair
to the examples in under-represented groups. For instance,
a few existing works (Kim 2016; Buolamwini and Gebru
2018) have discovered the performance gaps between demographic subgroups in real-world face recognition tasks;
the accuracy of a model on darker-skinned women is often
much lower than that on lighter-skinned men. This tendency
becomes a major weakness in achieving algorithmic fairness
and generalizing on unseen test environments with domain
or distribution shifts.

Mitigating spurious correlation has recently emerged as
an important issue in learning debiased model (Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Zhao et al. 2017; Zhang, Lemoine, and
Mitchell 2018; Li and Vasconcelos 2019; Wang et al. 2019;
Gong, Liu, and Jain 2020; Sagawa et al. 2020b,a). Given the
target and bias variables, they typically suppress spurious
correlation by making the algorithm independent of the bias
variables while maintaining the prediction results for the
target variables. To this end, various measurement methods
about algorithmic fairness or bias have been introduced, e.g.,
demographic parity (Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy
2009), equality of odds (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016),
and group-fairness accuracy (Sagawa et al. 2020a; Zhang
et al. 2020). Although they have been widely used to address the fairness issue, their accuracy- or logit-based bias
measurement schemes may lead to inaccurate algorithmic
bias measurement. For example, we observe that fine-tuning
the last linear classification layer of a model is sufficient to
achieve high unbiased accuracy and worst-group accuracy,
even without updating the biased representations.
To better quantify algorithmic bias, we first formulate the
spurious correlation from a causal point of view. Following
the strict definition of fairness, we derive the condition of
independence between a bias variable and a predicted target variable, which is evaluated by their mutual information.
However, in our causal view, it still gives a biased estimation of spurious correlation. To handle the issue, we propose
a new bias measurement technique based on conditional
mutual information using feature representations, which is
claimed to quantify the algorithmic bias more accurately.
Based on the new bias measurement, we propose a debiasing framework to mitigate the algorithmic bias by augmenting a bias regularization term to the original loss, which is
derived by the conditional mutual information. We also introduce a simple yet effective unsupervised debiasing technique by using stochastic label noise, which also prevents
a model from capturing spurious correlation even without
the prior knowledge about bias. Our experiments verify that
both approaches are helpful for alleviating the algorithmic
bias while preserving model accuracy effectively.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as
follows.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose an information-theoretic algorithm bias measurement technique via conditional mutual information

We propose an information-theoretic bias measurement technique through a causal interpretation of spurious correlation,
which is effective to identify the feature-level algorithmic
bias by taking advantage of conditional mutual information.
Although several bias measurement methods have been proposed and widely investigated to achieve algorithmic fairness
in various tasks such as face recognition, their accuracy- or
logit-based metrics are susceptible to leading to trivial prediction score adjustment rather than fundamental bias reduction.
Hence, we design a novel debiasing framework against the algorithmic bias, which incorporates a bias regularization loss
derived by the proposed information-theoretic bias measurement approach. In addition, we present a simple yet effective
unsupervised debiasing technique based on stochastic label
noise, which does not require the explicit supervision of bias
information. The proposed bias measurement and debiasing
approaches are validated in diverse realistic scenarios through
extensive experiments on multiple standard benchmarks.

Introduction

2180

