The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DetIE: Multilingual Open Information Extraction
Inspired by Object Detection
Michael Vasilkovsky1,10 , Anton Alekseev 3,4 , Valentin Malykh 2,3,6,9 , Ilya Shenbin 3 ,
Elena Tutubalina 5,6,7 , Dmitriy Salikhov 7 , Mikhail Stepnov 7 , Andrey Chertok 7,8 ,
Sergey Nikolenko 3,9,10
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark lab, Moscow, Russia
3
St. Petersburg Department of Steklov Mathematical Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia
4
St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia
5
HSE University, Moscow, Russia
6
Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russia
7
Sber AI, Moscow, Russia
8
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Moscow, Russia
9
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia
10
Neuromation OU, Tallinn, Estonia
Abstract

rely on a pre-defined ontology schema and are trained to be
domain-agnostic, so they can be used in many downstream
NLP tasks: multi-document question answering and summarization (Fan et al. 2019), event schema induction (Balasubramanian et al. 2013), fact salience (Ponza, Del Corro,
and Weikum 2018), word embedding generation (Stanovsky,
Dagan, and Mausam 2015), and more. Using triplets as
graph edges, OpenIE systems serve as a core component
for unsupervised knowledge graph construction (Mausam
2016); high-quality OpenIE systems can output an open
knowledge graph even without further post-processing.
Historically, OpenIE systems were purely statistical or
rule-based, often consisting of several components such as
PoS (part-of-speech) tagging or syntax parsing, so errors
tended to accumulate. Recently, end-to-end neural network
systems for OpenIE have begun to outperform their nonneural counterparts. There exist two paradigms in neural
OpenIE: sequence labeling (Stanovsky et al. 2018; Roy et al.
2019; Kolluru et al. 2020a) and sequence generation (Cui,
Wei, and Zhou 2018; Kolluru et al. 2020b), each with their
own merits and drawbacks. To avoid duplicates, in both
paradigms triplets are usually extracted iteratively either
in the autoregressive (Kolluru et al. 2020a,b) or predicatebased manner (Ro, Lee, and Kang 2020). During training,
autoregressive methods predict triplets in a prefedined order
that usually has no meaning and excessively penalizes the
model. Predicate-based methods first extract all predicates
and then iteratively find arguments for each, assuming that a
predicate occurs in only one chain of arguments, which may
not hold both in common benchmarks and in the real world.
In this work, we view OpenIE from a different perspective, as a direct set prediction problem. Our approach is inspired by one-stage anchor-based object detection models
from computer vision (Liu et al. 2015; Tan, Pang, and Le
2020) that predict all bounding boxes in one forward pass
and apply intersection-based matching to match predictions
with the ground truth. We bridge the inter-discipline gap and

State of the art neural methods for open information extraction (OpenIE) usually extract triplets (or tuples) iteratively
in an autoregressive or predicate-based manner in order not
to produce duplicates. In this work, we propose a different
approach to the problem that can be equally or more successful. Namely, we present a novel single-pass method for
OpenIE inspired by object detection algorithms from computer vision. We use an order-agnostic loss based on bipartite
matching that forces unique predictions and a Transformerbased encoder-only architecture for sequence labeling. The
proposed approach is faster and shows superior or similar performance in comparison with state of the art models on standard benchmarks in terms of both quality metrics
and inference time. Our model sets the new state of the art
performance of 67.7% F1 on CaRB evaluated as OIE2016
while being 3.35x faster at inference than previous state of
the art. We also evaluate the multilingual version of our
model in the zero-shot setting for two languages and introduce a strategy for generating synthetic multilingual data to
fine-tune the model for each specific language. In this setting, we show performance improvement of 15% on multilingual Re-OIE2016, reaching 75% F1 for both Portuguese
and Spanish languages. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/sberbank-ai/DetIE.

Introduction
Extracting structured information from raw texts is a key
area of research in natural language processing (NLP). It
has a core set of well-defined basic problems: relation extraction, named entity recognition (NER), slot filling, and so
on, each defining a specific view on the perception and analysis of textual data. In this work, we follow the paradigm of
open information extraction (OpenIE) that represents texts
from an arbitrary domain as a set of (subject, relation, object) triplets (Yates et al. 2007). OpenIE methods do not
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11412

