The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AXM-Net: Implicit Cross-Modal Feature Alignment for Person Re-identification
Ammarah Farooq1 , Muhammad Awais1,2,3 , Josef Kittler1,2,3 , Syed Safwan Khalid1
1

Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey,
2
Surrey Institute for People-centred AI (SI-PAI),
3
Sensus Futuris Ltd.
{ammarah.farooq, m.a.rana, j.kittler, s.khalid}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Cross-modal person re-identification (Re-ID) is critical for
modern video surveillance systems. The key challenge is to
align cross-modality representations induced by the semantic information present for a person and ignore background
information. This work presents a novel convolutional neural network (CNN) based architecture designed to learn semantically aligned cross-modal visual and textual representations. The underlying building block, named AXM-Block,
is a unified multi-layer network that dynamically exploits the
multi-scale knowledge from both modalities and re-calibrates
each modality according to shared semantics. To complement
the convolutional design, contextual attention is applied in
the text branch to manipulate long-term dependencies. Moreover, we propose a unique design to enhance visual partbased feature coherence and locality information. Our framework is novel in its ability to implicitly learn aligned semantics between modalities during the feature learning stage.
The unified feature learning effectively utilizes textual data as
a super-annotation signal for visual representation learning
and automatically rejects irrelevant information. The entire
AXM-Net is trained end-to-end on CUHK-PEDES data. We
report results on two tasks, person search and cross-modal
Re-ID. The AXM-Net outperforms the current state-of-theart (SOTA) methods and achieves 64.44% Rank@1 on the
CUHK-PEDES test set. It also outperforms its competitors
by >10% in cross-viewpoint text-to-image Re-ID scenarios
on CrossRe-ID and CUHK-SYSU datasets.

Figure 1: Illustration of semantic alignment for visual and
textual features. The semantic information in the features
should be aligned to enhance the cross-modal associations.

given. Nevertheless, in both tasks, it is critical to learn discriminative feature representations which are unique to an
individual and well-aligned within the class for finer matching.
The literature is packed with numerous deep learning
based person re-identification approaches. These methods
aim to learn robust person representations (Zhou et al. 2019;
Dai et al. 2019), apply various attention mechanisms (Xia
et al. 2019; Chen, Deng, and Hu 2019), look for crossdomain knowledge transfer (Jing et al. 2020b; Chen, Zhu,
and Gong 2019) and so on. Cross-modal person Re-ID is
another important aspect of Re-ID task (Yan, Kittler, and
Mikolajczyk 2018; Farooq et al. 2020a,b; Lu et al. 2020;
Jing et al. 2020b). The dependency on available image
queries limits the practical application of a vision-based system. For example, in the case of criminal search, often the
CCTV footage (or image) of a criminal is not available.
Therefore, police rely on the unique cues of the criminal
from the witnesses’ descriptions often given in terms of natural language description. In such cases, with no images
available, this descriptive information serves as a query for
person Re-ID. Hence, employing a multi-modal Re-ID system can overcome the limitations of image-based systems.
This work focuses on cross-modal person Re-ID using visual and textual information of the person. The aim of the
work is to design a system that semantically aligns crossmodal and cross-pose representations implicitly by focusing

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) has become a principal
component of intelligent video surveillance systems that
aims to retrieve a queried person from a large database
of pedestrian images. The database typically contains nonoverlapping camera viewpoints with respect to the query
images. Depending on the type of information provided as
a query, the task is referred to as person Re-ID or person
search in the literature. Person search (Li et al. 2017b) aims
to find a person based on the natural language description
of the person while images are provided as a query in person Re-ID. In person search, there is no constraint on the
camera viewpoints of the person, i.e., in the visual gallery
person may have the same pose for which the description is
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4477

