The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Blindfolded Attackers Still Threatening:
Strict Black-Box Adversarial Attacks on Graphs
Jiarong Xu1 , Yizhou Sun2 , Xin Jiang2 , Yanhao Wang1 , Chunping Wang3 , Jiangang Lu1 and
Yang Yang1 *
1

Zhejiang University
University of California, Los Angeles
3
FinVolution Group
{xujr, wangyanhao, lujg, yangya}@zju.edu.cn, yzsun@cs.ucla.edu, jiangxjames@ucla.edu, wangchunping02@xinye.com
2

Abstract

Information
Whiteaccessible
box
√
Model parameters √
Labels
√
Queries
√
Model structure

Adversarial attacks on graphs have attracted considerable research interests. Existing works assume the attacker is either
(partly) aware of the victim model, or able to send queries to it.
These assumptions are, however, unrealistic. To bridge the gap
between theoretical graph attacks and real-world scenarios,
in this work, we propose a novel and more realistic setting:
strict black-box graph attack, in which the attacker has no
knowledge about the victim model at all and is not allowed to
send any queries. To design such an attack strategy, we first
propose a generic graph filter to unify different families of
graph-based models. The strength of attacks can then be quantified by the change in the graph filter before and after attack.
By maximizing this change, we are able to find an effective
attack strategy, regardless of the underlying model. To solve
this optimization problem, we also propose a relaxation technique and approximation theories to reduce the difficulty as
well as the computational expense. Experiments demonstrate
that, even with no exposure to the model, the Macro-F1 drops
5.5% in node classification and 29.5% in graph classification,
which is a significant result compared with existent works.

1

Gray- Restricted Black- Strict
box black-box box black-box
×
×
×
×
√
×
×
×
√
×
×
×
◯
◯
×
×

Table 1: Different graph adversarial
√ attacks, categorized by
whether the attacker has full ( ), limited (◯), or no (×)
access to the model.
to the victim model (Wu et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019a; Chen
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018). Then gray-box attack is proposed, in which the attacker trains a surrogate model based
on limited knowledge of the victim as well as task-specific
labeled data (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018;
Zügner and Günnemann 2019). However, most real-world
networks are unlabeled and it is arduously expensive to obtain sufficient labels, which motivates the study of (restricted)
black-box attacks. With no access to the correct labels, restricted black-box attack shows its success but still needs
limited knowledge of the victim model (Chang et al. 2020).
Comparatively, the black-box model is not aware of the victim model, but has to query some or all examples to gather
additional information (Dai et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2020).
Despite these research efforts, there still exists a considerable gap between the existing graph attacks and the realworld scenarios. In practice, the attacker cannot fetch even
the basic information about the victim model (like whether
the model is GNN-based or random-walk-based). Moreover,
it is also unrealistic to assume that the attacker can query
the victim model in real-world applications. Such querying
attempts will be inevitably noticed and blocked by the defenders. For example, consider a credit risk model built upon the
user lending network in a commercial bank. This model only
serves the bank’s internal personnel, but is completely unavailable to the public or credit card users. When malicious
users want to improve their credit scores via some attack
strategies, they have no knowledge of the victim model (including model structure and parameters) and do not even
have access to queries or labels at all.
In view of the above limits, we propose a new attack strategy, strict black-box graph attack (STACK), which has no
knowledge of the victim model and no access to queries or

Introduction

Graph-based models, including graph neural networks
(GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018) and
various random walk-based models (Lovász 1993; Perozzi,
Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), have achieved significant success
in numerous domains like social network (Pei, Chakraborty,
and Sycara 2015), bioinformatics (Gilmer et al. 2017), finance (Paranjape, Benson, and Leskovec 2017), etc. However, these approaches have been shown to be vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Jin et al. 2020), namely those that
are intentionally crafted to fool the models through slight,
even human-imperceptible modifications to the input graph.
Therefore, adversarial attack presents itself as a serious security challenge, and is of great importance to identify the
weaknesses of graph-based models.
Over recent years, extensive efforts have been devoted
to studying adversarial attacks on graphs. According to the
amount of knowledge accessible to the attacker, we summarize five categories of existing works in Table 1. As the first
attempt, white-box attack assumes the attacker has full access
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4299

