The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Risk-Aware Stochastic Shortest Path
Tobias Meggendorfer
Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
tobias.meggendorfer@ist.ac.at

Probability

Abstract
We treat the problem of risk-aware control for stochastic
shortest path (SSP) on Markov decision processes (MDP).
Typically, expectation is considered for SSP, which however
is oblivious to the incurred risk. We present an alternative
view, instead optimizing conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), an
established risk measure. We treat both Markov chains as well
as MDP and introduce, through novel insights, two algorithms,
based on linear programming and value iteration, respectively.
Both algorithms offer precise and provably correct solutions.
Evaluation of our prototype implementation shows that riskaware control is feasible on several moderately sized models.

0.5
0.3
0.1
Costs

VaR40%

2

4

6

CVaR40%

8

10

Figure 1: Example distribution over costs to showcase VaR
and CVaR with threshold t = 40%. The bars represent the
respective probabilities, while the grey area depicts the part
considered by CVaR: The sum of the grey area equals the
specified threshold of 40%, the expectation over it is 7.875.

Introduction

(VaR) is the worst p-quantile for a given threshold t ∈ [0, 1].
It approximates the notion of a “reasonably likely” bad case.
However, VaR ignores the magnitude of worse cases, and
has been characterized “seductive, but dangerous” and “not
sufficient to control risk” (Beder 1995). Conditional value-atrisk (CVaR) (average value-at-risk, expected shortfall) yields
the expectation over all outcomes worse than the VaR, i.e.
the “tail loss”; see Fig. 1 for a sketch. As such, it considers outliers, weighted accordingly. It is an established and
“more consistent measure of risk” (Artzner et al. 1999; Rockafellar, Uryasev et al. 2000), gaining popularity in various
fields. We direct the interested reader to (Sarykalin, Serraino,
and Uryasev 2008) for detailed comparison between VaR
and CVaR, (Filippi, Guastaroba, and Speranza 2020) for a
survey of CVaR applications, and (Shapiro, Dentcheva, and
Ruszczynski 2014) for further risk measures.
Motivated by these observations, our primary goal in this
work is to provide risk-aware control for SSP objectives
through the optimization of its CVaR.

Markov decision processes (MDP) are a standard model for
sequential decision making in uncertain environments, applied in, for example, robot motion planning; see e.g. (White
1993, 1985) for a variety of further examples. Usually, one
aims to control such a system optimally with respect to a
“performance rating”, called objective. In this work, we consider the stochastic shortest path (SSP) objective (Bertsekas
and Tsitsiklis 1991), where the goal is to minimize the accumulated cost until a given set of target states is reached.
Traditionally, one seeks a policy minimizing the expectation of this accumulated cost. However, this policy willingly
accepts arbitrary risks to achieve a minimal increase in expected profit. This may be undesirable, especially when the
system in question, for example, models a situation which
takes a long time to unfold or is only executed once, such
as a retirement savings plan or Mars rover path planning. In
particular, the law of large numbers is not applicable, and expectation alone provides little insight in the actual dynamics.
To remedy this issue, risk-aware control proposes several
ideas. A popular approach is to quantify the risk incurred
by a policy and then optimizing this risk measure instead of
expectation. We briefly discuss some relevant measures: Variance does not focus on bad cases and may even incentivize
intentionally performing suboptimally in unexpectedly good
situations. Worst case analysis often is too pessimistic in probabilistic environments, considering events with probability
0 such as a fair coin toss never yielding heads. Value-at-risk

Related Work Firstly, (Křetı́nský and Meggendorfer 2018)
also considers CVaR, however for mean payoff instead of
SSP and only provides an linear programming based solution, while we additionally present a value iteration approach.
Secondly, (Chow et al. 2015) treats the discounted variant of
the problem, fundamentally relying on the discounting factor
to bound the error of the approximation. Moreover, (Carpin,
Chow, and Pavone 2016) considers two variants of the problem. For the first, much more restricted variant, they present
an approximative formulation together with an algorithm.
For the second variant, which is more general and closer to

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9858

