The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neighborhood Consensus Contrastive Learning for Backward-Compatible
Representation
Shengsen Wu1,2, * , Liang Chen3, * , Yihang Lou4,† , Yan Bai2 , Tao Bai4 , Minghua Deng3 ,
Ling-Yu Duan2,5,†
2

1
The SECE of Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Intelligent Vision Dept, Huawei Technologies, Beijing, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{sswu, clandzyy, yanbai, dengmh, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, {louyihang1, baitao13}@huawei.com

Abstract
In object re-identification (ReID), the development of deep
learning techniques often involves model updates and deployment. It is unbearable to re-embedding and re-index with the
system suspended when deploying new models. Therefore,
backward-compatible representation is proposed to enable
“new” features to be compared with “old” features directly,
which means that the database is active when there are both
“new” and “old” features in it. Thus we can scroll-refresh the
database or even do nothing on the database to update.
The existing backward-compatible methods either require a
strong overlap between old and new training data or simply
conduct constraints at the instance level. Thus they are difficult in handling complicated cluster structures and are limited in eliminating the impact of outliers in old embeddings,
resulting in a risk of damaging the discriminative capability
of new features. In this work, we propose a Neighborhood
Consensus Contrastive Learning (NCCL) method. With no
assumptions about the new training data, we estimate the subcluster structures of old embeddings. A new embedding is
constrained with multiple old embeddings in both embedding
space and discrimination space at the sub-class level. The effect of outliers diminished, as the multiple samples serve as
“mean teachers”. Besides, we propose a scheme to filter the
old embeddings with low credibility, further improving the
compatibility robustness. Our method ensures the compatibility without impairing the accuracy of the new model. It can
even improve the new model’s accuracy in most scenarios.

Figure 1: The Deployment Process. Without backward compatibility, the process to update the gallery is “backfilling”
with the system suspended until re-index has been done.
With backward compatibility, the process to update is “scroll
refreshing” with the system always active. Notice that the
classifier is abandoned when deployed as it is useless for retrieval but only a waste of space. Thus the old classifier is
unavailable when the old model is from a third party.
called “embedding”. Given query images of a specific object, the process of ReID is to find the same identity in the
gallery by finding its nearest neighbors in embedding space.
As the new training data or the improved model designs
are available, the deployed model will be updated to a new
version with better performance. Then we need to refresh
the gallery to harvest the benefits of the new model, namely
“backfilling”. As it is common to have millions or even billions of images in the database/gallery (Radenović et al.
2018), backfilling is a painful process, which requires reextracting embeddings and re-building indexes with the system suspended, as shown in Figure 1. An ideal solution is
enabling “new” embeddings to be compared with “old” embeddings directly. Then we can gradually replace “old” embedding with “new” embeddings in the gallery while the system is still active, named “scroll refreshing”. What’s more,
if the gallery is in scroll-refreshed mode initially (e.g., only
keep the surveillance data in the past x days), the proportion of new embeddings in the gallery increases from 0% to
100% over some time automatically.

Introduction
General object re-identification (ReID) aims at finding a
significant person/vehicle of interest in a large amount of
collection, called “gallery”. It has attracted much interest
in computer vision due to its great contributions in urban
surveillance and intelligent transportation (Ye et al. 2021;
Khan and Ullah 2019). Specifically, existing ReID methods
typically map each image into vector space using a convolutional neural network. The output in vector space is usually
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2722

