The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Robust Training via Backward Smoothing
Jinghui Chen1 , Yu Cheng2 , Zhe Gan2 , Quanquan Gu3 , Jingjing Liu4
1

Pennsylvania State University
2
Microsoft Corporation
3
University of California, Los Angeles
4
Tsinghua University
jzc5917@psu.edu, {yu.cheng, zhe.gan}@microsoft.com, qgu@cs.ucla.edu, JJLiu@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
xi k∞ ≤ } denotes the -perturbation ball, and L is the
cross-entropy loss.
On the other hand, instead of directly training on adversarial examples, TRADES (Zhang et al. 2019) further improves
model robustness with a trade-off between natural accuracy
and robust accuracy, by solving the empirical risk minimization problem with a robust regularization term:
n
1 Xh
min
L(fθ (xi ), yi )
θ n
i=1
i
+ β 0 max KL s(fθ (xi )), s(fθ (x0i )) ,
(1.2)

Abstract
Adversarial training is so far the most effective strategy in
defending against adversarial examples. However, it suffers
from high computational costs due to the iterative adversarial attacks in each training step. Recent studies show that it
is possible to achieve fast Adversarial Training by performing a single-step attack with random initialization. However,
such an approach still lags behind state-of-the-art adversarial training algorithms on both stability and model robustness. In this work, we develop a new understanding towards
Fast Adversarial Training, by viewing random initialization
as performing randomized smoothing for better optimization
of the inner maximization problem. Following this new perspective, we also propose a new initialization strategy, backward smoothing, to further improve the stability and model
robustness over single-step robust training methods. Experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our method
achieves similar model robustness as the original TRADES
method while using much less training time (∼3x improvement with the same training schedule).

xi ∈B (xi )

where {(xi , yi )}ni=1 is the training dataset, f (·) denotes the
logits output of the neural network, B (xi ) := {x : kx −

where s(·) denotes the softmax function, and β > 0 is a regularization parameter. The goal of this robust regularization
term (i.e., KL divergence term) is to ensure the outputs are
stable within the local neighborhood. Both adversarial training and TRADES achieve good model robustness, as shown
on recent model robustness leaderboards1 (Croce and Hein
2020b; Chen and Gu 2020). However, a major drawback lies
in that both are highly time-consuming for training, limiting
their usefulness in practice. This is largely due to the fact
that both methods perform iterative adversarial attacks (i.e.,
Projected Gradient Descent) to solve the inner maximization
problem in each outer minimization step.
Recently, (Wong, Rice, and Kolter 2020) shows that it is
possible to use single-step adversarial attacks to solve the inner maximization problem, which previously was believed
impossible. The key ingredient in their Fast AT approach
is adding a random initialization step before the single-step
adversarial attack. This simple change leads to a reasonably robust model that outperforms other fast robust training techniques, e.g., (Shafahi et al. 2019). However, the simple change also has its downsides: 1) random initialization
makes single-step robust training possible yet it can be quite
unstable (Li et al. 2020); 2) compared to state-of-the-art robust training models (Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019),
Fast AT still lags behind on model robustness. Besides these,
It also remains a mystery in (Wong, Rice, and Kolter 2020)
on why random initialization is empirically effective.
Although some attempts have been made trying to explain the role of random initialization and further improve

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://github.com/fra31/auto-attack and https://github.com/
uclaml/RayS.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are well known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013), i.e., a small perturbation on the original input can lead to misclassification or
erroneous prediction. Many defense methods have been developed to mitigate the disturbance of adversarial examples
(Guo et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018; Ma et al.
2018; Samangouei, Kabkab, and Chellappa 2018; Dhillon
et al. 2018; Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019), among
which robust training methods, such as adversarial training
(Madry et al. 2018) and TRADES (Zhang et al. 2019), are
currently the most effective strategies. Specifically, adversarial training method (Madry et al. 2018) trains a model
on adversarial examples by solving a min-max optimization
problem:
n

min
θ

1X
max L(fθ (x0i ), yi ),
n i=1 x0i ∈B (xi )

(1.1)

6222

