The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Lifelong Person Re-identification by Pseudo Task Knowledge Preservation
Wenhang Ge1,2,3, , Junlong Du2 , Ancong Wu1,3, * , Yuqiao Xian1 ,
Ke Yan2 , Feiyue Huang2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent,
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China,
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
gewh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; jeffdu@tencent.com; wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn; xianyq3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn;
kerwinyan@tencent.com; feiyuehuang@gmail.com; wszheng@ieee.org
Abstract
In real world, training data for person re-identification (ReID) is collected discretely with spatial and temporal variations, which requires a model to incrementally learn new
knowledge without forgetting old knowledge. This problem is
called lifelong person re-identification (LReID). Variations of
illumination and background for images of each task exhibit
task-specific image style and lead to task-wise domain gap. In
addition to missing data from the old tasks, task-wise domain
gap is a key factor for catastrophic forgetting in LReID, which
is ignored in existing approaches for LReID. The model tends
to learn task-specific knowledge with task-wise domain gap,
which results in stability and plasticity dilemma. To overcome this problem, we cast LReID as a domain adaptation
problem and propose a pseudo task knowledge preservation
framework to alleviate the domain gap. Our framework is
based on a pseudo task transformation module which maps
the features of the new task into the feature space of the
old tasks to complement the limited saved exemplars of the
old tasks. With extra transformed features in the task-specific
feature space, we propose a task-specific domain consistency
loss to implicitly alleviate the task-wise domain gap for learning task-shared knowledge instead of task-specific one. Furthermore, to guide knowledge preservation with the feature
distributions of the old tasks, we propose to preserve knowledge on extra pseudo tasks which jointly distills knowledge
and discriminates identity, in order to achieve a better tradeoff between stability and plasticity for lifelong learning with
task-wise domain gap. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of our method 1 as compared with the stateof-the-art lifelong learning and LReID methods.

Figure 1: Comparison between domain adaptation and lifelong learning for Re-ID. (a) Domain adaptation which minimizes the domain gap with access to sufficient samples
from both source and target domain. (b) Lifelong person
Re-ID training with task-wise domain shift without access
to sufficient source data, which results in catastrophic forgetting. (c) Our pseudo task knowledge preservation framework based on source-free domain adaptation for learning
task-shared knowledge instead of task-specific one.
for person Re-ID, when a new monitored area is added, extra training data will be collected along with the deployment
of new cameras. Therefore, the system needs to be updated
for the tasks in new domains without losing discriminative
capability in learned domains. Thus, it is imperative to study
Re-ID model training on sequential tasks with dynamic domain shift to accumulate knowledge incrementally and then
adapt the knowledge for both seen and unseen domains.
Most of the existing Re-ID methods focus on learning
knowledge with pre-prepared dataset with fixed data distribution. However, learning on sequential tasks is underexplored. To address this problem, recent works (Wu and
Gong 2021; Pu et al. 2021) study lifelong person Re-ID,
which has two main challenges. First, task-wise domain
gap. Training data of each task collected under different
background and illumination leads to task-wise domain gap,
which is one of the key reasons for catastrophic forgetting

Introduction
Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) has been widely investigated as a person retrieval issue across non-overlapping
cameras. Given a query person of interest, the purpose of
person Re-ID is to retrieve the person who shares the same
identity with the query in a large scale gallery. Due to the
real-world application, a model is expected to learn in an incremental manner to meet a fast adaptation requirement. For
example, in a large-scale and dynamic surveillance system
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code available at https://github.com/g3956/PTKP

688

