The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

LCTR: On Awakening the Local Continuity of Transformer for
Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Zhiwei Chen1 , Changan Wang2 , Yabiao Wang2 , Guannan Jiang3 ,
Yunhang Shen2 , Ying Tai2 , Chengjie Wang2 , Wei Zhang3 , Liujuan Cao1 *
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics,
Xiamen University, China. 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China. 3 CATL, China.
zhiweichen.cn@gmail.com, {changanwang, caseywang}@tencent.com, jianggn@catl.com,
{odysseyshen, yingtai, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com, zhangwei@catl.com, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to learn
object localizer solely by using image-level labels. The convolution neural network (CNN) based techniques often result
in highlighting the most discriminative part of objects while
ignoring the entire object extent. Recently, the transformer
architecture has been deployed to WSOL to capture the longrange feature dependencies with self-attention mechanism
and multilayer perceptron structure. Nevertheless, transformers lack the locality inductive bias inherent to CNNs and
therefore may deteriorate local feature details in WSOL. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework built upon the
transformer, termed LCTR (Local Continuity TRansformer),
which targets at enhancing the local perception capability
of global features among long-range feature dependencies.
To this end, we propose a relational patch-attention module (RPAM), which considers cross-patch information on a
global basis. We further design a cue digging module (CDM),
which utilizes local features to guide the learning trend of
the model for highlighting the weak local responses. Finally,
comprehensive experiments are carried out on two widely
used datasets, i.e., CUB-200-2011 and ILSVRC, to verify the
effectiveness of our method.

(a) Image
(a)
Image

(b)CAM
CAM
(b)

(c) TS-CAM
(c)
TS-CAM

(d) (d)
LCTR
(Ours)
Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of localization results on different
methods: (a) Original images. (b) CNN-based method tends
to be dominated by the most discriminative region. (c)
Transformer-based method maintains coarse long-range dependencies while ignoring the local feature details (light yellow line). (d) The proposed LCTR not only considers finer
local details but also retains global information. The predicted bounding boxes are in red. Best viewed in color.

Introduction
Deep learning based methods have achieved unprecedented
success in locating objects under a fully supervised setting (Liu et al. 2016; Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020;
Sun et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021). However, these methods
rely on a large number of bounding box annotations, which
are expensive to acquire. Recently, the research on weakly
supervised object localization (WSOL) has gained a significant momentum (Zhou et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018a; Gao
et al. 2021) since it can learn object localizers using only
image-level labels.
The pioneering work (Zhou et al. 2016) aggregated features from classification networks to generate class activation maps (CAM) for object localization. Unfortunately, image classifiers tend to focus only on the most discriminative
features to achieve high classification performance. Therefore, the spatial distribution of feature responses may only

cover the most discerning regions instead of the whole object
range, which limits localization accuracy with large margins, as shown in Figure 1(b).
To address this critical problem, many CAM-based approaches have been proposed, such as graph propagation (Zhu et al. 2017), data augmentation (Kumar Singh and
Jae Lee 2017; Yun et al. 2019), adversarial erasing (Zhang
et al. 2018a; Choe and Shim 2019; Chen et al. 2021) and
spatial relation activation (Xue et al. 2019; Zhang, Wei, and
Yang 2020; Guo et al. 2021). However, those approaches do
alleviate the partial activation issue, but in a compromised
manner — the essential philosophy behind it is first obtaining local features and then attempting to recover the nonsalient regions to get full object extent. In fact, the fundamental root of this issue is determined by the intrinsic nature
of convolution neural networks (CNNs). The CNN features

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

410

