The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Text-Based Interactive Recommendation via Offline Reinforcement Learning
Ruiyi Zhang1 Tong Yu2 Yilin Shen2 Hongxia Jin2
1

2

Duke University
Samsung Research America
ryzhang.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
Interactive recommendation with natural-language feedback
can provide richer user feedback and has demonstrated advantages over traditional recommender systems. However, the
classical online paradigm involves iteratively collecting experience via interaction with users, which is expensive and
risky. We consider an offline interactive recommendation to
exploit arbitrary experience collected by multiple unknown
policies. A direct application of policy learning with such fixed
experience suffers from the distribution shift. To tackle this
issue, we develop a behavior-agnostic off-policy correction
framework to make offline interactive recommendation possible. Specifically, we leverage the conservative Q-function to
perform off-policy evaluation, which enables learning effective policies from fixed datasets without further interactions.
Empirical results on the simulator derived from real-world
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed offline
training framework.

Introduction
Interactive recommendation with natural-language feedback
can provide flexible feedback to reflect complex user attitude towards various aspects of an item, compared with simple user feedback, such as clicking data or updated ratings
(Chapelle and Li 2011; Kveton et al. 2015; Li et al. 2010;
Xiao and Wang 2021). It widely exists in scenarios of personal assistants, such as Amazon Echo show and Google
home hub, where items are recommended (Guo et al. 2018,
2019). In these scenarios, a user can describe features of
desired items that are lacking in the current recommended
ones. The recommender then incorporates feedback and subsequently recommends more suitable items. This type of interactive recommendation is named as text-based interactive
recommendation.
The classical online paradigm involves iteratively collecting experience via interacting with users, which is not realistic in the real-world. Offline interaction recommendation is a
promising setting in, for example, safety critical or production systems, where learned policies should not be applied
on the real system until their performance and safety is verified. Further, we consider the scenario of personal assistants,
where users usually interact with their personal assistants on
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11694

devices. These devices can collect interaction data but can
only perform minor adaptation for personalized recommendation. This offline data can be shared by the users if they
agree for service improvement, but some personal information should be protected and never shared. Thus, the personalized policies on-device are usually unknown when training
a policy in an offline manner on the server side. One can apply imitation learning on successful interaction data, but the
policy can be sub-optimal because the recommender cannot
exploit failure experience. Directly learning a recommender
policy via off-policy reinforcement learning will suffer from
distribution shift as the experience are usually collected by
multiple unknown policies on devices. Previous offline training usually considers importance sampling for distribution
correction (Chen et al. 2019), but it assumes all the offline
data is collected by a single known policy. To overcome these
issues, we frame offline interactive recommendation as a
behaviour-agnostic offline reinforcement learning problem,
where a reward corrector is efficiently estimated.
In this paper, we propose an offline interactive recommendation framework driven by the personal assistants scenarios.
Different from traditional interactive recommendation with
simple user feedback, we first extract the intentions from user
natural-language feedback, and then train a recommendation policy based on the offline interaction logs collected by
multiple on-device personalized policies. Empirical results
on the simulator derived from real-world datasets show that
the proposed framework can accurately estimate the reward
corrector compared with some standard baselines. Further,
the offline training scheme shows superior performance compared with baselines in an offline interactive recommendation
system.

Background
Interactive Recommendation as a Reinforcement
Learning Problem
Reinforcement learning aims to learn an optimal policy for
an agent interacting with an unknown (and often highly complex) environment. In this paper, we consider interactive
recommendation with user feedback in natural language as
finite-horizon environments with the discounted reward criterion and discrete action space. Denote st ∈ S as the state
of the recommendation environment at time t and at ∈ A as

