The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NICE: Robust Scheduling through Reinforcement Learning-Guided Integer
Programming
Luke Kenworthy1 , Siddharth Nayak2 , Christopher Chin2 , Hamsa Balakrishnan2
1

US Air Force-MIT AI Accelerator
2
MIT
lkenworthy99@gmail.com, {sidnayak, chychin, hamsa}@mit.edu

Abstract

We propose a technique, Neural network IP Coefficient Extraction (NICE), that seeks to find a quick-butapproximate solution to a scheduling problem with an additional robustness objective, by using reinforcement learning
(RL) to guide the IP formulation. We first determine a feasible schedule using a baseline IP. We simultaneously train an
RL model to build a schedule for the same problem, using
a reward function that leads to more robust schedules (but
that would have added considerable computational burden
if encoded directly in the IP formulation). Then, rather than
use the RL model to create a schedule directly, we use the
probabilities in its output layer to assign coefficient weights
to the decision variables in our simpler IP to create a feasible schedule. By doing so, we leverage the intuition behind
knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015)
that the distribution of values in the output layer of a neural
network contains valuable information about the problem.
NICE allows us to approximate the robust scheduling formulation with significantly fewer variables and constraints.
Across a variety of disruption scenarios, we find that NICE
creates schedules with 33–48% fewer changes than the baseline. Moreover, in certain practical problem instances, NICE
finds a solution in a matter of seconds; the corresponding
IP that explicitly optimizes for robustness fails to produce a
solution within 90 minutes for the same scenarios.
The main contribution of this paper is the introduction
of a new technique to approximate complicated IP formulations using RL. To the best of our knowledge, NICE1 is the
first method to use information extracted from neural networks in IP construction. We illustrate the performance of
NICE in creating robust (disruption-resistant) crew schedules (i.e., assignments of pilots to flights). However, robust
crew scheduling is only one application of NICE; we believe
that the method is potentially applicable to a wider range of
discrete optimization problems.

Integer programs provide a powerful abstraction for representing a wide range of real-world scheduling problems. Despite their ability to model general scheduling problems, solving large-scale integer programs (IP) remains a computational
challenge in practice. The incorporation of more complex
objectives such as robustness to disruptions further exacerbates the computational challenge. We present NICE (Neural network IP Coefficient Extraction), a novel technique that
combines reinforcement learning and integer programming to
tackle the problem of robust scheduling. More specifically,
NICE uses reinforcement learning to approximately represent
complex objectives in an integer programming formulation.
We use NICE to determine assignments of pilots to a flight
crew schedule so as to reduce the impact of disruptions. We
compare NICE with (1) a baseline integer programming formulation that produces a feasible crew schedule, and (2) a
robust integer programming formulation that explicitly tries
to minimize the impact of disruptions. Our experiments show
that, across a variety of scenarios, NICE produces schedules
resulting in 33% to 48% fewer disruptions than the baseline
formulation. Moreover, in more severely constrained scheduling scenarios in which the robust integer program fails to produce a schedule within 90 minutes, NICE is able to build robust schedules in less than 2 seconds on average.

Introduction
Scheduling is a ubiquitous type of optimization problem that
is often solved using integer programs (IPs) or mixed-integer
programs (MIPs). While IPs and MIPs can model a wide
range of scheduling problems, solving large-scale instances
in practice can be computational challenging.
In most practical applications, it is also important that the
schedules are robust to uncertainties. Robust scheduling involves the building of schedules that will undergo minimal
change when faced with unknown future disruptions. While
MIP formulations of scheduling problems can be extended
to account for robustness, the resulting problems are often
much more computationally challenging than their baseline,
non-robust counterparts. Even with state-of-the-art solvers,
such extensions to accommodate robustness can add hours
to the time needed to compute an optimal schedule, sometimes making them impractical for real-world use.

Background and Related Work
Personnel scheduling has been a long-standing challenge in
Operations Research, and has been the focus of much research over the past several decades (Dantzig 1954; Van den
Bergh et al. 2013). Integer programs (IPs) and mixed inte-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9821

Our code is available at https://github.com/nsidn98/NICE

