The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Head Modularization to Leverage Generalization Capability
in Multi-Modal Networks
Jun-Tae Lee1 , Hyunsin Park1 , Sungrack Yun1 , and Simyung Chang2
Qualcomm AI Research1 *
Qualcomm Korea YH2
{juntlee,hyunsinp,sungrack,simychan}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract

Although these fusion schemes have made fruitful
progress, they have made less effort to understand the relationship between the generalization behaviors of the multimodal networks and input modalities. To delve into the relationship, we first note that modality is a way to transmit
information (Turk 2014; Caschera, Ferri, and Grifoni 2007).
If so, the information can be corrupted in some unreliable
modalities, and then multi-modal networks may fail to mine
discriminative features (Christoudias, Urtasun, and Darrell
2008; Hori et al. 2017).
To verify this, viewing multi-modal data as multiple projections of information, we design a toy multi-modal problem.
We show that the generalization behavior of a multi-modal
network is affected by the configuration of projections (i.e.
input modalities). Namely, in some projections, the multimodal network suffers from the over-fitting problem. However, in real-world problems, it is hard to find the optimal
configuration of input modalities, or re-calibrate them. Hence,
it is crucial to learn multi-modal networks to have strong generalization capability.
Generalization capability of deep networks mostly depends
on both learning algorithms and network architectures (Goodfellow et al. 2016). Therefore, while the existing works have
attempted to design multi-modal fusion architecture, we dedicate to the second point, generally applicable learning algorithm to leverage the generalization capability of deep multimodal networks. To this end, we focus on the small sensitivity
of well-generalized networks to perturbations (e.g. weight initialization, hyper-parameters, or noise on final weights) (Novak et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2020; Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio
2018). Inspired by this, we aim to develop a simple but effective training technique making multi-modal representation
robust to multiple classification heads with different generalization behaviors. Then, the deployed network can converge
to a more general solution with small sensitivity.
More specifically, we propose the multi-head modularization (MHM) algorithm to promote the generalization capability of multi-modal networks. We consider a multi-modal
network as a series of uni-modal embedding, multi-modal embedding, and (task-specific) head modules. Also, we exploit
multiple head modules instead of a single head during training. The objective of our modularization is to leverage the
generalization capability of the multi-modal embedding module. To this end, we split the entire training data and assign

It has been crucial to leverage the rich information of multiple modalities in many tasks. Existing works have tried to
design multi-modal networks with descent multi-modal fusion modules. Instead, we focus on improving generalization
capability of multi-modal networks, especially the fusion module. Viewing the multi-modal data as different projections of
information, we first observe that bad projection can cause
poor generalization behaviors of multi-modal networks. Then,
motivated by well-generalized network’s low sensitivity to
perturbation, we propose a novel multi-modal training method,
multi-head modularization (MHM). We modularize a multimodal network as a series of uni-modal embedding, multimodal embedding, and task-specific head modules. Also, for
training, we exploit multiple head modules learned with different datasets, swapping each other. From this, we can make
the multi-modal embedding module robust to all the heads
with different generalization behaviors. In testing phase, we
select one of the head modules not to increase the computational cost. Owing to the perturbation of head modules, though
including one selected head, the deployed network is more
well-generalized compared to the simply end-to-end learned.
We verify the effectiveness of MHM on various multi-modal
tasks. We use the state-of-the-art methods as baselines, and
show notable performance gain for all the baselines.

1

Introduction

Human beings perceive the world through comprehensive
information from multiple sensory systems. From this point,
it has been a crucial problem to leverage multi-modal data
obtained from different sources/structures (modalities) in machine learning (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2018; Wang,
Tran, and Feiszli 2020). Most of existing methods (Joze et al.
2020; Liu and Yuan 2018; Abavisani, Joze, and Patel 2019;
Ngiam et al. 2011) have tried to obtain collaborative multimodal representation where both cross- and uni-modal information are conveyed. To this end, diverse multi-modal fusion
schemes have been designed, such as averaging (Hazirbas
et al. 2016), concatenation (Ngiam et al. 2011; Lee, Uh, and
Byun 2020), or attentional alignment (Lee et al. 2021; Tsai
et al. 2019).
* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7354

