The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Proxy Learning of Visual Concepts of Fine Art Paintings from Styles through
Language Models
Diana Kim1 , Ahmed Elgammal1 , Marian Mazzone2
1 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, U.S.A
2 Department of Art and Architectural History, College of Charleston, USA

dsk101@rutgers.edu, elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu, marian.mazzone@gmail.com

Abstract

We focus on developing an AI system that can quantify such
concepts in this paper, and the concepts for art will be referred to as “visual elements”.
The main challenge is that it is not easy to deploy supervised methodology. Art is typically annotated with artist
information (name, dates, bio), style, and genre attributes
only, but annotating elements of art requires high specialties to identify the visual proprieties of artworks. To resolve
the issue, we propose a novel method to learn the visual elements of art through their general relations to styles (period
style). While it is difficult to obtain the labels for the visual
concepts, there are plenty of available paintings labeled by
styles and language resources relating styles to visual concepts, such as online encyclopedia and museum websites. In
general, knowing the dominant visual features of a painting
enables us to identify its plausible styles. So we have the
following questions; (1) what if we can take multiple styles
as proxy components to encode visual information of paintings? (2) can a deep Convolutional Neural Network (deepCNN) help to retrace visual semantics from a proxy representation of multiple styles?
In these previous studies (Elgammal et al. 2018; Kim et al.
2018), existence of the conceptual ties between visual elements and styles is demonstrated by using a hierarchical
structure in the deep-CNN. They showed the machine can
learn underlying semantic factors of styles from its hidden
layers. Inspired by the studies, we hypothetically set a linear
relation between visual elements and style. Next, we constrain a deep-CNN by the linear relation to make the machine learn visual concepts from its last hidden layer, while
it is trained as a style classifier only.
To explain the methodology, a new concept—proxy learning—is defined first. It refers to all possible learning methods aiming to quantify paintings with a set of finite visual
elements, which has no available label, by correlating it to
another concept that has abundant labeled data. In this paper, we reformulate four pre-existing methods in the context
of proxy learning and introduce a novel approach that utilizes a deep-CNN to learn visual concepts from styles labels
and language models. We propose to name it deep-proxy.
In the experiment, deep-proxy and four methods in attribute learning—sparse coding (Efron et al. 2004), logistic regression (LGT) (Danaci and Ikizler-Cinbis 2016),
Principal Component Analysis method (PCA) (Kim et al.

We present a machine learning system that can quantify fine
art paintings with a set of visual elements and principles
of art. The formal analysis is fundamental for understanding art, but developing such a system is challenging. Paintings have high visual complexities, but it is also difficult to
collect enough training data with direct labels. To resolve
these practical limitations, we introduce a novel mechanism,
called proxy learning, which learns visual concepts in paintings through their general relation to styles. This framework
does not require any visual annotation, but only uses style labels and a general relationship between visual concepts and
style. In this paper, we propose a novel proxy model and reformulate four pre-existing methods in the context of proxy
learning. Through quantitative and qualitative comparison,
we evaluate these methods and compare their effectiveness in
quantifying the artistic visual concepts, where the general relationship is estimated by language models; GloVe or BERT.
The language modeling is a practical and scalable solution requiring no labeling, but it is inevitably imperfect. We demonstrate how the new proxy model is robust to the imperfection,
while the other methods are sensitively affected by it.

Introduction
Artists and art historians usually use elements of art, such as
line, texture, color, and shape (Fichner-Rathus 2011), and
principles of art, such as balance, variety, symmetry, and
proportion (Ocvirk et al. 2002) to visually describe artworks.
These elements and principles provide structured grounds
for effectively communicating about art, especially the first
principle of art, which is “visual form” (Van Dyke 1887).
However, in the area of AI, understanding art has mainly
focused on a limited version of the principle, through developing systems such as predicting styles (Elgammal et al.
2018; Kim et al. 2018), finding non-semantic features for
style (Mao, Cheung, and She 2017), or designing digital
filters to extract some visual properties like brush strokes,
color, textures, and so on (Berezhnoy, Postma, and van den
Herik 2005; Johnson et al. 2008). While they are useful, the
concepts do not reveal much about the visual properties of
paintings in depth. Kim et al. (2018) suggested a list of 58
concepts that break down the elements and principles of art.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4513

