The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FedSoft: Soft Clustered Federated Learning with Proximal Local Updating
Yichen Ruan, Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
yichenr@andrew.cmu.edu, cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

Clustered FL relaxes the assumption of FL that each client
has an unique data distribution; instead, it allows different
clients to share one data distribution, with fewer source data
distributions than clients. The objective of clustered FL is
to train one model for every distribution. In traditional clustered FL, a client can only be associated with one data distribution. We thus call this method hard clustered federated
learning. Under the hard association assumption, the nonIID problem can be easily resolved: simply group clients
with the same data distribution into one cluster, then conduct
conventional FL on each cluster, within which the data distribution is now IID among clients. Unlike other personalization methods, clustered FL thus produces centrally available
models that can be selectively migrated to new users that
are unwilling, or unable, to engage in the subsequent local
adaptation process (e.g. fine tuning) due to privacy concerns
or resource limitations. This convenience in model adoption is particularly valuable for the current training-testingdeployment lifecycle of FL where deployment, rather than
the training itself, is the end goal (Kairouz et al. 2019).
However, hard clustered FL faces two fundamental problems in practice. First, multiple clients may be unlikely to
possess identical data distributions. In fact, the real-world
user data is more likely to follow a mixture of multiple distributions (Marfoq et al. 2021). E.g., if each client is a mobile
phone and we wish to model its user’s content preferences,
we might expect the clients to be clustered into adults and
children. However, adult users may occasionally view children’s content, and devices owned by teenagers (or shared
by parents and children) may possess large fractions of data
from both distributions. Similarly, content can be naturally
grouped by users’ interests (e.g., genres of movies), each of
which may have a distinct distribution. Data from users with
multiple interests then reflects a mixture of these distributions. Since the mixture ratios can vary for different clients,
they may have different overall distributions even though the
source distributions are identical. Clustering algorithms like
the Gaussian mixture model (Reynolds 2009) use a similar
rationale. Clients may then require models personalized to
their distributions to make accurate predictions on their data,
in addition to the cluster models used for new users.
Hard clustered FL’s second challenge is that it cannot
effectively exploit similarities between different clusters.
Though FL clients may have non-IID data distributions, two

Traditionally, clustered federated learning groups clients with
the same data distribution into a cluster, so that every client
is uniquely associated with one data distribution and helps
train a model for this distribution. We relax this hard association assumption to soft clustered federated learning, which allows every local dataset to follow a mixture of multiple source
distributions. We propose FedSoft, which trains both locally
personalized models and high-quality cluster models in this
setting. FedSoft limits client workload by using proximal updates to require the completion of only one optimization task
from a subset of clients in every communication round. We
show, analytically and empirically, that FedSoft effectively
exploits similarities between the source distributions to learn
personalized and cluster models that perform well.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an innovative privacy-preserving
machine learning paradigm that distributes collaborative
model training across participating user devices without
users’ sharing their raw training samples. In the widely
used federated learning algorithm FedAvg (McMahan et al.
2017), clients jointly train a shared machine learning model
by iteratively running local updates and synchronizing their
intermediate local models with a central server. In spite
of its success in applications such as next word prediction
(Hard et al. 2018) and learning on electronic health records
(Brisimi et al. 2018), FL is known to suffer from slow model
training when clients’ local data distributions are heterogeneous, or non-IID (non- independently and identically distributed). In response to this challenge, some recent works
propose to bypass data heterogeneity by performing local
model personalization. Instead of pursuing one universally
applicable model shared by all clients, these algorithms’
training objective is to create one model for each client that
fits its local data. Personalization methods include local fine
tuning (Sim, Zadrazil, and Beaufays 2019), model interpolation (Mansour et al. 2020), and multi-task learning (Smith
et al. 2017). In this paper, we focus on an alternative approach: clustered federated learning, which we generalize to
train both cluster and personalized models on realistic distributions of client data.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8124

