The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Continuous Control with Double Actors and Regularized Critics
Jiafei Lyu1 * , Xiaoteng Ma2∗ , Jiangpeng Yan2 , Xiu Li1†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{lvjf20, ma-xt17, yanjp17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

bias problem and significantly improves the performance of
DDPG. However, it turns out that TD3 may lead to large
underestimation bias (Ciosek et al. 2019), which negatively
affects its performance.
While many previous works have focused on enhancing
double critics (Pan, Cai, and Huang 2020; Kuznetsov et al.
2020) for better value estimation, the role and advantages
of double actors have long been overlooked. We uncover an
essential property of double actors, i.e., they enhance the
exploration ability of the agent. Double actors offer double
paths for policy optimization instead of making the agent
confined by a single policy, significantly reducing the agent’s
probability of being trapped locally.
We also explore the advantages of double actors for value
estimation correction and how they benefit continuous control. We first develop Double Actors DDPG (DADDPG),
showing that double actors can remove overestimation bias
when built upon a single critic. We experimentally find out
that DADDPG significantly outperforms DDPG, which sheds
light on the potential of double actors. Similarly, we demonstrate that double actors lessen underestimation bias of double
critics method, and develop Double Actors TD3 (DATD3)
algorithm. Finally, we propose a soft combination of value
estimates over double actors to control the bias flexibly.
To alleviate the potential over pessimistic value estimates
of double independent critics, we propose critic regularization, which restricts critics from differing too much. Together,
we present our Double Actors Regularized Critics (DARC)
algorithm. For illustrating the effectiveness of DARC, a thorough component comparison of relevant algorithms is given
in Table 1, reporting the average performance improvement
on MuJoCo (Todorov, Erez, and Tassa 2012) environments.
We perform extensive experiments on two challenging
continuous control benchmarks, MuJoCo (Brockman et al.
2016) and PyBullet (Ellenberger 2018), where we compare
our DARC algorithm against the current common baselines,
including TD3 and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.
2018a,b). The results show that DARC significantly outperforms them with much higher sample efficiency.

How to obtain good value estimation is a critical problem
in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Current value estimation
methods in continuous control, such as DDPG and TD3, suffer
from unnecessary over- or under- estimation. In this paper,
we explore the potential of double actors, which has been
neglected for a long time, for better value estimation in the
continuous setting. First, we interestingly find that double actors improve the exploration ability of the agent. Next, we
uncover the bias alleviation property of double actors in handling overestimation with single critic, and underestimation
with double critics respectively. Finally, to mitigate the potentially pessimistic value estimate in double critics, we propose
to regularize the critics under double actors architecture. Together, we present Double Actors Regularized Critics (DARC)
algorithm. Extensive experiments on challenging continuous
control benchmarks, MuJoCo and PyBullet, show that DARC
significantly outperforms current baselines with higher average return and better sample efficiency.

Introduction
Actor-Critic methods (Prokhorov and Wunsch 1997; Konda
and Tsitsiklis 2000) are among the most popular methods
in Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018)
which involve value approximation (Baird 1995; Gordon
1995) and policy gradients (Williams 1992; Weng 2018).
Built upon actor-critic framework, Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al. 2015) is a typical and
widely-used RL algorithm for continuous control. It has been
revealed that DDPG results in severe overestimation bias
(Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018) using single critic for
function approximation (Thrun and Schwartz 1993) since the
actor network is trained to execute action with the highest
value estimate.
To tackle the overestimation issue in DDPG, Fujimoto et
al. (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018) borrow ideas from the
Double Q-learning algorithm (Hasselt 2010; Hasselt, Guez,
and Silver 2016) and propose Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3), which utilizes the minimum
value from double critic networks for value estimation. With
clipped double Q-learning, TD3 alleviates the overestimation

Preliminaries
Reinforcement learning studies sequential decision making problems and it can be formulated by a Markov Decision Process (MDP). The MDP is defined as a 5-tuple

†

* Equal contribution, Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7655

