The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning from Weakly-Labeled Web Videos via Exploring Sub-concepts
Kunpeng Li1* , Zizhao Zhang2 , Guanhang Wu2 , Xuehan Xiong2 , Chen-Yu Lee2 ,
Zhichao Lu2 , Yun Fu1 , Tomas Pfister 2
1

Northeastern University

2

Google Cloud AI

Abstract
Learning visual knowledge from massive web videos has attracted growing research interest thanks to the large corpus
of easily accessible video data on the Internet. However, for
video action recognition, the action of interest might only exist in arbitrary clips of untrimmed web videos, resulting in
high label noises in the temporal space. To address this issue, we introduce a new method for pre-training video action recognition models using queried web videos. Instead
of trying to filter out potential noises, we propose to provide
fine-grained supervision signals by defining the concept of
Sub-Pseudo Label (SPL). Specifically, SPL spans out a new
set of meaningful “middle ground” label space constructed
by extrapolating the original weak labels during video querying and the prior knowledge distilled from a teacher model.
Consequently, SPL provides enriched supervision for video
models to learn better representations and improves data utilization efficiency of untrimmed videos. We validate the effectiveness of our method on four video action recognition
datasets and a weakly-labeled image dataset to study the generalization ability. Experiments show that SPL outperforms
several existing pre-training strategies and the learned representations lead to competitive results on several benchmarks.

Figure 1: SPL avoids potential noises by creating a new set
of “middle ground” pseudo labels (i.e. sub-concepts) via extrapolating two related action classes. Enriched supervision
is provided for effective model pre-training.

Introduction

on untrimmed videos), there is temporal noise due to the
lack of accurate temporal action localization. This means an
untrimmed web video may include other non-targeted content or only contain a small proportion of the target action.
Reducing noise effects for large-scale weakly-supervised
pre-training is critical but particularly challenging in practice. (Ghadiyaram, Tran, and Mahajan 2019) suggests querying short videos (e.g., within 1 minute) to obtain more accurate temporal localization of target actions. However, such
data pre-processing methods prevent models from fully utilizing widely available web video data, especially longer
videos with richer contents. (Duan et al. 2020) applies a
teacher model to do filtering before pre-training, but it will
remove a large proportion of data that is potentially useful.
In this work, we propose a novel learning method to conduct effective pre-training on untrimmed videos from the
web. Instead of simply filtering the potential temporal noise,
we propose to convert such “noisy” data to useful supervision by leveraging the proposed concept of Sub-Pseudo
Label (SPL). As shown in Figure 1, SPL creates a new set

Remarkable successes (Feichtenhofer et al. 2019) have been
achieved in video recognition in recent years thanks to the
development of deep learning models. However, training
deep neural networks requires a large amount of humanannotated data. It requires tremendous human labor and
huge financial cost and therefore oftentimes sets out to be
the bottleneck for real-world video recognition applications.
Web videos are usually acquired by online querying
through label keywords. A keyword, which we refer as a
weak label, is then assigned to each untrimmed video obtained. Although large-scale videos with weak labels are
easier to be collected, training with un-verified weak labels
poses another challenge in developing robust models. Recent studies (Ghadiyaram, Tran, and Mahajan 2019; Kuehne
et al. 2019; Chang et al. 2019) have demonstrated that,
in addition to the label noise (e.g. incorrect action labels
* Work done while the author was an intern at Google; now at
Meta Reality Labs. Email: kunpengli@fb.com
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1341

