The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Provably-Efficient Model-Free Algorithm for Infinite-Horizon Average-Reward
Constrained Markov Decision Processes
Honghao Wei,1 Xin Liu, 2 Lei Ying 1
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
ShanghaiTech University
honghaow@umich.edu, liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn, leiying@umich.edu

Abstract

learn the models from the data samples collected. This approach has also been utilized for CMDPs with linear function approximation (Ding et al. 2021) under the assumption
that the transition kernel is linear. Leveraging the estimated
model, the CMDPs can be solved approximately as long as
the estimate becomes more and more accurately. The works
mentioned above are proved to achieve sublinear constraint
violation. A detailed discussion on the sample complexity of
CMDPs of model-based approaches can be found in (HasanzadeZonuzy, Kalathil, and Shakkottai 2021). While modelbased RL algorithms are sample efficient, they need to continuously solve LPs when the estimated models are updated,
so these algorithms are often computationally inefficient and
require a large memory to maintain a large number of model
parameters.
Model-free algorithms, on the other hand, learn state or
action value functions, instead of transition kernels, so require significantly less memory space and have lower computational complexity. In (Borkar 2005), the author proposes an actor-critic RL algorithm and shows its asymptotic
global convergence using multi-timescale stochastic approximation theory for infinite-horizon average-reward CMDPs
when the model is unknown. Policy gradient approaches
have also been developed (Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018; Stooke, Achiam, and Abbeel 2020; Yang et al.
2020) and seen successes in practice for solving constrained
RL problems, though they lack regret and constraint violation analysis. (Ding et al. 2020; Xu, Liang, and Lan 2020;
Chen, Dong, and Wang 2021) show that sublinear regrets
and constraint violations are achievable when policy “simulators” (or generative models) are given. Two very recent
works (Liu et al. 2021a; Wei, Liu, and Ying 2021) show
that sublinear regret bound and zero violation are possible
for episodic CMDPs without simulators. In particular, (Liu
et al. 2021a) proposes a model-based algorithm and (Wei,
Liu, and Ying 2022) presents a model-free algorithm, and
(Bura et al. 2021) proves that it is possible to achieve zero
violation during training given a safe baseline policy based
on a model-based approach. Despite these significant developments, the following question is still open:
Can we design efficient RL algorithms for infinitehorizon, average-reward CMDPs with provably regret and
constraint violation guarantees?
We answer this question affirmatively and present a

This paper presents a model-free reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithm for infinite-horizon average-reward Constrained
Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs). Considering a learning horizon K, which
large, the proposed al √is sufficiently

5
SAκ
6
K
regret
and zero constraint
gorithm achieves Õ
δ
violation, where S is the number of states, A is the number
of actions, and κ and δ are two constants independent of the
learning horizon K.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning has gained significant attention because of its successes in board games and video games such
as Go (Silver et al. 2017) and StarCraft (Vinyals et al. 2019),
and in highly-complex robotics systems (Andrychowicz
et al. 2020). An agent’s objective in a typical RL problem is
to maximize the cumulative reward through interacting with
an unknown environment. In board games or video games,
the outcomes of a random action are not consequential to the
users (e.g. not life-threatening). However, a careless action
in an engineering system might have catastrophic outcomes
such as collisions and fatalities in robotics and autonomous
driving (Ono et al. 2015; Garcia and Fernández 2012; Fisac
et al. 2018) or surgical robotics (Richter, Orosco, and Yip
2019). Therefore, it is critical to strike a balance between
reward maximization and safety in real-world applications.
A standard formulation for RL with constraints is the Constrained Markov Decision Processes framework (Altman
1999), in which the agent aims at learning a policy that maximizes the expected cumulative reward under safety constraints during and after learning.
A CMDP problem can be solved using linear programming (LP) or the dual approach (Altman 1999) when the
model (the transition kernel) is given. For example, (Zheng
and Ratliff 2020) proposed a LP-based algorithm which
learns the optimal policy while satisfying the constraints
for a CMDP with a known model. Recent model-based algorithms (Singh, Gupta, and Shroff 2020; Brantley et al.
2020; Kalagarla, Jain, and Nuzzo 2021; Efroni, Mannor, and
Pirotta 2020; Qiu et al. 2020) follow a similar approach but
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3868

