The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Certification of Preference-Based Fairness
for Personalized Recommender Systems
Virginie Do1,2 , Sam Corbett-Davies2 , Jamal Atif1 , Nicolas Usunier2
1

LAMSADE, Université PSL, Université Paris Dauphine, CNRS, France
2
Meta AI
virginie.do@dauphine.eu, scd@fb.com, jamal.atif@lamsade.dauphine.fr, usunier@fb.com

Abstract

We propose an alternative approach to incorporating user
preferences in audits which focuses on envy-free recommendations: the recommender system is deemed fair if each user
prefers their recommendation to those of all other users. Envyfreeness allows a system to be fair even in the presence of
disparities between groups as long as these are justified by
user preferences. On the other hand, if user B systematically
receives better opportunities than user A from A’s perspective,
the system is unfair. The criterion does not require interpersonal comparisons of satisfaction, since it relies on comparisons of different recommendations from the perspective of
the same user. Similar fairness concepts have been studied in
classification tasks under the umbrella of preference-based
fairness (Zafar et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2019; Ustun et al.
2019). Envy-free recommendation is the extension of these
approaches to personalized recommender systems.
Compared to auditing for recommendation parity or equal
satisfaction, auditing for envy-freeness poses new challenges.
First, envy-freeness requires answering counterfactual questions such as “would user A get higher utility from the recommendations of user B than their own?”, while searching
for the users who most likely have the best recommendations
from A’s perspective. This type of question can be answered
reliably only through active exploration, hence we cast it
in the framework of pure exploration bandits (Bubeck et al.
2009). To make such an exploration possible, we consider
a scenario where the auditor is allowed to replace a user’s
recommendations with those that another user would have
received in the same context. Envy, or the absence thereof,
is estimated by suitably choosing whose recommendations
should be shown to whom. While this scenario is more intrusive than some black-box audits of parity, auditing for
envy-freeness provides a more compelling guarantee on the
wellbeing of users subject to the recommendations.
The second challenge is that active exploration requires
randomizing the recommendations, which in turn might alter
the user experience. In order to control this cost of the audit
(in terms of user utility), we follow the framework of conservative exploration (Wu et al. 2016; Garcelon et al. 2020),
which guarantees a performance close to the audited system.
We provide a theoretical analysis of the trade-offs that arise,
in terms of the cost and duration of the audit (measured in
the number of timesteps required to output a certificate).
Our technical contributions are twofold. (1) We provide

Recommender systems are facing scrutiny because of their
growing impact on the opportunities we have access to. Current audits for fairness are limited to coarse-grained parity
assessments at the level of sensitive groups. We propose to
audit for envy-freeness, a more granular criterion aligned with
individual preferences: every user should prefer their recommendations to those of other users. Since auditing for envy
requires to estimate the preferences of users beyond their
existing recommendations, we cast the audit as a new pure
exploration problem in multi-armed bandits. We propose a
sample-efficient algorithm with theoretical guarantees that it
does not deteriorate user experience. We also study the tradeoffs achieved on real-world recommendation datasets.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems shape the information and opportunities available to us, as they help us prioritize content from
news outlets and social networks, sort job postings, or find
new people to connect with. To prevent the risk of unfair
delivery of opportunities across users, substantial work has
been done to audit recommender systems (Sweeney 2013; Asplund et al. 2020; Imana et al. 2021). For instance, Datta et al.
(2015) found that women received fewer online ads for highpaying jobs than equally qualified men, while Imana et al.
(2021) observed different delivery rates of ads depending on
gender for different companies proposing similar jobs.
The audits above aim at controlling for the possible acceptable justifications of the disparities, such as education level
in job recommendation audits. Yet, the observed disparities
in recommendation do not necessarily imply that a group
has a less favorable treatment: they might as well reflect that
individuals of different groups tend to prefer different items.
To strengthen the conclusions of the audits, it is necessary to
develop methods that account for user preferences. Audits for
equal satisfaction between user groups follow this direction
(Mehrotra et al. 2017), but they also have limitations. For
example, they require interpersonal comparisons of measures
of satisfaction, a notoriously difficult task (Sen 1999).
* A complete version with technical appendix is available on
arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14527.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6532

