The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Fairness of Causal Algorithmic Recourse
Julius von Kügelgen,1,2 Amir-Hossein Karimi,1,3 Umang Bhatt,2
Isabel Valera,4 Adrian Weller,2,5 Bernhard Schölkopf1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
University of Cambridge
3
ETH Zürich
4
Saarland University
5
The Alan Turing Institute
jvk@tue.mpg.de, amir@tue.mpg.de, usb20@cam.ac.uk, ivalera@cs.uni-saarland.de, aw665@cam.ac.uk, bs@tue.mpg.de
Abstract
0.40

Algorithmic fairness is typically studied from the perspective
of predictions. Instead, here we investigate fairness from the
perspective of recourse actions suggested to individuals to remedy an unfavourable classification. We propose two new fairness criteria at the group and individual level, which—unlike
prior work on equalising the average group-wise distance from
the decision boundary—explicitly account for causal relationships between features, thereby capturing downstream effects
of recourse actions performed in the physical world. We explore how our criteria relate to others, such as counterfactual
fairness, and show that fairness of recourse is complementary
to fairness of prediction. We study theoretically and empirically how to enforce fair causal recourse by altering the classifier and perform a case study on the Adult dataset. Finally,
we discuss whether fairness violations in the data generating
process revealed by our criteria may be better addressed by societal interventions as opposed to constraints on the classifier.

1

Boundary
A=0
A=1

0.35

density

0.30
0.25
0.20

Credit card
denied (Y=-1)

Credit card
approved (Y=1)

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

10

5

0

Income X

5

10

Figure 1: Example demonstrating the difference between
fair prediction and fair recourse: here, only the variance of
(centered income) X differs across two protected groups
A ∈ {0, 1}, while the true and predicted label (whether an
individual is approved for a credit card) are determined by
sign(X). This scenario would be considered fair from the
perspective of prediction, but the cost of recourse (here, the
distance to the decision boundary, set at X = 0) is much
larger for individuals in the blue group with A = 0.

Introduction

Algorithmic fairness is concerned with uncovering and correcting for potentially discriminatory behavior of automated
decision making systems (Dwork et al. 2012; Zemel et al.
2013; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Chouldechova 2017).
Given a dataset comprising individuals from multiple legally
protected groups (defined, e.g., based on age, sex, or ethnicity), and a binary classifier trained to predict a decision
(e.g., whether they were approved for a credit card), most
approaches to algorithmic fairness seek to quantify the level
of unfairness according to a pre-defined (statistical or causal)
criterion, and then aim to correct it by altering the classifier. This notion of predictive fairness typically considers the
dataset as fixed, and thus the individuals as unalterable.
Algorithmic recourse, on the other hand, is concerned
with offering recommendations to individuals, who were unfavourably treated by a decision-making system, to overcome
their adverse situation (Joshi et al. 2019; Ustun, Spangher,
and Liu 2019; Sharma, Henderson, and Ghosh 2019; Mahajan, Tan, and Sharma 2019; Mothilal, Sharma, and Tan 2020;
Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020; Karimi et al. 2020c,b;
Karimi, Schölkopf, and Valera 2021; Upadhyay, Joshi, and

Lakkaraju 2021). For a given classifier and a negativelyclassified individual, algorithmic recourse aims to identify
which changes the individual could perform to flip the decision. Contrary to predictive fairness, recourse thus considers
the classifier as fixed but ascribes agency to the individual.
Within machine learning (ML), fairness and recourse have
mostly been considered in isolation and viewed as separate
problems. While recourse has been investigated in the presence of protected attributes—e.g., by comparing recourse
actions (flipsets) suggested to otherwise similar male and female individuals (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019), or comparing the aggregated cost of recourse (burden) across different
protected groups (Sharma, Henderson, and Ghosh 2019)—
its relation to fairness has only been studied informally, in
the sense that differences in recourse have typically been
understood as proxies of predictive unfairness (Karimi et al.
2020a). However, as we argue in the present work, recourse

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9584

