The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Probably Approximately Complete and Safe Action Models for
Stochastic Worlds
Brendan Juba,* 1 Roni Stern* 2
1

Washington University in St. Louis
Ben Gurion University & Xerox PARC
bjuba@wustl.edu, rstern@parc.com, sternron@post.bgu.ac.il
2

Abstract

The challenge of specifying a domain model is only more
acute in richer classes of action models. In this work, we
consider domains in which the effects of actions are randomly determined each time an action is taken. Therefore,
action models in such domains specify a distribution on effects for each action. Specifying such an action model by
hand is extremely difficult: small errors in the probabilities
may accumulate over the course of an execution, leading to
wildly inaccurate estimates of the effects of a plan in the
real world. It is therefore essential to use data about the real
world to inform the model.
We follow an offline approach to permit safe learning.
But, in order to establish that our model generalizes across
goals, we consider a different learning paradigm. Following
a recent approach to learning deterministic action models
(Stern and Juba 2017; Juba, Le, and Stern 2021), we suppose that problems for a domain are sampled from a fixed
distribution, and we are given a training set of trajectories
executing policies aiming to solve those problems in the domain. We seek an action model that captures enough of the
domain faithfully to ensure that
(i) policies that can be executed in the model behave similarly in the real world (solution safety) and
(ii) policies that attain similar rates of success on the problem distribution as the training policy distribution can be
executed in the model (solution completeness).
Such a guarantee is similar to that provided by imitation
learning (Osa et al. 2018; Khardon 1999), with the difference again (similar to the distinction with RL) that rather
than seeking to match a human teacher’s performance at
a single objective, we would like our model to generalize
across many possible goals.
We introduce an extension of PPDDL that captures a relaxed class of domain models in which there is uncertainty
about the effects. Instead of giving a probability of an effect occurring, an interval is specified such that the actual
probability lies somewhere in the interval—that is, specifying a MDP with Imprecise Probabilities (Satia and Lave Jr
1973). Then, we give an algorithm for learning such uncertain PPDDL models with the following guarantee: with high
probability over both the training data and policy execution,
the encountered transition distributions are consistent with
the learned model. The learned model also satisfies an analogous completeness property, that ensures that there is a pol-

We consider the problem of learning action models for planning in unknown stochastic environments that can be defined
using the Probabilistic Planning Domain Description Language (PPDDL). As input, we are given a set of previously
executed trajectories, and the main challenge is to learn an
action model that has a similar goal achievement probability
to the policies used to create these trajectories. To this end,
we introduce a variant of PPDDL in which there is uncertainty about the transition probabilities, specified by an interval for each factor that contains the respective true transition probabilities. Then, we present SAM+, an algorithm that
learns such an imprecise-PPDDL environment model. SAM+
has a polynomial time and sample complexity, and guarantees that with high probability, the true environment is indeed
captured by the defined intervals. We prove that the action
model SAM+ outputs has a goal achievement probability that
is almost as good or better than that of the policies used to
produced the training trajectories. Then, we show how to produce a PPDDL model based on this imprecise-PPDDL model
that has similar properties.

Introduction
Domain-independent planning is a long-standing goal of Artificial Intelligence (AI) research. The input to a domainindependent planning algorithm traditionally includes a description of the domain in which we wish to plan. This domain description is usually specified in a formal language
and includes an action model, which specifies which actions
can be in a plan and how they work. In a simple planning
languages such as STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson 1971), this
action model consists of the set of effects of the actions
on the world state, and the set of preconditions that must
hold in order for each action to be taken. Action models are
notoriously hard to formally specify, even in such a simple
planning language. This has motivated work on a number of
methods for automatically learning these action models from
examples (Yang, Wu, and Jiang 2007; Cresswell and Gregory 2011; Cresswell, McCluskey, and West 2013; Zhuo and
Kambhampati 2013; Stern and Juba 2017; Aineto, Celorrio,
and Onaindia 2019; Juba, Le, and Stern 2021).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9795

