The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AnchorFace: Boosting TAR@FAR for Practical Face Recognition
Jiaheng Liu* 1 , Haoyu Qin* 2 , Yichao Wu 2 , Ding Liang2
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
2
SenseTime Group Limited
liujiaheng@buaa.edu.cn, qinhaoyu1@sensetime.com, wuyichao@sensetime.com, liangding@sensetime.com

Abstract

indicates that the similarity scores distribution of all positive and negative face image pairs under the realistic predefined FAR, rather than the entire feature distribution, actually determines the performance of FR systems. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1c, from the ROC curves of three
typical FR models, we observe that the TAR performance
of MODEL1 outperforms all other models when FAR is
greater than 1e-5, while the TAR performance of MODEL3
is the best under the FAR of 1e-6. In real-world scenarios,
MODEL1 will be deployed when the FR systems fix the
FAR as 1e-4, while MODEL3 would be an ideal option in
the case of FAR as 1e-6. Furthermore, even though the TAR
performance of MODEL2 does not rank the first in a long interval, MODEL2 preserves the best TAR performance when
FAR is fairly small. Thus, optimization on the pre-defined
specific FAR is essential to the training process of the FR
model, which has not been well investigated before.
Motivated by the above analysis, in this work, we aim to
investigate how to optimize the similarity scores distribution
of positive and negative pairs under the pre-defined FAR for
real-world FR systems. In other words, the objective is to
boost the TAR performance under the pre-defined FAR. We
call the pre-defined FAR as Anchor FAR and the whole optimization process under the Anchor FAR as Anchor Optimization. The biggest challenges of Anchor Optimization
are how to construct the positive and negative pairs in the
training process for the calculation of the evaluation metrics
(i.e., TAR and FAR) and the non-differentiable property of
these evaluation metrics. These two challenges make it difficult to optimize the TAR under the Anchor FAR directly.
In addition, (Liu et al. 2021b) proposed to search the
loss functions automatically for different non-differentiable
computer vision metrics. However, these methods rely on
carefully designed search space and search strategy for different tasks, which are complex and time-consuming. Besides, the lack of Anchor Optimization in the training process can be considered as a gap between the training and
evaluation for FR. There are also some works that analyze
the gaps between the training and evaluation for FR. For
example, for most softmax-based loss functions, sampleto-prototype similarities are optimized in the training process, while sample-to-sample similarities are used in practice (Deng et al. 2021). Furthermore, domain shift is another
common gap (Sohn et al. 2017), where the FR models per-

Within the field of face recognition (FR), it is widely accepted
that the key objective is to optimize the entire feature space
in the training process and acquire robust feature representations. However, most real-world FR systems tend to operate at
a pre-defined False Accept Rate (FAR), and the corresponding True Accept Rate (TAR) represents the performance of
the FR systems, which indicates that the optimization on the
pre-defined FAR is more meaningful and important in the
practical evaluation process. In this paper, we call the predefined FAR as Anchor FAR, and we argue that the existing
FR loss functions cannot guarantee the optimal TAR under
the Anchor FAR, which impedes further improvements of FR
systems. To this end, we propose AnchorFace to bridge the
aforementioned gap between the training and practical evaluation process for FR. Given the Anchor FAR, AnchorFace
can boost the performance of FR systems by directly optimizing the non-differentiable FR evaluation metrics. Specifically, in AnchorFace, we first calculate the similarities of the
positive and negative pairs based on both the features of the
current batch and the stored features in the maintained onlineupdating set. Then, we generate the differentiable TAR loss
and FAR loss using a soften strategy. Our AnchorFace can
be readily integrated into most existing FR loss functions,
and extensive experimental results on multiple benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of AnchorFace.

Introduction
Face recognition (FR) based on deep learning has been well
investigated for many years (Sun et al. 2014; Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2015). The mainstream of recent studies is to introduce new loss functions (Deng et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2018b; Huang et al. 2020) to maximize the inter-class discriminative ability and the intra-class compactness, which
optimizes the classification accuracy for each identity in the
training process, as shown in Fig. 1a. In other words, the current methods mainly focus on optimizing the entire feature
space and generating robust and effective representation.
However, practically, current FR systems usually measure True Accept Rate (TAR) under a pre-defined False Accept Rate (FAR) as shown in Fig. 1b. Such measurement
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1711

