The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Random Mapping Method for Large-Scale Terrain Modeling
Xu Liu1,2,3 , Decai Li1,2 , Yuqing He1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
liuxu1@sia.cn, lidecai@sia.cn, heyuqing@sia.cn

Abstract

and storage consumption, in which the former one prohibit
the real-time mapping and the latter has become the bottleneck of large-scale environmental modeling.
To obtain a clean, complete, and accurate environmental
model efficiently and compactly, the traditional representation methods, such as the point cloud maps (Cole and Newman 2006), elevations maps (EM) (Krotkov and Hoffman
1994), multi-level surface maps (Triebel, Pfaff, and Burgard
2006), 3D voxel maps such as OctoMap (Hornung et al.
2013), and triangulated irregular networks (TIN) (Rekleitis
et al. 2009), are incompetent. Point cloud maps directly store
the measurements points, thus its memory consumption depends on how large the mapping area is and how sparse
the point cloud is. Similarly, the grid-based method including 3D voxel maps, elevations maps, and multi-level surface maps, are not memory-efficient when there is a need
for fine resolutions. TIN is a sample-based approach, which
also suffers from a huge memory footprint when encountering highly textured surfaces. Furthermore, all of the above
representations are obtained by pure geometric processing of
the original measurements, which typically cannot deal with
the data uncertainty in a statistically sound way and handle
the data incompleteness through terrain inference from the
information implied in the data.
The fact that the traditional methods can hardly deal with
the challenges brought by the large-scale terrain modeling
makes the state-of-art modeling techniques resort to probabilistic reasoning and machine learning. There are two main
ideas for using machine learning to model terrain. One is
to train a classifier to indicate if a three-dimensional (3D)
point is occupied, and the other is to establish a regression
model to fit the relationship between the two-dimensional
(2D) positions and their elevations. Current methods are
typically Bayesian-based, such as the Gaussian processes
(GPs) (Williams and Rasmussen 2006; Lee et al. 2019;
Jadidi, Miro, and Dissanayake 2018; Stork and Stoyanov
2020), variational inference (VI) (Bishop and Nasrabadi
2006; Guizilini and Ramos 2019), Bayesian kernel inference
(Doherty et al. 2019), Gaussian mixture model (GMM) (Srivastava and Michael 2018; O’Meadhra, Tabib, and Michael
2018), and some others involve the deep learning (Bauer,
Kuhnert, and Eckstein 2019). These techniques are sophisticated and possess good performances that they may incorporate uncertainty in a statistic way and replenish the incom-

The vast amount of data captured by robots in large-scale environments brings the computing and storage bottlenecks to
the typical methods of modeling the spaces the robots travel
in. In order to efficiently construct a compact terrain model
from uncertain, incomplete point cloud data of large-scale
environments, in this paper, we first propose a novel feature
mapping method, named random mapping, based on the fast
random construction of base functions, which can efficiently
project the messy points in the low-dimensional space into the
high-dimensional space where the points are approximately
linearly distributed. Then, in this mapped space, we propose
to learn a continuous linear regression model to represent the
terrain. We show that this method can model the environments in much less computation time, memory consumption,
and access time, with high accuracy. Furthermore, the models
possess the generalization capabilities comparable to the performances on the training set, and its inference accuracy gradually increases as the random mapping dimension increases.
To better solve the large-scale environmental modeling problem, we adopt the idea of parallel computing to train the models. This strategy greatly reduces the wall-clock time of calculation without losing much accuracy. Experiments show the
effectiveness of the random mapping method and the effects
of some important parameters on its performance. Moreover,
we evaluate the proposed terrain modeling method based on
the random mapping method and compare its performances
with popular typical methods and state-of-art methods.

Introduction
Mobile robot environment modeling is aimed at providing a
suitable representation of the space of interest, and it plays
a vital role in robot autonomous navigation and environment exploration. However, the construction of a lightweight
environmental model for a large-scale, unstructured, and
open environment is still a challenge. Specifically, the challenge results from several factors, such as: data uncertainty
brought by the inevitable sensor noise and compounded localization uncertainty, which will make the data ambiguous;
data incompleteness caused by the shielding or absorption of the sensor rays, and the gaps in the environments,
which will also make the generated maps incomplete; large
amount of data that results in high computation complexity
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5395

