The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Vertex-Oriented Polytopic Projection for Web-Scale Applications
Rohan Ramanath, S. Sathiya Keerthi, Yao Pan, Konstantin Salomatin, Kinjal Basu
LinkedIn Corportation
Mountain View, CA, USA
rohan@ramanath.me, {keselvaraj, yopan, ksalomatin, kbasu}@linkedin.com

arg miny∈C ky − xk. Certain large scale optimization problems, especially those arising from applications in the internet industry, have a huge number of polytope constraint sets,
{Ci }. To solve such problems each iteration of an algorithm
requires the projection of points {xi } to {x̃i = ΠCi (xi )}.
Computing such sets of projections is usually the key bottleneck (Wei and Banihashemi 2017) and hence efficiently
solving the projections is crucially important to solve such
large-scale optimization problems.
The set of points, {xi } usually has some structure connecting the xi that dictates the nature of the projections. Most
general purpose solvers such as ADMM (Boyd et al. 2011),
Block Splitting (Parikh and Boyd 2014) and Splitting Conic
Solver (O’Donoghue et al. 2019) do not exploit this special structure. Very recently, Basu et al. (2020) proposed
ECLIPSE (shorthand Ecl) - to solve such large scale problems while exploiting some general overall structure, but still
used off-the-shelf projection solvers such as the one in Duchi
et al. (2008) to tackle the projection step. As a result, similar
to the general purpose algorithms, the major computational
bottleneck for Ecl is also the projection step.
Although there are many different forms of projection
structures, in this paper we focus on a particular structure motivated by applications in the internet industry. We consider
those, for which, a majority of the projections, x̃i lies on a
vertex of Xi and also, over all i, the mean dimension of the
minimal face (Grünbaum et al. 2003) of Xi that contains x̃i
is very small. We refer to this as the vertex oriented structure.
Even for special polytopes such as the simplex and box-cut
(a hypercube cut by a single plane) general purpose projection algorithms are not designed to be efficient for the above
situation. The main goal of this paper is to develop special
purpose projection algorithms that (a) are specially efficient
for the vertex oriented structure; and (b) are applicable to
special polytopes such as the simplex, box-cut, and general
polytope forms.
To show the efficacy of these special purpose projection
algorithms, we switch out the projection step of Ecl , and
run an ablation study over various internet marketplace problems. We call this new solver DuaLip, a Dual decompositionbased Linear Programming framework which shows drastic speedups over the existing state-of-the-art. Moreover,
Ecl only tackled simple polytope constraints such as the
unit box or the simplex, which not only reduced the gener-

Abstract
We consider applications involving a large set of instances of
projecting points to polytopes. We develop an intuition guided
by theoretical and empirical analysis to show that when these
instances follow certain structures, a large majority of the
projections lie on vertices of the polytopes. To do these projections efficiently we derive a vertex-oriented incremental
algorithm to project a point onto any arbitrary polytope, as well
as give specific algorithms to cater to simplex projection and
polytopes where the unit box is cut by planes. Such settings
are especially useful in web-scale applications such as optimal
matching or allocation problems. Several such problems in
internet marketplaces (e-commerce, ride-sharing, food delivery, professional services, advertising, etc.), can be formulated
as Linear Programs (LP) with such polytope constraints that
require a projection step in the overall optimization process.
We show that in some of the very recent works, the polytopic
projection is the most expensive step and our efficient projection algorithms help in gaining massive improvements in
performance.

Introduction
Euclidean projection onto a polytope is not only a fundamental problem in computational geometry (He, Leng, and
Li 2006; Rambau and Ziegler 1996), but also has several
real-life applications ranging from decoding of low-density
parity-check codes (Wei and Banihashemi 2017) to generating screening rules for Lasso (Wang et al. 2013). Recent
work (Basu et al. 2020; Boyd et al. 2011) also uses polytope
projection as an operation in solving large optimization problems. Several such large-scale optimization solvers which
use polytopic projection (Parikh and Boyd 2014) are being
used to tackle different problems in the internet industry such
as matching (Azevedo and Weyl 2016) and multi-objective
optimization (Agarwal et al. 2011, 2012). Other examples include problems in natural language processing like structured
prediction (Smith 2011; Rush and Collins 2012; Martins
et al. 2015), semi-supervised approaches (Chang, Sundararajan, and Keerthi 2013), multi-class/hierarchical classification (Keerthi, Sellamanickam, and Shevade 2012), etc.
Given a compact set C and a point x, let ΠC (x) denote the (euclidean) projection of x onto C, i.e., ΠC (x) =
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3821

