The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

KOALA: A Kalman Optimization Algorithm with Loss Adaptivity
Aram Davtyan, Sepehr Sameni, Llukman Cerkezi, Givi Meishvili, Adam Bielski, Paolo Favaro
Computer Vision Group, University of Bern, Switzerland
{aram.davtyan, sepehr.sameni, llukman.cerkezi, givi.meishvili, adam.bielski, paolo.favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract

performance gains to the adoption of an approximate version of the objective function at each iteration step, which,
in turn, yields an approximate or noisy gradient.

Optimization is often cast as a deterministic problem, where
the solution is found through some iterative procedure such
as gradient descent. However, when training neural networks
the loss function changes over (iteration) time due to the randomized selection of a subset of the samples. This randomization turns the optimization problem into a stochastic one.
We propose to consider the loss as a noisy observation with
respect to some reference optimum. This interpretation of the
loss allows us to adopt Kalman filtering as an optimizer, as
its recursive formulation is designed to estimate unknown
parameters from noisy measurements. Moreover, we show
that the Kalman Filter dynamical model for the evolution of
the unknown parameters can be used to capture the gradient dynamics of advanced methods such as Momentum and
Adam. We call this stochastic optimization method KOALA,
which is short for Kalman Optimization Algorithm with Loss
Adaptivity. KOALA is an easy to implement, scalable, and
efficient method to train neural networks. We provide convergence analysis and show experimentally that it yields parameter estimates that are on par with or better than existing
state of the art optimization algorithms across several neural network architectures and machine learning tasks, such
as computer vision and language modeling. The project page
with the code and the supplementary materials is available at
https://araachie.github.io/koala/.

While SGD seems to benefit greatly (e.g., in terms of
rate of convergence) from such an approximation, it has
also been shown that too much noise hurts the performance
(Wang et al. 2013; Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2018). This
suggests that, to further improve over SGD, one could attempt to model the noise of the objective function. We consider the iteration-time varying loss function used in SGD as
a stochastic process obtained by adding the empirical risk to
zero mean Gaussian noise. A powerful approach designed
to handle estimation with such processes is Kalman filtering (Kalman 1960). In fact, Kalman filtering has been used
to train neural networks before (Haykin 2004; Patel 2016; Ismail et al. 2018). However, it can be applied in very different
ways. Indeed, in our approach, which we call KOALA, we
introduce a number of novel ideas that result in a practical
and effective training algorithm. Firstly, we introduce drastic approximations of the estimated covariance of Kalman’s
dynamical state so that the corresponding matrix depends
on only up to a 2 × 2 matrix of parameters. Secondly, we
approximate intermediate Kalman filtering calculations so
that more accuracy can be achieved. Thirdly, because of the
way we model the objective function, we can also define a
schedule for the optimization that behaves similarly to learning rate schedules used in SGD and other iterative methods
(Kingma and Ba 2015).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) We
design KOALA so that it can handle high-dimensional data
and models, and large datasets; 2) We present analysis and
conditions to ensure convergence; 3) We allow both the automated tuning of the algorithm and also the use of a learning
rate schedule similar to those in existing methods; 4) We incorporate the automatic adaptation to the noise in the loss,
which might vary depending on the settings of the training
(e.g., the minibatch size), and to the variation in the estimated weights over iteration time; 5) We show how to incorporate iteration-time dynamics of the model parameters,
which are analogous to momentum (Sutskever et al. 2013);
6) We introduce KOALA as a framework so that it can be
further extended (we show two variations of KOALA); 7)
We show experimentally that KOALA is on par with state of
the art optimizers and can yield better minima at test time

Introduction
Optimization of functions involving large datasets and high
dimensional models finds today large applicability in several data-driven fields in science and the industry. Given the
growing role of deep learning, in this paper we look at optimization problems arising in the training of neural networks.
The training of these models can be cast as the minimization or maximization of a certain objective function with respect to the model parameters. Because of the complexity
and computational requirements of the objective function,
the data and the models, the common practice is to resort
to iterative training procedures, such as gradient descent.
Among the iterative methods that emerged as the most effective and computationally efficient is stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951). SGD owes its
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6471

