The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Approval-Based Committee Voting under Incomplete Information
Aviram Imber,1 Jonas Israel,2 Markus Brill,2 Benny Kimelfeld1
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Research Group Efficient Algorithms, TU Berlin, Germany
aviram.imber@campus.technion.ac.il, j.israel@tu-berlin.de, brill@tu-berlin.de, bennyk@cs.technion.ac.il
2

Abstract

the election over time, and voter preferences over new candidates have not been elicited (Chevaleyre et al. 2012). Distinguishing between disapproved and unknown candidates
accounts for two fundamentally different reasons for nonapprovals: either the voter has evaluated the candidate and
judged him or her not worth approving (in which case the
candidate counts as disapproved), or the voter has not evaluated the candidate (in which case the candidate counts as
unknown). Furthermore, incorporating (partial) ordinal preferences among unknown candidates allows us to model situations in which we (partially) know how a voter rank-orders
the candidates, but we do not know where the voter draws
his or her “approval threshold.”
Scenarios involving incomplete knowledge about approval preferences arise naturally in a variety of practical
settings. For example, in a scenario where we retrieve information from indirect sources such as social media (say, for
the sake of prediction), we may get only sparse information
about approval (“Vote for X”) and disapproval ( “Definitely
not Y”), and possibly pairwise preferences due to explicit
statements (e.g., “X is at least better than Y ”). As another
example, in shortlisting scenarios (such as faculty hiring)
some voters may know with sufficient confidence that they
support or oppose some candidates (e.g., the ones from their
own field of expertise) but have no clear opinion on others.
This situation also naturally arises when labeling documents
for information retrieval, where the committee corresponds
to the page of search results: some documents are clearly relevant, some clearly irrelevant, and some are unclear. For the
unclear ones, it may be way easier to rank the documents
(totally or partially) by relevance rather than to insist on a
complete classification into relevant and irrelevant; in fact,
this is the motivation behind some successful methodologies
for learning ranking functions (learning to rank) such as the
pairwise and listwise approaches (Cao et al. 2007).
Our basic model of incompleteness is the poset approval
model that is illustrated in Figure 1(a). This model is a rather
direct generalization of the voter model in the seminal work
of Konczak and Lang (2005), who study problems of winner
determination with incomplete preferences under rankingbased single-winner rules (such as plurality and Borda). For
each voter, we are given a set of approved candidates and
a set of disapproved candidates, together with a partial order over the remaining (“unknown”) candidates that con-

We investigate approval-based committee voting with incomplete information about the approval preferences of voters.
We consider several models of incompleteness where each
voter partitions the set of candidates into approved, disapproved, and unknown candidates, possibly with ordinal
preference constraints among candidates in the latter category. This captures scenarios where voters have not evaluated all candidates and/or it is unknown where voters draw
the threshold between approved and disapproved candidates.
We study the complexity of some fundamental computational
problems for a number of classic approval-based committee voting rules including Proportional Approval Voting and
Chamberlin–Courant. These problems include that of determining whether a given set of candidates is a possible or necessary winning committee and whether it forms a committee
that possibly or necessarily satisfies representation axioms.
We also consider the problem whether a given candidate is
possibly or necessarily a member of the winning committee.

1

Introduction

Approval-based committee (ABC) voting represents a wellstudied multiwinner election setting, where a subset of candidates of a predetermined size, a so-called committee, needs
to be chosen based on the approval preferences of a set
of voters (Lackner and Skowron 2021). Traditionally, ABC
voting is studied in the context where we know, for each
voter and each candidate, whether the voter approves the
candidate or not. In this paper, we investigate the situation
where the approval information is incomplete. Specifically,
we assume that each voter is associated with a set of approved candidates, a set of disapproved candidates, and a
set of candidates where the voter’s stand is unknown, hereafter referred to as the unknown candidates. Moreover, we
may have (partial) ordinal information on voters’ preferences among the unknown candidates, restricting the “valid”
completions of voters’ approval sets.
When the number of candidates is large, unknown candidates are likely to exist because voters are not aware of or not
familiar with, and therefore cannot evaluate, all candidates.
In particular, this holds in scenarios where candidates join
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5076

