The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Task-Customized Self-Supervised Pre-training with Scalable Dynamic Routing
Zhili Liu1,2 , Jianhua Han2 , Lanqing Hong2 , Hang Xu2 , Kai Chen1 , Chunjing Xu2 , Zhenguo Li2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhili.liu, kai.chen}@connect.ust.hk, {hanjianhua4, honglanqing, xu.hang, xuchunjing, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract

mance of SSL models pre-trained on datasets with different
semantics. We deliberately split the ImageNet into two disjoint subsets, namely Subset-A and Subset-B, based on their
semantic dissimilarity in WordNet Tree (Miller 1998). We
pre-train models with Subset-A, Subset-B and the full ImageNet separately using SimSiam (Chen and He 2021) without
data annotations and evaluate the transfer performance on
11 downstream classification datasets. The training epochs
for the three models are the same. As shown in Fig. 1(b),
the model pre-trained on Subset-A shows the best transfer
performance on Aircraft, Cars and SUN397, while the model
pre-trained on Subset-B performs the best on Flowers, Pets,
and Food. Only five out of eleven downstream tasks benefit
more from the full ImageNet. The results indicate that involving irrelevant data in pre-training might instead hurt the
downstream performance. This phenomenon is identified as
the negative transfer in self-supervised pre-training. Similar
observations have also been discussed in (Cole et al. 2021)
and (Tian, Henaff, and Oord 2021). (Cole et al. 2021) further
investigate the importance of using semantic-similar data in
model pre-training for better transfer performance.
Prevailing SSL methods, such as MoCo-v2 (Chen et al.
2020c) and SimSiam (Chen and He 2021), usually neglect
the influence of negative transfer and provide a common
pre-trained model for different downstream tasks. A naive
extension to eliminate the effects of negative transfer is to pretrain models with task-customized datasets. However, such an
extension is actually impractical considering the burdensome
computational cost of pre-training. (Tian, Henaff, and Oord
2021) simply splits a large-scale dataset (i.e., YFCC100M)
into different subsets for customized model pre-training,
which is not scalable for a large number of downstream tasks.
It is desirable to develop an efficient SSL paradigm that provides task-customized pre-training models.
In this work, we propose a novel SSL paradigm called Scalable Dynamic Routing (SDR), which achieves dynamic pretraining and efficient deployment for different downstream
tasks. Specifically, we construct the SDRnet with various subnets and train each sub-net with different subsets of the data,
which contain different semantic clusters. We further propose
a data-aware progressive training framework to stabilize the
pre-training procedure of sub-nets and avoid collapse. When
a downstream task arrives, we route among all sub-nets to
obtain the best pre-trained model along with its weights. By

Self-supervised learning (SSL), especially contrastive methods, has raised attraction recently as it learns effective transferable representations without semantic annotations. A common
practice for self-supervised pre-training is to use as much
data as possible. For a specific downstream task, however,
involving irrelevant data in pre-training may degenerate the
downstream performance, observed from our extensive experiments. On the other hand, for existing SSL methods, it
is burdensome and infeasible to use different downstreamtask-customized datasets in pre-training for different tasks. To
address this issue, we propose a novel SSL paradigm called
Scalable Dynamic Routing (SDR), which can be trained once
and deployed efficiently to different downstream tasks with
task-customized pre-trained models. Specifically, we construct
the SDRnet with various sub-nets and train each sub-net with
only one subset of the data by data-aware progressive training. When a downstream task arrives, we route among all the
pre-trained sub-nets to get the best along with its corresponding weights. Experiment results show that our SDR can train
256 sub-nets on ImageNet simultaneously, which provides
better transfer performance than a unified model trained on
the full ImageNet, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) averaged
accuracy over 11 downstream classification tasks and AP on
PASCAL VOC detection task.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has attracted lots of attention
recently (Caron et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020),
which learns representations via pretext tasks without semantic annotations. Recent works in SSL (Xu et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2021) show competitive or even better performance on
various downstream tasks compared with supervised learning.
Without the need of annotation, SSL makes it possible to use
a large amount of unlabeled data (e.g., YFCC100M (Tian,
Henaff, and Oord 2021), Instagram (Goyal et al. 2021) and
SODA10M (Han et al. 2021a)) in model pre-training. However, will more data in self-supervised pre-training always
lead to better transfer performance? In other words, for a
specific downstream task, will irrelevant data in pre-training
hurt the downstream performance instead?
To answer the above questions, we first conduct a preliminary experiment in Sec. 3 to evaluate the transfer perforCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1854

