The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PluGeN: Multi-Label Conditional Generation from Pre-trained Models
Maciej Wołczyk1 * , Magdalena Proszewska1∗ , Łukasz Maziarka1 ,
Maciej Zieba2,4 , Patryk Wielopolski2 , Rafał Kurczab3 , Marek Śmieja1†
1

2

Jagiellonian University
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology
3
Institute of Pharmacology PAS
4
Tooploox
input

Abstract
Modern generative models achieve excellent quality in a variety of tasks including image or text generation and chemical
molecule modeling. However, existing methods often lack the
essential ability to generate examples with requested properties, such as the age of the person in the photo or the weight
of the generated molecule. Incorporating such additional conditioning factors would require rebuilding the entire architecture and optimizing the parameters from scratch. Moreover,
it is difficult to disentangle selected attributes so that to perform edits of only one attribute while leaving the others unchanged. To overcome these limitations we propose PluGeN
(Plugin Generative Network), a simple yet effective generative technique that can be used as a plugin to pre-trained generative models. The idea behind our approach is to transform
the entangled latent representation using a flow-based module into a multi-dimensional space where the values of each
attribute are modeled as an independent one-dimensional distribution. In consequence, PluGeN can generate new samples with desired attributes as well as manipulate labeled attributes of existing examples. Due to the disentangling of the
latent representation, we are even able to generate samples
with rare or unseen combinations of attributes in the dataset,
such as a young person with gray hair, men with make-up,
or women with beards. We combined PluGeN with GAN
and VAE models and applied it to conditional generation and
manipulation of images and chemical molecule modeling.
Experiments demonstrate that PluGeN preserves the quality
of backbone models while adding the ability to control the
values of labeled attributes. Implementation is available at
https://github.com/gmum/plugen.

gender

glasses

smile

Figure 1: Attributes manipulation performed by PluGeN using the StyleGAN backbone.

of each ethnicity are properly represented in the generated
set of face images. In numerous realistic problems, such as
drug discovery, we want to find objects with desired properties, like molecules with a particular activity, non-toxicity,
and solubility.
Designing the conditional variants of generative models
that operate on multiple labels is a challenging problem
due to intricate relations among the attributes. Practically,
it means that some combinations of attributes (e.g. a woman
with a beard) might be unobserved or rarely observed in the
training data. In essence, the model should be able to go
beyond the distribution of seen data and generate examples
with combinations of attributes not encountered previously.
One might approach this problem by building a new conditional generative model from the ground up or design a solution tailored for a specific existing unsupervised generative
model. However, this introduces an additional effort when
one wants to adapt it to a newly invented approach.
To tackle this problem while leveraging the power of existing techniques, we propose PluGeN (Plugin Generative
Network), a simple yet effective generative technique that
can be used as a plugin to various pre-trained generative
models such as VAEs or GANs, see Figure 1 for demonstration. Making use of PluGeN, we can manipulate the attributes of input examples as well as generate new samples
with desired features. When training the proposed module,
we do not change the parameters of the base model and thus

Introduction
Generative models such as GANs and variational autoencoders have achieved great results in recent years, especially
in the domains of images (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan
2018; Brown et al. 2020) and cheminformatics (GómezBombarelli et al. 2018; Jin, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2018).
However, in many practical applications, we need to control the process of creating samples by enforcing particular
features of generated objects. This would be required to regulate the biases present in the data, e.g. to assure that people
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author: marek.smieja@uj.edu.pl
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8647

