The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pizza Sharing Is PPA-Hard
Argyrios Deligkas* 1 , John Fearnley* 2 , Themistoklis Melissourgos3
1

Royal Holloway University of London, UK,
2
University of Liverpool, UK,
3
University of Essex, UK
argyrios.deligkas@rhul.ac.uk, john.fearnley@liverpool.ac.uk, themistoklis.melissourgos@essex.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the computational complexity of computing solutions for the straight-cut and square-cut pizza sharing problems. We show that finding an approximate solution is PPAhard for the straight-cut problem, and PPA-complete for
the square-cut problem, while finding an exact solution for
the square-cut problem is FIXP-hard and in BU. Our PPAhardness results apply even when all mass distributions are
unions of non-overlapping squares, and our FIXP-hardness
result applies even when all mass distributions are unions of
weighted squares and right-angled triangles. We also prove
that decision variants of the square-cut problem are hard: the
approximate problem is NP-complete, and the exact problem
is ETR-complete.

Figure 1: Partitions of the plane to 𝑅+ and 𝑅− (shaded and
non-shaded areas respectively). Subfigure (a): a straight-line
partition with four lines. Subfigure (b): a square-cut-path
with six turns. Observe that the path is not 𝑦-monotone. Subfigure (c): a 𝑦-monotone square-cut-path with four turns.

Introduction

Figure 1(𝑏) and 1(𝑐) for two examples of square-cuts. Intuitively, we can imagine that a pizza cutter is placed on the
plane, and is then moved horizontally and vertically without
being lifted in order to produce the cut. Note that the path
is allowed to wrap around on the horizontal axis: if it exits
the left or right boundary, then it re-appears on the opposite
boundary. So the cut in Figure 1(𝑐) is still considered to be
a single square-cut.
It has been shown by (Karasev, Roldán-Pensado, and
Soberón 2016) that, given 𝑛 masses, there always exists
a square-cut-path (termed SC-path) which makes at most
𝑛 − 1 turns and simultaneously bisects all of the masses.
This holds even if the SC-path is required to be 𝑦-monotone,
meaning that the path never moves downwards.
Two-dimensional fair division is usually called land division in the literature. Land division is a prominent topic
of interest in the Economics and AI communities that studies ways of fairly allocating two-dimensional objects among
𝑛 agents (Chambers 2005; Segal-Halevi et al. 2017; SegalHalevi et al. 2020; Elkind, Segal-Halevi, and Suksompong
2021; Aumann and Dombb 2015; Iyer and Huhns 2009;
Husseinov 2011). The first popular appearance of such problems in a mathematical description was done by (Steinhaus
1948), and since then, the existence of allocations under various fairness criteria have been extensively studied, together
with algorithms that achieve them. These problems find applications from division of resources on land itself, to the
Law of the Sea (Simmons and Su 2003), to redistricting
(Landau, Reid, and Yershov 2009; Landau and Su 2014).

Mass partition problems ask us to fairly divide measurable
objects that are embedded into Euclidean space (RoldánPensado and Soberón 2020). Perhaps the most popular
mass partition problem is the ham sandwich problem, in
which three masses are given in three-dimensional Euclidean space, and the goal is to find a single plane that cuts
all three masses in half. Recently, there has been interest in
pizza sharing problems, which are mass partition problems
in the two-dimensional plane, and in this paper we study the
computational complexity of such problems.
In the straight-cut pizza sharing problem, we are given
2𝑛 two-dimensional masses in the plane, and we are asked
to find 𝑛 straight lines that simultaneously bisect all of the
masses. See Figure 1(𝑎) for an example. It has been shown
that this problem always has a solution: the first result on
the topic showed that solutions always exist when 𝑛 = 2
(Barba, Pilz, and Schnider 2019), and this was subsequently
extended to show existence for all 𝑛 (Hubard and Karasev
2020).
Another related problem is the square-cut pizza sharing.
In this problem, there are 𝑛 masses in the plane, and the
task is to simultaneously bisect all masses using cuts, but
the method of generating the cuts is different. Specifically,
we seek a square-cut, which consists of a single path that
is the union of horizontal and vertical line segments. See
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4957

