The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hybrid Graph Neural Networks for Few-Shot Learning
Tianyuan Yu1,2 , Sen He1,3 , Yi-Zhe Song1,3 , Tao Xiang1,3
1

Center for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
2
National University of Defense Technology
3
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence
{tianyuan.yu, sen.he, y.song, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

Image feature

One-hot label

Task 1

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been used to tackle the
few-shot learning (FSL) problem and shown great potentials
under the transductive setting. However under the inductive
setting, existing GNN based methods are less competitive.
This is because they use an instance GNN as a label propagation/classification module, which is jointly meta-learned
with a feature embedding network. This design is problematic because the classifier needs to adapt quickly to new
tasks while the embedding does not. To overcome this problem, in this paper we propose a novel hybrid GNN (HGNN)
model consisting of two GNNs, an instance GNN and a prototype GNN. Instead of label propagation, they act as feature embedding adaptation modules for quick adaptation of
the meta-learned feature embedding to new tasks. Importantly they are designed to deal with a fundamental yet often neglected challenge in FSL, that is, with only a handful
of shots per class, any few-shot classifier would be sensitive to badly sampled shots which are either outliers or can
cause inter-class distribution overlapping. Extensive experiments show that our HGNN obtains new state-of-the-art on
three FSL benchmarks. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/TianyuanYu/HGNN.

class 1

Task n

class 2

class 1

class 2

Node (support)

Node (query)

Task 1
class 1

Task n

class 2

…

class 1

class 2

…

Information
propagation

Task-agnostic classifier
class 2

(a) Prior works

class 1

Classifier 1
class 2

… Classifier n

Task-specific class 1
(b) Our model

Figure 1: Illustration of the differences between our GNN
and prior GNN in FSL using 2-way 1-shot tasks. (a) Previous methods, e.g. (Garcia and Bruna 2018), use GNN for
label propagation, i.e., as a task-agnostic classifier. (b) We
use GNN for feature adaptation and leave the query image
label prediction job to task-specific classifiers.
Most recent FSL approaches follow the paradigm of metalearning (Hospedales et al. 2020) with episodic training.
Concretely, a model is trained in each episode with a fewshot classification task sampled from the base classes. Each
task consists of a support set and a query set for inner and
outer loop training respectively. This is to imitate the metatest setting, under which only few labeled data are given for
a novel task. The objective is to meta-learn a model capable
of “learning to learn”, that is, generalizing well to new tasks
composed of unseen classes. Existing approaches differ primarily on what is meta-learned – a deep embedding/distance
metric (Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017;
Sung et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020) or an optimization algorithm (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017).
Among various existing FSL approaches, graph neural
network (GNN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) based FSL methods (Garcia and Bruna 2018; Luo et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019;
Kim et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020) have received increasing
attention due to their excellent performance under the transductive setting. These methods, as shown in Figure 1(a), employ GNN as a label propagation module whereby the graph
is used for either node label prediction (Garcia and Bruna
2018; Liu et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020) or edge label prediction (Kim et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020). In other words, a
GNN is used as a classifier which takes a feature embedding

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
great successes in various computer vision problems including image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012), semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2017), object detection (Ren et al. 2015) and image captioning (Xu et al.
2015). However, training deep neural networks requires a
large amount of labeled data (e.g., hundreds of samples per
class). Collecting and annotating them is often tedious, expensive and even infeasible for some rare classes. This thus
hinders their deployments in real-world applications. One
widely studied solution to this problem is few-shot learning
(FSL) (Vinyals et al. 2016; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017;
Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Sung et al. 2018; Sun et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2020), which aims to recognize a set of
novel classes with only a handful of labeled samples/shots
(e.g., 1-5 per class) by knowledge transfer from a set of base
classes with abundant samples.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3179

