The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neighborhood-Adaptive Structure Augmented Metric Learning
Pandeng Li1 * , Yan Li2 * , Hongtao Xie1† , Lei Zhang2
1

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
lpd@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liyan@kuaishou.com, htxie@ustc.edu.cn, zhanglei06@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Most metric learning techniques typically focus on sample
embedding learning, while implicitly assume a homogeneous
local neighborhood around each sample, based on the metrics used in training (e.g., hypersphere for Euclidean distance
or unit hyperspherical crown for cosine distance). As realworld data often lies on a low-dimensional manifold curved
in a high-dimensional space, it is unlikely that everywhere
of the manifold shares the same local structures in the input space. Besides, considering the non-linearity of neural
networks, the local structure in the output embedding space
may not be as homogeneous as assumed. Therefore, representing each sample simply with its embedding while ignoring its individual neighborhood structure would have limitations in Embedding-Based Retrieval (EBR). By exploiting the heterogeneity of local structures in the embedding
space, we propose a Neighborhood-Adaptive Structure Augmented metric learning framework (NASA), where the neighborhood structure is realized as a structure embedding, and
learned along with the sample embedding in a self-supervised
manner. In this way, without any modifications, most indexing techniques can be used to support large-scale EBR with
NASA embeddings. Experiments on six standard benchmarks
with two kinds of embeddings, i.e., binary embeddings and
real-valued embeddings, show that our method significantly
improves and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

texture-dimension

Figure 1: Qualitative illustration of adaptive neighborhood:
neighbors of a cat can distribute in a wide range on the “texture” dimension, since cats can have very different texture
patterns, while neighbors of a tiger should distribute in a narrow range, since all tigers have similar texture patterns.

within a mini-batch (Wang et al. 2019) or similarities between samples and classification vectors (Deng et al. 2019).
Sampling strategies (Wu et al. 2017), memory bank (Wang
et al. 2020a) and examples generation (Ko and Gu 2020)
are proposed to mine informative samples in the training
process, and boost-like policies (Roth, Brattoli, and Ommer
2019) are used to improve the encoder. Generally, existing
methods concentrate on how to learn a good embedding for
each sample and represent each sample with its embedding.
The similarity of two samples are then measured by the
proximity between their embeddings, using a distance metric predefined in encoder training, such as Euclidean distance (Wu et al. 2017), cosine similarity (Deng et al. 2019)
and Hamming distance (Yang et al. 2018). Therefore, DML
methods implicitly make an assumption about the manifold
structure around each sample: the local neighborhood of
each sample is homogeneous and shares the same structures.
However, this assumption is relatively too ideal. As shown
in Fig. 1, given an image of a cat, in the embedding space,
its neighbors can distribute in a wide range on the “texture” dimension, since cats can have very different texture
patterns. By contrast, for a tiger, its neighbors should distribute in a narrow range, since all kinds of tigers have similar textures. Therefore, on the “texture” dimension, the cat

Introduction
With the recent success of deep learning, deep metric learning (DML) methods have demonstrated strong ability in various tasks (Ge et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021;
Lin et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020b), such as semantic search
(Huang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021b; Min et al. 2020a,b)
and face recognition (Li et al. 2021a). Most existing approaches (Roth, Brattoli, and Ommer 2019; Wu et al. 2017)
take as input a sample (e.g., an image or a document), use
a trained neural network as an encoder and represent this
sample with the output embedding. Currently, almost all of
these methods focus on the encoder training, and various
objectives are formulated in terms of pairwise similarities
* Equal contribution, this work was done during Pandeng Li’s
internship at Kuaishou. † Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1367

