The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Gradient-Based Novelty Detection
Boosted by Self-Supervised Binary Classification
Jingbo Sun1 , Li Yang1 , Jiaxin Zhang2 , Frank Liu2 , Mahantesh Halappanavar3 ,
Deliang Fan1 , Yu Cao1
1
Arizona State University
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
3
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
jsun127@asu.edu, lyang166@asu.edu, zhangj@ornl.gov, liufy@ornl.gov, Mahantesh.Halappanavar@pnnl.gov,
dfan@asu.edu, Yu.Cao@asu.edu
2

Abstract

OOD arrival, the system can then manage the situation with
three possible methods: (1) It can rely on the OOD detector to collect new data and send them back to the data center, such that OOD data can be combined with previous indistribution data (IDD) to re-train the model; (2) It can temporally utilize the detector as a one-class classifier to recognize the new class of OOD, in addition to existing IDD
classes; and (3) It can activate a continual learning method
at the edge to adapt the model in the field, such as the multihead method with the assistance of the OOD detector. In all
three cases, the accuracy and robustness of the novelty detector guard the success of continual model adaptation and
knowledge update.
In this work, we propose a self-supervised approach
which generates a set of OOD data from unsupervised statistical analysis, instead of supervised labeling. This set of
OOD data is then combined with IDD to train a binary classifier, which in turn, helps boost the performance of the unsupervised detector that collects more OOD data for training. As this mutual process continues, our novelty detector
achieves higher and higher confidence in OOD detection.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:

Novelty detection aims to automatically identify out-ofdistribution (OOD) data, without any prior knowledge of
them. It is a critical step in data monitoring, behavior analysis and other applications, helping enable continual learning in the field. Conventional methods of OOD detection perform multi-variate analysis on an ensemble of data or features, and usually resort to the supervision with OOD data
to improve the accuracy. In reality, such supervision is impractical as one cannot anticipate the anomalous data. In
this paper, we propose a novel, self-supervised approach that
does not rely on any pre-defined OOD data: (1) The new
method evaluates the Mahalanobis distance of the gradients
between the in-distribution and OOD data. (2) It is assisted
by a self-supervised binary classifier to guide the label selection to generate the gradients, and maximize the Mahalanobis
distance. In the evaluation with multiple datasets, such as
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN and TinyImageNet, the proposed approach consistently outperforms state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised methods in the area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) and area under the
precision-recall curve (AUPR) metrics. We further demonstrate that this detector is able to accurately learn one OOD
class in continual learning.

• Gradient-based novelty detection that employs the Mahalanobis distance as the metric to differentiate indistribution and OOD input. The gradients are generated
from a pre-trained classifier for IDD only, without any
pre-knowledge of OOD.
• A self-supervised binary classifier. As previous works
demonstrated, the availability of a binary classifier helps
boost the accuracy. Yet distinguished from them, we
don’t rely on any labelled OOD data to train the classifier. The training set is initialized by the gradientbased detector. In turn, the binary classifier pre-screens
OOD and IDD, and guides the selection of labels in the
gradient-based detector to maximize the distance calculation. Through such mutual assistance, our approach is
unsupervised and continually improves the accuracy.
• High accuracy in OOD detection and one-class classification. We evaluate our methodology in a comprehensive set of benchmarks. As shown in Fig. 1, our selfsupervised method consistently achieves higher AUROC
than other supervised and unsupervised results, confirming the advantages in gradient-based novelty detection.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved high accuracy in many fields, such as image classification, natural
language processing, and speech recognition. Their success
is built upon carefully handcrafted DNN architectures, big
data collection and expensive model training. A well-trained
model promises high inference accuracy if the input falls
into the distribution of the training data. However, in many
real-world scenarios, there is no guarantee that the input
is always in the distribution. The encounter with out-ofdistribution (OOD) input is inevitable due to the difficulty in
data collection, unforeseeable user scenarios, and complex
dynamics.
To manage the emergence of OOD data at the first moment, it is vitally important to have an accurate novelty detector that continuously evaluates the data stream and alarms
the system once OOD data arrives. Upon the detection of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8370

