The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Causal Intervention for Subject-Deconfounded Facial Action Unit Recognition
Yingjie Chen1 , Diqi Chen2 , Tao Wang1 * , Yizhou Wang1 , Yun Liang1
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing China
Advanced Institute of Information Technology (AIIT), Peking University, Hangzhou, China
chenyingjie@pku.edu.cn, dqchen@aiit.org.cn, wangtao@pku.edu.cn, yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn, ericlyun@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Subject-invariant facial action unit (AU) recognition remains
challenging for the reason that the data distribution varies
among subjects. In this paper, we propose a causal inference
framework for subject-invariant facial action unit recognition.
To illustrate the causal effect existing in AU recognition task,
we formulate the causalities among facial images, subjects,
latent AU semantic relations, and estimated AU occurrence
probabilities via a structural causal model. By constructing
such a causal diagram, we clarify the causal effect among
variables and propose a plug-in causal intervention module,
CIS, to deconfound the confounder Subject in the causal diagram. Extensive experiments conducted on two commonly
used AU benchmark datasets, BP4D and DISFA, show the
effectiveness of our CIS, and the model with CIS inserted,
CISNet, has achieved state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
With the proliferation of facial behavior analysis in realworld application scenarios such as online education and
driver safety assistance, facial action unit recognition has
attracted increasing research interest as a fundamental task
in the field of affective computing. According to Facial Action Coding System (FACS) (Friesen and Ekman 1978), facial action units (AUs), defined as the combinations of facial
muscle movements, can describe almost all facial behaviors,
which is essential for fine-grained facial behavior analysis.
In recent years, deep learning has proved its efficacy and efficiency in facial action unit recognition task (Cui et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2021b; Yang et al. 2021; Song et al. 2021b), but
there is still room for improvement since some inherent nature of AU has not been fully exploited.
AUs are not independent of each other. On the one hand,
AUs usually do not occur alone when humans express certain emotions, and thus some combinations of AUs, which
pertain to displayed emotions, can be frequently observed,
e.g. AU6 (Cheek Raiser) and AU12 (Lip Corner Puller) tend
to appear together and form facial expression happiness (Ekman 1992). On the other hand, there are strict co-occurrence
and mutual exclusion among AUs due to the structural con-

Figure 1: Illustration of subject variation problem. The AU
semantic relations embedded in the facial images of the four
subjects vary due to the differences among their customs
of expressing happiness. Using samples collected from the
first three subjects for training may cause the learned latent
AU semantic relations containing subject-specific ones (dark
yellow lines) in addition to universal ones (dark blue lines).
When encountering a new subject (Subject 4) in the inference stage, differences between Subject 4’s specific AU relations and the learned ones will lead to prediction bias.

straints brought by facial anatomy, e.g. AU22 (Lip Funneler) and AU23 (Lip Tightener) cannot appear simultaneously since they are all related to facial muscle Orbicularis
oris, and it is difficult to make AU9 (Nose Wrinkler) without the presence of AU6 (Cheek Raiser) due to muscular
synergy (Zarins 2018). Although the presence or absence
of each AU can be mainly inferred from facial appearance
changes, it can also be partially inferred based on the states
of other AUs. Therefore, an accurate AU recognition model

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

374

