The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Planning with Biological Neurons and Synapses
Francesco d’Amore1 , Daniel Mitropolsky2 , Pierluigi Crescenzi3 ,
Emanuele Natale1 , Christos H. Papadimitriou2
2

1
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, Sophia Antipolis, France
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA
3
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italia
{francesco.d-amore,emanuele.natale}@inria.fr
{dgm2144,christos}@columbia.edu
pierluigi.crescenzi@gssi.it

Abstract

2018): “We do not have a logic for the transformation of
neural activity to thought and action. I consider discerning
[this logic] as the most important future direction in Neuroscience”.
The Assembly Calculus (AC) is a recently proposed formal computational system (Papadimitriou et al. 2020). As
far as we know, it is the only computational system in the
literature whose explicit purpose is to bridge through computation the gap between neurons and intelligence — that is
to say, to function as Axel’s logic. The basic data item of the
AC is the assembly of neurons, a large stable set of neurons
believed to represent an idea, object, word, etc., while its
operations (project, associate, merge, etc.) create and manipulate assemblies in response to stimuli and other brain
events. Importantly, these operations can be provably simulated through the activity of stylized neurons and synapses.
All said, the AC is a Turing complete computational system
founded firmly on the basic principles of Neuroscience. In
the next section, we provide a comprehensive introduction
to the AC; however, the interested reader may want to read
(Papadimitriou et al. 2020).
So, is the AC the bridging “logic” sought by Axel? One
avenue for pursuing this important question is to demonstrate empirically that reasonably complex cognitive phenomena can be formulated and implemented in the AC
framework. Indeed, in the original paper (Papadimitriou
et al. 2020) it was argued that aspects of language generation can be handled by the operations of the AC, while in a
very recent paper (Mitropolsky, Collins, and Papadimitriou
2021), a Parser implemented in the AC was demonstrated to
analyze syntactically reasonably complex sentences of English, and it was argued that it can be generalized to more
complex features as well as other natural languages.
Our contribution in this paper is to demonstrate that a
program in the AC is capable of implementing reasonably
sophisticated stylized planning strategies – in particular,
heuristics for solving tasks in the blocks world (Gupta and
Nau 1991; Slaney and Thiébaux 2001). A blocks-world configuration is defined by a set of stacks, where a stack is a
sequence of unique blocks, each sitting on top of the previous one. A stack of size one is just a block sitting on the
table (see e.g. Fig. 1-A). A configuration can be manipulated
by moving a block from the top of a stack (or from the table) to the top of another stack (or to the table). A task in

We revisit the planning problem in the blocks world,
and we implement a known heuristic for this task. Importantly, our implementation is biologically plausible,
in the sense that it is carried out exclusively through the
spiking of neurons. Even though much has been accomplished in the blocks world over the past five decades,
we believe that this is the first algorithm of its kind. The
input is a sequence of symbols encoding an initial set of
block stacks as well as a target set, and the output is a sequence of motion commands such as “put the top block
in stack 1 on the table”. The program is written in the
Assembly Calculus, a recently proposed computational
framework meant to model computation in the brain
by bridging the gap between neural activity and cognitive function. Its elementary objects are assemblies of
neurons (stable sets of neurons whose simultaneous firing signifies that the subject is thinking of an object,
concept, word, etc.), its commands include project and
merge, and its execution model is based on widely accepted tenets of neuroscience. A program in this framework essentially sets up a dynamical system of neurons
and synapses that eventually, with high probability, accomplishes the task. The purpose of this work is to establish empirically that reasonably large programs in the
Assembly Calculus can execute correctly and reliably;
and that rather realistic — if idealized — higher cognitive functions, such as planning in the blocks world, can
be implemented successfully by such programs.

Introduction
How does intelligence happen? How can reasoning,
problem-solving, decision-making, planning, empathy, language, art be achieved through the activity of neurons
and synapses? Despite tremendous advances over the past
decades in our understanding of neural mechanisms — increasingly assisted and propelled by machine learning —
we are still very far from answering the overarching question: how does the brain beget the mind? The difficulty lies
in the huge gap of scale and methodology between Experimental Neuroscience and Cognitive Science. This frustration was articulated in a most eloquent way by Nobel laureate Richard Axel, who declared in a 2018 interview (Axel
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21

