The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Balanced Self-Paced Learning for AUC Maximization
Bin Gu1,2 * , Chenkang Zhang2 * , Huan Xiong1,3 * , Heng Huang4
1
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
School of Computer & Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
3
Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology, P.R.China
4
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
bin.gu@mbzuai.ac.ae, 20201221058@nuist.edu.cn, huan.xiong.math@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu
2

Abstract

higher decision value than a randomly drawn negative sample (McKnight and Najab 2010), would be a better evaluation criterion for imbalanced datasets.
Real-world data tend to be massive in quantity, but with
quite a few unreliable noisy data that can lead to decreased
generalization performance. Many studies have tried to address this, with some degree of success (Wu and Liu 2007;
Zhai et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020). However, most of these
studies only consider the impact of noisy data on accuracy,
rather than on AUC. In many cases, AUC maximization algorithms may decrease generalization performance due to
the noisy data. Thus, how to deal with noisy data in AUC
maximization problems is still an open topic.
Since its birth (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010), selfpaced learning (SPL) has attracted increasing attention (Wan
et al. 2020; Klink et al. 2020; Ghasedi et al. 2019) because
it can simulate the learning principle of humans, i.e., starting with easy samples and then gradually introducing more
complex samples into training. Complex samples are considered to own larger loss than easy samples, and noise
samples normally have a relatively large loss. Thus, SPL
could reduce the importance weight of noise samples because they are treated as complex samples. Under the learning paradigm of SPL, the model is constantly corrected and
its robustness is improved. Thus, SPL is an effective method
for handling noisy data. Many experimental and theoretical
analyses have proved its robustness (Meng, Zhao, and Jiang
2017; Liu, Ma, and Meng 2018; Zhang et al. 2020). However, existing SPL methods are limited to pointwise learning,
while AUC maximization is a pairwise learning problem.
To solve this challenging problem, we innovatively propose a balanced self-paced AUC maximization algorithm
(BSPAUC). Specifically, we first provide an upper bound
of expected AUC risk by the empirical AUC risk on training samples obeying pace distribution plus two more terms
related to SPL. Inspired by this, we propose our balanced
self-paced AUC maximization formulation. In particular, the
sub-problem with respect to all weight variables may be
non-convex in our formulation, while the one is normally
convex in existing self-paced problems. To solve this challenging difficulty, we propose a doubly cyclic block coordinate descent method to optimize our formulation.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows.

Learning to improve AUC performance is an important topic
in machine learning. However, AUC maximization algorithms may decrease generalization performance due to the
noisy data. Self-paced learning is an effective method for
handling noisy data. However, existing self-paced learning
methods are limited to pointwise learning, while AUC maximization is a pairwise learning problem. To solve this challenging problem, we innovatively propose a balanced selfpaced AUC maximization algorithm (BSPAUC). Specifically,
we first provide a statistical objective for self-paced AUC.
Based on this, we propose our self-paced AUC maximization formulation, where a novel balanced self-paced regularization term is embedded to ensure that the selected positive
and negative samples have proper proportions. Specially, the
sub-problem with respect to all weight variables may be nonconvex in our formulation, while the one is normally convex
in existing self-paced problems. To address this, we propose
a doubly cyclic block coordinate descent method. More importantly, we prove that the sub-problem with respect to all
weight variables converges to a stationary point on the basis of closed-form solutions, and our BSPAUC converges to
a stationary point of our fixed optimization objective under
a mild assumption. Considering both the deep learning and
kernel-based implementations, experimental results on several large-scale datasets demonstrate that our BSPAUC has a
better generalization performance than existing state-of-theart AUC maximization methods.

Introduction
Learning to improve AUC performance is an important topic
in machine learning, especially for imbalanced datasets
(Huang and Ling 2005; Ling, Huang, and Zhang 2003;
Cortes and Mohri 2004). Specifically, for severely imbalanced binary classification datasets, a classifier may achieve
a high prediction accuracy if it predicts all samples to be the
dominant class. However, the classifier actually has a poor
generalization performance because it cannot properly classify samples from non-dominant class. AUC (area under the
ROC curve) (Hanley and McNeil 1982), which measures the
probability of a randomly drawn positive sample having a
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6765

