The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contrast and Generation Make BART a Good Dialogue Emotion Recognizer
Shimin Li1,3 , Hang Yan1,3 , Xipeng Qiu1,2,3 *
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
{smli20, hyan19, xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn
2

[Jade]: Oh, Bob, he was nothing compared to you. I had
to bite my lip to keep from screaming your name.

Abstract
In dialogue systems, utterances with similar semantics may
have distinctive emotions under different contexts. Therefore,
modeling long-range contextual emotional relationships with
speaker dependency plays a crucial part in dialogue emotion
recognition. Meanwhile, distinguishing the different emotion
categories is non-trivial since they usually have semantically
similar sentiments. To this end, we adopt supervised contrastive learning to make different emotions mutually exclusive to identify similar emotions better. Meanwhile, we utilize
an auxiliary response generation task to enhance the model’s
ability of handling context information, thereby forcing the
model to recognize emotions with similar semantics in diverse contexts. To achieve these objectives, we use the pretrained encoder-decoder model BART as our backbone model
since it is very suitable for both understanding and generation
tasks. The experiments on four datasets demonstrate that our
proposed model obtains significantly more favorable results
than the state-of-the-art model in dialogue emotion recognition. The ablation study further demonstrates the effectiveness of supervised contrastive loss and generative loss.

[Chandler]: Well, that makes me feel so good.

[Jade]: It was just so awkward and bumpy

[Ross]: Bumpy?
[Chandler]: Well, maybe he had some kind of, uh, new,
cool style, that you‘re not familiar with.
[Jade]: Well, there really wasn’t much time to get used to
it, you know what I mean?

Figure 1: The conversation flow chart in multi-person dialogue emotion recognition. The solid line indicates that the
previous utterance directly influences the current speaker’s
emotion. The dashed line signifies that the same speaker is
influenced by other utterances and expresses different emotions.

Introduction
With the development and popularization of personal intelligent terminal technology and social networks, the importance of constructing a dialogue system that can comprehend
user emotions and intentions and conduct effective dialogue
interactions has increased significantly. A critical module in
the dialogue system is the natural language understanding
module that analyzes user behaviors like intents or emotions.
Analyzing user sentiments with contextual relationships is
an advanced step for simple sentiment classification tasks
and is more suitable for usage scenarios in the real world
with more research value. The task of emotion recognition
in conversation (ERC) is to assign emotion labels to all the
utterances in a historical dialogue with a contextual relationship. At the same time, each historical dialogue contains interactions between multiple different speakers, as illustrated
in Figure 1.
There are three challenges for ERC. (1) The first challenge is that the emotion of each utterance may be affected

by contextual information. For example, specific emotions
will depend on certain utterances of the context. Meanwhile,
utterances with the same expression may have completely
different emotions in various contexts. Therefore, effectively
modeling the context dependency and the speaker dependency is the main factor distinguishing this task from traditional sentiment classification. (2) The second challenge is
that each speaker’s emotion is influenced by the utterance of
other speakers in the conversation, so there may exist a sudden change in a speaker’s emotion. (3) The third challenge
lies in semantically similar but different categories of emotions, such as “frustrated” to “sad”, “happy” to “excited”,
etc. It is difficult to distinguish these semantically similar
sentiment categories.
Recent related work addressed contextual dependencies
and speaker relations using various graph networks (Shen
et al. 2021b; Ghosal et al. 2019; Ishiwatari et al. 2020; Sheng
et al. 2020). However, as the number of layers deepens, the
phenomenon of over-smoothing (Chen et al. 2020a) starts to
appear, resulting in the representation of similar sentiments

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11002

