The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

L OGIC D EF: An Interpretable Defense Framework against Adversarial Examples
via Inductive Scene Graph Reasoning
Yuan Yang, James C Kerce and Faramarz Fekri
Georgia Institute of Technology
{yyang754@, clayton.kerce@gtri., faramarz.fekri@ece.}gatech.edu

Original Image

Abstract

Car

Deep vision models have provided new capability across a
spectrum of applications in transportation, manufacturing, agriculture, commerce, and security. However, recent studies have
demonstrated that these models are vulnerable to adversarial
attack, exposing a risk-of-use in critical applications where
untrusted parties have access to the data environment or even
directly to the sensor inputs. Existing adversarial defense methods are either limited to specific types of attacks or are too
complex to be applied to practical vision models. More importantly, these methods rely on techniques that are not interpretable to humans. In this work, we argue that an effective
defense should produce an explanation as to why the system
is attacked, and by using a representation that is easily readable by a human user, e.g. a logic formalism. To this end, we
propose logic adversarial defense (L OGIC D EF), a defense
framework that utilizes the scene graph of the image to provide a contextual structure for detecting and explaining object
classification. Our framework first mines inductive logic rules
from the extracted scene graph, and then uses these rules to
construct a defense model that alerts the user when the vision
model violates the consistency rules. The defense model is
interpretable and its robustness is further enhanced by incorporating existing relational commonsense knowledge from
projects such as ConceptNet. In order to handle the hierarchical nature of such relational reasoning, we use a curriculum
learning approach based on object taxonomy, yielding additional improvements to training and performance.

Image with Rich Context

Train

?

Window
Door

Person

Number

Adversarial
Patch

Tracks

Scene Graph

Attacked Image
Tree

Cat

Person

Near

𝒙𝟏

?

Has

Track
𝒙𝟑

Has

𝒙𝟐
Door

On

Number

On

Window

Defense via Scene Graph Reasoning
“Something that has Door , Window and runs
on Track should be a train”

Figure 1: Defending the adversarial patch by reasoning over
the scene graph.

this defense to be vulnerable to carefully designed adversarial attacks (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Athalye and Carlini
2018). Other methods such as certifiable defenses seek to
protect the classifier by verifying its prediction is within a
prescribed `p ball around the input (Raghunathan, Steinhardt,
and Liang 2018; Chiang et al. 2020; Cohen, Rosenfeld, and
Kolter 2019). However, these methods are developed specifically for `p -norm attacks; furthermore, their computational
expense and the architectural limitations they impose limit
their practical application.
Despite their sophistication, we note that most of these
attacks can be easily detected by humans. In contrast to
machine learning models, humans recognize and describe
objects using a component hierarchy and by correlating cooccurring ancillary scene features, properties, and entities.
This association with relevant entities suggests it as a natural
defense mechanism against such attacks. For example, consider an image of a train as shown in Figure 1. The “train”
object in the image is classified as a “cat” by the deep object
classifier due to the adversarial attack. How would a human
detect the object is misclassified? One can say that “a cat is
an animal with paws and a tail” and these details are absent
from the image. Furthermore, the bounded object has compo-

Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved great success in many
visual tasks, such as object classification and detection. However, a wealth of research has shown that these models are not
robust in situations where an attacker can modulate the input
with only small perturbations, since such data modulation
can significantly alter the model predictions (Szegedy et al.
2013; Biggio et al. 2013; Brown et al. 2017).
Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to defend
against perturbation attacks. Some methods rely on empirical
techniques, such as training with adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Tramèr et al. 2017). This
defense is straightforward to apply but is limited to the attack
types seen in the training phase. Subsequent studies showed
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8840

