The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Private Rank Aggregation in Central and Local Models
Daniel Alabi,1 * Badih Ghazi,2 Ravi Kumar,2 and Pasin Manurangsi2
1

Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
2
Google Research, Mountain View, CA
alabid@g.harvard.edu, {badihghazi, ravi.k53}@gmail.com, pasin@google.com

Abstract

lows 1957; Fligner and Verducci 1986) or with other distributional assumptions. The question we ask in this work
is: can one circumvent such stylized settings and obtain a
DP rank aggregation algorithm with provably good utility in
the worst case? We answer this affirmatively by providing a
spectrum of algorithms in the central and local DP models.
In the central model of DP, a trusted curator holds the nonprivate exact rankings from all users and aggregates them
into a single ranking while ensuring privacy. In the local
model of DP, this process would be done without collating
the exact rankings of the users. As an example, consider a
distributed recommendation system that can be used to determine a central ranking based on individual user rankings.

In social choice theory, (Kemeny) rank aggregation is a wellstudied problem where the goal is to combine rankings from
multiple voters into a single ranking on the same set of items.
Since rankings can reveal preferences of voters (which a voter
might like to keep private), it is important to aggregate preferences in such a way to preserve privacy. In this work, we
present differentially private algorithms for rank aggregation
in the pure and approximate settings along with distributionindependent utility upper and lower bounds. In addition to
bounds in the central model, we also present utility bounds
for the local model of differential privacy.

Introduction

Background

The goal of rank aggregation is to find a central ranking
based on rankings of two or more voters. Rank aggregation
is a basic formulation that is studied in diverse disciplines
ranging from social choice (Arrow 1963), voting (Young
and Levenglick 1978; Young 1995), and behavioral economics to machine learning (Wistuba and Pedapati 2020),
data mining (Dwork et al. 2001), recommendation systems (Pennock, Horvitz, and Giles 2000), and information
retrieval (Mansouri, Zanibbi, and Oard 2021). The problem
has a long and rich algorithmic history (Conitzer, Davenport,
and Kalagnanam 2006; Meila et al. 2007; Kenyon-Mathieu
and Schudy 2007; Mandhani and Meila 2009; Schalekamp
and van Zuylen 2009; Ailon, Charikar, and Newman 2008).
In many rank aggregation applications such as voting, it is
imperative to find a central ranking such that the privacy of
the voters who contributed the rankings is preserved. A principled way to achieve this is to view the problem through
the lens of the rigorous mathematical definition of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006b,a). As in other privacy
settings, it is then important to understand the trade-off between privacy and utility, i.e., the quality of the aggregation.
DP rank aggregation has been studied in a few recent
papers (Hay, Elagina, and Miklau 2017; Yan, Li, and Liu
2020; Liu et al. 2020). While the algorithms in these works
are guaranteed to be DP, their utility is provably good only
under generative settings such as the Mallows model (Mal-

Let [m] = {1, . . . , m} be the universe of items to be ranked
(we assume this is public information) and let Sm be the
group of rankings (i.e., permutations) on [m]. For example,
the universe of items could be the set of all restaurants in
New York. Let Π = {π1 , . . . , πn } be a given set of rankings, where n is the number of users and each πk ∈ Sm
gives an ordering on the m items. We assume that the lower
the position π(j) of an item j ∈ [m] in a ranking π, the
higher our preference for that item j. For i, j ∈ [m] such
Π
Π
that i 6= j, define wij
= Prπ∼Π [π(i) < π(j)], i.e., wij
is
the fraction of rankings that rank item i before j. As noted
by Ailon, Charikar, and Newman (2008), for a graph on m
Π
nodes, when the weight of each edge (i, j) is wij
, rank aggregation reduces to the weighted version of the minimum
Feedback Arc Set in Tournaments (FAST) problem.
Rank aggregation is based on the Kendall tau metric:
K(π1 , π2 ) = |{(i, j) : π1 (i) < π1 (j) but π2 (i) > π2 (j)}|,
for any two rankings π1 , π2 ∈ Sm . In other words,
K(π1 , π2 ) is the number of pairwise disagreements between
the two permutations π1 and π2 . Note that K(π, π) = 0
forany permutation π and the maximum value of K(·, ·) is
m
2 . We also define the average Kendall tau distance (or
the Kemeny Score) to aPset Π = {π1 , . . . , πn } of rankn
ings as K(σ, Π) = n1 i=1 K(σ, πi ). We use OPT(Π)
to denote minσ K(σ, Π). We say that a randomized algorithm A obtains an (α, β)-approximation for the (Kemeny)
rank aggregation problem if, given Π, it outputs σ such that

* Work done while an intern at Google Research.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5984

