The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transfer Learning for Color Constancy via Statistic Perspective
Yuxiang Tang, Xuejing Kang, Chunxiao Li, Zhaowen Lin, Anlong Ming*
School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering School), Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
{tangyuxiang, kangxuejing, chunxiaol, linzw, mal}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

☀

Color Constancy aims to correct image color casts caused by
scene illumination. Recently, although the deep learning approaches have remarkably improved on single-camera data,
these models still suffer from the seriously insufficient data
problem, resulting in shallow model capacity and degradation in multi-camera settings. In this paper, to alleviate this
problem, we present a Transfer Learning Color Constancy
(TLCC) method that leverages cross-camera RAW data and
massive unlabeled sRGB data to support training. Specifically, TLCC consists of the Statistic Estimation Scheme (SEScheme) and Color-Guided Adaption Branch (CGA-Branch).
SE-Scheme builds a statistic perspective to map the camerarelated illumination labels into camera-agnostic form and
produce pseudo labels for sRGB data, which greatly expands
data for joint training. CGA-Branch further promotes efficient transfer learning from sRGB to RAW data by extracting color information to regularize the backbone’s features
adaptively. Experimental results show the TLCC has overcome the data limitation and model degradation, outperforming the state-of-the-art performance on popular benchmarks.
Moreover, the experiments also prove the TLCC is capable of
learning new scenes information from sRGB data to improve
accuracy on the RAW images with similar scenes.

Estimate
Illuminations

CNN
(a)

☀

CNN with
multi-camera strategies

Estimate
Illuminations

(b)
Pseudo Statistic Label

☀

Estimate
Statistics

CNN

SE-Scheme

Guide

Places205

CGA-Branch
(c)

Figure 1: The difference between TLCC and existing methods. (a) Classic CNN-based methods are limited to single
camera data. (b) Recent methods adopt the multi-camera
strategies to improve the network by joint training of multicamera data. (c) Our TLCC method can leverage both multicamera RAW data and massive unlabeled sRGB data.

Introduction
Computational Color Constancy (CCC) aims to remove illumination color casts in RAW images, which helps improve accuracy for many downstream tasks, such as visual
recognition (Chen et al. 2015), image segmentation (Afifi
and Brown 2019b), etc (Diamond et al. 2017; Andreopoulos and Tsotsos 2011). In the past, most statistic-based color
constancy approaches utilize image statistics or physical attributes to estimate the illumination color of the scene (Land
1977; Van De Weijer, Gevers, and Gijsenij 2007). However, the statistics for the reflectance distribution are oversimplified, and these methods are arduous to cope with
various scenes in the complicated world. Over the years,
learning-based color constancy methods have achieved a remarkable improvement (Hu, Wang, and Lin 2017; Barron
and Tsai 2017). They can effectively use complex nonlinear functions to extract illumination cues from the single-

camera data automatically, thereby fitting rough illumination curves and obtaining strong generalization capabilities
to some extent (Fig. 1(a)). However, due to the sensor domain gap (Hernandez-Juarez et al. 2020) and costly data
collection (Shi 2010), learning-based methods are limited
to single-camera and face seriously insufficient data problem(Xiao, Gu, and Zhang 2020).
To deal with this problem, some methods have been proposed. A common technic is to reduce the model parameters
to prevent over-fitting the few images but limit the model
capacity (Hu, Wang, and Lin 2017). Recently, to overcome
the influence of the sensor domain gap to benefit from multicamera joint training, several approaches (McDonagh et al.
2018; Xiao, Gu, and Zhang 2020) apply the ideas of multidomain learning and few-shot learning strategies to extend
the training set (Fig. 1(b)). However, these methods are still
restricted in RAW datasets with few images and cannot really solve the lack of data problem in the CCC task.
In this work, we present a transfer learning color con-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2361

