The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Degrade Is Upgrade: Learning Degradation for Low-Light Image Enhancement
Kui Jiang1 , Zhongyuan Wang1∗ , Zheng Wang1 , Chen Chen2 , Peng Yi1 , Tao Lu3 , Chia-Wen Lin4
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
University of Central Florida
3
Wuhan Institute of Technology
4
National Tsing Hua University
{kuijiang, wangzwhu, yipeng}@whu.edu.cn, wzy hope@163.com, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu, lutxyl@gmail.com,
cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw
Abstract
Low-light image enhancement aims to improve an image’s
visibility while keeping its visual naturalness. Different from
existing methods tending to accomplish the relighting task
directly by ignoring the fidelity and naturalness recovery,
we investigate the intrinsic degradation and relight the lowlight image while refining the details and color in two steps.
Inspired by the color image formulation (diffuse illumination color plus environment illumination color), we first estimate the degradation from low-light inputs to simulate the
distortion of environment illumination color, and then refine
the content to recover the loss of diffuse illumination color.
To this end, we propose a novel Degradation-to-Refinement
Generation Network (DRGN). Its distinctive features can be
summarized as 1) A novel two-step generation network for
degradation learning and content refinement. It is not only
superior to one-step methods, but also capable of synthesizing sufficient paired samples to benefit the model training;
2) A multi-resolution fusion network to represent the target
information (degradation or contents) in a multi-scale cooperative manner, which is more effective to address the complex unmixing problems. Extensive experiments on both the
enhancement task and joint detection task have verified the
effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed method, surpassing the SOTA by 0.70dB on average and 3.18% in mAP, respectively. The code will be available soon.

1

Figure 1: Results of different low-light image enhancement methods. RetinexNet (Wei et al. 2018), KinD (Zhang,
Zhang, and Guo 2019), DeepUPE (Wang et al. 2019) and
EnlightenGAN (Jiang et al. 2021b) light up the image contents, but cause severe color distortion. LIME (Guo, Li, and
Ling 2017), Zero-DCE (Guo et al. 2020), MIRNet (Zamir
et al. 2020) and SSIEN (Zhang et al. 2020) tend to produce
over-exposed images. Our DRGN generates more realistic
and credible textures with visually pleasing contrast.
are less effective on scenarios when the predefined models do not hold. Recently, deep learning frameworks have
emerged as a promising solution to low-light image enhancement (Zhu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2021; Jiang et al. 2021b; Zhu et al. 2020). The existing methods can be roughly divided into two categories regarding the
imaging models under low-light conditions.
Scheme One: An observed low-light image IL is featured
as a superposition of a normal-light image I with some perturbations IN (noise, exposure, etc.) through a special combination manner θ(·), defined as
IL = θ(I, IN ).
(1)
Given IL , the goal of low-light image enhancement is to
predict I. When θ(·) is simplified as the pixel-wise summation (Gharbi et al. 2017), the effort is to learn the perturbation IN and then subtract it from the observed image IL .
Some methods (Lv et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2020b) also attempt to directly estimate the optimal approximation of I.
However, these methods rely heavily on abundant data, innovative architectures, and training strategies, ignoring the
intrinsic degradation itself, resulting in unsatisfactory and
unnatural contents in texture, color, contrast, etc.
Scheme Two: The low-light image IL is mathematically
modeled as a combination of the reflectance IR and illumination IT component through Eq. 2:
IL = IR ◦ IT ,
(2)

Introduction

Low-light conditions cause a series of visibility degradation
and even sometimes destroy the color or content of the image. Such signal distortion and detail loss often lead to the
failure of many computer vision systems (Bae 2019; Huang
et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2020a; Yu, Yang, and Chen 2021;
Xu et al. 2021a; Zhong et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2021b). Therefore, there is a pressing need to develop
algorithms to produce normally exposed outputs.
Early low-light enhancement works mainly focus on
contrast enhancement to recover the visibility of dark regions (Land 1977). Since the hand-crafted priors and assumptions are introduced for specific scenes or degradation
conditions, these techniques (Kaur, Kaur, and Kaur 2011)
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1078

