The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Residual Similarity Based Conditional Independence Test
and Its Application in Causal Discovery
Hao Zhang1,2 , Shuigeng Zhou1∗ , Kun Zhang3,4 and Jihong Guan5
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
School of Computer, Guangdong University of Petrochemical Technology, China
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
4
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
5
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
{haoz15, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu, jhguan@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

set of independent variables x and the corresponding residual
R x→y (or the causal process of P(y|x)).
Without given any assumption or precondition, CI testing is generally more difficult than independence testing.
Many existing methods are based on explicit estimation of
conditional densities or their variants such as ranks, kernel,
copulas, nearest neighbours and discretizing-based methods (Diakonikolas and Kane 2016). For example, the characterization of CI of P x|yZ =P x|Z can be used to test CI by measuring
the distance between two conditional densities (Su and White
2008). Due to the curse of dimensionality, inevitably the required sample size increases dramatically with the size of
controlling set Z, which makes accurate estimation of conditional density or related quantity hard to be accomplished.
Assume that Z contains only one variable with a finite number of values {z1 , ..., zk }, then x y y|Z iff x y y|Z=zi for each
value zi . Given a sample of size n, even if the data are distributed evenly on the values of Z, we must ensure that the
independence within each subset of the sample with the same
Z value by using only approximately n/k data points in each
subset. When Z is continuously distributed or contains several
variables, the observed values of Z are almost surely unique.
To extend the above procedure to the continuous cases, we
must consider the neighboring values of Z. However, it is
also difficult for us to find appropriate neighboring points.
As kernel functions are able to represent high order moments by calculating similarity of high-dimensional implicit
functions, a series of kernel-based CI tests were presented
to solve the above problems. In practice, mapping variables
into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs) allows us
to infer properties of distributions like independence (Gretton et al. 2006). Fukumizu et al. (2007) tested conditional
covariance by using Hilbert-Schmidt norm of conditional
cross-covariance operator, as the zero operator norm is equivalent to x y y|Z when the RKHSs are characteristic kernels.
Daudin (1980) presented a characterization of CI that transforms CI to a set of zero correlations of regression functions.
Concretely, x y y|Z if and only if for all ψ ∈ L2xZ and φ ∈ Ly2
(L2xZ and Ly2 denote the spaces of square integrable functions of (x, Z) and y, respectively) such that E(ψ̃φ̃) = 0 where
ψ̃(x, Z) = ψ(x, Z) − rψ (Z) and φ̃(y, Z) = φ(y) − rφ (Z), where
rψ , rφ ∈ LZ2 are regression functions. To give an empirical
estimate of this characterization of CI, Zhang et al. (2011)

Recently, many regression based conditional independence
(CI) test methods have been proposed to solve the problem of
causal discovery. These methods provide alternatives to test CI
by first removing the information of the controlling set from
the two target variables, and then testing the independence
between the corresponding residuals Res1 and Res2. When
the residuals are linearly uncorrelated, the independence test
between them is nontrivial. With the ability to calculate inner
product in high-dimensional space, kernel-based methods are
usually used to achieve this goal, but still consume considerable time. In this paper, we investigate the independence
between two linear combinations under linear non-Gaussian
structural equation model. We show that the dependence between the two residuals can be captured by the difference
between the similarity of (Res1, Res2) and that of (Res1,
Res3) (Res3 is generated by random permutation) in highdimensional space. With this result, we design a new method
called SCIT for CI test, where permutation test is performed
to control Type I error rate. The proposed method is simpler
yet more efficient and effective than the existing ones. When
applied to causal discovery, the proposed method outperforms
the counterparts in terms of both speed and Type II error rate,
especially in the case of small sample size, which is validated
by our extensive experiments on various datasets.

Introduction
Independence and conditional independence (CI) are central
notions in statistical model building, as well as being a foundational concept for much of statistical theory. In the problem
of causal discovery, independence and CI tests are usually
used for testing CIs among variables. In constraint-based
methods (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018), the CI relationship
x y y|Z allows us to separate x−y when constructing a probabilistic model based on the joint distribution, which results in
a parsimonious representation (Zhang et al. 2011). By using
CI tests, constraint-based methods (Pearl 2009) can generally
return a partial directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Pearl 2009).
In the causal functional model (Velikova et al. 2014; Peters
et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2016), there is a solution to infer
causal directions by testing the independence between the
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5942

