The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Idiomatic Expression Paraphrasing without Strong Supervision
Jianing Zhou1 , Ziheng Zeng1 , Hongyu Gong1,2 , Suma Bhat1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Facebook AI
1
{zjn1746, zzeng13,spbhat2}@illinois.edu
2
hygong@fb.com

Idiomatic sentences
Nature
conservation
runs against the grain
of current political doctrine.
Putting him behind bars
won’t serve any purpose,
will it?

Abstract
Idiomatic expressions (IEs) play an essential role in natural
language. In this paper, we study the task of idiomatic sentence paraphrasing (ISP), which aims to paraphrase a sentence with an IE by replacing the IE with its literal paraphrase. The lack of large-scale corpora with idiomatic-literal
parallel sentences is a primary challenge for this task, for
which we consider two separate solutions. First, we propose
an unsupervised approach to ISP, which leverages an IE’s
contextual information and definition and does not require a
parallel sentence training set. Second, we propose a weakly
supervised approach using back-translation to jointly perform
paraphrasing and generation of sentences with IEs to enlarge
the small-scale parallel sentence training dataset. Other significant derivatives of the study include a model that replaces
a literal phrase in a sentence with an IE to generate an idiomatic expression and a large scale parallel dataset with idiomatic/literal sentence pairs. The effectiveness of the proposed solutions compared to competitive baselines is seen
in the relative gains of over 5.16 points in BLEU, over 8.75
points in METEOR, and over 19.57 points in SARI when the
generated sentences are empirically validated on a parallel
dataset using automatic and manual evaluations. We demonstrate the practical utility of ISP as a preprocessing step in
En-De machine translation.

Literal sentences
Nature
conservation
is contrary to current political doctrine.
Putting him in prison won’t
serve any purpose, will it?

Table 1: Examples of idiomatic sentences and corresponding literal sentences. Idioms and their corresponding literal
paraphrases are in bold underlined.
and Nilsson 2004; Nasr et al. 2015) suggest that IE paraphrasing as a preprocessing step holds promise for NLP.
Despite this, research on IE paraphrasing remains largely
under-explored (Zhou, Gong, and Bhat 2021a). While most
IE processing studies have focused on their identification
and detection (Gong, Bhat, and Viswanath 2017; Liu and
Hwa 2018; Biddle et al. 2020), in this paper, we study the
task of idiomatic sentence paraphrasing (ISP), i.e., automatically paraphrasing IEs into literal expressions. We refer to
a sentence with an IE as an idiomatic sentence and to its
corresponding sentence where the IE is replaced with a literal phrase as the literal sentence. Table 1 shows examples
of idiomatic and literal sentences between which we expect
to paraphrase. Ideally, an ISP system would have an IE span
detection stage to detect the presence and span of IEs (Zeng
and Bhat 2021) and feeds only idiomatic sentences to ISP.
Here we study the ISP task on its own and assume the input
sentence is idiomatic and the IE span is available.
Semantic simplification using ISP can be used to many
ends, including for making reading more inclusive for populations that struggle to comprehend figurative expressions in
everyday text (e.g., children with the autistic spectrum disorder (Norbury 2004)). Based on prior studies (Nivre and
Nilsson 2004; Nasr et al. 2015), it could also serve as a preprocessing step for downstream applications—an aspect we
explore in this study.
Successful ISP involves overcoming at least two challenges: (1) The linguistic challenge of handling semantic
ambiguity, i.e., ensuring that the meaning of the IE and that
of the literal phrase match when an IE is polysemous, e.g.
the idiom give her a hand can mean both “applaud her” and
“help her,” and (2) the related resource-challenge of the lack

Introduction
Idiomatic expressions (IEs) are multi-word expressions
whose meaning cannot be inferred from that of their constituent words, a property known as non-compositionality
(Nunberg, Sag, and Wasow 1994). These expressions have
varied forms, ranging from fixed expressions such as by
the way to figurative constructions such as born with a silver spoon in one’s mouth. Not only are IEs an essential
component of a native speakers’ lexicon (Jackendoff 1995),
they also render language more natural (Sprenger 2003).
Their non-compositionality has been the classical ‘pain in
the neck’ for NLP applications (Salton, Ross, and Kelleher
2014) and studies to make these applications idiom-aware,
either by identifying them before or during the task (Nivre
* The work was done while Hongyu Gong was at UIUC

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11774

