The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Ensemble Semi-supervised Entity Alignment via Cycle-Teaching
Kexuan Xin1 , Zequn Sun2 , Wen Hua1 * , Bing Liu1 , Wei Hu2 , Jianfeng Qu3 * , Xiaofang Zhou4
1
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{uqkxin, w.hua, bing.liu}@uq.edu.au, zqsun.nju@gmail.com, whu@nju.edu.cn, jfqu@suda.edu.cn, zxf@cse.ust.hk
2

Abstract

training data insufficiency issue in real-world scenarios (Chen
et al. 2017) prevents embedding-based approaches from effectively capturing entity similarities across different KGs.
The semi-supervised approach is an effective solution to
the above issue. It iteratively proposes new “reliable” entity alignment to augment training data (Zhu et al. 2017;
Sun et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018). There are several shortcomings of existing semi-supervised approaches, and not
all semi-supervised strategies can bring improved performance and stability to entity alignment in real scenarios (Sun
et al. 2020b). For example, although the popular self-training
approach BootEA (Sun et al. 2018) can alleviate the erroraccumulation issue via a heuristic alignment editing method,
the learning capability of its entity alignment model and the
alignment selection bias still limit its performance. The cotraining approach KDCoE (Chen et al. 2018) incorporates
literal descriptions as side information to complement the
structure view of entities. However, it requires a high complementary of the two independent feature views and specific
prior knowledge for feature selection. It usually fails to bring
improvement due to the limited availability of descriptions.
In summary, the shortcomings of existing semi-supervised
entity alignment approaches lie in the following aspects. (i)
Noisy alignment accumulation. This is the critical challenge for semi-supervised approaches that the newly proposed entity alignment inevitably contains much noisy data.
Iteratively accumulating new entity alignment as training
data is also error-propagation. The incorrect entity alignment
can spread to the following iterations with adverse effects
on final performance. (ii) Biased alignment selection. The
semi-supervised approach usually proposes the predicted
high-confidence alignment to bootstrap itself, and such alignment will receive more training and higher confidence in
the next iterations. The approach will then be more inclined
to propose the same more and more “reliable” alignment,
leading to a biased alignment selection. The performance improvement brought by retraining the entity alignment model
with what it already knows is limited. (iii) Performance bottleneck of the aligner. Although the embedding-based entity
alignment model (called aligner) can receive better optimization with more training data during semi-supervised learning,
the aligner has its performance bottleneck due to its limited
expressiveness on embedding learning. This can be reflected
by the variable performance of the entity alignment approach

Entity alignment is to find identical entities in different knowledge graphs. Although embedding-based entity alignment
has recently achieved remarkable progress, training data insufficiency remains a critical challenge. Conventional semisupervised methods also suffer from the incorrect entity alignment in newly proposed training data. To resolve these issues,
we design an iterative cycle-teaching framework for semisupervised entity alignment. The key idea is to train multiple
entity alignment models (called aligners) simultaneously and
let each aligner iteratively teach its successor the proposed
new entity alignment. We propose a diversity-aware alignment selection method to choose reliable entity alignment
for each aligner. We also design a conflict resolution mechanism to resolve the alignment conflict when combining the
new alignment of an aligner and that from its teacher. Besides, considering the influence of cycle-teaching order, we
elaborately design a strategy to arrange the optimal order that
can maximize the overall performance of multiple aligners.
The cycle-teaching process can break the limitations of each
model’s learning capability and reduce the noise in new training data, leading to improved performance. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed cycle-teaching framework, which significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art models when the training data
is insufficient and the new entity alignment has much noise.

1

Introduction

Entity alignment seeks to find identical entities of different KGs that refer to the same real-world object. Recently,
embedding-based entity alignment approaches have achieved
great progress (Sun, Hu, and Li 2017; Sun et al. 2018; Cao
et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019a; Sun et al. 2020a; Zeng et al.
2020; Mao et al. 2020). One prime advantage of embedding
techniques lies in relieving the heavy reliance on hand-craft
features or rules. KG embeddings have also demonstrated
their great strength to tackle the symbolic heterogeneity of
different KGs (Wang et al. 2017). Especially for entity alignment, embedding-based approaches capture the similarity of
entities in vector space. But these approaches highly rely on
sufficient training data (i.e., seed entity alignment) to bridge
different KG embedding spaces for alignment learning. The
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4281

