The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

From Actions to Programs as Abstract Actual Causes
Bita Banihashemi* 1 , Shakil M. Khan* 2 , Mikhail Soutchanski3
1
York University, 4700 Keele St, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada
University of Regina, 3737 Wascana Pkwy, Regina, SK S4S 0A2, Canada
3
(Former) Ryerson University, 350 Victoria St, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada
bita@eecs.yorku.ca, shakil.khan@uregina.ca, mes@cs.ryerson.ca
2

Abstract

all executions of the program produce the effect. Note that a
strong potential cause is also weak, but not vice versa. Also,
in both cases we talk about potential causes, since they can
manifest only in some of the situations that are produced by
the execution of the program sequence.
As an example, imagine Suzy buying a lottery ticket that
later wins a reward. If one conceptualizes the complex actions of purchasing the ticket as a highly non-deterministic
program, then it is reasonable to say that this program was a
weak potential cause of the fact that Suzy won, since there is
an execution of this program that leads to a situation where
the effect holds and another to a situation where it doesn’t.
Again, imagine a computer system that involves multiple interacting agents. The typical examples of such systems
arise in computer security contexts where the behaviours of
the agents are specified by non-deterministic protocols due
to versatility of possible agent interactions. In this context,
one might be interested in determining if all of the executions of a protocol led to the successful handling of a security leak. This corresponds to the case of a strong potential
cause.
In this paper, we give a definition of the more inclusive notion of weak cause. We consider programs formulated in the
high-level logic programming language ConGolog (De Giacomo, Lespérance, and Levesque 2000), which is based on
action theories specified in the situation calculus (SC) (McCarthy and Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001). We build on a recently
proposed definition of actual cause in the SC (Batusov and
Soutchanski 2018), which only considers primitive actions
as causes. Since we focus on programs as causes, a natural
question that arises then is how these two notions can be related. The programs can be complex, but often they can be
conceptualized at some abstract high-level (HL) as actions.
It turns out that the abstraction framework proposed in (Banihashemi, De Giacomo, and Lespérance 2017) that can relate
programs with primitive actions is also useful for relating a
subclass of weak potential causes (in particular, weak causes
that are also strong) at different levels of abstraction.
On the semantic level, models of programs can be very
complicated, but reasoning about effects of actions that serve
as their abstractions can be easier since essential details are
encapsulated in a simpler HL model. We argue that HL and
low-level (LL) causes can be related in a kind of commutative diagram. Namely, if an HL action is found to be a cause

Causality plays a central role in reasoning about observations.
In many cases, it might be useful to define the conditions
under which a non-deterministic program can be called an
actual cause of an effect in a setting where a sequence of
programs are executed one after another. There can be two
perspectives, one where at least one execution of the program leads to the effect, and another where all executions do
so. The former captures a “weak” notion of causation and is
more general than the latter stronger notion. In this paper, we
give a definition of weak potential causes. Our analysis is performed within the situation calculus basic action theories and
we consider programs formulated in the logic programming
language ConGolog. Within this setting, we show how one
can utilize a recently developed abstraction framework to relate causes at various levels of abstraction, which facilitates
reasoning about programs as causes.

Introduction
Actual or token causation is concerned with identifying the
events or actions in a trace that can be considered as causes
of an observed effect. The seminal work of Pearl (2000) provided the foundations and served as inspiration for research
on actual causes in AI. This research culminated in the book
(Halpern 2016) that summarized a number of previously developed definitions concerning when an event can be considered as an actual cause of an effect. These definitions are developed within the framework of structural equations models (SEM), where a simple event is understood as assigning
a value to an endogenous variable.
However, this perspective does not facilitate the study of
causation for more complex activities such as control flow in
programs. It can be interesting and important to define when
a non-deterministic program is an actual cause of an effect
in a setting where a sequence of programs are executed one
after another. This immediately leads to the question when
can one intuitively say that a program is an actual cause?
One perspective can be that a non-deterministic program is
a weak potential cause, if at least one execution of the program leads to a situation where the effect holds. Another
perspective is that a program is a strong potential cause if
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5470

