The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adversarial Data Augmentation for Task-Specific Knowledge
Distillation of Pre-trained Transformers
Minjia Zhng, Niranjan Uma Naresh, Yuxiong He
Microsoft Corporation
Bellevue, Washington 98004
{minjiaz,Niranjan.Uma,yuxhe}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Deep and large pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT, GPT3) are state-of-the-art for various natural language processing
tasks. However, the huge size of these models brings challenges to fine-tuning and online deployment due to latency
and cost constraints. Existing knowledge distillation methods
reduce the model size, but they may encounter difficulties
transferring knowledge from the teacher model to the student
model due to the limited data from the downstream tasks. In
this work, we propose AD2 , a novel and effective data augmentation approach to improving the task-specific knowledge
transfer when compressing large pre-trained transformer models. Different from prior methods, AD2 performs distillation
by using an enhanced training set that contains both original
inputs and adversarially perturbed samples that mimic the output distribution from the teacher. Experimental results show
that this method allows better transfer of knowledge from the
teacher to the student during distillation, producing student
models that retain 99.6% accuracy of the teacher model while
outperforming existing task-specific knowledge distillation
baselines by 1.2 points on average over a variety of natural
language understanding tasks. Moreover, compared with alternative data augmentation methods, such as text-editing-based
approaches, AD2 is up to 28 times faster while achieving comparable or higher accuracy. In addition, when AD2 is combined
with more advanced task-agnostic distillation, we can advance
the state-of-the-art performance even more. On top of the
encouraging performance, this paper also provides thorough
ablation studies and analysis. The discovered interplay between KD and adversarial data augmentation for compressing
pre-trained Transformers may further inspire more advanced
KD algorithms for compressing even larger scale models.

Introduction
There has been a huge paradigm shift in AI: large-scale foundation models (Bommasani et al. 2021), such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020), are trained on
massive data at scale and then are adapted to a wide range of
different domains with additional task-specific data. One interesting trend of these foundation models is their sizes grow
at an unprecedented speed, from a few hundred million parameters (e.g., BERT) to over one hundred billion parameters
(e.g., GPT-3), a three-orders-of-magnitude increase. Recent
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11685

studies from OpenAI have shown that the model scale has
been increasing exponentially with roughly a 3.4-month doubling time and the performance of these models continues
to improve with their sizes (Kaplan et al. 2020). Despite
their remarkable performance in accuracy, huge challenges
have been raised when deploying applications on top of these
foundation models due to latency and capacity constraints.
One effective approach for reducing the model size is
knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015), where a stronger model (called teacher) guides the
learning of another small model (called student) with an objective to minimize the discrepancy between the teacher and
student outputs. Since its debut, KD has been extensively
applied to computer vision and NLP tasks (Wang and Yoon
2020; Gou et al. 2021). On the NLP side, several variants
of KD have been proposed to compress BERT (Devlin et al.
2019), including how to define the knowledge that is supposed to be transferred from the teacher BERT model to the
student variations. Examples of such knowledge definitions
include output logits (e.g., DistilBERT (Sanh et al. 2019))
and intermediate knowledge such as feature maps (Sun et al.
2019; Aguilar et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2021) and self-attention
maps (Wang et al. 2020b; Sun et al. 2020) (we refer KD
using these additional knowledge as deep knowledge distillation (Wang et al. 2020b)). Unfortunately, the gap between the
teacher and the student is sometimes large, even with deep
distillation, especially when the downstream task data is limited. To mitigate the accuracy gap, existing work has explored
applying knowledge distillation in the more expensive pretraining stage, which aims to provide a better initialization
to the student for adapting to downstream tasks. As an example, MiniLM (Wang et al. 2020b) and MobileBERT (Sun
et al. 2020) advance the state-of-the-art by applying deep
knowledge distillation and architecture change to pre-train
a student model on the general-domain corpus, which then
can be directly fine-tuned on downstream tasks with good
accuracy. TinyBERT (Jiao et al. 2019) proposes to perform
deep distillation in both the pre-training and fine-tuning stage
and shows that these two stages of knowledge distillation are
complementary to each other and can be combined to achieve
state-of-the-art results on GLUE tasks.
Despite the great progress, there remains one big challenge — while the pre-training distillation may benefit from
unsupervised learning over a huge amount of general domain

