The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Zero-Shot Audio Source Separation through Query-Based Learning
from Weakly-Labeled Data
Ke Chen1* , Xingjian Du2* , Bilei Zhu2 , Zejun Ma2 , Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick1 , Shlomo Dubnov1
1

University of California San Diego, CA, USA
2
Bytedance AI Lab, Shanghai, China
{knutchen, sdubnov, tberg}@ucsd.edu, {duxingjian.real, zhubilei, mazejun}@bytedance.com

Abstract

vised training data is limited? Can large amounts of weaklylabeled data be used to increase generalization performance?
The first challenge is known as universal source separation, meaning that we only need a single model to separate
as many sources as possible. Most models mentioned above
require training a full set of model parameters for each target type of audio source. As a result, training these models is both time and memory intensive. There are several
heuristic frameworks (Samuel, Ganeshan, and Naradowsky
2020) that leverage meta-learning to bypass this problem,
but they have difficulty generalizing to diverse types of audio sources. In other words, these frameworks succeeded in
combining several source separators into one model, but the
number of sources is still limited.
One approach to overcome this challenge is to train a
model with an audio separation dataset that contains a very
large variety of sound sources. The more sound sources a
model can see, the better it will generalize. However, the
scarcity of the supervised separation datasets makes this
process challenging. Most separation datasets contain only
a few source types. For example, MUSDB18 (Rafii et al.
2017) and DSD100 (Liutkus et al. 2017) contain music
tracks of only four source types (vocal, drum, bass, and
other) with a total duration of 5-10 hours. MedleyDB (Bittner et al. 2014) contains 82 instrument classes but with a
total duration of only 3 hours. There exists some large-scale
datasets such as AudioSet (Gemmeke et al. 2017) and FUSS
(Wisdom et al. 2021), but they contain only weakly-labeled
data. AudioSet, for example, contains 2.1 million 10-sec audio samples with 527 sound events. However, only 5% of
recordings in Audioset have a localized event label (Hershey
et al. 2021). For the remaining 95% of recordings, the correct occurrence of each labeled sound event can be anywhere
within the 10-sec sample. In order to leverage this large and
diverse source of weakly-labeled data, we first need to localize the sound event in each audio sample, which is referred
as an audio tagging task (Fonseca et al. 2018).
In this paper, as illustrated in Figure 1, we devise a
pipeline1 that comprises of three components: a transformerbased sound event detection system ST-SED for performing
time-localization in weakly-labeled training data, a querybased U-Net source separator to be trained from this data,

Deep learning techniques for separating audio into different
sound sources face several challenges. Standard architectures
require training separate models for different types of audio
sources. Although some universal separators employ a single
model to target multiple sources, they have difficulty generalizing to unseen sources. In this paper, we propose a threecomponent pipeline to train a universal audio source separator from a large, but weakly-labeled dataset: AudioSet. First,
we propose a transformer-based sound event detection system for processing weakly-labeled training data. Second, we
devise a query-based audio separation model that leverages
this data for model training. Third, we design a latent embedding processor to encode queries that specify audio targets for separation, allowing for zero-shot generalization. Our
approach uses a single model for source separation of multiple sound types, and relies solely on weakly-labeled data
for training. In addition, the proposed audio separator can be
used in a zero-shot setting, learning to separate types of audio sources that were never seen in training. To evaluate the
separation performance, we test our model on MUSDB18,
while training on the disjoint AudioSet. We further verify the
zero-shot performance by conducting another experiment on
audio source types that are held-out from training. The model
achieves comparable Source-to-Distortion Ratio (SDR) performance to current supervised models in both cases.

Introduction
Audio source separation is a core task in the field of audio
processing using artificial intelligence. The goal is to separate one or more individual constituent sources from a single
recording of a mixed audio piece. Audio source separation
can be applied in various downstream tasks such as audio extraction, audio transcription, and music and speech enhancement. Although there are many successful backbone architectures (e.g. Wave-U-Net, TasNet, D3Net (Stoller, Ewert,
and Dixon 2018; Luo and Mesgarani 2018; Takahashi and
Mitsufuji 2020)), fundamental challenges and questions remain: How can the models be made to better generalize to
multiple, or even unseen, types of audio sources when super* The first two authors have equal contribution, and this work
was performed while Ke Chen interned at Bytedance.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4441

The official code is available in https://git.io/JDWQ5

