The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Language Model Priming for Cross-Lingual Event Extraction
Steven Fincke, Shantanu Agarwal, Scott Miller, Elizabeth Boschee
University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute
sfincke@isi.edu, shantanu@isi.edu, smiller@isi.edu, boschee@isi.edu

Abstract

One major advance in recent years was the move from
static word embeddings, e.g. word2vec (Mikolov et al.
2013), where the representation for a word is constant no
matter the context in which it appears, to contextualized language models, e.g. ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) and BERT
(Devlin et al. 2019), where the representation for a word is
conditioned on its surrounding context. With contextualized
language models, the representation for arrest in the context
”They protested his arrest” will likely be very different than
when it appears in ”She is a cardiac arrest survivor”.
However, even with a powerful mechanism like BERT,
the representation for, say, activists, in “Activists protested
his arrest” will be the same whether the model is being
asked if activists is an argument of the D EMONSTRATE
event protested or of the A RREST-JAIL event arrest.
Recent advances for structured NLP tasks, such as named
entity recognition (Li et al. 2019a), relation extraction (Li
et al. 2019b) and coreference resolution (Wu et al. 2020),
have noted this and responded accordingly, by providing a
prompt that modifies the context in which a sentence is seen,
allowing the language model to adjust its representations of
the sentence tokens accordingly. This method for injecting
task-specific guidance to the model is particularly beneficial
in low-resource settings (Scao and Rush 2021).
Returning to the task of event extraction, Du and Cardie
(2020) show some of the promise of applying similar principles in this domain, reframing event extraction as a questionanswering problem. Their best results come from using natural English questions as prompts to their overall model, e.g.
asking “Which is the agent in arrested? — The police arrested the thief.” However, it is not clear that this Englishcentric approach of question generation will generalize well
to cross-lingual transfer.
In this work, we present a new, language-agnostic mechanism IE-P RIME which provides task-specific direction to
an event extraction model at runtime. We show that it significantly outperforms prior work on argument extraction,
including Du and Cardie (2020), and that it is particularly effective in low-resource and zero-shot cross-lingual settings
for both trigger and argument detection and classification.

We present a novel, language-agnostic approach to “priming”
language models for the task of event extraction, providing
particularly effective performance in low-resource and zeroshot cross-lingual settings. With priming, we augment the input to the transformer stack’s language model differently depending on the question(s) being asked of the model at runtime. For instance, if the model is being asked to identify arguments for the trigger protested, we will provide that trigger
as part of the input to the language model, allowing it to produce different representations for candidate arguments than
when it is asked about arguments for the trigger arrest elsewhere in the same sentence. We show that by enabling the
language model to better compensate for the deficits of sparse
and noisy training data, our approach improves both trigger
and argument detection and classification significantly over
the state of the art in a zero-shot cross-lingual setting.

Introduction
Recent advances in massively-pretrained cross-lingual language models, e.g. Conneau et al. (2020), have revolutionized approaches to extracting information from a much
broader set of languages than was previously possible. For
some information extraction (IE) tasks, it is not unusual to
find annotated datasets in a variety of languages. Name annotation, for instance, has both wide utility and can be performed relatively cheaply and easily by non-experts—and
as a result, one can find annotated named entity datasets for
languages from Spanish to Polish to Farsi to Indonesian. In
contrast, datasets for event extraction tasks are much fewer
and further between (even in English).
In order to extract events from most languages, then, it is
critical to be able to train models with data from one language and deploy those models in another. A pretrained,
cross-lingual language model can carry some of this burden.
If the language model’s vector representation for arrest (English) is close to its representation for anholdelsen (Danish),
then a model trained on the English sentence “They protested
his arrest” may be able to detect the A RREST-JAIL event in
“De tre mænd blev ved anholdelsen 29 januar”1 .

Related Work

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The three men were arrested on January 29. (Danish)

Event extraction is a well-studied topic. Some of the most
effective recent approaches in a mono-lingual context in10627

