The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On Probabilistic Generalization of Backdoors in Boolean Satisfiability
Alexander Semenov, Artem Pavlenko, Daniil Chivilikhin, Stepan Kochemazov
ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia
alex.a.semenov@itmo.ru, alpavlenko@itmo.ru, chivdan@itmo.ru, stepan.kochemazov@itmo.ru

Abstract

into a family of simpler formulas which differ from the original in that the values of some variables are fixed. Some
examples of this approach are the so-called Partitioning
strategy (Hyvärinen, Junttila, and Niemelä 2010; Hyvärinen
2011) and Cube-and-Conquer (Heule et al. 2012). They both
work exceptionally well when combined with parallel computing, because it is possible to solve the simplified problems independently of each other, making it possible to
tackle even very hard problems, see e.g. (Heule, Kullmann,
and Marek 2016; Heule 2018).
It is clear that we can always decompose a CNF formula
C into a family of subformulas in such a way that each subformula can be solved by some polynomial algorithm. In
the extreme case, if we use the whole set of variables in C
for this purpose, then the subformulas will be easily solved
by means of Unit Propagation (UP) rule (Dowling and Gallier 1984; Marques-Silva, Lynce, and Malik 2009). A more
practical class of decompositions which use poly-time algorithms to solve subformulas was introduced in (Williams,
Gomes, and Selman 2003) and relies on the concept of
the so-called backdoor sets or “backdoors”. In particular, a
Strong Backdoor Set (SBS) is such a set of variables from
C that the substitution of any of their assignments into C
results in a formula for which SAT is solvable by a polynomial algorithm. Clearly, if there exists a small SBS, then
it guarantees a significantly smaller hardness of the formula
compared to p(|C|) · 2|X| , where X is the set of Boolean
variables occurring in C and p(·) is some polynomial. Nontrivial SBSes arise in diverse contexts, e.g., they often can
be identified in SAT encodings representing algorithms in
symbolic verification or cryptography. In these cases, the
variables encoding the input of a function specified by the
considered algorithm form an SBS, and their share in the set
X can be as small as tenths of a percent.
A large drawback of SBSes and their variants is that in
the general case, the problem of finding such a backdoor is
computationally hard. A number of results that fit these issues into the context of Structural Complexity can be found
in (Kilby et al. 2005; Hemaspaandra and Narváez 2017,
2019, 2021). The works (Fichte and Szeider 2011; Gaspers
and Szeider 2012a,b,c; Misra et al. 2013) demonstrate the
relationship between backdoors and basic concepts of Parameterized Complexity. The article (Ansótegui et al. 2008)
notes that backdoors can be naturally used to measure the

The paper proposes a probabilistic generalization of the
well-known Strong Backdoor Set (SBS) concept applied to
the Boolean Satisfiability Problem (SAT). We call a set of
Boolean variables B a ρ-backdoor, if for a fraction of at least
ρ of possible assignments of variables from B, assigning their
values to variables in a Boolean formula in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) results in polynomially solvable formulas.
Clearly, a ρ-backdoor with ρ = 1 is an SBS. For a given set B
it is possible to efficiently construct an (ε, δ)-approximation
of parameter ρ using the Monte Carlo method. Thus, we define an (ε, δ)-SBS as such a set B for which the conclusion
“parameter ρ deviates from 1 by no more than ε” is true with
probability no smaller than 1 − δ. We consider the problems
of finding the minimum SBS and the minimum (ε, δ)-SBS.
To solve the former problem, one can use the algorithm described by R. Williams, C. Gomes and B. Selman in 2003. In
the paper we propose a new probabilistic algorithm to solve
the latter problem, and show that the asymptotic estimation
of the worst-case complexity of the proposed algorithm is significantly smaller than that of the algorithm by Williams et al.
For practical applications, we suggest a metaheuristic optimization algorithm based on the penalty function method to
seek the minimal (ε, δ)-SBS. Results of computational experiments show that the use of (ε, δ)-SBSes found by the
proposed algorithm allows speeding up solving of test problems related to equivalence checking and hard crafted and
combinatorial benchmarks compared to state-of-the-art SAT
solvers.

Introduction
It is well known that the Boolean satisfiability problem
(SAT) has an extremely wide range of practical applications.
Despite the NP-hardness of SAT, modern SAT solvers successfully cope with Boolean formulas of large dimensions
and, as a result, can be used in diverse application areas,
such as symbolic verification, bioinformatics, cryptanalysis,
explainable AI, etc. In view of this, the development of new
and increasing the efficiency of known SAT solving algorithms is an important and relevant area of research.
One of the natural approaches to solving SAT is the one
in which the original SAT instance (hereinafter we will assume that it is in Conjunctive Normal Form, CNF) is split
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10353

