The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TAG: Learning Timed Automata from Logs
Lénaı̈g Cornanguer1,2,3,4 , Christine Largouët5,2,1,3,4 , Laurence Rozé2,6,3,1,4 , Alexandre Termier2,1,3,4
1

Inria
Univ Rennes
3
CNRS
4
IRISA
5
Institut Agro
6
INSA Rennes
lenaig.cornanguer@irisa.fr
2

Abstract

in the posterior model analysis (Tax et al. 2019) but time
is still considered in a qualitative way. One can also mention the specification mining field which focuses on program
logs to learn specifications in the form of untimed state machines (Ammons, Bodı́k, and Larus 2002) or Timed Regular
Expressions (given its untimed template) (Narayan and Fischmeister 2019). However, none of those approaches considers the problem of discovering a human-understandable
global temporal model of the real-time system having generated the log. This is the problem tackled in this paper.
Including time quantitatively in models is crucial for
many applications such as self-driving cars or security protocols. To model real-time systems, the formalism of Timed
Automata (TA) has been defined by Alur and Dill (Alur
and Dill 1994). TA extends the formalism of automata by
adding clocks expressing explicit timing constraints on the
model. TA are well studied, both in theory and practice.
The success of TA comes from a powerful formalism with
high expressiveness associated with efficient algorithms and
tool support. TA have been applied for the analysis of many
real-time systems for solving problems as diverse as optimal planning, scheduling, or controlled synthesis (Clarke
et al. 2018). They have proved to be relevant outside the
field of real-time systems, for biological ecosystems, home
care plans, agricultural processes, or software systems. In
the wide range of applications possible with TA, we can cite
optimization of animal waste allocation to crops (Hélias,
Guerrin, and Steyer 2008), synthetic data generation from
real data for privacy matter (Connes, De La Higuera, and
Le Capitaine 2021), or anomaly detection in water treatment
plant (Xu, Ali, and Yue 2021). Moreover, the graphical representation and explicit timing constraints between events
can offer a human-understandable view of the model, as long
as the size remains limited.
Our objective is thus to learn a timed automaton consistent with the logs of the observed system. There is a
large body of work on learning (non-timed) automata and
state machines stemming from the grammatical inference
field (Angluin 1987; de la Higuera 2010) and extended for
various classes of models (e.g., DFAs, mealy machines,
Moore machines). Several algorithms exist (e.g., EDSM,
Alergia, MDI) and efficient implementations can be found
in LearnLib (Isberner, Howar, and Steffen 2015).
However, learning a model where time constraints play a

Event logs are often one of the main sources of information
to understand the behavior of a system. While numerous approaches have extracted partial information from event logs,
in this work, we aim at inferring a global model of a system
from its event logs.
We consider real-time systems, which can be modeled with
Timed Automata: our approach is thus a Timed Automata
learner. There is a handful of related work, however, they
might require a lot of parameters or produce Timed Automata
that either are undeterministic or lack precision. In contrast,
our proposed approach, called TAG, requires only one parameter and learns a deterministic Timed Automaton having a good tradeoff between accuracy and complexity of the
automata. This allows getting an interpretable and accurate
global model of the real-time system considered. Our experiments compare our approach to the related work and demonstrate its merits.

Introduction
The classic way of understanding a complex physical, or
software system is to perform a manual analysis of this system, in order to produce a model, that should be as accurate as possible. This process is tedious and extremely timeconsuming for the human(s) performing it, especially if the
system is large and with many possible states. Due to this
complexity, it is not done in practice for most running systems. Instead, the systems are equipped to produce detailed
logs, that can help to detect odd behaviors on the fly, or at
least allow to perform a post-mortem analysis after a failure happened. Data mining techniques can help analyzing
these logs to discover human-understandable local regularities in the log, for example in the form of episodes or chronicles (Zou et al. 2010; Tatti and Vreeken 2012; Sahuguède,
Le Corronc, and Le Lann 2018), that can directly correspond
to parts of the global model. Process mining techniques
(van der Aalst 2016) are dedicated to logs exploration, with
notably one part dedicated to the construction of a global
untimed model in the form of Petri net or BPMN (Business
Process Model and Notation) to realize performance analysis or conformance checking. There are recent attempts to
include time in the construction of the model and not only
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3949

