The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Word Level Robustness Enhancement: Fight Perturbation with Perturbation
Pei Huang,1,2 * Yuting Yang,2,4 * Fuqi Jia,1,2 Minghao Liu,1,2 Feifei Ma,1,2,3† Jian Zhang1,2†
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ISCAS), Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Laboratory of Parallel Software and Computational Science, ISCAS, Beijing, 100190, China
4
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
yangyuting@ict.ac.cn, {huangpei, jiafq, liumh, maff, zj}@ios.ac.cn
Abstract

the network, ranging from character-level word misspelling,
word-level substitution, phrase-level insertion and removal,
to sentence-level paraphrasing. Unlike the image area, attack
approaches that result in illegal text sentences can be easily
detected and restored by spelling correction and grammar
error correction (Islam and Inkpen 2009; Sakaguchi, Post,
and Durme 2017; Pruthi, Dhingra, and Lipton 2019). Among
these attacks, word substitution attack is hard to be detected
at the grammatical level. The hacker will craft adversarial
examples by replacing words with their synonyms in an input text to deceive the model while maintaining semantic
and fluency. Therefore, word substitution-based attacks have
attracted many researchers and continue to pose a profound
challenge for the robustness of deep NLP models.
Several empirical approaches have been proposed to defend against word perturbation attacks. For example, adversarial training (Wang et al. 2021) incorporates adversarial
examples into training and can maintain a greater degree of
accuracy in NLP. However, its defensive efficiency is very
limited and may fall when encountering stronger attacks.
Certified defense methods like interval bound propagation
(IBP) (Jia et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019) and randomized
smoothing (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019) have been
applied to improve the robustness of models in the worst
case, but they may reduce the prediction accuracy for clean
data to a notable extent. Many studies show that adversarial robustness may be odd at accuracy (Raghunathan et al.
2020; Tsipras et al. 2019). Defending against attacks effectively while maintaining clean accuracy is the main difficulty
for robustness improvement.
Although deep models are vulnerable to word substitution attacks, they generalize well to the noised input in practice. While investigating the adversarial examples from the
view of quantification, an interesting phenomenon appears.
That is, there is only a small proportion of adversarial examples in the perturbation space around the data distribution.
Take BERT trained on IMDB task as an example, it achieves
92.27% prediction accuracy but can be attacked with a high
probability of 87.1%. However, we find that less than 1/3
samples are adversarial examples for over 97.61% perturbation spaces. We call this property weak robustness (Figure
1), which means the model is stable to most random perturbations. Although the model is not robust enough to adver-

State-of-the-art deep NLP models have achieved impressive
improvements on many tasks. However, they are found to be
vulnerable to some perturbations. In this paper, we design a
robustness enhancement method to defend against word substitution perturbation, whose basic idea is to fight perturbation with perturbation. We find that: although many welltrained deep models are not robust in the setting of the presence of adversarial samples, they satisfy weak robustness.
That means they can handle most non-crafted perturbations
well. Taking advantage of the weak robustness property of
deep models, we utilize non-crafted perturbations to resist
the adversarial perturbations crafted by attackers. Our method
contains two main stages. The first stage is using randomized
perturbation to conform the input to the data distribution. The
second stage is using randomized perturbation to eliminate
the instability of prediction results and enhance the robustness guarantee. Experimental results show that our method
can significantly improve the ability of deep models to resist
the state-of-the-art adversarial attacks while maintaining the
prediction performance on the original clean data.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been broadly applied
in various domains. However, they are vulnerable to adversarial examples that are intentionally crafted by attackers aiming at misleading the prediction result (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). The vulnerability of deep
neural networks has been exposed in many NLP tasks, including text classification (Samanta and Mehta 2017; Liang
et al. 2018; Alzantot et al. 2018), machine translation (Zhao,
Dua, and Singh 2018; Cheng et al. 2020), dialogue systems (Cheng, Wei, and Hsieh 2019), reading comprehension
(Jia and Liang 2017), and dependency parsing (Zheng et al.
2020). In particular, as deep learning-based models are increasingly used in safety-critical applications, the vulnerability of deep models has raised concerns as a critical issue.
In recent years, a series of adversarial attack algorithms
have been proposed to interfere with the predictions of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10785

