The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bridging the Gap: Using Deep Acoustic Representations to Learn Grounded
Language from Percepts and Raw Speech
Gaoussou Youssouf Kebe1 , Luke E. Richards1,2 , Edward Raff1,2 , Francis Ferraro1 , Cynthia
Matuszek1
1

University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA
2
Booz Allen Hamilton, USA
gaoussou1@umbc.edu, lerichards@umbc.edu, raff edward@bah.com, ferraro@umbc.edu, cmat@umbc.edu
Abstract

et al. 2021), which represents a problem in inclusive design.
They are also “black box” systems that cannot improve their
speech recognition from their environment or other perceptual clues. Since the grounding system does not have access
to the information used by these models, it can only rely on
their sometimes erroneous output.
In this work, we bridge the gap between learning
grounded language about the perceived world via text-based
language, and directly learning to recognize speech without access to the physical context in which it occurs. We
contribute a detailed analysis of natural language grounding
from raw speech to robotic sensor data of everyday objects
using state-of-the-art speech representation models. We then
conduct an analysis of audio and speech qualities of individual participants, in which we demonstrate that learning
directly from raw speech mitigates the performance difference between linguistic groups on a well-known grounded
language learning problem.
The primary contributions of this paper are twofold. First,
we demonstrate the feasibility of acquiring grounded language directly from end-user speech using a relatively small
number of data points, without relying on intermediate textual representations. Second, we show that such learning improves performance on users with accented speech as compared to relying on automatic transcriptions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. After a discussion of related work, we describe our approach,
including the dataset (Kebe et al. 2021), learning method,
and different speech-based features tested, as well as the
object selection task we use to determine whether language groundings have been learned successfully. We compare the experimental results of learning from percepts and
raw speech directly, vs. the traditional transcription-first approach, and provide an analysis of both approaches when
learning from spoken language from different demographics present in the dataset.

Learning to understand grounded language, which connects
natural language to percepts, is a critical research area. Prior
work in grounded language acquisition has focused primarily
on textual inputs. In this work, we demonstrate the feasibility
of performing grounded language acquisition on paired visual percepts and raw speech inputs. This will allow interactions in which language about novel tasks and environments
is learned from end-users, reducing dependence on textual
inputs and potentially mitigating the effects of demographic
bias found in widely available speech recognition systems.
We leverage recent work in self-supervised speech representation models and show that learned representations of speech
can make language grounding systems more inclusive towards specific groups while maintaining or even increasing
general performance.

Introduction
Learning to understand grounded language—learning the
semantics of language that occurs in the context of, and
refers to, the broader world—is a rich area of work that has
engaged researchers from robotics (Tellex et al. 2020), natural language processing (Liu et al. 2016), vision (Deng et al.
2018), and cognitive science (Salvucci 2021), among others.
In robotics, grounded language refers primarily to grounding
human utterances in the perceived physical world of objects,
actions, and the environment. Learning from grounded language is an intuitive choice for interacting with agents in a
physical environment.
While language learning offers a clearly defined way for
embodied agents to learn about changing environments and
goals directly from a specific end user, with some exceptions, the majority of current work in this area still operates
primarily on textual data. This approach significantly limits
our ability to deploy agents in realistic human environments,
where spoken inputs can be expected. Existing work on using speech directly typically relies on off-the-shelf speechto-text systems. These systems are rarely developed in tandem with the robotics community, and so do not take the
unique challenges of robotic sensing into account (Marge
et al. 2022). In addition, current ASR systems work inconsistently across demographics (Tatman 2017; Hinsvark

Related Work
Grounded Language Acquisition from Text. In robotics, language is grounded in real-world actions and percepts, whose
applications include following task instructions (Vanzo et al.
2020; Bastianelli et al. 2016; Shridhar, Mittal, and Hsu
2020), navigation instruction following, (Shah et al. 2018;
Zang et al. 2018), and learning groundings from human-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10884

