The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Editing for Counterfactual Stories
Jiangjie Chen1,2 * , Chun Gan3 * , Sijie Cheng1 , Hao Zhou2† , Yanghua Xiao1,5† , Lei Li4‡
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
ByteDance AI Lab 3 JD.com 4 University of California, Santa Barbara
5
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
{jjchen19, sjcheng20, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn,
cgan5@wisc.edu, zhouhao.nlp@bytedance.com, lilei@cs.ucsb.edu
Original Ending

Abstract
Creating what-if stories requires reasoning about prior statements and possible outcomes of the changed conditions. One
can easily generate coherent endings under new conditions,
but it would be challenging for current systems to do it with
minimal changes to the original story. Therefore, one major
challenge is the trade-off between generating a logical story
and rewriting with minimal-edits. In this paper, we propose
E DU C AT, an editing-based unsupervised approach for counterfactual story rewriting. E DU C AT includes a target position
detection strategy based on estimating causal effects of the
what-if conditions, which keeps the causal invariant parts of
the story. E DU C AT then generates the stories under fluency,
coherence and minimal-edits constraints. We also propose a
new metric to alleviate the shortcomings of current automatic
metrics and better evaluate the trade-off. We evaluate E DU C AT on a public counterfactual story rewriting benchmark.
Experiments show that E DU C AT achieves the best trade-off
over unsupervised SOTA methods according to both automatic and human evaluation. The resources of E DU C AT are
available at: https://github.com/jiangjiechen/EDUCAT.

1

Original
Storyline
S2: She had been
playing it for weeks.
S1: Kelly was playing
her new Mario game.

What if…

S’2: Kelly never beat the
game though.

Counterfactual
Storyline

S3: She was playing for so long without beating the
level.
S4: Finally she beat the last level.
S5: Kelly was so happy to finally beat it.
Iterative Editing
by g(xt+1 | xt )
S’3: She was playing for so long
without beating the level.
S’4: She beat never beat the last
level.
S’5: Kelly was so happy to finally
beat it.
xt
S’3: She was playing for so long
without beating the level.
S’4: She never beat the last level.
S’5: Kelly was so happy sad to
xt+1
finally beat it.

"
!
Step1: Accept
Step2: Accept
Step3: Reject
Step4: Reject
Step5: Accept
….

S’3: She was playing for so long without beating the
level.
S’4: She never beat the last level.
S’5: Kelly was so sad to be stuck at the end.
Counterfactual Ending

Figure 1: Counterfactual story rewriting example from the
T IME T RAVEL (Qin et al. 2019) dataset. Our proposed E DU C AT iteratively edits the original ending to obtain new endings.

Introduction

Counterfactual reasoning is a hypothetical thinking process
to assess possible outcomes by modifying certain prior conditions. It is commonly known as “what-if” analysis —
“what will happen if . . . ”. It is a big challenge to build an
intelligent system with counterfactual reasoning capabilities (Pearl 2009; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). Counterfactual
reasoning relies on the ability to find the causal invariance
in data, i.e. the factors held constant with the change of conditions in a series of events (Sloman and Lagnado 2004).
In this paper, we study unsupervised counterfactual story
rewriting, a concrete instance of counterfactual reasoning.
We focus on unsupervised methods for this task, since humans do not need supervised learning to imagine alternative
futures. The task is to create plausible alternative endings
given small modifications to the story context.

In this task, the major challenge is the trade-off between
generating natural stories and modifying the original text
with minimal-edits. This requires finding the causal invariance in a story, i.e., invariant future events under the change
of conditions. Indeed, with a pre-trained language model
(LM), it is relatively easy to generate fluent endings under new conditions with massive edits. However, difficulties arise when one has to perform accurate reasoning during
modifying the ending minimally while keeping it natural.
For example, in Figure 1, what if Kelly played with the
Mario game but never beat the game (alter s2 to s02 )? From
human commonsense, one can easily create a plausible alternative story ending by making small edits that Kelly never
beat the last level rather than finally beat it, and hence Kelly
would be sad instead of happy. In this case, the invariant
event is that Kelly still plays all levels until the last, but the
variant event would be the consequence of the counterfactual intervention. By identifying and keeping the invariant

* Work is done during internship at ByteDance AI Lab.
†

Corresponding authors.
Work is done while at ByteDance AI Lab.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

10473

