The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hibernated Backdoor: A Mutual Information Empowered Backdoor Attack to
Deep Neural Networks
Rui Ning1 , Jiang Li2 , Chunsheng Xin1,2 , Hongyi Wu1,2 , and Chonggang Wang3
1 School of Cybersecurity, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
2

Department of ECE, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529, USA
3
InterDigital Communications, Conshohocken, PA 19428, USA
{rning, jli, cxin, h1wu}@odu.edu, chonggang.wang@interdigital.com

Abstract

et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2020). At the same time, attackers
make their efforts to evade detection by crafting the trigger to be small (Gu et al. 2019), transparent (Chen et al.
2017), dynamic (Salem et al. 2020), and with complicated
patterns (Liu et al. 2020), posting more challenges to be reconstructed. More advanced detection schemes then have
been developed accordingly (Wang et al. 2020; Gao et al.
2019; Kolouri et al. 2020). We emphasize that this arms race
will likely never end as long as the planted backdoor is active, which gives hint to the defender since the backdoor always responds to triggers when they are present in the input.
To this end, we report a first-of-its-kind neural backdoor
attack, named Hibernated Backdoor, which is initially in an
inactive state (does not respond to the trigger) to evade detection. Nevertheless, when being deployed by victims, it
will turn to active state after a normal fine-tuning (to optimize the model’s performance).
Contributions. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows.
(1) We propose a hibernated backdoor attack by crafting
a deep learning model that embeds a hibernated backdoor.
The backdoor is planted in a hibernated mode to avoid being
detected when it is initially examined by users. The novelty
of this attack is that once deployed and fine-tuned on enddevices, the backdoor turns into the active state that can be
exploited by the attacker.
(2) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first neural
backdoor attack achieved by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between the gradients of regular and malicious
data on the model. The larger the mutual information between them, the more the knowledge of the backdoor can be
learned through fine-tuning with regular data.
(3) We show that there exists a solution to the MI maximization problem and introduce a practical algorithm to effectively plant the hibernated backdoor.
(4) To evade adaptive defenses, we further develop a targeted hibernated backdoor, which can only be activated by
specific data samples to evade adaptive detection.
(5) We show that the hibernated backdoor is robust and
cannot be removed by existing backdoor removal schemes.

We report a new neural backdoor attack, named Hibernated
Backdoor, which is stealthy, aggressive and devastating. The
backdoor is planted in a hibernated mode to avoid being detected. Once deployed and fine-tuned on end-devices, the hibernated backdoor turns into the active state that can be exploited by the attacker. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first hibernated neural backdoor attack. It is achieved
by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between the gradients of regular and malicious data on the model. We introduce a practical algorithm to achieve MI maximization
to effectively plant the hibernated backdoor. To evade adaptive defenses, we further develop a targeted hibernated backdoor, which can only be activated by specific data samples
and thus achieves a higher degree of stealthiness. We show
the hibernated backdoor is robust and cannot be removed by
existing backdoor removal schemes. It has been fully tested
on four datasets with two neural network architectures, compared to five existing backdoor attacks, and evaluated using
seven backdoor detection schemes. The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the hibernated backdoor attack under various settings.

Introduction
Deep Learning has achieved proven success in a range of applications. However, due to its empirical and data-driven nature, training a Deep Learning model typically requires extensive data, expertise, computation, and energy resources.
Therefore, common practice is to resort to third parties, e.g.,
the public online model zoo such as Caffe Model Zoo (Jia
et al. 2014), to adopt a base model and fine-tune it to fit
a user’s specific application. However, adopting a thirdparty model exposes users to the risk of neural backdoor
attacks (Gu et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018, 2020). The basic
idea of neural backdoor is to create a unique pattern (called
trigger) and embed it in training data. The trained neural
network (NN) model thus contains a backdoor. It behaves
normally with clean inputs. However, whenever the trigger
appears in the input image, the backdoor is activated to misclassify the input to a category targeted by the attacker.
The security community has taken initial steps to detect
neural backdoor by reverse-engineering the trigger (Wang

Background
Neural Backdoor. Neural backdoor has raised serious concerns about the integrity and reliability in machine learning

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10309

