The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Machine-Learned Prediction Equilibrium for Dynamic Traffic Assignment
Lukas Graf1 , Tobias Harks1 , Kostas Kollias2 , Michael Markl1
1

University of Augsburg
2
Google
{lukas.graf, tobias.harks}@math.uni-augsburg.de, kostaskollias@google.com, michael.markl@student.uni-augsburg.de

e = vw ∈ E exceeds the rate capacity νe , a queue builds
up and agents need to wait in the queue before they are
forwarded along the edge. The total travel time along e is
thus composed of the waiting time spent in the queue plus
the physical transit time τe . The Vickrey model is arguably
one of the most important traffic models (see Li, Huang and
Yang (Li, Huang, and Yang 2020) for an up to date research
overview of the past 50 years), and yet, it is mathematically
quite challenging to analyze (see Friesz et al. (Han, Friesz,
and Yao 2013b) for a discussion of the inherent complexities).
Given a physical flow propagation model, the routing and
traffic prediction algorithms are usually subsumed under a
behavioral model of agents in order to solve a DTA model.
The behavior of agents is modelled based on their informational assumption which in turn defines their respective
utility function. Most works in the DTA literature on the
Vickrey model can roughly be classified into two main informational categories: the full information model and the
instantaneous information model. In the full information
model, an agent is able to exactly forecast future travel
times along a chosen path effectively anticipating the whole
spatio-temporal flow evolution over the network. This assumption has been justified by letting travelers learn good
routes over several trips and a dynamic equilibrium then
corresponds to an attractor of an underlying learning dynamic. Existence and computation of dynamic equilibria in
the full information model has been studied extensively in
the transportation science literature, see (Friesz et al. 1993;
Han, Friesz, and Yao 2013a,b,c; Meunier and Wagner 2010;
Zhu and Marcotte 2000), whereas the works in (Koch and
Skutella 2011; Cominetti, Correa, and Larré 2015) allow a
direct combinatorial characterization of dynamic equilibria
leading to existence and uniqueness results in the realm of
the Vickrey bottleneck model. While certainly relevant and
key for the entire development of the research in DTA, this
concept may not accurately reflect the behavioral changes
caused by the wide-spread use of navigation devices and resulting real-time decisions by agents.
In the instantaneous route choice model, agents are informed in real-time about the current traffic situations and,
if beneficial, reroute instantaneously no matter how good or
bad that route was in hindsight, see Ran and Boyce (Ran and
Boyce 1996, § VII-IX), Boyce, Ran and LeBlanc (Boyce,

Abstract
We study a dynamic traffic assignment model, where agents
base their instantaneous routing decisions on real-time delay
predictions. We formulate a mathematically concise model
and derive properties of the predictors that ensure a dynamic
prediction equilibrium exists. We demonstrate the versatility of our framework by showing that it subsumes the wellknown full information and instantaneous information models, in addition to admitting further realistic predictors as special cases. We complement our theoretical analysis by an experimental study, in which we systematically compare the induced average travel times of different predictors, including
a machine-learning model trained on data gained from previously computed equilibrium flows, both on a synthetic and a
real road network.

Introduction
Understanding and optimizing traffic networks is a significant effort that impacts billions of people living in urban areas, with key challenges including managing congestion and
carbon emissions. These phenomena are heavily impacted
by individual driver routing decisions, which are often influenced by ML-based predictions for the delays of road
segments (see, for instance, (Jiang and Luo 2021) for an
overview of convolutional and graph neural network based
approaches). One key aspect that is not well understood, is
that these routing decisions, in turn, influence the forecasting models by changing the underlying signature of traffic
flows.
In this paper, we address this interplay focusing on the
popular dynamic traffic assignment (DTA) framework, on
which there has been substantial work over the past decades
(see the classical book of Ford and Fulkerson (Ford and
Fulkerson 1962) or the more recent surveys of Friesz et
al. (Friesz and Han 2019), Peeta and Ziliaskopoulos (Peeta
and Ziliaskopoulos 2001) and Skutella (Skutella 2008)). A
fundamental base model describing the dynamic flow propagation process is the so-called deterministic queuing model
due to Vickrey (Vickrey 1969). Here, a directed graph G =
(V, E) is given, where edges e ∈ E are associated with a
queue with positive rate capacity νe ∈ R>0 and a physical transit time τe ∈ R>0 . If the total inflow into an edge
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5059

