The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AutoBERT-Zero: Evolving BERT Backbone from Scratch
Jiahui Gao1 , Hang Xu2 * , Han Shi3 , Xiaozhe Ren2 ,
Philip L.H. Yu4 , Xiaodan Liang5 , Xin Jiang2 , Zhenguo Li2
1

The University of Hong Kong, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
The Education University of Hong Kong, 5 Sun Yat-sen University, China
sumiler@hku.hk, {xu.hang, renxiaozhe, Jiang.Xin, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com
hshiac@cse.ust.hk, plhyu@eduhk.hk, xdliang328@gmail.com
Abstract

Output

Transformer-based pre-trained language models like BERT
and its variants have recently achieved promising performance in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks.
However, the conventional paradigm constructs the backbone by purely stacking the manually designed global selfattention layers, introducing inductive bias and thus leads to
sub-optimal. In this work, we make the first attempt to automatically discover novel pre-trained language model (PLM)
backbone on a flexible search space containing the most fundamental operations from scratch. Specifically, we propose
a well-designed search space which (i) contains primitive
math operations in the intra-layer level to explore novel attention structures, and (ii) leverages convolution blocks to
be the supplementary for attentions in the inter-layer level to
better learn local dependency. To enhance the efficiency for
finding promising architectures, we propose an OperationPriority Neural Architecture Search (OP-NAS) algorithm,
which optimizes both the search algorithm and evaluation
of candidate models. Specifically, we propose OperationPriority (OP) evolution strategy to facilitate model search via
balancing exploration and exploitation. Furthermore, we design a Bi-branch Weight-Sharing (BIWS) training strategy for
fast model evaluation. Extensive experiments show that the
searched architecture (named AutoBERT-Zero) significantly
outperforms BERT and its variants of different model capacities in various downstream tasks, proving the architecture’s
transfer and scaling abilities. Remarkably, AutoBERT-Zerobase outperforms RoBERTa-base (using much more data) and
BERT-large (with much larger model size) by 2.4 and 1.4
higher score on GLUE test set.

Self-Attention

1

Output

Self-Attention

matmul

...

scale

Self-Attention

matmul

Q

V

Input

(a) BERT

(b) Self-Attention

matmul
softmax

...

scale

...

matmul
neg

Searched Attention
K

linear

Searched
Convolution

softmax

...

Self-Attention

Searched Attention

linear

Searched
Convolution

logsigmoid
neg

add
Q

K

Input

(c) Searched backbone (d) Searched Attention

Figure 1: Comparison between BERT and our searched
model. Our searched AutoBERT-Zero is a hybrid structure
with convolution layers and the novel searched attention layers, whose kernel sizes and attention structures are various
across different layers.
The conventional paradigm constructs the backbone by
stacking the manually-designed global self-attention layers.
However, many recent works have pointed out that the design of self-attention structures is not optimal (Kovaleva et
al. 2019; Michel et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2021), whose inductive bias limits its performance as well as efficiency. In
particular, (Dong et al. 2021) find that repeatedly stacking
self-attention results to “token-uniformity” problem, meaning that different tokens are mapped to similar latent representations. Even though they claim that skip connection and
multi-layer perceptions mitigate this problem, we still observe it on the BERT output (see Figure 5). Another work
Reformer (Kitaev et al. 2020) discovered that sharing the
weights for query and key does not impact the model’s
performance, indicating that redundant parameters exist in
self-attention structure. In addition, ConvBERT (Jiang et al.
2020) shows that local operations such as convolution helps
better learn the inherent local dependencies in natural languages. Here, we raise the following questions: Does there
exist more powerful and efficient attention beyond the pure
query-key-value self-attention for PLM? Can we boost the
model performance and efficiency by flexibly combining
global attention with local operations?
To address the above fundamental challenges in the NLP
field, we resort to Neural Architecture Search (NAS), which
has emerged as a powerful technique to automatically discover promising models without excessive human interven-

Introduction

Benefiting from the powerful capacity of self-attention
structures in transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017), the pretrained language models (PLM) (e.g. BERT (Devlin et al.
2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b), ALBERT (Lan et al.
2020), GPT3 (Brown et al. 2020)) have achieved satisfying performance across various NLP tasks (Wang et al.
2018; Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018;
Zellers et al. 2018). All these models are based on the fixed
hand-crafted self-attention structure by varying training resources, parameter numbers, layer numbers and inputs.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10663

