The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Partial Wasserstein Covering
Keisuke Kawano, Satoshi Koide, Keisuke Otaki
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc.
{kawano, koide, otaki}@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Abstract
We consider a general task called partial Wasserstein covering with the goal of providing information on what patterns are not being taken into account in a dataset (e.g.,
dataset used during development) compared with another
dataset(e.g., dataset obtained from actual applications). We
model this task as a discrete optimization problem with partial
Wasserstein divergence as an objective function. Although
this problem is NP-hard, we prove that it satisfies the submodular property, allowing us to use a greedy algorithm with
a 0.63 approximation. However, the greedy algorithm is still
inefficient because it requires solving linear programming for
each objective function evaluation. To overcome this inefficiency, we propose quasi-greedy algorithms that consist of a
series of acceleration techniques, such as sensitivity analysis
based on strong duality and the so-called C-transform in the
optimal transport field. Experimentally, we demonstrate that
we can efficiently fill in the gaps between the two datasets
and find missing scene in real driving scenes datasets.

Figure 1: Concept of PWC. PWC extracts some data from
an unlabeled application dataset by minimizing the partial
Wasserstein divergence between the application dataset and
the union of the selected data and a development dataset.
PWC focuses on regions in which development data are
lacking compared with the application dataset, whereas
anomaly detection extracts irregular data, and active learning selects to improve accuracy.

Introduction
A major challenge in real-world machine learning applications is coping with mismatches between the data distribution obtained in real-world applications and those used for
development. Regions in the real-world data distribution that
are not well supported in the development data distribution
(i.e., regions with low relative densities) result in potential
risks such as a lack of evaluation or high generalization error, which in turn leads to low product quality. Our motivation is to provide developers with information on what patterns are not being taken into account when developing products by selecting some of the (usually unlabeled) real-world
data distribution, also referred to as application dataset,1 to
fill in the gaps in the development dataset. Note that the term
“development” includes choosing models to use, designing
subroutines for fail safe, and training/testing models.
Our research question is formulated as follows. To resolve the lack of data density in development datasets, how
and using which metric can we select data from application datasets with a limited amount of data for developers to understand? One reasonable approach is to define

the discrepancy between the data distributions and select
data to minimize this discrepancy. The Wasserstein distance
has attracted significant attention as a metric for data distributions (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; AlvarezMelis and Fusi 2020). However, the Wasserstein distance
is not capable of representing the asymmetric relationship
between application datasets and development datasets, i.e.,
the parts that are over-included during development increase
the Wasserstein distance.
In this paper, we propose partial Wasserstein covering
(PWC) that selects a limited amount of data from the application dataset by minimizing the partial Wasserstein divergence (Bonneel and Coeurjolly 2019) between the application dataset and the union of the development dataset and
the selected data. PWC, as illustrated in Fig. 1, selects data
from areas with fewer development data than application
data in the data distributions (lower-right area in the blue
distribution in Fig. 1) while ignoring areas with sufficient
development data (upper-middle of the orange distribution).
We also highlight the data selected through an anomaly detection method, LOF (Breunig et al. 2000), where irregular
data (upper-right points) were selected, but the major density
difference was ignored. Furthermore, we show the selection

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
More precisely, we call a finite set of data sampled from the
real-world data distribution application dataset in this study.

7115

