The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimistic Initialization for Exploration in Continuous Control
Sam Lobel, Omer Gottesman* , Cameron Allen* , Akhil Bagaria* , George Konidaris
Brown University
samuel lobel@brown.edu, omer gottesman@brown.edu, csal@brown.edu, akhil bagaria@brown.edu, gdk@cs.brown.edu

Abstract

til proven otherwise, thus encouraging the agent to explore
(Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002; Strehl et al. 2006; Jaksch,
Ortner, and Auer 2010). In the discrete state-action settings, optimistic initialization is well understood and leads
to strong theoretical regret bounds (Strehl et al. 2006). When
using function approximation, however, naı̈ve attempts at
optimistic initialization are quickly learned away due to generalization (Rashid et al. 2020; Machado, Srinivasan, and
Bowling 2015).
We introduce Deep Optimistic Initialization for Exploration (DOIE), a novel, practical method for optimistically
initializing value functions that enables precise control over
the effect of generalization on optimism. Our method uses
a nearest-neighbors-based optimism module that identifies
the degree to which state-action pairs are similar to those already observed by the agent. We then compute an optimistic
value function by using this similarity measure to interpolate between a learned value-estimate and an optimistic envelope that describes an upper bound of the optimal value
function. In contrast to an engineered dense reward, this envelope can be defined using very little domain knowledge.
However, through value shaping, more domain knowledge
can be used to define a tighter envelope and speed up learning.
DOIE drastically improves exploration in sparse-reward
domains, and is amenable to principled approximation
schemes which allow for its use over long time scales. In
the limit of complete exploration this method reduces to
standard Q-learning and therefore does not modify the fixed
point optimal policy. On the other extreme, with no interaction, the effective Q function is the optimistic envelope, thus
satisfying optimistic initialization.
We empirically investigate our method’s behavior on a variety of challenging sparse reward continuous control problems, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance on a maze
navigation domain and improved sample-efficiency compared with exploratory baselines on sparse-reward tasks in
the DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al. 2018).

Optimistic initialization underpins many theoretically sound
exploration schemes in tabular domains; however, in the deep
function approximation setting, optimism can quickly disappear if initialized naı̈vely. We propose a framework for
more effectively incorporating optimistic initialization into
reinforcement learning for continuous control. Our approach
uses metric information about the state-action space to estimate which transitions are still unexplored, and explicitly
maintains the initial Q-value optimism for the corresponding
state-action pairs. We also develop methods for efficiently approximating these training objectives, and for incorporating
domain knowledge into the optimistic envelope to improve
sample efficiency. We empirically evaluate these approaches
on a variety of hard exploration problems in continuous control, where our method outperforms existing exploration techniques.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning is the study of learning to maximize
cumulative reward while interacting with an environment
(Sutton and Barto 2018). Many tasks of interest have a naturally sparse reward signal, for example reaching a goal or
satisfying a given condition. Learning in this case is significantly harder than when rewards are naturally dense, because the agent may not receive any guiding signal during
most of its training. A common approach in these cases is to
augment the sparse reward with a dense reward built using
domain knowledge, to guide training in helpful directions
(Randløv and Alstrøm 1998). However, there are three problems with this approach. First, it is not always clear how to
construct such a reward signal. Second, the learned policy
under this changed reward function may no longer be optimal (or even good) in the original task (Ng, Harada, and
Russell 1999). Finally, this approach may not be enough to
ensure sufficient exploration in challenging exploration domains.
In the absence of a dense learning signal, the agent needs
alternative ways to motivate its decision-making. A common approach is optimistic initialization in which unobserved transitions are assumed to be maximally desirable un-

Background
We consider sequential decision making problems represented as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) denoted by
hS, A, T, R, P0 , γi, where S, A and γ are the state space,
action space, and the discount factor, respectively. The tran-

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7612

