The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Rendering-Aware HDR Environment Map Prediction from a Single Image
Jun-Peng Xu1 , Chen-Yu Zuo2 , Fang-Lue Zhang3 , Miao Wang1,4 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University, China
2
Xidian University, China
3
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
xujunpeng1998@buaa.edu.cn, cyzuo@stu.xidian.edu.cn, fanglue.zhang@vuw.ac.nz, miaow@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

et al. 2018; Zhao and Guo 2020) and spherical Gaussians
(SG) (Li et al. 2019a, 2020). However, parametric models
often struggle to accurately and sufficiently estimate fullfrequency lighting. As has been demonstrated, SH have limited capacity to interpret high-frequency lighting (Cheng
et al. 2018). SG (Zhan et al. 2021) enable high-quality specular reflection and highlights. But the constant ambient lighting term limits the capability of describing low-frequency
lighting. Meanwhile, direct predicting an HDR environment
map that retains both high- and low-frequency could suffer
from scalability issues due to the complexity of the solution
space (Gardner et al. 2017). Inspecting the rendering quality by existing methods, there still remains a large space for
further exploration in this field.
In this work, we build a novel two-stage framework to
predict an HDR environment map from a single LDR image with a limited FOV, as shown in Figure 1. We first learn
parameters of a hybrid illumination representation of the environment. Specifically, we estimate SG for main lighting
sources via a Transformer, and predict the 2nd order SH
for low-frequency lighting using CNNs. The estimated parameters are transformed to a Gaussian lighting map and a
diffuse irradiance map via projection functions. In the second stage, a generative adversarial network (GAN) takes
the transformed maps as guidance to predict an HDR environment map. We design a panoramic image-based rendering layer that efficiently computes a rendering loss between the predicted and ground truth environment maps. As
a result, the generated HDR environment map enables photorealistic rendering results for virtual objects with diverse
reflectances. Our main contributions are:

High dynamic range (HDR) illumination estimation from
a single low dynamic range (LDR) image is a significant
task in computer vision, graphics and augmented reality. We
present a two-stage deep learning-based method to predict an
HDR environment map from a single narrow field-of-view
LDR image. We first learn a hybrid parametric representation
that sufficiently covers high- and low-frequency illumination
components in the environment. Taking the estimated illuminations as the guidance, we build a generative adversarial network to synthesize an HDR environment map that enables realistic rendering effects. We specifically consider the rendering effect by supervising the networks using rendering losses
in both stages, on the predicted environment map as well as
the hybrid illumination representation. Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves
lower relighting errors for virtual object insertion and is preferred by users compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Learning and predicting the high dynamic range (HDR) illumination from a low dynamic range (LDR) partial-view
image has a broad range of practical applications in augmented reality (AR). As a convenient way, relighting virtual
objects using 360◦ HDR environment maps is able to generate appropriate lighting effects that are consistent with its
real-world surroundings. However, since images are formed
by radiometric and geometric processes to project real-world
3D scenes to 2D images, involving many factors such as
lighting conditions, surface material, scene geometry, and
camera parameters, the inverse process to estimate the global
environment lighting from a narrow field-of-view (FOV) image is under-constrained. It is even more complicated to infer an HDR panoramic environment map when the image is
recorded in LDR with a limited FOV.
Thanks to the emergence of deep neural networks and to
the availability of large-scale lighting-related datasets, predicting light from a single image has become achievable by
direct generation of environment maps (Gardner et al. 2017;
Song and Funkhouser 2019), or regression of lighting parametric models, such as spherical harmonics (SH) (Cheng

• A novel two-stage deep architecture that enables highquality HDR environment map prediction, which outperforms the previous approaches.
• Rendering-aware learning schemes to both the lighting
parameter and environment map prediction, including a
novel differentiable rendering layer to obtain perceptual
rendering loss from an environment map.
• Sub-network structures and learning strategies designed
to address difficulties in environment map prediction,
such as the Transformer-based SG prediction, and the hybrid illumination representation combining SH and SG as
complementary components.

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2857

