The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How Good are Low-Rank Approximations in Gaussian Process Regression?
Constantinos Daskalakis1 , Petros Dellaportas2, 4, 5 , Aristeidis Panos3
1

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
2
University College London, UK
3
University of Warwick, UK
4
Athens University of Economics and Business, Greece
5
The Alan Turing Institute, UK
costis@csail.mit.edu, p.dellaportas@ucl.ac.uk, ares.panos@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract

making the inferential framework hard to scale computationally beyond a few thousand observations.
The computational burden of GP inference has motivated a large body of work on faster, approximate inference
frameworks, as surveyed in Liu et al. (2020). Many rely
on the Nyström method, identifying for this purpose a set
of “inducing inputs” on the input (i.e. feature vector) domain (Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen 2005; Snelson and
Ghahramani 2006; Titsias 2009; Williams and Seeger 2001;
Hensman, Fusi, and Lawrence 2013), or the spectral domain
(Lázaro-Gredilla et al. 2010; Gal and Turner 2015; Hensman,
Durrande, and Solin 2017). Other approaches are based on
approximating the kernel by truncating its Mercer expansion (Ferrari-Trecate, Williams, and Opper 1999; Solin and
Särkkä 2020), or using random features (Cutajar et al. 2017).
For more discussion see Section 2.
The motivating question for this work is that, while there
is substantial work providing approximation guarantees for
various low-rank kernel approximations with respect to different metrics, the impact of such approximation guarantees
to the quality of approximate GP inference is not sufficiently
understood. E.g. many works provide entry-wise approximation guarantees between a given kernel and an approximate
one constructed via the Nyström method, random features,
Mercer expansion truncation, or other approximation technique; see e.g. Rahimi and Recht (2008); Cortes, Mohri, and
Talwalkar (2010); Yang et al. (2012). However, it is unclear
how to translate such entry-wise guarantees to meaningful approximation guarantees relating GP inference using an exact
kernel to inference using an approximate kernel.
Recent work by Burt, Rasmussen, and van der Wilk (2020)
pursued an investigation similar to ours for the sparse variational GP regression framework (Titsias 2009; Hensman,
Matthews, and Ghahramani 2015). They provide bounds for
the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the true posterior distribution and one obtained using inducing inputs in
the above framework.
The goal of our work is to provide bounds for the impact
to GP inference of two other prominent low-rank kernel
approximation methods, based on random features (Thm 2)
and on truncating the kernel’s Mercer expansion (Thm 3). In
particular, we provide bounds on the KL divergence between
the marginal likelihood of an idealized GP with covariance
matrix K(kθ , X) and the marginal likelihood of a GP with a

We provide guarantees for approximate Gaussian Process (GP)
regression resulting from two common low-rank kernel approximations: based on random Fourier features, and based
on truncating the kernel’s Mercer expansion. In particular, we
bound the Kullback–Leibler divergence between an exact GP
and one resulting from one of the afore-described low-rank
approximations to its kernel, as well as between their corresponding predictive densities, and we also bound the error
between predictive mean vectors and between predictive covariance matrices computed using the exact versus using the
approximate GP. We provide experiments on both simulated
data and standard benchmarks to evaluate the effectiveness of
our theoretical bounds.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) have long been studied in probability and statistics; see e.g. Rasmussen and Williams (2006). In
Bayesian inference, they provide a canonical way to define
a probability distribution over functions, which can be used
as a prior to build probabilistic frameworks for quantifying
uncertainty in prediction. Among many applications, they
have been a method of choice for hyperparameter tuning in
deep learning (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012).
In the simplest setting of GP regression, which is the focus
of this paper, a measure over functions f : x 7→ y is defined
such that, for any collection X = (x1 , . . . , xN ) of feature
vectors, their corresponding responses y = (y1 , . . . , yN )
are jointly Gaussian, with zero mean and covariance matrix K(kθ , X) := (kθ (xi , xj ))ij , where kθ (·, ·) is a positive
semidefinite kernel indexed by some parameter vector θ. A
common inferential practice is to assume that we do not observe the Gaussian sample directly but additional noise drawn
from a zero-mean isotropic Gaussian is added to it prior to
our observation. Bayesian inference then proceeds by estimating θ and the noise variance as well as computing predictive
distributions of unobserved responses y∗ corresponding to a
collection of new feature vectors X ∗ of interest. These inference tasks require computing the inverse and determinant of
the covariance matrix K(kθ , X), which naively costs O(N 3 )
operations (or more precisely matrix multiplication time),
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6463

