The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generalized Stochastic Matching
Alireza Farhadi, Jacob Gilbert, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
University of Maryland
farhadi@cs.umd.edu, jgilber8@umd.edu, hajiagha@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

minimizing the amount of compatibility tests while maximizing compatible exchanges is an important problem in the
medical world. Moreover, in this paper we also account for
the possibility that a patient or donor may decide to drop
out of the exchange due to health conditions or at their discretion at any point throughout the months’ long process.
Therefore, while prior papers only considered donor-patient
compatibility, we will also consider potential dropouts from
the exchange process on top of compatibility.
In our proposed stochastic matching model of kidney exchange, each donor-patient pair is represented by a vertex
in the graph. Edges in this graph G represent donor-patient
pairs that may be compatible for exchange. Only a subset
of the edges are found to be compatible through medical
records and testing, and this subset forms a realized subgraph G of possible successful exchanges. We say these
edges are realized, i.e. appear in G, with some probability
pe . Similarly, a vertex is realized with probability pv if the
pair does not dropout during the exchange process. In our
generalized model, an edge can only be included in G if both
of its vertices are realized as well. A maximum matching algoritm seeks to pair vertices connected by an edge of the
graph together to create the maximum amount of matches.
So, a maximum matching of G represents maximized compatible kidney exchanges. As mentioned, medical tests for
compatibility are expensive, and so querying the edges of G
to see if they were realized should be kept to a minimum.
Without knowing the sub-graph G, the goal of the stochastic matching problem is to find some degree-bounded subgraph Q with an expected maximum matching of realized
edges that has a size approximately that of the actual maximum matching of G. We will state and prove the existence
of the first bounds for the approximation ratio achieved with
this model of kidney exchange in which vertices and edges
may be dropped from the original graph.

In this paper, we generalize the recently studied stochastic
matching problem to more accurately model a significant
medical process, kidney exchange, and several other applications. Up until now the stochastic matching problem that has
been studied was as follows: given a graph G = (V, E), each
edge is included in the realized sub-graph G of G mutually
independently with probability pe , and the goal is to find a
degree-bounded sub-graph Q of G that has an expected maximum matching that approximates the expected maximum
matching of G. This model does not account for possibilities
of vertex dropouts, which can be found in several applications, e.g. in kidney exchange when donors or patients opt
out of the exchange process as well as in online freelancing
and online dating when online profiles are found to be faked.
Thus, we will study a more generalized model of stochastic
matching in which vertices and edges are both realized independently with some probabilities pv , pe , respectively, which
more accurately fits important applications than the previously studied model.
We will discuss the first algorithms and analysis for this generalization of the stochastic matching model and prove that
they achieve good approximation ratios. In particular, we
show that the approximation factor of a natural algorithm for
this problem is at least 0.6568 in unweighted graphs, and
1/2 + ϵ in weighted graphs for some constant ϵ > 0. We
further improve our result for unweighted graphs to 2/3 using edge degree constrained subgraphs (EDCS).

Introduction
The stochastic matching problem has been used to model
kidney exchange in several research papers in recent years,
and in this paper, we generalize this model to better suit
the needs of kidney exchange and other applications. Kidney exchange is an important medical procedure that is utilized to increase the amount of possible successful kidney
transplants between patients and donors for hundreds of
donor-patient pairs in the U.S. each year. This medical process occurs when an incompatible kidney donor-patient pair
matches with another incompatible pair such that the donors
are swapped to become compatible pairs with the patients.
Unfortunately, compatibility medical testing can require patients and donors to be hospitalized and are expensive. Thus,

Additional Applications
With our generalized stochastic matching, in addition to kidney exchange we can model the freelancing industry comprised of freelance workers and their potential employers.
In modern freelancing, workers may have online profiles on
websites that businesses can look through to find freelancers
with compatibility for a job or project. Unfortunately, a large
amount of fake profiles and fake job offerings plague these

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10008

