The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SAS: Self-Augmentation Strategy for Language Model Pre-training
Yifei Xu1 * , Jingqiao Zhang2 * , Ru He2 * , Liangzhu Ge2 * , Chao Yang2 , Cheng Yang2† , Ying Nian Wu1
1

University of California, Los Angeles
2
Alibaba Group
fei960922@ucla.edu, {jingqiao.zhang, ru.he, liangzhu.glz, xiuxin.yc, charis.yangc}@alibaba-inc.com, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract

refined or extended in the literature by adding or varying pretraining tasks and/or data augmentation. For example, the
RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) empirically shows that dynamically masking tokens boosts BERT’s performance, while
pairing sentences and undertaking a corresponding next sentence prediction (NSP) task does not; the SpanBERT (Joshi
et al. 2019) masks spans of tokens in each input sequence
and then uses two boundary tokens of each masked span
to predict each token in the span; the StructBERT (Wang
et al. 2019) shuffles a proportion of unmasked tri-grams in
each input sequence and then re-constructs the right order
of these tokens; the XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) permutes the
token index order in each input sequence and then autoregressively predicts the ending tokens in each given order; the
UNILM (Dong et al. 2019) employs different self-attention
masks to augment input data in three ways so that unidirectional, bidirectional and sequence-to-sequence LM tasks
can be performed together; the ERNIE (Sun et al. 2019)
uses prior knowledge to enhance its data augmentation by
phrase-level masking and entity-level masking; the CLEAR
(Wu et al. 2020), while keeping the MLM task, generates a
pair of augmented sentences from each input sentence using
four augmentation methods (words deletion, spans deletion,
synonym substitution and reordering) and then performs a
sentence-level contrastive learning task to minimize the distance between augmented sentences coming from the same
original sentence. In all these models, data augmentations
are manually designed and context-independent without taking sequence context into account.

The core of self-supervised learning for pre-training language
models includes pre-training task design as well as appropriate data augmentation. Most data augmentations in language model pre-training are context-independent. A seminal contextualized augmentation was recently proposed in
ELECTRA and achieved state-of-the-art performance by introducing an auxiliary generation network (generator) to produce contextualized data augmentation for the training of
a main discrimination network (discriminator). This design,
however, introduces extra computation cost of the generator and a need to adjust the relative capability between the
generator and the discriminator. In this paper, we propose
a self-augmentation strategy (SAS) where a single network
is utilized for both regular pre-training and contextualized
data augmentation for the training in later epochs. Essentially,
this strategy eliminates a separate generator and uses the single network to jointly conduct two pre-training tasks with
MLM (Masked Language Modeling) and RTD (Replaced Token Detection) heads. It avoids the challenge to search for an
appropriate size of the generator, which is critical to the performance as evidenced in ELECTRA and its subsequent variant models. In addition, SAS is a general strategy that can
be seamlessly combined with many new techniques emerging recently or in the future, such as the disentangled attention
mechanism from DeBERTa. Our experiments show that SAS
outperforms ELECTRA and other state-of-the-art models in
the GLUE tasks with similar or less computation cost.

Introduction

Recently, the ELECTRA (Clark et al. 2020b) model is
proposed to construct contextualized data augmentation. It
trains an auxiliary generation network to provide plausible
tokens to replace a proportion (typically 15%) of the original tokens according to the input context, and then utilize a
main discrimination network to classify whether each token
in the augmented input is a replaced token or not. The latter task was named as replaced token detection (RTD). After
pre-training, the generator is discarded and the discriminator
is further fine-tuned for downstream NLP tasks. ELECTRA
has shown impressive advantages over MLM-based models
in various downstream tasks under similar computation cost,
especially when a model size is small. Since the ELECTRA
model needs to train two separate neural networks (i.e., generator and discriminator) side by side, however, it is chal-

In recent years, language model pre-training has achieved
enormous success in various natural language processing
(NLP) downstream tasks, largely due to innovations in pretraining task design as well as associated data augmentation.
Especially, the BERT model (Devlin et al. 2018) is a milestone, where each input token sequence is augmented by
randomly masking a proportion (typically 15%) of tokens
and then a masked language model (MLM) task is undertook by recovering each masked token out of the vocabulary
from the augmented input. Since its success, BERT has been
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Cheng Yang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11586

