The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Disentangled Classification and Localization Representations for
Temporal Action Localization
Zixin Zhu1 , Le Wang1 * , Wei Tang2 , Ziyi Liu3 , Nanning Zheng1 , Gang Hua3
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago
3
Wormpex AI Research
zhuzixin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang,nnzheng}@xjtu.edu.cn, tangw@uic.edu, iair lzy@foxmail.com, ganghua@gmail.com
Time (sec)

Abstract

Classification

Completeness and Localization

A common approach to Temporal Action Localization (TAL)
is to generate action proposals and then perform action classification and localization on them. For each proposal, existing methods universally use a shared proposal-level representation for both tasks. However, our analysis indicates that
this shared representation focuses on the most discriminative
frames for classification, e.g., “take-offs” rather than “runups” in distinguishing “high jump” and “long jump”, while
frames most relevant to localization, such as the start and end
frames of an action, are largely ignored. In other words, such
a shared representation can not simultaneously handle both
classification and localization tasks well, and it makes precise
TAL difficult. To address this challenge, this paper disentangles the shared representation into classification and localization representations. The disentangled classification representation focuses on the most discriminative frames, and
the disentangled localization representation focuses on the
action phase as well as the action start and end. Our model
can be divided into two sub-networks, i.e., the disentanglement network and the context-based aggregation network.
The disentanglement network is an autoencoder to learn orthogonal hidden variables of classification and localization.
The context-based aggregation network aggregates the classification and localization representations by modeling local
and global contexts. We evaluate our proposed method on two
popular benchmarks for TAL, which outperforms all state-ofthe-art methods.

High Jump

Background 69.10s
Cosine similarity

71.23s

78.41s

Background
79.71s

Proposal

0.85
0.80

Snippets

(a) Attention of the original shared proposal features to different
snippets.
Time (sec)

High Jump

Background 69.10s

Cosine similarity

71.23s

Proposal

78.41s

Background
79.71s

0.90
0.80

Snippets

(b) Attentions of our disentangled classification and localization
features to different snippets.

Figure 1: We visualize the cosine similarity between proposal features and features of snippets within the corresponding proposal. We assume that if the proposal features
are more similar to the feature of a snippet, it indicates the
proposal features pay more attention to that temporal segment corresponding to the snippet. (a) The original shared
proposal features (the orange line) focus on the most discriminative frames for classification. Therefore, it is not the
best for judging completeness and locating the action. (b)
Our localization features (the red line) focus on the start and
end moments of the action and all snippets within the action,
which are useful for completeness scoring and localization.
Besides, our classification features (the blue line) also focus
on the most discriminate frames.

Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims to seek out actions of interest in a video and locate the temporal start and
end of each action instance. It is inherently a heterogeneous
multi-task learning problem, with action classification and
action localization as different tasks. Recently, TAL has received more attention as a fundamental tool for several applications such as video summarization (Xiao et al. 2020),
action recognition (Meng et al. 2020), and video captioning (Wang et al. 2018).
Inspired by the great success of the proposal-based object
detection framework, i.e., object proposal generation followed by proposal classification and boundary regression,

many current TAL methods (Huang et al. 2018; Bai et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Li and Yao 2021; Li
et al. 2020) have followed this pipeline. They first generate
category-agnostic action proposals (Lin et al. 2019, 2018;

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3644

