The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Not to Learn: Nature versus Nurture in Silico
Robert Tjarko Lange, Henning Sprekeler
Berlin Institute of Technology, Excellence Cluster Science of Intelligence, Marchstr. 23, 10587 Berlin
{robert.t.lange,h.sprekeler}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

A promising approach to automatically learn rules of
adaptation that facilitate environment-specific specialization
is meta-learning (Schmidhuber 1987; Thrun and Pratt 1998).
At its core lies the idea of using generic optimization methods to learn inductive biases for a given ensemble of tasks.
In this approach, the inductive bias usually has its own set
of parameters (Hochreiter, Younger, and Conwell 2001) that
are optimized on the whole task ensemble, that is, on a long,
’evolutionary’ time scale. These parameters in turn control
how a different set of parameters (e.g., activities in the network) are updated on a much faster time scale. These rapidly
changing parameters then allow the system to adapt to a specific task at hand. Notably, the parameters of the system that
are subject to ’nature’ – i.e., those that shape the inductive
bias and are common across tasks – and those that are subject to ’nurture’ are usually predefined from the start.
In this work, we use the memory-based meta-learning
approach for a different goal, namely to acquire a qualitative understanding of which aspects of behavior should be
hard-coded and which should be adaptive. Our hypothesis is
that meta-learning can not only learn efficient learning algorithms, but can also decide not to be adaptive at all, and to
instead apply a generic heuristic to the whole ensemble of
tasks. Phrased in the language of biology, meta-learning can
decide whether to hard-code a behavior or to render it adaptive, based on the range of environments the individuals of a
species could encounter.
We study the dependence of the meta-learned algorithm
on three central features of the meta-reinforcement learning
problem:

Animals are equipped with a rich innate repertoire of sensory, behavioral and motor skills, which allows them to interact with the world immediately after birth. At the same time,
many behaviors are highly adaptive and can be tailored to specific environments by means of learning. In this work, we use
mathematical analysis and the framework of memory-based
meta-learning (or ’learning to learn’) to answer when it is
beneficial to learn such an adaptive strategy and when to hardcode a heuristic behavior. We find that the interplay of ecological uncertainty, task complexity and the agents’ lifetime has
crucial effects on the meta-learned amortized Bayesian inference performed by an agent. There exist two regimes: One in
which meta-learning yields a learning algorithm that implements task-dependent information-integration and a second
regime in which meta-learning imprints a heuristic or ’hardcoded’ behavior. Further analysis reveals that non-adaptive
behaviors are not only optimal for aspects of the environment
that are stable across individuals, but also in situations where
an adaptation to the environment would in fact be highly beneficial, but could not be done quickly enough to be exploited
within the remaining lifetime. Hard-coded behaviors should
hence not only be those that always work, but also those that
are too complex to be learned within a reasonable time frame.

Introduction
The ’nature versus nurture’ debate (Mutti, Zadnik, and
Adams 1996; Tabery 2014) – the question of which aspects
of behavior are ’hard-coded’ by evolution, and which are
learned from experience – is one of the oldest and most controversial debates in biology. Evolutionary principles prescribe that hard-coded behavioral routines should be those
for which there is no benefit in adaptation. This is believed
to be the case for behaviors whose evolutionary advantage
varies little among individuals of a species. Mating instincts
or flight reflexes are general solutions that rarely present an
evolutionary disadvantage. On the other hand, features of
the environment that vary substantially for individuals of a
species potentially ask for adaptive behavior (Buss 2015).
Naturally, the same principles should not only apply to biological but also to artificial agents. But how can a reinforcement learning agent differentiate between these two behavioral regimes?

• Ecological uncertainty: How diverse is the range of
tasks the agent could encounter?
• Task complexity: How long does it take to learn the optimal strategy for the task at hand? Note that this could
be different from the time it takes to execute the optimal
strategy.
• Expected lifetime: How much time can the agent spend
on exploration and exploitation?
Using analytical and numerical analyses, we show that
non-adaptive behaviors are optimal in two cases – when the
optimal policy varies little across the tasks within the task
ensemble and when the time it takes to learn the optimal

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7290

