The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Powerful Graph Convolutional Networks with Adaptive Propagation Mechanism
for Homophily and Heterophily
Tao Wang1,† , Di Jin1,† , Rui Wang1 , Dongxiao He1, * , Yuxiao Huang2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Data Scienc, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., USA
{2019216113, jindi, wr1895, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn, yuxiaohuang@gwu.edu

Abstract

Goldwasser 2019; Yan et al. 2019). Recently, graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017), which exhibits significant power on processing graph-structured data,
has gained great success and already been adapted in various
network analysis tasks, including node classification, community detection, anomaly detection and recommender system (Tang, Aggarwal, and Liu 2016; Tian et al. 2014; Gao,
Denoyer, and Gallinari 2011; Gong et al. 2019; Yu and Han
2014; Jin et al. 2021a).
Although many GCN-based methods have been proposed
in recent years, such as GraphSage (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017), GAT (Velickovic et al. 2018), MixHop
(Abu-El-Haija et al. 2019), and HIN (Xu et al. 2019),
they implicitly assume that most connected nodes are from
the same class or with similar attributes, which is typically called the homophily of network structure. GCN-based
methods reflect the homophily assumption by feature propagation and aggregation within graph neighborhoods. And
these methods have shown satisfactory performance in many
downstream tasks on network with homophily. However, in
real world, there are also many networks where most connected nodes are from different classes, which is called heterophily or low homophily. For example, in dating networks,
most people tend to connect with people of the opposite gender. In protein networks, different types of amino are more
likely to connect with each other. Under heterophily or low
homophily, these methods suffer from poor performance,
as the propagation mechanism within graph neighborhoods,
which is the most fundamental part of GCN, is problematic
and will mix irrelevant information from different classes.
Therefore, existing GCN-based methods cannot adapt to the
scenario of heterophily or low homophily.
Recently, some efforts have been dedicated to generalizing GCN to heterophilic networks. For example, GeomGCN (Pei et al. 2020) proposes a novel geometric aggregation scheme which aggregates immediate neighborhoods
and distant nodes that have a certain similarity with the target node in a continuous space. H2GCN (Zhu et al. 2020)
applies some key designs, such as higher-order neighborhoods aggregation and combination of intermediate representations, to boost learning from graph with heterophily.
GPR-GNN (Chien et al. 2021) deals with heterophily and
oversmoothing by combining each step of feature propagation with a learnable weight. GGCN (Yan et al. 2021) al-

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have been widely
applied in various fields due to their significant power on
processing graph-structured data. Typical GCN and its variants work under a homophily assumption (i.e., nodes with
same class are prone to connect to each other), while ignoring the heterophily which exists in many real-world networks
(i.e., nodes with different classes tend to form edges). Existing methods deal with heterophily by mainly aggregating
higher-order neighborhoods or combing the immediate representations, which leads to noise and irrelevant information
in the result. But these methods did not change the propagation mechanism which works under homophily assumption
(that is a fundamental part of GCNs). This makes it difficult to distinguish the representation of nodes from different classes. To address this problem, in this paper we design a novel propagation mechanism, which can automatically change the propagation and aggregation process according to homophily or heterophily between node pairs. To adaptively learn the propagation process, we introduce two measurements of homophily degree between node pairs, which
is learned based on topological and attribute information, respectively. Then we incorporate the learnable homophily degree into the graph convolution framework, which is trained
in an end-to-end schema, enabling it to go beyond the assumption of homophily. More importantly, we theoretically
prove that our model can constrain the similarity of representations between nodes according to their homophily degree.
Experiments on seven real-world datasets demonstrate that
this new approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
under heterophily or low homophily, and gains competitive
performance under homophily.

Introduction
Networks (such as social networks, citation networks, biological networks and traffic networks) are ubiquitous structures that can model relational data. Network analysis (Wang
et al. 2016, 2019; Cao et al. 2021; Jin et al. 2021b; He
et al. 2021) has been a hot research topic for decades and
has been widely used in many scientific fields such as computer science, social science, biology and physics (Li and
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4210

