The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Renovate Yourself: Calibrating Feature Representation of Misclassified Pixels for
Semantic Segmentation
Hualiang Wang1 * , Huanpeng Chu1 * , Siming Fu1 , Zuozhu Liu2 , Haoji Hu1†
1

2

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
Zhejiang University-Angelalign Inc. R&D Center for Intelligent Healthcare, ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University,
China.
{hualiang wang,chuhp,fusiming,haoji hu}@zju.edu.cn, zuozhuliu@intl.zju.edu.cn
(Huang et al. 2019), pixel-to-object (Yuan, Chen, and Wang
2020), and channel-to-channel (Fu et al. 2019) affinities. Despite the great performance, there are still a considerable
number of indistinguishable pixels in images which are usually misclassified by existing methods due to complicated
morphological or optical characteristics such as occlusion,
sunlight, etc.
A non-trivial observation of the current segmentation
methods is that the cosine similarities between the feature
representations of the misclassified pixels produced by networks, such as DeepLabV3 (Chen et al. 2017) and OCRNet (Yuan, Chen, and Wang 2020), and their surrounding
neighbor pixels are usually quite low, as illustrated in Figure 1(c). When such representations are introduced into the
global contextual information, the representations of certain
objects would be significantly affected and intertwined with
representations from other objects in the image, resulting in
wrong segmentations and inferior performance. In contrast,
the networks trained with our proposed method can correctly
recognize these indistinguishable pixels with a much higher
cosine similarity. We further show statistically that many of
these wrong segmentation predictions, either false negative
(pixels belong to the current category which are misclassified as other categories, FN) or false positive (pixels belonging to other categories which are misclassified as the current
category, FP), could be corrected by our method. As illustrated in Figure 1(a-b), the distribution of the logit scores of
FNs would shift to the right when our method is applied,
leading to more true positive (pixels which are correctly
classified, TP) predictions. Similarly, there is a left shift of
the distribution of the logit scores of FPs, which helps produce more true negative predictions.
Motivated by the aforementioned findings, we propose the
representation calibration head (RCH) to calibrate the errorprone feature representations of misclassified pixels for better intra-class consistency and segmentation performance.
RCH could be plugged into the latent layers, jointly trained
with the segmentation networks, and discarded in the inference stage without additional trainable parameters. RCH
consists of three modules and a metric loss function. The
Image Decoupling module (ID) is responsible for categorizing pixels to TP, FN and FP for each object. The Prototype
Clustering module (PC) dynamically uses TP pixels to calculate the object prototypes during training, inspired by (Wu

Abstract
Existing image semantic segmentation methods favor
learning consistent representations by extracting long-range
contextual features with the attention, multi-scale, or graph
aggregation strategies. These methods usually treat the
misclassified and correctly classified pixels equally, hence
misleading the optimization process and causing inconsistent
intra-class pixel feature representations in the embedding
space during learning. In this paper, we propose the auxiliary
representation calibration head (RCH), which consists of
the image decoupling, prototype clustering, error calibration
modules and a metric loss function, to calibrate these
error-prone feature representations for better intra-class
consistency and segmentation performance. RCH could be
incorporated into the hidden layers, trained together with the
segmentation networks, and decoupled in the inference stage
without additional parameters. Experimental results show
that our method could significantly boost the performance of
current segmentation methods on multiple datasets (e.g., we
outperform the original HRNet and OCRNet by 1.1% and
0.9% mIoU on the Cityscapes test set). Codes are available
at https://github.com/VipaiLab/RCH.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most fundamental and
challenging tasks in computer vision, which aims to assign
the correct category to each pixel in the image. An expressive representation for semantic segmentation should exhibit
both consistency and discriminability, i.e., the representations ought to be as similar as possible for intra-class pixels
while remaining distinctly different for inter-class pixels.
Recently, Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) adopts the softmax loss to
learn discriminative features and achieves promising performance. Based on FCN, multi-scale methods (Chen et al.
2017; Zhao et al. 2017) explore multi-level feature fusion
strategies to capture global features. Another mainstream
methods employ attention (Vaswani et al. 2017) to enhance
intra-class consistency and obtain non-local context (Wang
et al. 2018) using pairwise affinities, including pixel-to-pixel
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2450

