The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Hybrid Causal Structure Learning Algorithm for Mixed-Type Data
Yan Li* , Rui Xia* , Chunchen Liu, Liang Sun
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{yl.yy6993, guangyao.xr, chencang.lcc, liang.sun}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

attention in the causal discovery literature where techniques
involving purely discrete or continuous variables have been
advanced. The goal of this paper is to conduct causal discovery from i.i.d. samples with mixed-type variables whose
distribution is Markov w.r.t. an underlying causal directed
acyclic graph (DAG).

Inferring the causal structure of a set of random variables
is a crucial problem in many disciplines of science. Over
the past two decades, various approaches have been proposed for causal discovery from observational data. However, most of the existing methods are designed for either
purely discrete or continuous data, which limit their practical
usage. In this paper, we target the problem of causal structure learning from observational mixed-type data. Although
there are a few methods that are able to handle mixed-type
data, they suffer from restrictions, such as linear assumption and poor scalability. To overcome these weaknesses, we
formulate the causal mechanisms via mixed structure equation model and prove its identifiability under mild conditions. A novel locally consistent score, named CVMIC, is
proposed for causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure
learning. Moreover, we propose an efficient conditional independence test, named MRCIT, for mixed-type data, which is
used in causal skeleton learning and final pruning to further
improve the computational efficiency and precision of our
model. Experimental results on both synthetic and real-world
data demonstrate that our proposed hybrid model outperforms
the other state-of-the-art methods. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/DAMO-DI-ML/AAAI2022-HCM.

Structural equation models (SEMs) (Pearl 2009) and
causal Bayesian network are the two major categories of
causal discovery methods. SEMs formulate causal relations
through specifying the equations between effects and causes,
where additive noise models (ANM) (Peters et al. 2014;
Bühlmann et al. 2014) and post-nonlinear (Zhang and Hyvarinen 2012) causal models have been widely and successfully
applied for continuous variables. Peters et al. (Peters, Janzing,
and Scholkopf 2011) propose ANM for processing discrete
variables. Methods for causal Bayesian networks fall into
two main categories: constraint-based and score-based ones.
Constraint-based methods conduct conditional independence
tests (CITs) to assess presence of edges. Log-likelihood ratio
G-test and Pearson’s X 2 are the typical CITs used on finite
discrete variables. Pearson’s correlation coefficient, kernelbased (Zhang et al. 2012; Strobl, Zhang, and Visweswaran
2019) CITs and mutual information-based CITs (Runge
2018) are the CITs commonly used for continuous variables. Score-based methods evaluate the quality of candidate
causal structure using some properly defined score functions.
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (Schwarz et al. 1978)
and Bayesian Dirichlet equivalent uniform (BDeu) (Buntine
1991) are the most commonly used score functions for continuous and discrete data, respectively. Recently in (Zheng
et al. 2018), Zheng et al. propose a continuous optimization
framework for DAG structure learning and several extensions (Zheng et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2019) are built with the similar procedure. Unfortunately, all the aforementioned methods are designed for purely continuous or discrete data. To
handle mixed-type variables, traditional methods either discretize continuous variables (Monti and Cooper 1998; Dojer
2016) or convert the conditional distributions of mixed-type
variables into the same type (Romero, Rumí, and Salmerón
2006). More recently, the latent-LiNGAM proposed by Yamayoshi (Yamayoshi, Tsuchida, and Yadohisa 2020) introduces link functions to generate discrete variables. Copula
PC (Cui, Groot, and Heskes 2016) algorithm relaxes the
rank-based measures of correlation in the continuous space

Introduction
Discovering the underlying causal relations among multiple
variables is beneficial in many applications, such as gene
regulatory network reconstruction (Neto et al. 2010), understanding climate changes (Ebert-Uphoff and Deng 2012), and
quantum analysis (Wood and Spekkens 2015). Conduction
of experiments for causal relation identification (Glymour,
Zhang, and Spirtes 2019) is usually expensive, time consuming and even unethical. Therefore, discovering the causal
relations from purely observational data, commonly known as
causal discovery or causal structure learning (Heinze-Deml,
Maathuis, and Meinshausen 2018), is desired. In the realworld scenario, mixed-type data comprising both categorical
and continuous variables is commonly observed, e.g., demographic attributes such as gender and occupation are often
mixed with professional details including shopping behaviors in e-commerce. However, mixed-type data receives less
* These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7435

