The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Distributional Framework for Risk-Sensitive End-to-End Planning
in Continuous MDPs
Noah Patton* 1 , Jihwan Jeong* 1 , Michael Gimelfarb* 2 , Scott Sanner2
1

Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
University of Toronto, 5 King’s College Rd, Toronto, ON M5S 3G8
2
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada.
noah.patton@mail.utoronto.ca, jhjeong@mie.utoronto.ca, mike.gimelfarb@mail.utoronto.ca, ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca
Abstract

real world. However, despite recent advances in scalable endto-end planning, existing approaches do not take risk into
account. For instance, BackpropPlan (Wu, Say, and Sanner
2017) utilizes recent advances in deep learning and is highly
scalable in continuous-state-action MDPs (CSA-MDPs). Its
main limitation is that it cannot be applied to stochastic models, which could be addressed by learning reactive policies
(Bueno et al. 2019). However, existing approaches do not take
the distribution of the return into account and only optimize
for risk-neutral policies that maximize expected return.
Utility theory offers a powerful way of modeling and evaluating preferences towards payoffs or returns of heterogeneous
decision-makers (Stigler 1950; Fishburn 1970), by evaluating
risk as a function of the return distribution. A variety of utility functions and risk measures have been proposed to measure risk in MDPs, including exponential/entropic utilities
(Osogami 2012; Bäuerle and Rieder 2014), mean-variance
approaches (Tamar, Di Castro, and Mannor 2012, 2016) and
conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Chow et al. 2015). However, existing utility functions have different mathematical
properties and assumptions, making them suitable for measuring different types of exogenous risk. For example, meanvariance approaches and entropic utilties are particularly wellsuited for problems with high variance, while CVaR is more
suitable for assessing tail risk. This makes a unified treatment of different utility functions particularly advantageous.
End-to-end planning can be particularly advantageous since
it does not rely on the Bellman principle that can present computational challenges when considering general risk-sensitive
utility functions (Defourny, Ernst, and Wehenkel 2008; Mannor and Tsitsiklis 2011).
To this end, we propose RAPTOR (Risk-Aware Planning
using pyTORch) for scalable risk-aware end-to-end planning
in CSA-MDPs by backpropagation through a general differentiable utility function. To achieve this, we begin by leveraging an extension of BackpropPlan to accommodate stochastic
transitions (Bueno et al. 2019), by representing the planning domain as a stochastic computation graph (Figure 2).
While we cannot directly formalize a distributionally-defined
utility function in closed-form for end-to-end planning, for
many classes of problems we can reparameterize the objective and apply stochastic backpropagation, allowing us to
leverage automatic differentiation tools (Paszke et al. 2019)
for gradient-based optimization. This leads to a compact yet

Recent advances in efficient planning in deterministic or
stochastic high-dimensional domains with continuous action
spaces leverage backpropagation through a model of the environment to directly optimize action sequences. However,
existing methods typically do not take risk into account when
optimizing in stochastic domains, which can be incorporated
efficiently in MDPs by optimizing a nonlinear utility function
of the return distribution. We bridge this gap by introducing Risk-Aware Planning using PyTorch (RAPTOR), a novel
unified framework for risk-sensitive planning through end-toend optimization of commonly-studied risk-sensitive utility
functions such as entropic utility, mean-variance optimization and CVaR. A key technical difficulty of our approach is
that direct optimization of general risk-sensitive utility functions by backpropagation is impossible due to the presence
of environment stochasticity. The novelty of RAPTOR lies in
leveraging reparameterization of the state distribution, leading
to a unique distributional perspective of end-to-end planning
where the return distribution is utilized for sampling as well
as optimizing risk-aware objectives by backpropagation in a
unified framework. We evaluate and compare RAPTOR on
three highly stochastic MDPs, including nonlinear navigation,
HVAC control, and linear reservoir control, demonstrating the
ability of RAPTOR to manage risk in complex continuous
domains according to different notions of risk-sensitive utility.

Introduction
As machine learning models are more frequently deployed
in the real world, the concern over ensuring their safety is
ever-increasing (Faria 2018; Pereira and Thomas 2020). In
sequential stochastic decision-making problems, it has been
shown that optimizing the expected cumulative reward can
lead to undesirable outcomes such as excessive risk-taking,
since low-probability catastrophic outcomes with negative
reward, or risk, can be underrepresented (Moldovan 2014).
The risk-averse MDP framework addresses this problem by
optimizing utility functions or risk measures with favorable
mathematical properties (Ruszczyński 2010).
On the other hand, planning optimizes decisions or actions given a mathematical description of the environment,
thus minimizing the need to do dangerous exploration in the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9894

