The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Guide Local Feature Matching by Overlap Estimation
Ying Chen1 * , Dihe Huang1,2 * , Shang Xu1 , Jianlin Liu1 , Yong Liu1†
1

Tencent Youtu Lab
Tsinghua University
{mumuychen, shangxu, jenningsliu, choasliu}@tencent.com, hdh20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Local image feature matching under large appearance, viewpoint, and distance changes is challenging yet important.
Conventional methods detect and match tentative local features across the whole images, with heuristic consistency
checks to guarantee reliable matches. In this paper, we introduce a novel Overlap Estimation method conditioned on
image pairs with TRansformer, named OETR, to constrain local feature matching in the commonly visible region. OETR
performs overlap estimation in a two step process of feature correlation and then overlap regression. As a preprocessing module, OETR can be plugged into any existing local
feature detection and matching pipeline, to mitigate potential view angle or scale variance. Intensive experiments show
that OETR can boost state of the art local feature matching performance substantially, especially for image pairs with
small shared regions. The code will be publicly available at
https://github.com/AbyssGaze/OETR.

(a) Local feature matching by SuperPoint and SuperGlue.

Introduction
Detecting precise locations for local features, then establishing their reliable correspondences across images are underpinning steps towards many computer vision tasks, such
as Structure-from-Motion (SfM) (Schonberger and Frahm
2016; Wu 2013), visual tracking (Yan et al. 2021; Voigtlaender et al. 2020) and visual localization (Sarlin et al.
2019). By extension, feature matching enables real applications such as visual navigation of autonomous vehicles and
portable augmented/mixed reality devices. However, under
extreme appearance, viewpoint or scale changes in longterm conditions (Sattler et al. 2018), repeatable keypoints
detection, and stable descriptor matching are very challenging and remain unsolved.
Traditionally, appearance, viewpoint, and scale invariance
are parameterized by hand-crafted transformation and statistics of local feature patches (Lowe 2004; Bay, Tuytelaars,
and Van Gool 2006). Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based local features (DeTone, Malisiewicz,
and Rabinovich 2018a; Revaud et al. 2019; Tyszkiewicz,
Fua, and Trulls 2020) with strong semantic representation

(b) Add OETR to guide SuperPoint and SuperGlue.

Figure 1: SP+SG vs. OETR+SP+SG. By overlap estimation,
OETR is capable of constraining local feature matching in
the commonly visible regions, compensating for viewpoint
change and pruning ambiguous matches.

and attention aided matching protocols (Wiles, Ehrhardt,
and Zisserman 2021; Sarlin et al. 2019) have shown significant improvements over their hand-crafted counterparts
under appearance changing conditions, such as day-night,
weather, and seasonal variations. Nevertheless, detection
from the deepest layer embedding high-level information often struggles to identify low-level structures (corners, edges,
etc.) where keypoints are often located, leading to less accurate keypoints (Germain, Bourmaud, and Lepetit 2020). So
recent methods (Luo et al. 2020) fuse earlier layers that preserve high-frequency local details to help retrieve accurate
keypoints. However, corresponding descriptors are vulnerable to large view angle or scale change due to a limited receptive field that implies less semantic context. So, the performance is highly depend on complicated multi-scale fea-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

365

