The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

RareGAN: Generating Samples for Rare Classes
Zinan Lin, Hao Liang, Giulia Fanti, Vyas Sekar
Carnegie Mellon University
zinanl@andrew.cmu.edu, hl106@rice.edu, gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu, vsekar@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
AmpMAP
RareGAN (ours)

We study the problem of learning generative adversarial networks (GANs) for a rare class of an unlabeled dataset subject
to a labeling budget. This problem is motivated from practical
applications in domains including security (e.g., synthesizing
packets for DNS amplification attacks), systems and networking (e.g., synthesizing workloads that trigger high resource
usage), and machine learning (e.g., generating images from a
rare class). Existing approaches are unsuitable, either requiring fully-labeled datasets or sacrificing the fidelity of the rare
class for that of the common classes. We propose RareGAN, a
novel synthesis of three key ideas: (1) extending conditional
GANs to use labelled and unlabelled data for better generalization; (2) an active learning approach that requests the
most useful labels; and (3) a weighted loss function to favor
learning the rare class. We show that RareGAN achieves a
better fidelity-diversity tradeoff on the rare class than prior
work across different applications, budgets, rare class fractions,
GAN losses, and architectures.

1

Budget↓

Fidelity↓

Diversity↑

14,788,089
200,000

16.60
4.16

1.68%
98.07%

Table 1: RareGAN achieves better fidelity and diversity with
lower budget on DNS amplification attacks than domainspecific techniques. See § 5.1 for the definition of metrics.
(e.g., attack packets, packets that trigger high CPU usage)
without requiring prior knowledge about the systems. Note
that there are two unique characteristics in our problem:
C1. High labeling cost. Labels (whether a sample belongs to
the rare class) are often not available a priori, and getting
labels is often resource intensive. For example, for a new
system, we often do not know a priori which packets will
trigger high CPU usage, and evaluating the CPU usage
of a packet (for labeling it) can be time consuming.
C2. Rare class only. We only need samples from the rare
class (e.g., attack packets); system operators are often
less concerned about common class samples (e.g., benign
packets).
To the best of our knowledge, no prior GAN paper considers
both constraints. Prior related work (see § 3.2) often assumes
that the labels are available (failing C1), or tries to generate
both rare and common samples, which sacrifices the fidelity
on the rare class (failing C2). We will see in § 4 that these
new characteristics bring unique challenges.
Contributions. We propose RareGAN, a generative model
for rare data classes, given an unlabeled dataset and a labeling budget. It combines three ideas: (1) It modifies existing
conditional GANs (Odena, Olah, and Shlens 2017) to use
both labelled and unlabelled data for better generalization.
(2) It uses active learning to label samples; we show theoretically that unlike prior work (Xie and Huang 2019), our
implementation does not bias the learned rare class distribution. (3) It uses a weighted loss function that favors learning
the rare class over the common class; we propose efficient
optimization techniques for realizing this reweighting.
We show that RareGAN achieves a better fidelity-diversity
tradeoff on the rare class than baselines across different use
cases, budgets, rare class fractions, GAN losses, and architectures. Table 1 shows that RareGAN achieves better fidelity
and diversity (with a smaller labeling budget) when gen-

Introduction

Many practitioners in diverse domains such as security, networking, and systems require samples from rare classes. For
example, operators often want to generate queries that force
servers to send undesirable responses (Moon et al. 2021),
or generate packets that trigger high CPU/memory usage or
processing delays for performance evaluation (Petsios et al.
2017).
Prior domain-specific solutions to these problems rely
heavily on prior knowledge (e.g., source code) of the systems, which is often unavailable (Lin et al. 2019). Indeed, in
response to a recent executive order Improving the Nation’s
Cybersecurity1 , the U.S. National Institute of Standards and
Technology published guidance highlighting the importance
of creating ‘black box’ tests for device and software security
that do not rely on the implementation or source code of
systems (Black, Guttman, and Okun 2021).
Given the success of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) on data generation, we
ask if we can use GANs to generate samples from a rare class
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/05/17/202110460/improving-the-nations-cybersecurity

7506

