The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

InfoLM: A New Metric to Evaluate Summarization
& Data2Text Generation
Pierre Jean A. Colombo1 * , Chloé Clavel2 ,Pablo Piantanida1
1

Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes (L2S), CentraleSupelec CNRS Universite Paris-Saclay
2
Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris Saclay
pierre.colombo@centralesupelec.fr
chloe.clavel@telecom-paris.fr
pablo.piantanida@centralesupelec.fr
Abstract

consider criteria such as data coverage, correctness and text
structure.
Automatic text evaluation metrics fall into two categories: metrics that are trained to maximise their correlations using human annotation (e.g., BLEND (Ma et al.
2017)) and untrained metrics (e.g., BLEU (Papineni et al.
2002), ROUGE (Lin 2004), BERTSCORE (Zhang et al.
2019), DepthScore (Staerman et al. 2021), BaryScore
(Colombo et al. 2021c), MOVERSCORE (Zhao et al. 2019)).
In this work, we focus on untrained metrics as trained metrics may not generalize well to new data (existing labelled
corpora are of small size). Two categories of untrained metrics can be distinguished: word or character based-metrics
that compute a score based on string representation and
embedding-based metrics that rely on a continuous representation. String-based metrics (e.g., BLEU) often fail to robustly match paraphrases (Reiter and Belz 2009) as they
mainly focus on the surface form as opposed to embeddingbased metrics relying on continuous representations.
In this paper, we introduce InfoLM a family of new untrained metrics to evaluate text summarization and data2text
generation. At the highest level InfoLM key components
include: (1) a pre-trained masked language model (PMLM)
that is used to compute two discrete probability distributions over the vocabulary. They represent the probability of observing each token of the vocabulary given the
candidate and the reference sentence, respectively. (2) A
contrast function I that is used to measure the dissimilarity between aforementioned probability distributions.
InfoLM differs from existing BERT-based metrics (e.g.
BERTSCORE, MOVERSCORE) as it directly relies on the
PMLM which outputs discrete probability distributions. Thus
InfoLM does neither require to arbitrarily select one or
several specific layers ( e.g. BERTSCORE relies on the 9th
layer for bert-base-uncased), nor involves selecting
arbitrary aggregations technics (e.g. see MOVERSCORE). As
InfoLM relies on statistics on tokens it can also be seen as
a string-based metric. However, it does not suffer from common pitfalls of string-based metrics (e.g. synonyms, need of
an exact string-match) as the PMLM also allows ones to assign a high score to paraphrases and to capture distant dependencies.
Contributions Our contributions are summarized below:

Assessing the quality of natural language generation systems through human annotation is very expensive. Additionally, human annotation campaigns are time-consuming and
include non-reusable human labour. In practice, researchers
rely on automatic metrics as a proxy of quality. In the last
decade, many string-based metrics (e.g., BLEU) have been
introduced. However, such metrics usually rely on exact
matches and thus, do not robustly handle synonyms. In this
paper, we introduce InfoLM a family of untrained metrics
that can be viewed as a string-based metric that addresses
the aforementioned flaws thanks to a pre-trained masked language model. This family of metrics also makes use of information measures allowing the adaptation of InfoLM to various evaluation criteria. Using direct assessment, we demonstrate that InfoLM achieves statistically significant improvement and over 10 points of correlation gains in many configurations on both summarization and data2text generation.

1

Introduction

A plethora of applications of natural language processing
(NLP) performs text-to-text transformation (Mellish and
Dale 1998; Belz and Reiter 2006; Specia, Scarton, and Paetzold 2018). Given an input, these systems are required to
produce an output text that is coherent, readable and informative. Due to both high annotation costs and time, researchers tend to rely on automatic evaluation to compare
the outputs of such systems. Reference-based automatic
evaluation relies on comparing a candidate text produced by
the NLG system and one or multiple reference texts (‘gold
standard’) created by a human annotator. Generic automatic
evaluation of NLG is a huge challenge as it requires building a metric that evaluates the similarity between a candidate
and one or several gold-standard reference texts. However,
the definition of success criteria is task-specific: as an example, evaluation of text summarization focuses on content, coherence, grammatically, conciseness, and readability (Mani
2001; Colombo et al. 2022), whereas machine translation
focuses on fidelity, fluency and adequacy of the translation
(Hovy 1999) and data2text generation (Gardent et al. 2017)
* Work done while Pierre was funded by IBM & Telecom Paris
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10554

