The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Constraint-Driven Explanations for Black Box ML Models
Aditya A. Shrotri∗1† , Nina Narodytska∗2 ,
Alexey Ignatiev3 , Kuldeep S. Meel4 , Joao Marques-Silva5 , Moshe Y. Vardi1
1

Rice University, Houston, USA 2 VMware Research Inc., Palo Alto, USA 3 Monash University, Melbourne, Australia 4 National
University of Singapore, Singapore 5 IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
{as128,vardi}@rice.edu, nnarodytska@vmware.com, alexey.ignatiev@monash.edu, meel@comp.nus.edu.sg,
joao.marques-silva@irit.fr

Abstract

A number of different approaches have been proposed in
literature for generating post-hoc explanations (c.f. Adadi
and Berrada (2018a)). A broad class of techniques explain individual predictions by capturing the behavior of the opaque
model in a small neighborhood of the input instance in two
phases (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2013). In the first phase, the input instance is perturbed according to some criteria and in the second phase the behavior
of the model on the perturbed instances is captured using various interpretable artifacts such as linear classifiers (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017), gradients (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan
2017), counterfactuals (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell
2017), subgraphs of GNNs (Ying et al. 2019) etc.

The need to understand the inner workings of opaque Machine
Learning models has prompted researchers to devise various
types of post-hoc explanations. A large class of such explainers proceed in two phases: first perturb an input instance whose
explanation is sought, and then generate an interpretable artifact to explain the prediction of the opaque model on that
instance. Recently, Deutch and Frost proposed to use an additional input from the user: a set of constraints over the input
space to guide the perturbation phase. While this approach
affords the user the ability to tailor the explanation to their
needs, striking a balance between flexibility, theoretical rigor
and computational cost has remained an open challenge.
We propose a novel constraint-driven explanation generation
approach which simultaneously addresses these issues in a
modular fashion. Our framework supports the use of expressive Boolean constraints giving the user more flexibility to
specify the subspace to generate perturbations from. Leveraging advances in Formal Methods, we can theoretically guarantee strict adherence of the samples to the desired distribution.
This also allows us to compute fidelity in a rigorous way, while
scaling much better in practice. Our empirical study demonstrates concrete uses of our tool CLIME in obtaining more
meaningful explanations with high fidelity.

1

Different choices for each phase yield different tradeoffs
between flexibility, computational cost and theoretical rigor.
For example, one of the earliest and most popular post-hoc
explainers called LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016)
employs a fixed heuristic perturbation procedure, and uses
a simple linear classifier trained on the perturbed instances
as the interpretable artifact. The advantages are that LIME
is model-agnostic in that it can explain predictions of any
black-box model, and is reasonably fast in practice. However,
it suffers from drawbacks like lack of a strong theoretical
foundation and susceptibility to adversarial attacks (Slack
et al. 2020) among others. The explainer SHAP (Lundberg
and Lee 2017) rectified some of these issues by using Shapley
values from game theory for axiomatically deriving the coefficients of the linear model. While Shapley values are provably
‘ideal’ under some mild assumptions, they are expensive to
compute (Van den Broeck et al. 2021; Arenas et al. 2021),
and in practice we have to resort to approximations or accept
the loss of model-agnosticity. Recently, Deutch and Frost
(2019) proposed to employ user-defined constraints to generate explanations. In particular, they allow the user to supply
domain knowledge through constraints in the form of linear
inequalities over the input space. These constraints guide
the perturbation procedure for generating counterfactual explanations. While constraints provide flexibility in tailoring
explanations, the modeling language (linear inequalities) is
restrictive and the proposed algorithm is not model-agnostic.
Thus, striking a balance between flexibility, rigor, and com-

Introduction

The field of eXplainable AI (XAI) has emerged out of the
need for humans to understand the complex and opaque decision processes governing modern Machine Learning models. Researchers seek to develop both naturally interpretable
models (Hu, Rudin, and Seltzer 2019; Angelino et al. 2018;
Rudin 2019; Avellaneda 2020) as well as post-hoc explanations for opaque models like Deep Neural Networks and
ensembles (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and
Lee 2017). State-of-the-art learning approaches in most domains, however, are uninterpretable and necessitate the latter
approach.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
This work was mostly done during internship at VMware Research. Code, results and full version of the text is available at
https://gitlab.com/Shrotri/clime
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8304

