The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Iteratively Selecting an Easy Reference Frame
Makes Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation Easier
Youngjo Lee, Hongje Seong, and Euntai Kim*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{lzozo95, hjseong, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Initial Mask Prediction Results

Abstract
Unsupervised video object segmentation (UVOS) is a perpixel binary labeling problem which aims at separating the
foreground object from the background in the video without
using the ground truth (GT) mask of the foreground object.
Most of the previous UVOS models use the first frame or
the entire video as a reference frame to specify the mask of
the foreground object. Our question is why the first frame
should be selected as a reference frame or why the entire
video should be used to specify the mask. We believe that
we can select a better reference frame to achieve the better
UVOS performance than using only the first frame or the
entire video as a reference frame. In our paper, we propose
Easy Frame Selector (EFS). The EFS enables us to select
an “easy” reference frame that makes the subsequent VOS
become easy, thereby improving the VOS performance. Furthermore, we propose a new framework named as Iterative
Mask Propagation (IMP). In the framework, we repeat applying EFS to the given video and selecting an “easier” reference frame from the video than the previous iteration, increasing the VOS performance incrementally. The IMP consists
of EFS, Bi-directional Mask Prediction (BMP), and Temporal Information Updating (TIU). From the proposed framework, we achieve state-of-the-art performance in three UVOS
benchmark sets: DAVIS16, FBMS, and SegTrack-V2.

Selected Easy Frame (Ours)

J&F

First Frame
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
1
6

11

FirstFrame

16

21 26 31 36 41
Frame Number
EntireFrame
EasyFrame

46

Figure 1: Three experimental results according to the reference frame selection: (1) referencing the first frame only
(yellow), (2) referencing entire frames (green), and (3) referencing the easy frame which predicted by our Easy Frame
Selector (red). We plot the J &F scores computed by predicted mask for every frame according to the selection.
Black dots indicate the selected reference frame(s). Our approach (red) shows superior performance than other reference frame selection methods (yellow and green) in every
frame. Note that predicted masks are express on the image
and the dotted arrows indicate the positions of each frame.

Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is a task that segments the objects as pixel-level binary masks from videos.
In general, VOS is divided into two other tasks: Semisupervised Video Object Segmentation (SVOS) and Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation (UVOS). At train time,
video frames and their ground truth (GT) masks are given to
both tasks. They are trained in a supervised manner. At inference time, the first frame’s mask annotation of foreground
objects is given to SVOS. On the other hand, only the video
frames without any annotations are given to UVOS. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework for UVOS.
In SVOS, as the first frame’s GT mask is given, most
SVOS models indeed predict the remaining frames’ masks
with the first frame as a reference frame. For UVOS, there

is no need to use the first frame as a reference frame because there is no annotation even for the first frame. Thus,
any frame can be a reference frame in UVOS. Especially,
we call the reference frame an easy/hard frame according to
how easy to predict a foreground object for the remaining
frames from it.
Most UVOS methods (Tokmakov, Alahari, and Schmid
2017b; Jain, Xiong, and Grauman 2017; Tokmakov, Alahari,
and Schmid 2017a; Cheng et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018;
Yang et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Faisal
et al. 2019; Siam et al. 2019; Tokmakov, Schmid, and Alahari 2019; Zhou et al. 2020; Zhuo et al. 2019) find the object’s mask based on various types of reference frames. In
Yang et al. (2019), they call the first frame as an anchor
frame and use it as a reference frame. However, the first

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1245

