The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generalized Equivariance and Preferential Labeling
for GNN Node Classification
Zeyu Sun1 , Wenjie Zhang1 , Lili Mou2 , Qihao Zhu1 , Yingfei Xiong1 , Lu Zhang1
1
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, MoE;
School of Computer Science, Peking University, 100871, P. R. China
2
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligent Institute (Amii)
University of Alberta, Edmonton T6G 2E8, Canada
{szy , zhang wen jie, zhuqh, xiongyf, zhanglucs}@pku.edu.cn, doublepower.mou@gmail.com

Abstract

graph. A common scenario is that there is no attribute related to the nodes. For example, community detection for
large-scale social networks may lack the identity information of nodes, i.e., a person, possibly due to privacy concerns (Backstrom, Dwork, and Kleinberg 2007). Another
scenario is that the attribute of a node is an artefact and captures no semantic meanings. Figure 1 shows a graph that
represents a propositional satisfiability (SAT) problem (Selsam et al. 2019), where x1 and c1 are arbitrary namings of
the literals (variable or its negations) and clauses (disjunction of literals), and could be renamed without changing the
nature of the formula. If such an identifier is represented by
table look-up embeddings, it would become an artefact in
the GNN, because these embeddings do not represent common knowledge among different training samples. Nor do
they generalize to new samples.
To encode unattributed graphs, previous methods typically adopt an arbitrary labeling for nodes and represent them by embeddings (Allamanis, Brockschmidt, and
Khademi 2018; Wei et al. 2020). As mentioned, this introduces artefacts to GNNs. Recently, Selsam et al. (2019)
have realized that such artefacts are undesired, and assign
all nodes with the same embedding. However, this approach
may suffer from the problem that the graph neural network
becomes insensitive to the nodes.
In this work, we analyze unattributed node classification
tasks, which require equivariance, i.e., the change of node
labels should be reflected correspondingly in the output. To
address the mentioned problems, a naı̈ve idea is to still assign different node embeddings, but to eliminate such artefacts by an ensemble of multiple labelings. For training, the
labeling is randomly sampled every time we process a data
sample; during inference, an ensemble of multiple random
labelings is adopted for a sample. In this way, the nodes
are distinguishable given any labeling, but such artefacts are
smoothed out by the ensemble average.
Our theoretical analysis, however, shows that such a naı̈ve
treatment does not work well for node classification. An
equivariant GNN is unable to solve equivariant node classification problems where multiple outputs are appropriate
for an input graph.
To this end, we propose a generalized equivariance property that is more suited to unattributed node classification.
We further propose a Preferential Labeling approach, which

Existing graph neural networks (GNNs) largely rely on
node embeddings, which represent a node as a vector
by its identity, type, or content. However, graphs with
unattributed nodes widely exist in real-world applications
(e.g., anonymized social networks). Previous GNNs either
assign random labels to nodes (which introduces artefacts
to the GNN) or assign one embedding to all nodes (which
fails to explicitly distinguish one node from another). Further,
when these GNNs are applied to unattributed node classification problems, they have an undesired equivariance property,
which are fundamentally unable to address the data with multiple possible outputs. In this paper, we analyze the limitation of existing approaches to node classification problems.
Inspired by our analysis, we propose a generalized equivariance property and a Preferential Labeling technique that
satisfies the desired property asymptotically. Experimental
results show that we achieve high performance in several
unattributed node classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Graphs are a widely used type of data structure in computer science. A graph can be represented as G = hV, Ei,
where V is a set of nodes, and E is a set of node pairs
known as edges (directed or undirected). With the prosperity
of deep learning techniques, graph neural networks (GNNs)
are shown to be effective to various graph-related applications, such as program analysis (Mou et al. 2016), social
networks (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017), knowledge
graphs (Hamaguchi et al. 2017), molecule analysis (Scarselli
et al. 2009), and the satisfiability (SAT) problem (Zhang
et al. 2020).
Existing GNNs highly rely on node embeddings, which
are a vector representation of a node, typically based on its
identity, type, or content. For example, a GNN for a knowledge graph typically embeds an entity/concept (e.g., a “cat”
and a “mammal”) as a vector (Wang, Ye, and Gupta 2018),
whereas a GNN for molecules embeds the atom (e.g., hydrogen and oxygen atoms) as a vector (Scarselli et al. 2009).
In many applications, however, the nodes in a graph may
not be attributed, and we call such a graph an unattributed
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8395

