The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SimIPU: Simple 2D Image and 3D Point Cloud Unsupervised Pre-training
for Spatial-Aware Visual Representations
Zhenyu Li1 , Zehui Chen2 , Ang Li3 , Liangji Fang3 , Qinhong Jiang3 ,
Xianming Liu1 , Junjun Jiang1 * , Bolei Zhou4 , Hang Zhao5
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
University of Science and Technology
3
SenseTime Research
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
IIIS, Tsinghua University
{zhenyuli17, csxm, jiangjunjun}@hit.edu.cn, lovesnow@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{liang1, fangliangji, jiangqinhong}@senseauto.com, bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Previous Methods
Crop

Pre-training has become a standard paradigm in many computer vision tasks. However, most of the methods are generally designed on the RGB image domain. Due to the
discrepancy between the two-dimensional image plane and
the three-dimensional space, such pre-trained models fail to
perceive spatial information and serve as sub-optimal solutions for 3D-related tasks. To bridge this gap, we aim to
learn a spatial-aware visual representation that can describe
the three-dimensional space and is more suitable and effective for these tasks. To leverage point clouds, which are
much more superior in providing spatial information compared to images, we propose a simple yet effective 2D Image and 3D Point cloud Unsupervised pre-training strategy,
called SimIPU. Specifically, we develop a multi-modal contrastive learning framework that consists of an intra-modal
spatial perception module to learn a spatial-aware representation from point clouds and an inter-modal feature interaction
module to transfer the capability of perceiving spatial information from the point cloud encoder to the image encoder,
respectively. Positive pairs for contrastive losses are established by the matching algorithm and the projection matrix.
The whole framework is trained in an unsupervised end-toend fashion. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study to explore contrastive learning pre-training strategies
for outdoor multi-modal datasets, containing paired camera
images and LIDAR point clouds.

Feature Extract

CL

Only Design On 2D

Inter-modal CL

Design On
2D and 3D

Our Methods
Feature Extract
z

y

x Feature Extract

LIDAR Point Cloud

Intra-modal CL
Another View
Matched Features

Figure 1: Motivation. SimIPU is designed on both the 2D
image plane and the 3D space. Intra-modal module learns
the spatial-aware representation with point clouds. Intermodal module transfers the capability of extracting spatialaware representations to the image-feature extractor. ‘CL’ is
the abbreviation of the contrastive learning.

Grill et al. 2020) have achieved comparable or better results compared to supervised pre-trained ones on a few
2D tasks, including image classification, object detection,
and image segmentation (Jaiswal et al. 2021). However, all
these methods are designed on the two-dimensional image
plane, which exists a large discrepancy between the threedimensional space. As a result, such pre-trained models can
not perceive spatial information and demonstrate limited
performance improvement on 3D-related downstream tasks.
Therefore, learning a spatial-aware representation that can
describe three-dimensional space is much more essential.
Compared to images, point clouds are much more superior in providing spatial information (Qi et al. 2017), which
may lead them to be more suitable for learning such representations. PointContrast (Xie et al. 2020) is the first study to
explore pre-training strategies for point clouds. They utilize
different scene views to generate positive pairs and adopt
a PointInfoNCE loss to learn useful dense/local representa-

Introduction
Large-scale models have achieved significant success in
deep learning, where fine-tuning after pre-training has become a well-established and commonly used paradigm, such
as ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), GPT (Brown et al. 2020),
and BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) in NLP. As for computer vision, benefiting from the massive amount of labeled data,
the supervised pre-trained models on ImageNet (Deng et al.
2009) have long dominated. In recent years, unsupervised
pre-training strategies have drawn much more attention. Various successful methods (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020;
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1500

