The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Discovering State and Action Abstractions for
Generalized Task and Motion Planning
Aidan Curtis, Tom Silver, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Leslie Kaelbling
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{curtisa, tslvr, jbt, tlp, lpk}@mit.edu

Abstract

Abstract Features

Generalized planning accelerates classical planning by finding an algorithm-like policy that solves multiple instances of
a task. A generalized plan can be learned from a few training examples and applied to an entire domain of problems.
Generalized planning approaches perform well in discrete AI
planning problems that involve large numbers of objects and
extended action sequences to achieve the goal. In this paper,
we propose an algorithm for learning features, abstractions,
and generalized plans for continuous robotic task and motion
planning (TAMP) and examine the unique difficulties that
arise when forced to consider geometric and physical constraints as a part of the generalized plan. Additionally, we
show that these simple generalized plans learned from only
a handful of examples can be used to improve the search efficiency of TAMP solvers.

Abstract Actions

Figure 1: An abstract policy for the working L OAD task
example. The generalized plan that solves this L OAD task
picks an object (A1 ) and places it on the tray (A2 ) until either the tray is full (¬φ3 ) or no objects are remaining on
the table (¬φ2 ). After one of these two features evaluates to
false, the tray is grasped (A3 ). Here Free(o) is used as a
shorthand for the larger feature ∃p, r∀o2 , p2 : Tray(r) ∧
¬On(o, p, r) ∧ On(o2 , p2 , r) ⇒ ¬CFree(o, p, o2 , p2 , r)

Introduction
A shared goal in the robotics and artificial intelligence communities is to build intelligent autonomous robotic agents
that can solve long-horizon tasks in arbitrary human environments. Two of the major roadblocks to building such
general-purpose intelligent systems are scalability to settings with large numbers of objects and generalizability to
a wide array of novel environments and goals.
A scalable and generalizable intelligent robotic agent
must consider objects’ geometric, physical, visual, and semantic attributes to select and execute goal-directed actions.
For example, a task such as “pack all my camping gear
into my backpack” might require reasoning about the location, size and shape, mass and deformability, ownership, and
category designation of each item in the environment. The
agent must also execute actions that progress to the specified
goal without violating physical and geometric constraints induced by the environment.
One typical approach to solving this type of problem is
task and motion planning (TAMP) (Garrett et al. 2020). TAMP
solvers work by integrating discrete symbolic planning with
geometric motion planning where the results from each of
these two subsystems can affect the other’s feasibility. Because of this mutual dependence between the symbolic and

geometric constraints, TAMP solvers usually rely on iterative procedures that alternate between geometric and discrete symbolic planning until a geometrically feasible plan
is found that reaches the goal. The resulting iterative planning algorithms are much more computationally complex
than classical planning algorithms. While TAMP solvers are
fully generalizable to novel environments and tasks, they are
limited in scalability due to the large combinatorial and continuous search problem that exists for each problem.
Generalized planning is a method for tackling exactly this
scalability problem in classical planning. Generalized planners find abstract high-level plans that apply to a large, often infinite, class of problem instances with a shared structure. For example, “While there are objects in the box, pick
up a reachable object in the box and place it on the table.”
is a generalized plan that applies to settings with any number of objects. Solving each problem instance independently
with standard planning approaches can be highly inefficient
as planners are often slow and become exponentially slower
with increasing solution length. The motivation of generalized planning is to avoid search in large state-space problem

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5377

