The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Leashing the Inner Demons: Self-Detoxification for Language Models
Canwen Xu, Zexue He, Zhankui He, Julian McAuley
University of California, San Diego
{cxu,zehe,zhh004,jmcauley}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Language models (LMs) can reproduce (or amplify) toxic language seen during training, which poses a risk to their practical
application. In this paper, we conduct extensive experiments
to study this phenomenon. We analyze the impact of prompts,
decoding strategies and training corpora on the output toxicity. Based on our findings, we propose a simple yet effective
method for language models to “detoxify” themselves without
an additional large corpus or external discriminator. Compared
to a supervised baseline, our proposed method shows better
toxicity reduction with good generation quality in the generated content under multiple settings. Warning: some examples
shown in the paper may contain uncensored offensive content.

Introduction
Generative Pretrained Language Models (e.g., GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019), BART (Keskar et al. 2019), GPT-3 (Brown
et al. 2020), to name a few) have become the standard for
high-fidelity text generation. However, concerns have been
raised over ethical issues including bias and toxic generation (Bender et al. 2021). Training data is crawled from various sources that may contain toxic language including racist,
sexist, or violent content. Such content inevitably makes its
way into pretrained models. At the very least, one would hope
that these models do not amplify or reinforce such toxicity
during generation. Unfortunately, previous studies (Leino
et al. 2019; Lloyd 2018) have revealed that machine learning
models tend to amplify bias in the data.
In this paper, we conduct extensive experiments and confirm the existence of such an amplification effect in language
models (LMs). We consider the setting of creative writing
based on a given prompt (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018).
We evaluate the toxicity of generated content via a toxicity
detection API. We investigate multiple decoding strategies,
including random sampling with temperature (Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski 1985), top-k sampling (Fan, Lewis, and
Dauphin 2018), nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al. 2020) and
beam search (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Vinyals and
Le 2015). We discover that under all of these common decoding strategies, LMs output significantly higher toxicity than
would be expected based on their training corpus. By plotting
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11530

the results and comparing them with previous work (Holtzman et al. 2020), we study the parameter settings that can
mitigate toxic generation and improve the generation quality.
However, our experiments show that only tuning decoding
parameters is not enough for reducing the toxicity to an acceptable level. To further address the challenge of detoxification, we design a simple discriminator- and supervision-free
method, as illustrated in Figure 1. First, we encourage general
pretrained LMs to output toxic content by feeding them toxic
prompts. Then, we “infect” an LM by fine-tuning it on the
generated toxic text. Inspired by re-ranking in Recommender
Systems (Ai et al. 2018; Pei et al. 2019), we first truncate
the token distribution to the top-k, to provide a guarantee
for generation quality, as the tokens already have a chance
to be generated by a common top-k generation. Then we
can minimize the chance of toxic tokens to be generated by
re-ranking based on their probabilities under the toxic model.
Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of controlling
the toxicity of generated text in both directions, i.e., detoxification and toxification.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We conduct extensive experiments to reveal the relationship between decoding strategies and generation toxicity.
By considering other perspectives on generation, we provide practical recommendations for choosing decoding
parameters for LM generation.
• We propose a simple yet effective method to further detoxify language models. The proposed method achieves stateof-the-art toxicity reduction with good generation quality.

Related Work
Recently, many studies have investigated toxicity in natural
language generation (NLG). Sheng et al. (2019) exploited
templated prompts to analyze the social biases in NLG and
found pretrained LMs are prone to biased and toxic language
generation. Wallace et al. (2019) found some nonsensical
prompts can trigger toxic generation in GPT-2. Some attempts have been made to prevent toxic generation from the
perspective of data collection. Raffel et al. (2020) constructed
the C4 corpus by removing any page that contained any word
on a “bad words” list. Gehman et al. (2020) created a test-bed
dataset, RealToxicPrompts, which consists of English text
that encourages LMs to generate toxic content.

