The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multiscale Generative Models: Improving Performance of a Generative Model
Using Feedback from Other Dependent Generative Models
Changyu Chen,1 Avinandan Bose,2 Shih-Fen Cheng,1 Arunesh Sinha1
1

Singapore Management University
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
cychen.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, avibose@iitk.ac.in, sfcheng@smu.edu.sg, aruneshs@smu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has built
multi-agent simulations with multiple interacting generative
models. Our work focuses on utilizing the interaction in a
multi-agent system for better (generative) modeling of an
individual agent for whom the data is limited or biased. Reflecting the multi-agent interaction in the real world, we set
up a hierarchy of generative model instances, called Multiscale Generative Models (MGM), where the higher level is
a conditional model that generates data conditioned on data
generated by multiple distinct generative model instances
at the lower level. We particularly note that our hierarchy
is among different GAN instances (with distinct generative
tasks), unlike hierarchy among multiple generators or discriminators for a single generative task that has been explored in the literature (Hoang et al. 2018).
Our first contribution is an architecture of how to utilize
the feedback from a higher-level conditional GAN to improve the performance of a lower-level GAN. The higherlevel GAN takes as input the output of (possibly multiple)
lower-level GANs, mirroring agent interaction in the real
world, e.g., prices offered in multiple regions (apart from
other random factors) determining the total demand of electricity. We repurpose the discriminator (or critic in WGANs)
of the higher-level model to provide an additional feedback
(as an additional loss term) to the lower-level generator.
As our second contribution, we provide a mathematical
interpretation of the interacting GAN set-up, thereby characterizing that the coupling between the higher-level and the
lower-level models determines whether the additional feedback improves the performance of the lower-level GANs or
not. We identify two scenarios where our set-up can be especially helpful. One is where there is a small amount of data
available per agent at the lower-level and another where data
is missing in some biased manner for the lower-level agents.
Both these scenarios are often encountered in the real-world
data, for example, in the use case of modeling electricity
market, the amount of demand data for a new consumer
might be small and the feedback from a higher-level model
about such consumer’s expected behaviors helps in building a more realistic behavioral model. Moreover, the case
of small amount of data can also be viewed as a few-shot
generation problem.
Finally, we provide three distinct sets of experiments revealing the fundamental and broadly applicable nature of

Realistic fine-grained multi-agent simulation of real-world
complex systems is crucial for many downstream tasks such
as reinforcement learning. Recent work has used generative
models (GANs in particular) for providing high-fidelity simulation of real-world systems. However, such generative models are often monolithic and miss out on modeling the interaction in multi-agent systems. In this work, we take a first
step towards building multiple interacting generative models
(GANs) that reflects the interaction in real world. We build
and analyze a hierarchical set-up where a higher-level GAN
is conditioned on the output of multiple lower-level GANs.
We present a technique of using feedback from the higherlevel GAN to improve performance of lower-level GANs. We
mathematically characterize the conditions under which our
technique is impactful, including understanding the transfer
learning nature of our set-up. We present three distinct experiments on synthetic data, time series data, and image domain,
revealing the wide applicability of our technique.

Introduction
Realistic simulations are an important component of training a reinforcement learning based decision-making system
and transferring the policy to the real world. While typical
video game-based simulations are, by design, realistic, the
same is very difficult to claim when the problem domain is
a real-world multi-agent system such as stock markets and
transportation. Indeed, recent works have used generative
models to design high-fidelity simulators using real world
data (Li et al. 2020a; Sun et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2019), supposedly providing a higher degree of fidelity
than traditional agent-based simulators. However, such generative models do not provide a fine-grained simulation of
each agent in a multi-agent system, instead modeling the
system as a single generative model. A fine-grained simulation can be informative in the design of interventions to
optimize different aspects of the problem, e.g., how traders
react to a new stock market policy. In this work, we take
a first step towards building multiple interacting generative
models (specifically, GANs), one for each type of agent, providing basic building blocks for a fine-grained high-fidelity
simulator for complex real-world systems.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6193

