The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Tracing Text Provenance via Context-Aware Lexical Substitution
Xi Yang, Jie Zhang* , Kejiang Chen, Weiming Zhang* ,
Zehua Ma, Feng Wang, Nenghai Yu
University of Science and Technology of China
{yx9726@mail., zjzac@mail., chenkj@mail., zhangwm@, mzh045@mail., nishi@mail., ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

works, commercial secrets, and government documents can
often cause significant losses to individuals and society. Besides, powered by the advances of large-scale pre-trained
language models like GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020), natural
language generation has made remarkable progress in generating fluent and realistic text. The adversaries can leverage
these models to automatically generate misleading content
like fake news (Shu et al. 2021) that look authentic and fool
humans; or profit by plagiarising machine-generated valuable content such as financial reports (Ren et al. 2021).
Watermarking is one of the techniques to solve the above
issues, which has demonstrated its remarkable capabilities
for protecting images (Zhu et al. 2018; Tancik, Mildenhall, and Ng 2020) and image processing networks (Zhang
et al. 2020). However, it is more challenging to embed watermarks with imperceptible perturbations on text due to
its inherent discrete nature. Traditional text watermarking
schemes embed watermarks by slightly altering the image
features like text format (Brassil, Low, and Maxemchuk
1999; Rizzo, Bertini, and Montesi 2016) and fonts (Xiao,
Zhang, and Zheng 2018; Qi et al. 2019), which are fragile to
cross-media transmissions like OCR. Considering this, natural language watermarking (NLW) schemes choose to manipulate the semantics of text, which are inherently robust in
the OCR-style transmissions. Most NLW works (Topkara,
Topkara, and Atallah 2006; Hao et al. 2018) design a set of
complex linguistic rules to substitute words with their synonyms chosen from handcrafted lexical resources like WordNet (Miller 1992), but they fail to consider the substitution’s
impact on the overall meaning of the sentences. Moreover,
it is time-consuming to build specific lexical dictionaries for
different types of text content and the static dictionaries are
not feasible for some linguistic phenomenons like polysemy.
Recently, an end-to-end transformer-based text watermarking network (Abdelnabi and Fritz 2021) was proposed
to replace the unobtrusive words (e.g., articles, prepositions,
conjunctions) in the input sentence with other inconspicuous words or symbols, which can guarantee the visual consistency between the watermarked text and the original text.
Nevertheless, such replacements still impair the logical and
semantic coherence of the sentences, because these selected
words often represent specific semantic or syntactic information by forming phrases with their adjacent words. Besides, their dataset-specific framework has poor transferabil-

Text content created by humans or language models is often stolen or misused by adversaries. Tracing text provenance can help claim the ownership of text content or identify the malicious users who distribute misleading content
like machine-generated fake news. There have been some attempts to achieve this, mainly based on watermarking techniques. Specifically, traditional text watermarking methods
embed watermarks by slightly altering text format like line
spacing and font, which, however, are fragile to cross-media
transmissions like OCR. Considering this, natural language
watermarking methods represent watermarks by replacing
words in original sentences with synonyms from handcrafted
lexical resources (e.g., WordNet), but they do not consider
the substitution’s impact on the overall sentence’s meaning.
Recently, a transformer-based network was proposed to embed watermarks by modifying the unobtrusive words (e.g.,
function words), which also impair the sentence’s logical and
semantic coherence. Besides, one well-trained network fails
on other different types of text content.
To address the limitations mentioned above, we propose a
natural language watermarking scheme based on contextaware lexical substitution (LS). Specifically, we employ
BERT to suggest LS candidates by inferring the semantic relatedness between the candidates and the original sentence.
Based on this, a selection strategy in terms of synchronicity
and substitutability is further designed to test whether a word
is exactly suitable for carrying the watermark signal. Extensive experiments demonstrate that, under both objective and
subjective metrics, our watermarking scheme can well preserve the semantic integrity of original sentences and has a
better transferability than existing methods. Besides, the proposed LS approach outperforms the state-of-the-art approach
on the Stanford Word Substitution Benchmark.

Introduction
Tracing the provenance of text content is an important but
still under-exploited issue in forensics. With readily available smart devices, adversaries can easily copy and distribute text content created by humans or language models, leading to undesirable consequences. For example, the
leakage of confidential documents like unpublished literary
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11613

