The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Attention-Based Transformation from Latent Features to Point Clouds
Kaiyi Zhang1 , Ximing Yang1 , Yuan Wu1 , Cheng Jin1,2
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhangky20, xmyang19, wuyuan, jc}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
A better design ?

Shared MLP

Fully Connected Layers

Shared MLP

Latent Features

In point cloud generation and completion, previous methods
for transforming latent features to point clouds are generally
based on fully connected layers (FC-based) or folding operations (Folding-based). However, point clouds generated by
FC-based methods are usually troubled by outliers and rough
surfaces. For folding-based methods, their data flow is large,
convergence speed is slow, and they are also hard to handle the generation of non-smooth surfaces. In this work, we
propose AXform, an attention-based method to transform latent features to point clouds. AXform first generates points
in an interim space, using a fully connected layer. These interim points are then aggregated to generate the target point
cloud. AXform takes both parameter sharing and data flow
into account, which makes it has fewer outliers, fewer network parameters, and a faster convergence speed. The points
generated by AXform do not have the strong 2-manifold constraint, which improves the generation of non-smooth surfaces. When AXform is expanded to multiple branches for
local generations, the centripetal constraint makes it has properties of self-clustering and space consistency, which further
enables unsupervised semantic segmentation. We also adopt
this scheme and design AXformNet for point cloud completion. Considerable experiments on different datasets show
that our methods achieve state-of-the-art results.

Point Clouds

Folding Operations

(a) Transformations from Latent Features to Point Clouds

(b) Self-clustering

(c) Space Consistency

Figure 1: (a) Two commonly used methods for the transformation. (b, c) Two properties of AXform with K branches.

Introduction
Recently, there have been considerable deep-learning-based
point cloud generation and completion methods based on
the architecture of autoencoder. Methods such as PointNet
(Qi et al. 2017a), PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), DGCNN
(Wang et al. 2019), and Point Transformer (Zhao et al. 2020)
have studied encoder in detail to obtain better point cloud
representations. There are also many methods exploring the
design of the decoder. For example, (Fan, Su, and Guibas
2017; Achlioptas et al. 2017; Yuan et al. 2018; Yang et al.
2021) simply use fully connected layers to generate coarse
outputs. (Yang et al. 2018; Groueix et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2019a; Wen et al. 2020) deform 2d squares into 3d surfaces.
As shown in Figure 1(a), fully connected layers and folding
operations are two commonly used methods for the transformation from latent features to point clouds. However, they
do not fully explore the transformation from aspects of point

constraints, network parameters, data flow, and convergence
speed.
As shown in the upper airplane in Figure 1(b), point
clouds generated by the FC-based method usually have outliers and rough surfaces. It is because the generated points do
not share parameters, i.e., the available parameters of each
point are few. When it is expanded to multiple branches,
the generated point clouds do not have the property of selfclustering. The property of self-clustering means points generated by each branch are gathered together and it reflects
the locality of an object. The lower airplane in Figure 1(b)
is an example of a self-clustered point cloud. The reason for
this problem is that each generated point is free and not subject to a centripetal constraint.
Different from the FC-based method, the folding-based
method has much fewer parameters and uses grid priors to
constrain the generated points on a smooth 2-manifold. This

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3291

