The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Robust Off-Policy Learning for Runtime Uncertainty
Da Xu,1 Yuting Ye, 2 Chuanwei Ruan, 3 Bo Yang 4
1
Walmart Labs
University of California, Berkeley
3
Instacart
4
LinkedIn
daxu5180@gmail.com, yeyt@berkeley.edu, ruanchuanwei@gmail.com, by9ru@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Off-policy learning plays a pivotal role in optimizing and
evaluating policies prior to the online deployment. However,
during the real-time serving, we observe varieties of interventions and constraints that cause inconsistency between the
online and offline settings, which we summarize and term
as runtime uncertainty. Such uncertainty cannot be learned
from the logged data due to its abnormality and rareness nature. To assert a certain level of robustness, we perturb the
off-policy estimators along an adversarial direction in view of
the runtime uncertainty. It allows the resulting estimators to be
robust not only to observed but also unexpected runtime uncertainties. Leveraging this idea, we bring runtime-uncertainty
robustness to three major off-policy learning methods: the
inverse propensity score method, reward-model method, and
doubly robust method. We theoretically justify the robustness
of our methods to runtime uncertainty, and demonstrate their
effectiveness using both the simulation and the real-world
online experiments.

Introduction
The offline optimization and evaluation have been studied
intensively in the past few years, as deploying a sub-optimal
policy for real-time experiments can be costly and even risky
(Dudík, Langford, and Li 2011; Bottou et al. 2013; Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a; Athey and Wager 2017). Nevertheless, it is arguably true that off-policy learning can barely
represent real-world scenarios except for a few ideal settings.
In particular, real-time policy deployments are inevitably subject to various interventions and constraints that can not be
unaccounted for in standard off-policy learning. We categorize these unexpected events as runtime uncertainty since
they are brought about by some anomalous events of the
online execution mechanism. Examples include:
1. in e-commerce recommendation, the product displacement is sometimes subject to real-time business factors
such as trending popularity;
2. in personalized online advertisement, during peak hours,
the policy execution may be replaced by the backup plan
if the response-time agreement can not be satisfied;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10101

3. in autonomous driving, the self-driving vehicle can be hit
by accidents, harsh weather, or intrusions that limit the
ability to carry out the designed policy.
We conclude that the impacts of runtime uncertainty are often
reflected in the changes to the policy’s execution. In the above
examples, one may expect the following consequences: 1).
the original exposure probabilities are adjusted by the instant
trends of the items; 2). the exceeding web traffic will be
directed to the rollback setting, e.g., non-personalized policy,
rather than calling the online inference service of the designed
policy; 3). the emergency mechanism, e.g., emergent brake,
is triggered and takes over the running policy.
In stark contrast to the issue of a non-stationary environment where the underlying reward mechanism changes over
time (Bubeck and Slivkins 2012), runtime uncertainty may
not alter the reward mechanism. Additionally, runtime uncertainty does not cause distribution change or missing observation of the contextual features, so our problem clearly
distinguishes from the setting of distribution-robust and
confounding-robust policy optimization (see Section for
detail). The major challenge here is that the designed policy
cannot be executed as-is due to unexpected events on the executors, which leads to discrepancies between the online and
offline settings. It is implausible to remove or characterize
these exceptional uncertainties by learning from the logged
data, since they are abnormal and intractable by nature. As a
consequence, the runtime uncertainty raises a novel problem
for off-policy learning, which to the best of our knowledge,
has not been studied.
Our strategy is to incorporate a certain level of robustness
against potential runtime uncertainty via an offline max-min
learning. We search for an adversarial scenario where runtime
uncertainties induce the worst impact on a value function of
interest. Since runtime uncertainties act on policy’s execution,
we adversarially perturb the logging policy in search for the
worst case as if additional runtime uncertainties have played
a role. Then we identify the candidate policy with the best
offline performance under this worst case. Specifically, for
any candidate policy π, let V̂ (π, πu ) be the estimated reward,
e.g., via inverse-propensity score weighting, assuming that
the logged feedback was generated under πu (u represents
some perturbation mechanism). The key is to introduce an
uncertainty set Uα (π0 ) that surrounds the logging policy π0 ,
constructed by such as the `2 , `∞ or Wasserstein balls with

