The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bi-CMR: Bidirectional Reinforcement Guided Hashing for Effective Cross-Modal
Retrieval
Tieying Li1 , Xiaochun Yang1 * , Bin Wang1 , Chong Xi1 , Hanzhong Zheng1 , Xiangmin Zhou2
1

2
Northeastern University, China
RMIT University, Australia
{tieying, hanzhong}@stumail.neu.edu.cn, {yangxc, binwang}@mail.neu.edu.cn, 15734022139@163.com,
Xiangmin.zhou@rmit.edu.au

Abstract

Existing cross-modal hashing techniques can be mainly
classified into two lines: unsupervised learning (Song et al.
2013; Zhou, Ding, and Guo 2014; Wang et al. 2015; Ding
et al. 2016; Hu et al. 2019) and supervised learning (Yang
et al. 2017; Jiang and Li 2017; Liong et al. 2017; Li et al.
2018; Zhu et al. 2021). Supervised learning methods exploit
labels or the semantic affinities of training data to achieve a
performance superior to the unsupervised ones. Early stage
supervised methods use label annotations to guide crossmodal hash learning (Liong et al. 2017; Jiang and Li 2017).
Multi-label network-based method (Li et al. 2018) and its
variant (Xu et al. 2020) improve the supervised learning by
integrating a self-supervised semantic network to capture the
semantic information from multi-label and supervise modality learning. All these methods assume that label annotations
can reliably reflect the relevance between their corresponding instances. However, this assumption conflicts with human perception in real applications. Consider an example in
benchmark dataset MIRFlickr25K (Huiskes and Lew 2008)
for cross-modal retrieval as shown in Figure 1. Given two
images with same labels and a query text shown in the figure,
existing methods believe these images are equally relevant to
the query. However, it is clear that Figure 1(a) is relevant to
the query text, while Figure 1(b) is not, since both query text
and image in Figure 1(a) are mainly about “flower”, while
the image in Figure 1(b) is mainly about “structure”. There
is a semantic gap between the low-level annotations and the
high-level semantic understanding of images.

Cross-modal hashing has attracted considerable attention for
large-scale multimodal data. Recent supervised cross-modal
hashing methods using multi-label networks utilize the semantics of multi-labels to enhance retrieval accuracy, where
label hash codes are learned independently. However, all
these methods assume that label annotations reliably reflect
the relevance between their corresponding instances, which is
not true in real applications. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework called Bidirectional Reinforcement Guided Hashing for Effective Cross-Modal Retrieval (Bi-CMR), which exploits a bidirectional learning to relieve the negative impact of
this assumption. Specifically, in the forward learning procedure, we highlight the representative labels and learn the reinforced multi-label hash codes by intra-modal semantic information, and further adjust similarity matrix. In the backward
learning procedure, the reinforced multi-label hash codes and
adjusted similarity matrix are used to guide the matching of
instances. We construct two datasets with explicit relevance
labels that reflect the semantic relevance of instance pairs
based on two benchmark datasets. The Bi-CMR is evaluated
by conducting extensive experiments over these two datasets.
Experimental results prove the superiority of Bi-CMR over
four state-of-the-art methods in terms of effectiveness.

Introduction
With the blooming of multimodal data (e.g., images and
texts) in the areas of search engines and social networks,
information retrieval across different types of data has attracted wide attention. Accordingly, it gives rise to the
emerging real-world application of cross-modal retrieval,
which aims to search the semantically relevant instances in
all the modalities (e.g., images and texts) given a query of
one modality. In order to satisfy the requirements of low
storage, high query speed in real-world applications, hashing
has gained increasing attention in the field of cross-modal retrieval due to its capability of transforming variant modal instances to uniform binary codes. However, as instances from
different modalities are heterogeneous in terms of feature
representation and character distribution, exploiting multilabels of instances from variant modalities to retrieve multimodal data effectively is a big challenge.

To address the problem of effective cross-modal retrieval,
we need to learn a new scheme which well narrows the semantic gap between multi-label annotations and instance relevance in the learning phase. A popular scheme of evaluating instance relevance in existing supervised methods is
pairwise multi-label similarity matrix (PMLSM) denoted as
S:{Sij }. Here, in the learning phase, Sij indicates if the instances xi and xj are relevant or not (Liong et al. 2017; Jiang
and Li 2017; Li et al. 2018). Two instances xi and xj are relevant if they share any label annotations, their relevance is
set as Sij = 1. Otherwise, they are irrelevant with Sij = 0.
However, all these PMLSM-based methods highly rely on
an accurate similarity matrix S to guide model learning. The
similarity measure based on label annotation intersection is
also used as ground truth in testing phase to measure the relevance of the retrieval results, resulting in wrong evaluations

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10275

