The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PureGaze: Purifying Gaze Feature for Generalizable Gaze Estimation
Yihua Cheng1 , Yiwei Bao1 , Feng Lu1, 2∗
1

State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{yihua c, baoyiwei, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

濚

Abstract
Extractor

Gaze estimation methods learn eye gaze from facial features.
However, among rich information in the facial image, real
gaze-relevant features only correspond to subtle changes in
eye region, while other gaze-irrelevant features like illumination, personal appearance and even facial expression may affect the learning in an unexpected way. This is a major reason
why existing methods show signiﬁcant performance degradation in cross-domain/dataset evaluation. In this paper, we
tackle the cross-domain problem in gaze estimation. Different
from common domain adaption methods, we propose a domain generalization method to improve the cross-domain performance without touching target samples. The domain generalization is realized by gaze feature puriﬁcation. We eliminate gaze-irrelevant factors such as illumination and identity to improve the cross-domain performance. We design a
plug-and-play self-adversarial framework for the gaze feature
puriﬁcation. The framework enhances not only our baseline
but also existing gaze estimation methods directly and signiﬁcantly. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to
propose domain generalization methods in gaze estimation.
Our method achieves not only state-of-the-art performance
among typical gaze estimation methods but also competitive
results among domain adaption methods. The code is released
in https://github.com/yihuacheng/PureGaze.

Train
9 Images
9 Gaze labels

Source
domain

Self-adversarial task
Gaze feature purification Test

Rec. from
purified
feature

Gaze
Identity
Illumination
Gaze Estimation

Unknown target
domain 1…N

Figure 1: We propose a domain-generalization framework
for gaze estimation. Our method is only trained in the source
domain and brings improvement in all unknown target domains. The key idea of our method is to purify the gaze feature with self-adversarial framework. The visualization result shows gaze-irrelevant factors such as illumination and
identity are eliminated from the extracted feature.

cult and time-consuming. This challenge can be ignored in
a ﬁxed environment, but becomes a bottleneck when gaze
estimation is required in a new environment. The changed
environment brings many unexpected factors such as different illumination, thus degrades the performance of pretrained model. Recent methods usually handle the crossenvironment problem1 as a domain adaption problem. Researches aim to adapt the model trained in source domains
to target domains (Zhang et al. 2018; Kellnhofer et al. 2019).
However, these methods usually require target samples and
time-consuming setup. These requirements greatly harm the
ﬂexibility of methods.
In this paper, we innovate a new direction to solve the
problem. We propose a domain-generalization method for
improving the cross-domain performance. Our method does
not require any images or labels in target domains, but aims
to learn a generalized model in the source domain for any
“unseen” target domains. We notice the intrinsic gaze pattern is similar in all domains, but there are domain differences in gaze-irrelevant factors such as illumination and
identity. These factors are usually domain-speciﬁc, and directly blend in captured images. The in-depth fusion makes
these factors difﬁcult to be eliminated during feature extrac-

Introduction
Human gaze implicates important cues for understanding
human cognition (Rahal and Fiedler 2019) and behavior (Dias et al. 2020). It enables researchers to gain insights into many areas such as saliency detection (Wang
et al. 2019b; Wang and Shen 2018), virtual reality (Xu et al.
2018) and ﬁrst-person video analysis (Yu et al. 2020). Recently, appearance-based gaze estimation with deep learning becomes a hot topic. They leverage convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to estimate gaze from human appearance (Park, Spurr, and Hilliges 2018; Xiong, Kim, and Singh
2019), and achieve accurate performance.
CNN-based gaze estimation requires a large number of
samples for training. But collecting gaze sample is difﬁ∗

Corresponding author.
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC) under grant 61972012.
c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

436

We refer it as cross-domain/dataset problem in the rest.

