The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Complementary Attention Gated Network for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Jinghai Duan1 , Le Wang2 * , Chengjiang Long3
Sanping Zhou2 , Fang Zheng1 , Liushuai Shi1 , Gang Hua4
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
JD Finance America Corporation
4
Wormpex AI Research
{caesardjh98,zhengfang,shiliushuai}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang,spzhou}@xjtu.edu.cn, {cjfykx, ganghua}@gmail.com
2

1.0

Abstract
(S.a)

Pedestrian trajectory prediction is crucial in many practical
applications due to the diversity of pedestrian movements,
such as social interactions and individual motion behaviors.
With similar observable trajectories and social environments,
different pedestrians may make completely different future
decisions. However, most existing methods only focus on the
frequent modal of the trajectory and thus are difficult to generalize to the peculiar scenario, which leads to the decline
of the multimodal fitting ability when facing similar scenarios. In this paper, we propose a complementary attention
gated network (CAGN) for pedestrian trajectory prediction,
in which a dual-path architecture including normal and inverse attention is proposed to capture both frequent and peculiar modals in spatial and temporal patterns, respectively.
Specifically, a complementary block is proposed to guide normal and inverse attention, which are then be summed with
learnable weights to get attention features by a gated network. Finally, multiple trajectory distributions are estimated
based on the fused spatio-temporal attention features due to
the multimodality of future trajectory. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets, i.e., the ETH, and the UCY, demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods
by 13.8% in Average Displacement Error (ADE) and 10.4%
in Final Displacement Error (FDE). Code will be available at
https://github.com/jinghaiD/CAGN

(T.a)

Input in Scenario A

Weight

Weight

Weight

Output in Scenario A

0.5

(T.b)

(S.b)
Input in Scenario B
Observed
Trajectory

Weight

Temporal
Motion

Spatial
Interaction
Prediction

Ground
Truth

Output in Scenario B 0.0
Temporal
Spatial
Motion
Interaction

Figure 1: Scenarios A and B represent frequent and peculiar
modals with similar inputs and different outputs. (Spatial Interaction) Diverse spatial interaction, including frequent and
peculiar spatial interaction, are generated by fusing complementary attention via the gated network. (Temporal Motion)
Diverse temporal motions, including frequent and peculiar
temporal motions, are generated by fusing complementary
attention via the gated network.

Li, and Wang 2016), people tend to turn at a random angle
to avoid collisions (Sun, Jiang, and Lu 2020), and pedestrians who walk in groups perform the different from those
who walk alone (Mohamed et al. 2020). In addition, different pedestrians show different behaviors when dealing with
similar situations in specific scenarios as shown in Figure 1.
Recently, the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017)
achieves excellent progress in capturing spatial interactions
and temporal motion of trajectory sequence. Due to the
data-driven learning strategy, prior attention-based methods (Kosaraju et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2021;
Zheng et al. 2021) easily collapse into the frequent data
modal representing major common scenarios. Since the behaviors of pedestrians are naturally random and diverse, frequent information will mislead the attention model to focus
only on common scenarios and ignore other possibilities of
pedestrian movements.
As an example of frequent and peculiar scenarios illustrated in Figure 1, Scenarios A and B represent frequent and
peculiar modals with similar inputs and different outputs.
Scenario A in spatial interaction as shown in (S.a) represents
the frequent modal that the green pedestrian avoids the collision with the purple group pedestrians. In contrast, Scenario
B as shown in (S.b) represents the peculiar modal that the

Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction aims to predict the future
trajectory based on the observed trajectory. It plays an important role in many applications, such as automatic driving (Bai et al. 2015; Luo et al. 2018), visual recognition (Donahue et al. 2015; Hua et al. 2018; Hu, Long, and
Xiao 2021; Long and Hua 2017; Islam, Long, and Radke
2021), anomaly detection (Liu et al. 2021), human motion
prediction (Dang et al. 2021), and traffic early warning system (Luber et al. 2010; Yasuno, Yasuda, and Aoki 2004;
Alahi, Ramanathan, and Fei-Fei 2014).
Although significant progress has been made recently,
pedestrian trajectory prediction is still challenging due to
the complex traffic scenarios. For example, pedestrians behind are prone to follow the trajectories of those in front (Yi,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

542

