The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Exploiting Fine-Grained Face Forgery Clues via Progressive Enhancement
Learning
Qiqi Gu1,2 * , Shen Chen2 * , Taiping Yao2 * , Yang Chen2 , Shouhong Ding2† , Ran Yi1,3†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent,
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU
miemie@sjtu.edu.cn, {kobeschen, taipingyao, wizyangchen, ericshding}@tencent.com, ranyi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2021) have made great contributions
to this task. Prior works use hand-crafted features (e.g.,
eye blinking (Li, Chang, and Lyu 2018), head inconsistency (Yang, Li, and Lyu 2019)) or semantic features extracted by universal CNN (Afchar et al. 2018; Chollet 2017)
to conduct binary classification. Recently, two typical manners for mining subtle task-specific artifacts have been explored. On the one hand, some works (Dang et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2020a; Chen et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020) utilize auxiliary supervision such as blending
boundary (Li et al. 2020a) or forged mask (Dang et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2021). However, the mask ground-truth they rely
on is difficult to access in most cases. On the other hand,
some attempt to employ the frequency-aware features to assist classification, using DCT (Qian et al. 2020), local frequency (Chen et al. 2021) or SRM (Luo et al. 2021). Although these works have made considerable performance,
the frequency features extracted by their strategies are relatively coarse, which burdens the network to assemble discriminative feature patterns. Moreover, all these frequencyaware approaches either directly concatenate RGB and frequency features at the end of the network or fuse them only
at a shallow layer. This makes it difficult for them to fully
utilize the decomposed frequency information and limits the
possibility of discovering fine-grained face forgery cues.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel Progressive Enhancement Learning (PEL) framework aiming
at exploiting face forgery clues. Specifically, we employ
the patch-wise Discrete Fourier Transform (Xu et al. 2020)
with the sliding window to decompose the RGB input into
fine-grained frequency components. Frequency domain information is assisted and complementary to the RGB features. And different from conventional frequency components, fine-grained frequency components can produce more
combinations of features to discover potential artifacts.
To fully exploit RGB image and fine-grained frequency
components, we design a two-stream network structure with
two novel enhancement modules that progressively enhance
the forgery clues. One is the self-enhancement module. It
captures the traces in different input spaces separately based
on spatial noise enhancement and channel attention. The
other is the mutual-enhancement module, which achieves
concurrent enhancement of both the RGB and frequency

With the rapid development of facial forgery techniques,
forgery detection has attracted more and more attention
due to security concerns. Existing approaches attempt to
use frequency information to mine subtle artifacts under
high-quality forged faces. However, the exploitation of frequency information is coarse-grained, and more importantly,
their vanilla learning process struggles to extract fine-grained
forgery traces. To address this issue, we propose a progressive enhancement learning framework to exploit both the
RGB and fine-grained frequency clues. Specifically, we perform a fine-grained decomposition of RGB images to completely decouple the real and fake traces in the frequency
space. Subsequently, we propose a progressive enhancement
learning framework based on a two-branch network, combined with self-enhancement and mutual-enhancement modules. The self-enhancement module captures the traces in different input spaces based on spatial noise enhancement and
channel attention. The Mutual-enhancement module concurrently enhances RGB and frequency features by communicating in the shared spatial dimension. The progressive enhancement process facilitates the learning of discriminative
features with fine-grained face forgery clues. Extensive experiments on several datasets show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art face forgery detection methods.

Introduction
Over the past few years, face forgery technology has made
significant progress. With public accessible tools such as
deepfakes (Tora 2018) or face2face (Thies et al. 2016), people can easily manipulate the expression, attribution or identity of faces in images. Various powerful algorithms are utilized to generate realistic forged faces, which are hardly discerned by human eyes. These realistic forged faces have
been used in pornography or political rumors, which are
harmful to the community and evoke social panic. Under
this background, the face forgery detection task was born.
Many significant works (Chollet 2017; Li et al. 2020a;
Dang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Qian et al. 2020; Zhao
* These authors contributed equally. This work was done when

Qiqi Gu was a research intern at Tencent YouTu Lab.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

735

