The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

RetGen: A Joint Framework for Retrieval and Grounded Text Generation Modeling
Yizhe Zhang * , Siqi Sun, Xiang Gao, Yuwei Fang,
Chris Brockett, Michel Galley, Jianfeng Gao, Bill Dolan
Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA
yizhe.zhang@hotmail.com, {siqi.sun,xiag,yuwfan,mgalley,chrisbkt,jfgao,billdol}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent advances in large-scale pre-training such as GPT-3
allow seemingly high quality text to be generated from a
given prompt. However, such generation systems often suffer
from problems of hallucinated facts, and are not inherently
designed to incorporate useful external information. Grounded
generation models appear to offer remedies, but their training typically relies on rarely-available parallel data where
information-relevant documents are provided for context. We
propose a framework that alleviates this data constraint by
jointly training a grounded generator and document retriever
on the language model signal. The model learns to reward retrieval of the documents with the highest utility in generation,
and attentively combines them using a Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) ensemble to generate follow-on text. We demonstrate
that both generator and retriever can take advantage of this
joint training and work synergistically to produce more informative and relevant text in both prose and dialogue generation.

Introduction
Recent large-scale pre-trained language models (LMs) such
as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019),
GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020), and T5 (Raffel et al. 2019) have
brought numerous breakthroughs in natural language generation (NLG) across a variety of tasks. These models, however, are not designed to leverage external information to
enhance or to verify the predicted text. Gao et al. (2020),
for example, demonstrate that they fail to reliably generate responses grounded in real-world knowledge, and may
fall short when generating goal-directed responses that are
optimized for information-seeking task completion. These
models pose several challenges in information-demanding
scenarios: First, they are usually trained offline, rendering
the model agnostic to the latest information (e.g., asking a
chat-bot trained from 2011-2018 about COVID-19). Second,
they are mostly trained on public data, rendering them less
suitable in scenarios where customized or personalized information must be processed (e.g., writing suggestions based
on private user-data). Third, even in scenarios that call only
for public information, generation from these LMs may be
unfaithful to the facts (e.g., hallucinations about birth dates),
* Work done at Microsoft Research
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11739

especially when the people or entities are less well known
and the scenario demands a high degree of fidelity. As a practical matter, moreover, there remains a fundamental capacity
issue in that large LMs cannot effectively represent all the
information about every person or entity in the world.
A solution that would at first glance seem obvious is
to ground the language model in real-world knowledge,
which can be present in either structured data (e.g., a
knowledge-graph) or unstructured data (e.g., documents such
as Wikipedia, user documents or background stories) (Wu
et al. 2021; Ghazvininejad et al. 2018; Dinan et al. 2019; Qin
et al. 2019). The advantage of using unstructured grounding
data over structured data is that the former provides richer
information and it is typically more flexible when it comes
to maintaining and updating the information base. However,
training a grounded text generation model that takes additional unstructured documents as input typically demands
that the training data contains pairs of context and corresponding oracle documents. These pairs are seldom available. Recent work, such as REALM (Guu et al. 2020) and
RAG (Lewis et al. 2020b), attempts to leverage information
retrieval machinery in real time to mitigate this data paucity
in open-domain question answering systems. The approach
taken in this paper is in similar vein, but is not confined
to the specialized case of question answering, and seeks to
present a mechanism to that addresses the broader problem
of informational accuracy in text generation.
In this paper, we investigate the task of generating text by
potentially taking advantage from massive reference documents. We called this task as Information-aware Text Generation (ITG). Note that ITG is related but different from
open-domain Question Answering (ODQA). In ODQA, the
input is typically an information query/question, and the generation is expected to be the answer for that query. In ITG,
the input is usually not an information query/question. The
task is to potentially leverage any possible external reference documents to predict the next utterance or sentence.
Unlike the ODQA, ITG might not always directly seek an
answer from retrieved documents, instead it usually requires
the retrieved information to be digested as context to subtly
influence the generation. Therefore, ITG can be applied to
scenarios like dialogue generation and text auto-completion
which generalize the open-domain QA scenario.
Below, we present a large-scale general purpose pre-

