The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Incorporating Constituent Syntax for Coreference Resolution
Fan Jiang and Trevor Cohn
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
fan.jiang1@student.unimelb.edu.au, t.cohn@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract

DA: It’s because of what both of you are doing to have
things change. I think that’s what’s. . . Go ahead Linda.
LW: Thanks goes to you and to the media to help us.
DA: Absolutely.
LW: Obviously we couldn’t seem loud enough to bring the
attention, so our hat is off to all of you as well.

Syntax has been shown to benefit Coreference Resolution from
incorporating long-range dependencies and structured information captured by syntax trees, either in traditional statistical
machine learning based systems or recently proposed neural
models. However, most leading systems use only dependency
trees. We argue that constituent trees also encode important
information, such as explicit span-boundary signals captured
by nested multi-word phrases, extra linguistic labels and hierarchical structures useful for detecting anaphora. In this work,
we propose a simple yet effective graph-based method to incorporate constituent syntactic structures. Moreover, we also
explore to utilise higher-order neighbourhood information to
encode rich structures in constituent trees. A novel message
propagation mechanism is therefore proposed to enable information flow among elements in syntax trees. Experiments on
the English and Chinese portions of OntoNotes 5.0 benchmark
show that our proposed model either beats a strong baseline or
achieves new state-of-the-art performance. Code is available
at https://github.com/Fantabulous-J/Coref-Constituent-Graph.

Figure 1: An example of coreference resolution (Pradhan
et al. 2012). Coreferent mentions are with the same colour.

Introduction
As one of the most fundamental and important tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP), Coreference Resolution
aims to group all mentions that refer to the same real-world
entity. This is framed as a span-level classification problem
over sequences of words, as illustrated in Figure 1. Recently,
neural models have achieved strong performance in coreference resolution (Lee, He, and Zettlemoyer 2018; Joshi et al.
2019, 2020; Wu et al. 2020) with the help of pretrained language models (Peters et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019).
Syntax was widely used in early learning-based methods,
through the use of features derived from syntax trees, which
were shown to significantly improve statistical coreference
systems (Ge, Hale, and Charniak 1998; Bergsma and Lin
2006; Kong et al. 2010; Kong and Zhou 2011). However,
it is not clear whether these syntax-related features can improve modern neural coreference models. Meanwhile, many
research in other tasks have got positive effects by introducing syntactic information into neural models. They normally apply graph neural networks (Schlichtkrull et al. 2017;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10831

Veličković et al. 2018) to automatically incorporate dependency trees to better capture the non-local relationships between words (Marcheggiani and Titov 2017; Bastings et al.
2017; Schlichtkrull et al. 2017). A very recent work (Jiang
and Cohn 2021) shows that incorporating dependency syntax together with semantic role features using heterogeneous
graph networks can significantly improve a strong neural
coreference model. However, few attempts have been made
for the application of constituent syntax, especially on neural
coreference models.
In this work, we aim to investigate the use of constituent
syntax in neural coreference models, and we argue that compared to dependency syntax, incorporating constituent syntax
is more natural for coreference resolution. In constituent
trees, the information encoding boundaries of non-terminal
phrases is explicitly presented. By contrast, such information
is either implicitly encoded or not revealed in dependency
trees. Besides, gold mentions usually map to a limited range
of constituent types (See Section 4.5). We thus believe constituent tree structures capture signals for mention detection
more effectively and explicitly, which we suspect is more
helpful to the overall coreference resolution task. Besides,
extra linguistic labels are also shown to reveal linguistic constraints for coreference resolution (Ng 2010) (e.g., indefinite
mentions are less likely to refer to any preceding mentions).
In order to effectively incorporate constituent syntax structures, we propose a graph-based neural coreference model.
Previous works (Trieu et al. 2019; Kong and Jian 2019) introduced constituent trees as hard constraints to filter invalid
mentions, which helps obtain better mention detectors and
overall coreference resolvers. However, these methods do not
preserve the full structure of original trees, as a result of their

