The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Representation Learning Framework for Remote Physiological
Measurement Using Spatiotemporal Augmentation Loss
Hao Wang, 1 Euijoon Ahn, 1,2,3 * Jinman Kim 1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science, the University of Sydney, Australia
Telehealth and Technology Centre, Nepean and Blue Mountains Local Health District, Australia
3
College of Science & Engineering, James Cook University, Australia
hwan7885@uni.sydney.edu.au, euijoon.ahn@jcu.edu.au, jinman.kim@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

skin. This constrains the application of monitoring and estimation process in an unobtrusive and concomitant way with
ubiquitous devices (e.g., smartphone cameras, webcams)
(McDuff et al. 2015). In recent years, non-contact videobased remote physiological measurement (RPM) has been of
great interest. Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG), using
facial videos, has been introduced to overcome the limitation
of conventional contact-based measurement approaches. In
rPPG, signals are measured based on colour fluctuations on
human skin, which are caused by the variations of blood volume during cardiac cycle (De Haan and Jeanne 2013).

Recent advances in supervised deep learning methods are
enabling remote measurements of photoplethysmographybased physiological signals using facial videos. The performance of these supervised methods, however, are dependent on the availability of large labelled data. Contrastive
learning as a self-supervised method has recently achieved
state-of-the-art performances in learning representative data
features by maximising mutual information between different augmented views. However, existing data augmentation
techniques for contrastive learning are not designed to learn
physiological signals from videos and often fail when there
are complicated noise and subtle and periodic colour/shape
variations between video frames. To address these problems,
we present a novel self-supervised spatiotemporal learning
framework for remote physiological signal representation
learning, where there is a lack of labelled training data.
Firstly, we propose a landmark-based spatial augmentation
that splits the face into several informative parts based on
the Shafer’s dichromatic reflection model to characterise subtle skin colour fluctuations. We also formulate a sparsitybased temporal augmentation exploiting Nyquist–Shannon
sampling theorem to effectively capture periodic temporal
changes by modelling physiological signal features. Furthermore, we introduce a constrained spatiotemporal loss
which generates pseudo-labels for augmented video clips.
It is used to regulate the training process and handle complicated noise. We evaluated our framework on 3 public
datasets and demonstrated superior performances than other
self-supervised methods and achieved competitive accuracy
compared to the state-of-the-art supervised methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/Dylan-H-Wang/SLF-RPM.

Several recent studies using supervised deep learning
methods (Yu et al. 2019; Qiu et al. 2019; Niu et al. 2020b;
Lee, Chen, and Lee 2020; Li et al. 2018) have shown promising results to remotely estimate physiological signals. They,
however, remain problematic because of their dependency
on the availability of large-scale labelled training data. The
annotation of large-scale data is costly, slow and requires
medical equipment. Researchers have employed various approaches to help solve these challenges including transferring knowledge across different domains and fine-tuning
those knowledge with a relatively smaller amount of labelled
image data. For example, Niu et al. (2020a) used a model
that was pre-trained using large labelled natural images (i.e.,
ImageNet) and fine-tuned this knowledge using rPPG facial
videos. Another approach is to create synthetic physiological signals to increase the number of training videos (Niu
et al. 2018a; Condrea, Ivan, and Leordeanu 2020). However,
such approach is limited by the domain shift between original and synthetic data. An alternative approach is to use
self-supervised learning (SSL) to learn and extract image
features from unlabelled data. Many recent SSL methods
commonly applied the concept of contrastive learning and
have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances in unsupervised image/video representation learning (Ahn et al.
2020; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Han, Xie, and Zisserman 2019; Qian et al. 2020; Ahn, Feng, and Kim 2021).
In these approaches, videos are transformed using standard
data augmentation techniques such as frame cropping, resizing, colour jittering and frame re-ordering to produce
different views. Invariant video features are then learnt by
maximising mutual information between different views in
a contrastive manner. These standard augmentation techniques, however, are mainly limited to learn features for ac-

Introduction
Physiological signals are critical indicators for human cardiovascular activities such as heart rate (HR), respiration frequency (RF), heart rate variability (HRV) and blood pressure
(BP) (Xu, Yu, and Wang 2021). These signals are commonly
used to monitor the wellness of patients (Avram et al. 2019).
Traditionally, the Electrocardiography (ECG) and Photoplethysmography (PPG) are used to measure physiological
signals, and both of them rely on the availability of cuffbased equipment which requires direct contact to human
* This work was done at the University of Sydney
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2431

