The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PatchUp: A Feature-Space Block-Level Regularization Technique for
Convolutional Neural Networks
Mojtaba Faramarzi1, 2 , Mohammad Amini1, 3 , Akilesh Badrinaaraayanan1, 2 , Vikas Verma1, 2, 4 ,
Sarath Chandar 1, 5
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute
2
University of Montreal
3
McGill University
4
Aalto Univeristy, Finland
5
École Polytechnique de Montréal
Abstract

Such noisy computation based regularization techniques can be categorized into data-dependent and dataindependent techniques (Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2018). Earlier work in this area has been more focused on the
data-independent techniques such as Dropout (Srivastava
et al. 2014), Variational Dropout (Gal and Ghahramani
2016) and ZoneOut (Krueger et al. 2016), Information
Dropout (Achille and Soatto 2018), SpatialDropout (Tompson et al. 2014a), and DropBlock (Ghiasi, Lin, and Le 2018).
Dropout performs well on fully connected layers (Srivastava et al. 2014). However, it is less effective on convolutional layers (Tompson et al. 2014b). One of the reasons
for the lack of success of dropout on CNN layers is perhaps that the activation units in the convolutional layers
are correlated, thus despite dropping some of the activation
units, information can still flow through these layers. SpatialDropout (Tompson et al. 2014b) addresses this issue by
dropping the entire feature map from a convolutional layer.
DropBlock (Ghiasi, Lin, and Le 2018) further improves SpatialDropout by dropping random continuous feature blocks
from feature maps instead of dropping the entire feature map
in the convolutional layers.
Data-augmentation also is a data-dependent solution to
improve the generalization of a model. Choosing the best
augmentation policy is challenging. AutoAugment (Cubuk
et al. 2019) finds the best augmentation policies using reinforcement learning with huge computation overhead. AugMix (Hendrycks et al. 2020) reduces this overhead by
using stochasticity and diverse augmentations and adding
a Jensen-Shannon Divergence consistency loss to training loss. Recent works show that data-dependent regularizers can achieve better generalization for CNN models.
Mixup (Zhang et al. 2017), one such data-dependent regularizer, synthesizes additional training examples by interpolating random pairs of inputs xi , xj and their corresponding
labels yi , yj as:

Large capacity deep learning models are often prone to a high
generalization gap when trained with a limited amount of labeled training data. A recent class of methods to address this
problem uses various ways to construct a new training sample by mixing a pair (or more) of training samples. We propose PatchUp, a hidden state block-level regularization technique for Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), that is applied on selected contiguous blocks of feature maps from a
random pair of samples. Our approach improves the robustness of CNN models against the manifold intrusion problem
that may occur in other state-of-the-art mixing approaches.
Moreover, since we are mixing the contiguous block of features in the hidden space, which has more dimensions than
the input space, we obtain more diverse samples for training towards different dimensions. Our experiments on CIFAR10/100, SVHN, Tiny-ImageNet, and ImageNet using
ResNet architectures including PreActResnet18/34, WRN28-10, ResNet101/152 models show that PatchUp improves
upon, or equals, the performance of current state-of-the-art
regularizers for CNNs. We also show that PatchUp can provide a better generalization to deformed samples and is more
robust against adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning (DL), particularly deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved exceptional performance in many machine learning tasks, including object
recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2015), speech recognition (Hinton
et al. 2012) and natural language understanding (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017). However, in a
very deep and wide network, the network has a tendency
to memorize the samples, which yields poor generalization for data outside of the training data distribution (Arpit
et al. 2017; Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). To
address this issue, noisy computation is often employed during the training, making the model more robust against invariant samples and thus improving the generalization of the
model (Achille and Soatto 2018). This idea is exploited in
several state-of-the-art regularization techniques.

x̃ = λxi + (1 − λ)xj

and

ỹ = λyi + (1 − λ)yj , (1)

where λ ∈ [0, 1] is sampled from a Beta distribution such
that λ ∼ Beta(α, α) and (x̃, ỹ) is the new example. By
using these types of synthetic samples, Mixup encourages
the model to behave linearly in-between the training samples. The mixing coefficient λ in Mixup is sampled from

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

589

