The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Truthful Aggregation of Budget Proposals with Proportionality Guarantees
Ioannis Caragiannis1 , George Christodoulou2 , Nicos Protopapas3
1
Aarhus University
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
3
University of Liverpool
iannis@cs.au.dk, gichristo@csd.auth.gr, n.protopapas@liverpool.ac.uk
2

Abstract

on how to divide the upcoming year’s budget on education,
among a list of publicly funded schools. Each citizen proposes her preferred allocation of the budget and the city
council uses a suitable aggregation mechanism to allocate
the budget among the schools.
A natural way to aggregate the proposals is to compute
the arithmetic mean for each project and assign to each
school exactly that proportion of the budget. This method,
(or variations1 of it) is used in practice in economics and
sports. See (Rosar 2015; Renault and Trannoy 2005, 2011)
for some applications. Assigning the budget proportionally
comes with some perks: It can be easily described, it’s calculated efficiently and it scales naturally to any number of
projects.
Unfortunately, allocating the budget proportionally comes
with a serious drawback; namely, it is susceptible to manipulation. Indeed, consider a simple example with two projects
and one hundred voters. Fifty voters propose a 50% − 50%
allocation, while the other fifty voters propose a 100% − 0%
allocation. Hence, the proportional allocation is 75%−25%.
Assume now, that one voter changes her 50% − 50% proposal to 0% − 100%. This turns the aggregated division to
74.5%−25.5%, a division which is closer to the 50%−50%
proposal that she prefers. Hence, she may have an incentive
to misreport her most preferred allocation to obtain a better
outcome, according to her preference.
Truthful mechanisms, i.e. mechanisms nullifying the incentives for strategic manipulation have already been proposed in the literature, for voters with `1 preferences. Under
`1 preferences (Freeman et al. 2021), a voter has an ideal
division in mind and suffers a disutility equal to the `1 distance from her ideal division. (Lindner, Nehring, and Puppe
2008) and (Goel et al. 2019) proposed truthful budget aggregation mechanisms that minimize the sum of disutilities for
the voters, a quantity known in the literature as the utilitarian social welfare.
Recently, (Freeman et al. 2021) observed that these mechanisms are disproportionately biased towards the majority.
This lead them to propose the property of proportionality. A
mechanism is proportional if, in any input consisted only by

We study a participatory budgeting problem, where a set of
strategic agents wish to split a divisible budget among different projects by aggregating their proposals on a single division. Unfortunately, the straightforward rule that divides
the budget proportionally is susceptible to manipulation. Recently, a class of truthful mechanisms has been proposed,
namely the moving phantom mechanisms. One such mechanism satisfies the proportionality property, in the sense that
in the extreme case where all agents prefer a single project to
receive the whole amount, the budget is assigned proportionally.
While proportionality is a naturally desired property, it is defined over a limited type of preference profiles. To address
this, we expand the notion of proportionality, by proposing
a quantitative framework that evaluates a budget aggregation
mechanism according to its worst-case distance from the proportional allocation. Crucially, this is defined for every preference profile. We study this measure on the class of moving
phantom mechanisms, and we provide approximation guarantees. For two projects, we show that the Uniform Phantom
mechanism is optimal among all truthful mechanisms. For
three projects, we propose a new, proportional mechanism
that is optimal among all moving phantom mechanisms. Finally, we provide impossibility results regarding the approximability of moving phantom mechanisms.

Introduction
Participatory budgeting is an emerging democratic process
that engages community members with public decisionmaking, particularly when public expenditure should be allocated to various public projects. Since its initial adoption in the Brazilian city of Porto Alegre in the late
1980s (Cabannes 2004), its usage has been spread in various cities across the world. Madrid, Paris, San Francisco,
and Toronto provide an indicative, but far from exhaustive,
list of cities that have adopted participatory budgeting procedures. See (Aziz and Shah 2021) for more examples.
In this paper, we follow the model of (Freeman et al.
2021), where voters are tasked to split an exogenously given
amount of money among various projects. As an illustrative example, consider a city council inquiring the residents

1

A usual variation is the trimmed mean mechanism, where
some of the extreme bids are discarded. This is done to discourage a single voter to heavily influence a particular alternative.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4917

