The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Lifelong Hyper-Policy Optimization with Multiple Importance Sampling
Regularization
Pierre Liotet1 , Francesco Vidaich2 , Alberto Maria Metelli1 , Marcello Restelli1
1

Politecnico di Milano
University of Padova
pierre.liotet@polimi.it
2

Abstract

region of non-stationary behavior can be experienced multiple times by the agent.
Still moving towards a more realistic setting, another
modification is the lifelong interaction with the environment (Silver, Yang, and Li 2013; Brunskill and Li 2014).
Here, the separation in episodes vanishes and, therefore,
there is no clear distinction between learning and testing.
Moreover, given the never-ending nature of this interaction,
the agent is not allowed to reset the environment and might
not be able to visit twice some portions of the environment.
Thus, the agent aims at exploiting the experience collected
in the past to optimize its future performance. In this sense,
Lifelong Learning (LL) can be considered closer to the intuitive idea of learning for human agents. More technically,
LL requires the agent to readily adapt its behavior to the environment’s evolution, as well as keeping memory of past
behaviors in order to leverage this knowledge on future similar phases (Khetarpal et al. 2020). This represents a critical trade-off, peculiar of the lifelong setting. Indeed, if the
agent displays a highly non-stationary behavior, the samples
collected in the past would be poorly informative and, consequently, hardly usable to estimate the future performance.
Instead, being more stationary favors sample reuse, at the
cost of sacrificing the optimality of the learned behavior.
In this paper, we consider the RL problem with a lifelong
interaction between an agent and its environment, where the
latter’s dynamics smoothly evolve over time. We address this
problem by designing a hyper-policy, responsible for selecting the best policy to be played at time t. This way, we decouple the problem of learning in a non-stationary setting,
by assigning to the hyper-policy level the management of
the dependence on time and to the policy level the action
to be played given a state (Section 3). This hyper-policy
is trained with an objective composed of the future performance, the ultimate quantity to be maximized, and the
past performance. Although the past performance is not the
direct interest of our agent, it is included to constrain the
hyper-policy to perform well on past samples, thus mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Future performance is estimated
through multiple importance sampling. To avoid overfitting,
we additionally penalize the hyper-policy for the variance
of the estimations. Rather than estimating this quantity, that
would inject further uncertainty, we derive a differentiable
upper-bound allowing a gradient based optimization. This

Learning in a lifelong setting, where the dynamics continually evolve, is a hard challenge for current reinforcement
learning algorithms. Yet this would be a much needed feature for practical applications. In this paper, we propose an
approach which learns a hyper-policy, whose input is time,
that outputs the parameters of the policy to be queried at
that time. This hyper-policy is trained to maximize the estimated future performance, efficiently reusing past data by
means of importance sampling, at the cost of introducing a
controlled bias. We combine the future performance estimate
with the past performance to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
To avoid overfitting the collected data, we derive a differentiable variance bound that we embed as a penalization term.
Finally, we empirically validate our approach, in comparison
with state-of-the-art algorithms, on realistic environments, including water resource management and trading.

1

Introduction

In the most common setting, Reinforcement Learning (RL,
Sutton and Barto 2018) considers the interaction between an
agent and an environment in a sequence of episodes. The
agent progressively adapts its policy, but the dynamics of
the environment, typically, remain unchanged. Most importantly, the agent can experience multiple times the same portion of the environment. However, this usual setting is sometimes not met in real applications. Hence several modifications have been proposed to model different, more realistic, scenarios. One of them is non-stationary RL (Bowerman
1974), which considers that the episodes can follow different distributions, or even that the distribution changes within
each episode. The change can either be abrupt, when a clear
separation between tasks evolving through time is present,
or smooth, when the environment’s evolution displays some
regularity w.r.t. time. Non-stationarity can arise from diverse
causes and can be interpreted as a form of partial knowledge
(Khetarpal et al. 2020). Learning in non-stationary environments has been diffusely addressed in the literature (Garcia
and Smith 2000; Ghate and Smith 2013; Lesner and Scherrer
2015). Nevertheless, in these works, the agent-environment
interaction based on episodes is preserved, so that the same
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7525

