The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Detecting Human-Object Interactions
with Object-Guided Cross-Modal Calibrated Semantics
Hangjie Yuan1 , Mang Wang3 , Dong Ni1,2 * , Liangpeng Xu3
1

2

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, China
{hj.yuan, dni}@zju.edu.cn, {wangmang.wm, liangpeng.xlp}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

object class information for verb prediction. Objects can reveal direct clues to the interactiveness of HOI triplets (Li
et al. 2019) and furthermore the specific interactions of HOI
triplets. Although those unlikely object-verb pairs can be rejected by introducing a post-processing (e.g. applying a binary mask (Tamura, Ohashi, and Yoshinaga 2021)), a better
choice is to inject statistical prior information during training, thus producing better ranking results (Chen et al. 2019).
In this paper, we take a step further to implant the prior
knowledge into an end-to-end model.
To profit from the object-guided hierarchy, we propose to
utilize the semantic space (Rahman et al. 2020; Xu et al.
2019). Semantic embeddings are intialized from word embeddings (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Mikolov
et al. 2013). Several attempts on utilizing semantic space in
HOI constrained in vanilla pretrained embeddings or their
independent projections (i.e. MLPs) (Zhong et al. 2020; Gao
et al. 2020; Bansal et al. 2020; Peyre et al. 2019). However,
semantic space tends to have a domain discrepancy towards
visual space (Zhu et al. 2021), which can not be overcome
by such transformations. Some works (Xu et al. 2019; Peyre
et al. 2019) incorporate semantic space to push visual space
closer to it, which will cause negative effects when visual
features are strong and robust. Inspired by (Wu et al. 2018;
You et al. 2020), we propose a Verb Semantic Model (VSM)
that outputs a set of semantic features that fit in with the
HOI dataset’s verb co-occurrence priors. This procedure is
optimized by the proposed Similarity KL (SKL) loss without entry relaxation. Then, we inject object-verb hierarchical
priors via semantic aggregation, which generates a set of semantic features corresponding to a set of visual features. By
proper utilization of two-modal features, performance can
still be boosted under strong vision models.
As VSM is shared across all images for a given dataset,
semantic aggregation gathers static verb semantic embeddings given an object class. This static property is identical
to previous methods (Liu, Chen, and Zisserman 2020) and
lacks cross-modality-aware representation. As two modalities provide complementarity, we manage to solve the problem by cross-modal one-to-one calibration: mutually calibrating features from one modality via excitation from the
other modality. By this mutual calibration, our model can
generate a vision-aware semantic feature set and a semanticaware visual feature set. Specifically, we propose to do

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is an essential
task to understand human-centric images from a fine-grained
perspective. Although end-to-end HOI detection models
thrive, their paradigm of parallel human/object detection and
verb class prediction loses two-stage methods’ merit: objectguided hierarchy. The object in one HOI triplet gives direct clues to the verb to be predicted. In this paper, we
aim to boost end-to-end models with object-guided statistical priors. Specifically, We propose to utilize a Verb Semantic Model (VSM) and use semantic aggregation to profit from
this object-guided hierarchy. Similarity KL (SKL) loss is proposed to optimize VSM to align with the HOI dataset’s priors. To overcome the static semantic embedding problem, we
propose to generate cross-modality-aware visual and semantic features by Cross-Modal Calibration (CMC). The above
modules combined composes Object-guided Cross-modal
Calibration Network (OCN). Experiments conducted on two
popular HOI detection benchmarks demonstrate the significance of incorporating the statistical prior knowledge and
produce state-of-the-art performances. More detailed analysis
indicates proposed modules serve as a stronger verb predictor
and a more superior method of utilizing prior knowledge. The
codes are available at https://github.com/JacobYuan7/OCNHOI-Benchmark.

Introduction
Human Object Interaction (HOI) detection has recently become a thriving research topic as it provides a fine-grained
understanding to human-centric images. HOI detection aims
to detect triplets formulated as ⟨human, verbs, object⟩. Elaborate HOI detection can boost the results of image captioning (Yao et al. 2018), image retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015),
activity recognition (Yuan, Ni, and Wang 2021), etc..
Recently proposed end-to-end methods (Liao et al. 2020;
Kim et al. 2021; Tamura, Ohashi, and Yoshinaga 2021)
for HOI detection have achieved notable results without
two-stage processing. Unlike two-stage methods that deal
with human/object detection and verb prediction sequentially, end-to-end methods run these two processes in parallel. Since two-stage methods identify object class first, it
is more effective than end-to-end methods in leveraging the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3206

