The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generative Adaptive Convolutions for Real-World Noisy Image Denoising
Ruijun Ma1, 2 , Shuyi Li1 , Bob Zhang1∗ , Zhengming Li2
1

PAMI Research Group, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Guangdong Industrial Training Center, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University
{yb97442, yb97443, bobzhang}@um.edu.mo, gslzm@gpnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning techniques are soaring and have
shown dramatic improvements in real-world noisy image denoising. However, the statistics of real noise generally vary
with different camera sensors and in-camera signal processing pipelines. This will induce problems of most deep denoisers for the overfitting or degrading performance due to
the noise discrepancy between the training and test sets. To
remedy this issue, we propose a novel flexible and adaptive
denoising network, coined as FADNet. Our FADNet is
equipped with a plane dynamic filter module, which generates weight filters with flexibility that can adapt to the specific input and thereby impedes the FADNet from overfitting
to the training data. Specifically, we exploit the advantage of
the spatial and channel attention, and utilize this to devise a
decoupling filter generation scheme. The generated filters are
conditioned on the input and collaboratively applied to the
decoded features for representation capability enhancement.
We additionally introduce the Fourier transform and its inverse to guide the predicted weight filters to adapt to the noisy
input with respect to the image contents. Experimental results
demonstrate the superior denoising performances of the proposed FADNet versus the state-of-the-art. In contrast to the
existing deep denoisers, our FADNet is not only flexible and
efficient, but also exhibits a compelling generalization capability, enjoying tremendous potential for practical usage.

19.05 dB
Noisy Input

37.17 dB
37.14 dB
CycleISP (CVPR 2020)DANet (ECCV 2020)

37.12 dB
37.56 dB
InvNet (CVPR 2021) NBNet (CVPR 2021)

39.18 dB
FADNet (Ours)

Figure 1: Denoising example from the Smartphone Image
Denoising Dataset (SIDD). Compared to the recent stateof-the-art methods, our algorithm can better preserve the
structural contents and image textures, while eliminating the
complex real noise. Please view in color with zoom.

essarily remain uniform like AWGN (Seybold et al. 2014;
Karaimer and Brown 2016). The assumption that the AWGN
and real noise follow the same distribution, however, may
limit the applicability greatly on real-world denoising tasks.
Recent research on real-world noisy image denoising has
progressed dramatically with the rapid advance of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The boost in performance
of most deep denoisers is overly dependent on whether the
domains of the training and test sets are well matched. Actually, the statistics of real noise are device-dependent. Factors
such as camera sensors, camera settings, ISP pipelines and
scenes can cause heavy noise discrepancy among real camera images. Thus, simply training the deep denoisers on the
open benchmark datasets (i.e., SIDD (Abdelhamed, Lin, and
Brown 2018) and Nam (Nam et al. 2016)) will deprive their
generalization ability to adapt to a wider range of scenarios.
As a remedy, (Guo et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2020) provided
an alternative solution by modeling the noise distribution.
These methods simulate the response functions of the ISP
pipelines to establish a more generalized noise model. One

Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental computer vision task, aiming to recover the latent clean image from its counterpart
noisy observation. In the past years, a vast amount of denoising methods have been proposed and obtained a continuous performance growth. Most of these methods are dedicated to additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) removal
and have achieved near-optimal performances (Zhang et al.
2017; Zhang, Zuo, and Zhang 2018; Jia et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2021). Whereas in real CCD or CMOS
camera systems, the image noises are heavily transformed
by the in-camera signal processing (ISP) pipeline and contain multiple different sources (Tsin, Ramesh, and Kanade
2001; Kim et al. 2012). The statistics of real noise, oftentimes, are signal-dependent, spatially variant and do not nec∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1935

