The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Classical Planning with Avoid Conditions
Marcel Steinmetz1 , Jörg Hoffmann1 , Alisa Kovtunova2 , Stefan Borgwardt2
1
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
steinmetz@cs.uni-saarland.de, hoffmann@cs.uni-saarland.de, alisa.kovtunova@tu-dresden.de,
stefan.borgwardt@tu-dresden.de
2

Abstract

them directly as conditions to avoid. Moreover, avoid conditions can be used as a tool to specify domain-specific control
knowledge, e. g., characterizing states the user knows to be
dead ends. The question then becomes how to make use of
the provided knowledge in the best possible way.
A straightforward way to handle avoid conditions is the
compilation into preconditions. However, this incurs a large
overhead and is, as our experiments illustrate, often not effective. Our contribution consists in advanced algorithmic
methods. Apart from several compilation techniques, we
adapt prior work in classical planning to design a method
learning from the avoid condition during search, and a
method using abstraction, to predict states starting from
which ϕ can no longer be avoided.
Our learning method is based on traps (Lipovetzky,
Muise, and Geffner 2016). Traps are goal-free sets of states
that, once entered, cannot be left again. Represented compactly, traps yield an effective method to recognize dead-end
states during forward search. By initiating trap refinements
from unrecognized dead ends encountered in search, one can
incrementally extend the representation as a form of nogood
learning (Steinmetz and Hoffmann 2017). We extend the
trap definition to take into account ϕ. We show how these
changes fit into the trap learning approach, and introduce an
adaption of Trapper (Lipovetzky, Muise, and Geffner 2016)
as an alternative trap generation method.
Our abstraction method is a form of state abstraction, a
wide-spread method used to design heuristic functions in
planning (Edelkamp 2001; Helmert et al. 2014; Seipp and
Helmert 2018). Abstract state spaces group concrete states
s into block states A. Observe that, given such an abstract
state space, we know that s ∈ A can be pruned if all paths
from A to a goal block traverse a block A0 that implies ϕ,
i.e., where s0 |= ϕ for all s0 ∈ A0 . In other words, given an
abstraction, we can predict that every plan for a state s will
necessarily traverse the avoid condition. The question remains how to tailor abstractions for this purpose. To this end,
we leverage so-called Cartesian abstractions and their associated counter-example guided abstraction refinement (CEGAR) process (Seipp and Helmert 2013, 2018). We show
how one can test A0 ⇒ ϕ for Cartesian states. We modify the
CEGAR process to incorporate ϕ as an additional source of
counter-examples and, therewith, of refinement steps.
We run experiments on satisficing planning, optimal plan-

It is often natural in planning to specify conditions that should
be avoided, characterizing dangerous or highly undesirable
behavior. PDDL3 supports this with temporal-logic state trajectory constraints. Here we focus on the simpler case where
the constraint is a non-temporal formula ϕ – the avoid condition – that must be false throughout the plan. We design techniques tackling such avoid conditions effectively. We show
how to learn from search experience which states necessarily
lead into ϕ, and we show how to tailor abstractions to recognize that avoiding ϕ will not be possible starting from a
given state. We run a large-scale experiment, comparing our
techniques against compilation methods and against simple
state pruning using ϕ. The results show that our techniques
are often superior.

Introduction
It is often natural in planning to specify conditions that
should be avoided. Work along these lines has so far focused
on temporal-logic formulas that must be true in the state sequence induced by the plan. One prominent early approach
used such formulas as control knowledge for effective handtailored planning (Bacchus and Kabanza 2000; Doherty and
Kvarnström 2001). The PDDL3 language (Gerevini et al.
2009) features temporal formulas (among others) in the
role of state trajectory constraints. Work since then has
devised compilations back into classical tasks (Edelkamp
2006; Baier and McIlraith 2006; De Giacomo, De Masellis, and Montali 2014; Torres and Baier 2015; Bonassi et al.
2021), compilations into SAT (Mattmüller and Rintanen
2007), and approaches handling soft-goal plan preferences
effectively (Baier, Bacchus, and McIlraith 2007, 2009).
Here we focus on the special case where the state trajectory constraint is a state formula ϕ that must remain false
in all states along the plan. We refer to such constraints as
avoid conditions. This special case is relevant, for example,
to express dangerous or undesirable situations, such as risky
states in a deterministic approximation of a probabilistic
planning application. While the avoidance of such situations
could in principle be enforced via additional action preconditions, it is typically easier and much more natural to model
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9944

