The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sparse MLP for Image Recognition: Is Self-Attention Really Necessary?
Chuanxin Tang1 * , Yucheng Zhao2 * † , Guangting Wang2 * † , Chong Luo1 ,
Wenxuan Xie1 , Wenjun Zeng1
1

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{chutan, cluo, wenxie, wezeng}@microsoft.com,{lnc, flylight}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Transformers have sprung up in the field of computer vision. In this work, we explore whether the core self-attention
module in Transformer is the key to achieving excellent performance in image recognition. To this end, we build an
attention-free network called sMLPNet based on the existing MLP-based vision models. Specifically, we replace the
MLP module in the token-mixing step with a novel sparse
MLP (sMLP) module. For 2D image tokens, sMLP applies 1D MLP along the axial directions and the parameters are shared among rows or columns. By sparse connection and weight sharing, sMLP module significantly reduces the number of model parameters and computational
complexity, avoiding the common over-fitting problem that
plagues the performance of MLP-like models. When only
trained on the ImageNet-1K dataset, the proposed sMLPNet
achieves 81.9% top-1 accuracy with only 24M parameters,
which is much better than most CNNs and vision Transformers under the same model size constraint. When scaling up to 66M parameters, sMLPNet achieves 83.4% top1 accuracy, which is on par with the state-of-the-art Swin
Transformer. The success of sMLPNet suggests that the selfattention mechanism is not necessarily a silver bullet in computer vision. The code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/microsoft/SPACH.

(a) MLP

(b) sparse MLP

Figure 1: The proposed sparse MLP reduces the computational complexity of MLP by sparse connection and weight
sharing. In MLP (a), the token in dark orange interacts with
all the other tokens in a single MLP layer. In contrast, in one
sMLP layer (b), the dark-orange token only interacts with
horizontal and vertical tokens marked in light orange. The
interaction with all the other white tokens can be achieved
when sMLP is executed twice.

well on image recognition tasks when pretrained on a very
large dataset. Shortly after, DeiT (Touvron et al. 2021b)
further demonstrates that a conv-free vision Transformer
can achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) image recognition accuracy when pretrained on ImageNet-1K, with appropriate
data augmentation and model regularization techniques.
The conv-free vision transformers are actually promoting two views. First, global dependency modeling is important. Not only that, it could even completely replace local dependency modeling which used to be baked into the
model by convolutions. Second, self-attention is important.
Despite the good performance of ViT and DeiT, it is clear
that academia has not fully embraced both views, and questions about them are often heard.
On the one hand, researchers challenge the complete disposal of locality bias. It is natural to ask, since locality
is always valid in natural images, why bother learning it
through global self-attention modules instead of directly injecting it into the network? Besides, global self-attention
has quadratic computational complexity with respect to the
number of input tokens. As a result, the network structure
does not favor high-resolution input and is not friendly to

Introduction
Since the proposal of AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been the dominant design paradigm in computer vision. This
situation has recently been changed by the boom of convfree vision Transformers. The pioneering work ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) interprets an image as a sequence of
patches and processes it by a standard Transformer encoder
as used in natural-language processing (NLP). Specifically,
an image is divided into non-overlapping patches, and the
sequence of linear embeddings of these patches are used
as an input to the vision Transformer. The encoding process involves alternate spatial mixing and channel mixing
modules implemented by multi-head self-attention and feed
forward networks (FFNs), respectively. ViT performs very
* Equal contribution
†

Interns at MSRA
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2344

