The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Knowledge Compilation Meets Logical Separability
Junming Qiu1, 2 , Wenqing Li1, 2 , Zhanhao Xiao3 , Quanlong Guan1, 2 * ,
Liangda Fang1, 4, 5 * , Zhao-Rong Lai1, 2 , Qian Dong1
1
Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
Guangdong Institute of Smart Education, Guangzhou 510632, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, China
5
Guangxi Key Laboratory of Trusted Software, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
{2040697476jnu, eskii0706}@stu2020.jnu.edu.cn; xiaozhh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn; {gql, fangld, laizhr, dongq8}@jnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

One of primary purposes of KC is to design a suitable target
language that achieves a good trade-off between succinctness and tractability for one or more specific reasoning tasks.
In the past decades, many prominent target compilation
languages were developed, particularly, decomposable
negation normal form (DNNF), the subset of negation normal
form (NNF) satisfying the ∧-decomposability property (Darwiche 2001a). The author also designed two polytime procedures for satisfiability check and clausal entailment check,
which are correct for DNNF. In other words, DNNF supports
polytime satisfiability check and clausal entailment check.
One question worth investigation is the intrinsic reason
why DNNF supports such polytime queries. It actually can
be answered by the notion of logical separability which
was first proposed by Levesque (1998). Roughly speaking,
a conjunction φ is logically separable, if the clausal entailment problem of a conjunction φ can be decomposed to
entailment problems for every conjunct of φ. It is easily
verified that any conjunction appearing in a DNNF-formula is
logically separable due to the ∧-decomposability property.
In addition, prime implicate normal form (PI) supports
polytime clausal entailment check as the conjunction of
prime implicates is logically separable. Hence, logical
separability offers a thorough explanation for why both
DNNF and PI supports clausal entailment check.
It is interesting to explore what role logical separability on earth plays in problem tractability. In the paper
(Levesque 1998), Levesque also defined a normal form,
namely Levesque’s normal form (LNF), s.t. the entailment
check is tractable for a class of knowledge bases. However,
after that, the idea of logical separability has hardly been
applied to language design for other reasoning problems.
It motivates us to take logical separability into account
to design succinct target languages in which reasoning
problems are tractably solved.
In this paper, we focus on three reasoning problems in the
context of propositional logic: satisfiability check, clausal
entailment check and model counting. For these three
reasoning problems, we start by providing three polytime
procedures CO, CE and CT , and then give definitions of
logical separability based properties: CO-logical separability, CE-logical separability and CT-logical separability,

Knowledge compilation is an alternative solution to address
demanding reasoning tasks with high complexity via converting knowledge bases into a suitable target language.
Interestingly, the notion of logical separability, proposed by
Levesque, offers a general explanation for the tractability
of clausal entailment for two remarkable languages: decomposable negation normal form and prime implicates. It is
interesting to explore what role logical separability on earth
plays in problem tractability. In this paper, we apply the
notion of logical separability in three reasoning problems
within the context of propositional logic: satisfiability check
(CO), clausal entailment check (CE) and model counting (CT),
contributing to three corresponding polytime procedures. We
provide three logical separability based properties: CO-logical
separability, CE-logical separability and CT-logical separability. We then identify three novel normal forms: CO-LSNNF,
CE-LSNNF and CT-LSNNF based on the above properties.
Besides, we show that every normal form is the necessary
and sufficient condition under which the corresponding
procedure is correct. We finally integrate the above four
normal forms into the knowledge compilation map.

Introduction
Knowledge compilation (KC) has been attracted interests
in many areas of AI, for example, model-based diagnosis
(Huang and Darwiche 2005; Mateescu, Dechter, and Marinescu 2008), explainable machine learning (Shih, Darwiche,
and Choi 2019; Darwiche and Hirth 2020), probabilistic
inference (Martires, Dries, and De Raedt 2019; Shih, Choi,
and Darwiche 2019) and planning (Palacios et al. 2005;
Huang 2006) and so on. As an alternative solution to
address demanding reasoning tasks with high complexity,
KC converts knowledge bases into a target language in
which such reasoning tasks can be tractably accomplished.
Darwiche and Marquis (2002) proposed two criteria to
evaluate target compilation languages: succinctness (the
size of complied knowledge bases) and tractability (the supported polytime queries and transformations). In general,
more succinct languages are less tractable and vice versa.
* Both are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5851

