The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SECRET: Self-Consistent Pseudo Label Refinement for Unsupervised Domain
Adaptive Person Re-identification
Tao He* 1,2 , Leqi Shen* 1,2 , Yuchen Guo†2 , Guiguang Ding†1,2 , Zhenhua Guo3
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
3
Alibaba Group
{kevin.92.he, lunarshen, yuchen.w.guo}@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, cszguo@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Global
Top
Bottom

D
F

E

80

98

SXVK

96

70

SUP-consistency
SUP-mAP
UDA-consistency
UDA-mAP

consistency

94
92

*OREDO

90

/RFDO

88

SXOO

60

mAP

Unsupervised domain adaptive person re-identification aims
at learning on an unlabeled target domain with only labeled
data in source domain. Currently, the state-of-the-arts usually solve this problem by pseudo-label-based clustering and
fine-tuning in target domain. However, the reason behind the
noises of pseudo labels is not sufficiently explored, especially
for the popular multi-branch models. We argue that the consistency between different feature spaces is the key to the
pseudo labels’ quality. Then a SElf-Consistent pseudo label RefinEmenT method, termed as SECRET, is proposed
to improve consistency by mutually refining the pseudo labels generated from different feature spaces. The proposed
SECRET gradually encourages the improvement of pseudo
labels’ quality during training process, which further leads
to better cross-domain Re-ID performance. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show the superiority of our
method. Specifically, our method outperforms the state-ofthe-arts by 6.3% in terms of mAP on the challenging dataset
MSMT17. In the purely unsupervised setting, our method
also surpasses existing works by a large margin. Code is available at https://github.com/LunarShen/SECRET.

50

40

86
30

84
0

10

20

30

40

epoch

50

60

70

80

Figure 1: (a) A multi-branch CNN model. (b) Clustered results of global and local space. Shapes denote pseudo labels. (c) The consistency and mAP curves of a multi-branch
model on Market-1501 during training epochs. SUP: supervised setting, where the three features are all supervised by
the ground truth ID. UDA: unsupervised domain adaptive
setting, where the three features are independently supervised by their respective pseudo labels.

Introduction

fine-tuning with pseudo labels in the target domain. Benefiting from exploring relations between samples in the target
domain, pseudo-label-based ones (Fu et al. 2019; Ge, Chen,
and Li 2020) have achieved better performance and are attracting more attention.
Despite the fact that pseudo-label-based methods have obtained promising performance, the key issue: the quality of
the pseudo labels, is still unexplored. If generated pseudo labels exactly match the ground truths, then the performance
of UDA Re-ID methods will reach the supervised counterparts. Therefore, improvements on the quality of pseudo labels will potentially lead to a great performance gain. In this
work, we move along this line to directly optimize pseudo
labels’ quality during the training process. Multi-branch is a
popular pseudo-label-based method (Fu et al. 2019) which
can explore global and local feature spaces simultaneously
(as shown in Figure 1(a)). We argue that the consistency of
different feature spaces is a key to improving performance.
By consistency, we mean that different feature spaces should
induce the same label space. In the supervised setting, the
consistency is kept by the same supervision signals (such as
person IDs) (Sun et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018). However,

Person re-identification (Re-ID) is to match persons across
non-overlapping cameras. Due to the laborious human labeling efforts in supervised person Re-ID methods (Luo et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018), unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) person Re-ID has become an active research field in recent years. UDA Re-ID aims at learning on
an unlabeled target domain with only labeled data in source
domain. Currently, there are roughly two ways to tackle the
problem: (1) generative-model-based methods (Wei et al.
2018; Deng et al. 2018), in which generative models like
GAN are used to translate the source domain data to the
target domain together with their corresponding labels, so
that supervised methods can be performed with the generated data. (2) pseudo-label-based methods (Fu et al. 2019;
Ge, Chen, and Li 2020), which firstly pre-trains a model on
source domain data by supervised methods and then alternates between generating pseudo labels by clustering and
* equal contribution
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

879

