The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Conservative and Adaptive Penalty for Model-Based Safe Reinforcement Learning
Yecheng Jason Ma* 1 , Andrew Shen* 2 , Osbert Bastani1 , Dinesh Jayaraman1
1

University of Pennsylvania
University of Melbourne
jasonyma@seas.upenn.edu
2

Abstract

learned transition models to directly synthesize policies using simulated samples, thereby reducing the number of real
samples needed to train the policy. Given the true environment transition model, it would be trivial to synthesize
safe policies without any violations, since we could simply
simulate a sequence of actions to evaluate its safety. However, MBRL agents must learn this transition model from
finite experience, which induces approximation errors. In
this paper, we ask: can safety be guaranteed during modelbased reinforcement learning, despite these model errors?
We prove that this is indeed possible, and design a practical
algorithm that permits model-based safe RL even in highdimensional problem settings.
Specifically, we propose a model-based safe RL framework involving a conservative and adaptive cost penalty
(CAP). We build on a basic model-based safe RL framework, which simply executes a model-free safe RL algorithm inside a learned transition model. We make two important conceptual contributions to improve this basic approach. First, we derive a conservative upper bound on the
error in the policy cost computed according to the learned
model. In particular, we show that this error is bounded
above by a constant factor of an integral probability metric (IPM) (Müller 1997) computed over the true and learned
transition models. Based on this bound, we propose to inflate
the cost function with an uncertainty-aware penalty function.
We prove that all feasible policies with respect to this conservative cost function, including the optimal feasible policy (with highest task reward), are guaranteed to be safe in
the true environment. A direct consequence is that we can
ensure that all intermediate policies are safe and incur zero
safety violations during training.
Second, this penalty function, though theoretically optimal, is often too conservative or cannot be computed for
high-dimensional tasks. Therefore, in practice, we propose
a heuristic penalty term that includes a scale hyperparameter to modulate the degree of conservativeness: higher scales
produce behavior that is more averse to risks arising from
modeling errors. Thus, different scales may be appropriate
for use with different environments and model fidelities.
We observe that this crucial scale hyperparameter need
not be manually set and frozen throughout training. Instead,
we can exploit the fact that the policy receives feedback on
its true cost value from the environment, to formulate the

Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents in the real world must
satisfy safety constraints in addition to maximizing a reward
objective. Model-based RL algorithms hold promise for reducing unsafe real-world actions: they may synthesize policies that obey all constraints using simulated samples from a
learned model. However, imperfect models can result in realworld constraint violations even for actions that are predicted
to satisfy all constraints. We propose Conservative and Adaptive Penalty (CAP), a model-based safe RL framework that
accounts for potential modeling errors by capturing model
uncertainty and adaptively exploiting it to balance the reward
and the cost objectives. First, CAP inflates predicted costs using an uncertainty-based penalty. Theoretically, we show that
policies that satisfy this conservative cost constraint are guaranteed to also be feasible in the true environment. We further show that this guarantees the safety of all intermediate
solutions during RL training. Further, CAP adaptively tunes
this penalty during training using true cost feedback from
the environment. We evaluate this conservative and adaptive
penalty-based approach for model-based safe RL extensively
on state and image-based environments. Our results demonstrate substantial gains in sample-efficiency while incurring
fewer violations than prior safe RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many applications of reinforcement learning (RL) require
the agent to satisfy safety constraints in addition to the standard goal of maximizing the expected reward. For example,
in robot locomotion, we may want to impose speed or torque
constraints to prevent the robot from damaging itself. Since
the set of states that violates the imposed constraints is often a priori unknown, a central goal of safe reinforcement
learning (Pecka and Svoboda 2014; Garcıa and Fernández
2015) is to learn a reward-maximizing policy that satisfies
constraints, while incurring as few constraint violations as
possible during the agent’s training process.
To reduce the cumulative number of constraint violations during training, a promising approach is to incorporate
safety considerations into sample-efficient RL algorithms,
such as model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) (Sutton 1990, 1991). MBRL refers to RL algorithms that use
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5404

