The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Machine Learning for Utility Prediction in
Argument-Based Computational Persuasion
Ivan Donadello1 , Anthony Hunter2 , Stefano Teso4 , Mauro Dragoni3
1
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
University College London, United Kingdom
3
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
4
University of Trento, Italy
ivan.donadello@unibz.it, anthony.hunter@ucl.ac.uk, stefano.teso@unitn.it, dragoni@fbk.eu
2

Abstract

the argumentation, and on the user’s characteristics. An APS
maintains a model of the user to choose the best moves in the
dialogue (Hadoux and Hunter 2019). During the turn of the
APS, it presents an argument to the user and then user can
select their counterarguments from a menu. An APS can also
use a natural language interface to allow users input their argument in free text (Chalaguine and Hunter 2020).
In order for an APS to choose the moves it makes in
the dialogue (i.e., the arguments it presents), it needs to
use a strategy. Within the literature on computational models of arguments, key approaches to strategies are: Mechanism design where it is a one-step process rather for multistep dialogues (Rahwan and Larson 2008; Rahwan, Larson, and Tohmé 2009; Fan and Toni 2012); Planning systems to optimize choice of arguments based on belief in
premises (Black, Coles, and Bernardini 2014; Black, Coles,
and Hampson 2017) or minimize the number of moves made
(Atkinson, Bench-Capon, and Bench-Capon 2012); Machine learning of strategies such as Reinforcement Learning (Monteserin and Amandi 2013; Rosenfeld and Kraus
2016b; Rach, Minker, and Ultes 2018; Katsumi et al. 2018;
Riveret et al. 2019; Alahmari 2020) and transfer learning
(Rosenfeld and Kraus 2016a); Probabilistic methods to select a move based on what an agent believes the other is
aware of (Rienstra, Thimm, and Oren 2013), to approximately predict the argument an opponent might put forward
based on data about the moves made by the opponent in previous dialogues (Hadjinikolis et al. 2013), using a decisiontheoretic lottery (Hunter and Thimm 2016), using POMDPs
when there is uncertainty about the internal state of the opponent (Hadoux et al. 2015); and Local strategies based for
example on the concerns (i.e., issues raised or addressed by
an argument) of the persuadee (Hadoux and Hunter 2019;
Chalaguine and Hunter 2020).
Apart from local strategies based on concerns, the above
proposals do not take the user’s needs into account. Yet, if
an APS is to persuade someone to accept some arguments,
then how those arguments relate to their needs is fundamental in deciding how to argue with them. This can be captured
by considering the utility of each argument from the point
of view of both the APS and the user (i.e., we have a utility function for each agent). For this we can harness games
in extensive form (Osborne and Rubinstein 1994). For argumentation, this has led to Bi-party Decision Theory (BDT)

Automated persuasion systems (APS) aim to persuade a user
to believe something by entering into a dialogue in which arguments and counterarguments are exchanged. To maximize
the probability that an APS is successful in persuading a user,
it can identify a global policy that will allow it to select the
best arguments it presents at each stage of the dialogue whatever arguments the user presents. However, in real applications, such as for healthcare, it is unlikely the utility of the
outcome of the dialogue will be the same, or the exact opposite, for the APS and user. In order to deal with this situation,
games in extended form have been harnessed for argumentation in Bi-party Decision Theory. This opens new problems
that we address in this paper: (1) How can we use Machine
Learning (ML) methods to predict utility functions for different subpopulations of users? and (2) How can we identify for
a new user the best utility function from amongst those that
we have learned? To this extent, we develop two ML methods, EAI and EDS, that leverage information coming from
the users to predict their utilities. EAI is restricted to a fixed
amount of information, whereas EDS can choose the information that best detects the subpopulations of a user. We evaluate EAI and EDS in a simulation setting and in a realistic case
study concerning healthy eating habits. Results are promising
in both cases, but EDS is more effective at predicting useful
utility functions.

Introduction
Persuasion is an activity that involves one party trying to
induce another party to believe something. It is an important and multifaceted human facility. Often, it can involve a
dialogue in which arguments and counterarguments are exchanged between the persuader and the persuadee. For example, a doctor can use arguments to persuade a patient to
eat a more healthy diet, and the patient can give counterarguments based on their understanding and preferences. Also,
the doctor may provide counterarguments to attempt to overturn misconceptions held by the patient.
An automated persuasion system (APS) is a software system that takes on the role of a persuader, and a user is the
persuadee (Hunter et al. 2019). It aims to use convincing arguments in order to persuade the user. Whether an argument
is convincing depends on its own nature, on the context of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5592

