The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hindsight Network Credit Assignment:
Efficient Credit Assignment in Networks of Discrete Stochastic Units
Kenny Young
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Edmonton, Canada
kjyoung@ualberta.ca

ment learning (Hafner et al. 2021). Hence, techniques for
efficiently training networks of discrete stochastic units have
the potential to be of significant practical interest.
Prior work has proposed a number of techniques for producing either biased, or unbiased estimates of gradients for
discrete stochastic units. Bengio, Léonard, and Courville
(2013) propose an unbiased REINFORCE (Williams 1992)
style estimator, as well as a biased but low variance estimator
which replaces a random variable with its expectation during backpropagation. Tang and Salakhutdinov (2013) propose an EM procedure which maximizes a variational lower
bound on the loss. Mnih and Gregor (2014) propose several
techniques to reduce the variance of a REINFORCE style estimator, including subtracting a learned baseline and normalizing by a moving average standard deviation. Maddison,
Mnih, and Teh (2017) and Jang, Gu, and Poole (2017) each
propose a biased estimator based on a continuous relaxation
of discrete outputs. Tucker et al. (2017) use such a continuous relaxation to derive a control variate for a REINFORCE
style estimator, resulting in a variance reduced unbiased gradient estimator. Grathwohl et al. (2018) and Gu et al. (2018)
also explore the use of control variates with discrete random variables. Yin and Zhou (2019) provide a variance reduced unbiased estimator, called ARM, based on a particular reparameterization and antithetic sampling. Dong, Mnih,
and Tucker (2020) further reduce the variance of ARM by
marginalizing over the reparameterization step.
We introduce an unbiased, and computationally efficient
estimator for the gradients of stochastic units which provably reduces gradient estimate variance compared to REINFORCE. Our estimator works by assigning credit to each
unit based on how much it impacts the outputs of its immediate children. Our approach is inspired by Hindsight Credit
Assignment (HCA; Harutyunyan et al. (2019)) for reinforcement learning (RL), hence we call it Hindsight Network
Credit Assignment (HNCA).
Aside from HCA, perhaps the most closely related work
is the Local Expectation Gradients (LEG) approach of Titsias and Lázaro-Gredilla (2015). In fact, the gradient estimator used in HNCA can be seen as an instance of the LEG
estimator. However, the generic expression for the LEG estimator makes it unclear when and how it can be efficiently
computed. This has led to suggestions in the literature that
LEG tends to be too computationally expensive to be practi-

Abstract
Training neural networks with discrete stochastic variables
presents a unique challenge. Backpropagation is not directly
applicable, nor are the reparameterization tricks used in networks with continuous stochastic variables. To address this
challenge, we present Hindsight Network Credit Assignment
(HNCA), a novel gradient estimation algorithm for networks
of discrete stochastic units. HNCA works by assigning credit
to each unit based on the degree to which its output influences
its immediate children in the network. We prove that HNCA
produces unbiased gradient estimates with reduced variance
compared to the REINFORCE estimator, while the computational cost is similar to that of backpropagation. We first
apply HNCA in a contextual bandit setting to optimize a reward function that is unknown to the agent. In this setting,
we empirically demonstrate that HNCA significantly outperforms REINFORCE, indicating that the variance reduction
implied by our theoretical analysis is significant and impactful. We then show how HNCA can be extended to optimize a
more general function of the outputs of a network of stochastic units, where the function is known to the agent. We apply
this extended version of HNCA to train a discrete variational
auto-encoder and empirically show it compares favourably to
other strong methods. We believe that the ideas underlying
HNCA can help stimulate new ways of thinking about efficient credit assignment in stochastic compute graphs.

Introduction
Using discrete stochastic units within neural networks is
appealing for a number of reasons, including representing
multimodal distributions, modeling discrete choices, providing regularization and facilitating exploration. However,
training such units efficiently and accurately presents challenges, as backpropagation is not directly applicable, nor are
the reparameterization tricks (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) that are typically
used with continuous stochastic units. Despite these challenges, discrete stochastic units have played an important
role in recent empirical successes in both text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al. 2021) and model based reinforceCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Code to reproduce the experiments is available at:
https://github.com/kenjyoung/HNCA code supplement.

8919

