The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Provable Sensor Sets for Epidemic Detection over Networks with Minimum Delay
Jack Heavey1 , Jiaming Cui2 , Chen Chen1 , B. Aditya Prakash2 , Anil Vullikanti1
1

University of Virginia
Georgia Institute of Technology
{jch7jm, zrh6du, vsakumar}@virginia.edu, {jiamingcui1997, badityap}@gatech.edu
2

Abstract

disease in the network. As in prior work (Leskovec et al.
2007; Adhikari et al. 2019), we assume that either a set
of cascades (or possible scenarios) of disease transmission
in a graph are given, or the cascades are sampled from an
SIR process on the network. Standard metrics for effective
surveillance are probability of detection and the expected delay in detection. Submodularity has been the primary technique in finding good algorithms in prior work (Leskovec
et al. 2007; Adhikari et al. 2019). While the detection probability is submodular, the detection time is not (also, it is
a minimization problem). (Leskovec et al. 2007) show that
a slightly different “penalty reduction” variation of the detection time objective is submodular. As a result, a greedy
algorithm gives a (1 − 1/e)-factor approximation.
However, as we show, a solution computed by the greedy
algorithm for maximizing such a penalty reduction objective can be highly suboptimal with respect to the detection
time—this is especially important in regimes when the detection time is low, which is the more realistic setting in disease surveillance. No prior results are known for directly
minimizing the detection time. Further, in an SIR model,
minimizing the expected detection time is a stochastic optimization problem, which hasn’t been considered before.

The efficient detection of outbreaks and other cascading phenomena is a fundamental problem in a number of domains,
including disease spread, social networks, and infrastructure
networks. In such settings, monitoring and testing a small
group of pre-selected nodes from the susceptible population
(i.e., a sensor set) is often the preferred testing regime. We
study the problem of selecting a sensor set that minimizes the
delay in detection—we refer to this as the MinDelSS problem. Prior methods for minimizing the detection time rely
on greedy algorithms using submodularity. We show that this
approach can sometimes lead to a worse approximation for
minimizing the detection time than desired. We also show
that MinDelSS is hard to approximate within an O(n1−1/γ )factor for any constant γ ≥ 2 for a graph with n nodes.
This instead motivates seeking a bicriteria approximations.
We present the algorithm ROUND S ENSOR, which gives a rigorous worst case O(log n)-factor for the detection time, while
violating the budget by a factor of O(log2 n). Our algorithm
is based on the sample average approximation technique from
stochastic optimization, combined with linear programming
and rounding. We evaluate our algorithm on several networks,
including hospital contact networks, which validates its effectiveness in real settings.

Our Contributions.

Introduction

• We study the problem MinDelSS of finding a sensor set
with a given budget, that directly minimizes the detection time; the cascades can be either specified as input,
or sampled, in the case of the SIR model for epidemic
spread. We show that the greedy approach of (Leskovec
et al. 2007) can have an approximation factor of Θ(n),
in general, where n denotes the number of nodes in the
graph. We prove that MinDelSS is hard to approximate
within an O(n1−1/γ )-factor, for any constant γ ≥ 2,
which contrasts with the complexity of maximizing the
detection probability or the penalty reduction approach
for detection time (Leskovec et al. 2007); this hardness
holds even when the cascades are sampled from the SIR
process.
• We design a bicriteria approximation algorithm,
ROUND S ENSOR, which gives a rigorous worst case
O(log n)-factor for the average delay for a set of
cascades, while violating the budget by a factor of
O(log2 n). Note that in light of the above approximation

Recurring disease outbreaks, including the COVID-19 pandemic and the emerging variants, illustrate the importance
of good surveillance in order to detect the onset of a disease
outbreak in the population. Diverse mechanisms exist for
testing, ranging from syndromic surveillance (CDC 2021)
based on symptoms to more accurate PCR based tests, which
can detect fragments of the pathogen. However, such testing is expensive, both in terms of personnel and equipment
needed. This is also true in a hospital setting, where hospital
acquired infections, such as MRSA, pose significant health
burden (Stone 2009; Leclère et al. 2017). Problems of detecting a spreading process also arise more generally in a
number of other applications, such as water networks and
blog networks (Leskovec et al. 2007).
Such surveillance problems involve finding a “sensor set”
S, such that monitoring nodes in S is sufficient to detect the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10202

