The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hedonic Diversity Games:
A Complexity Picture with More than Two Colors
Robert Ganian1 , Thekla Hamm1 , Dušan Knop2 , Šimon Schierreich2 , Ondřej Suchý2
1

2

Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
{rganian, thamm}@ac.wien.ac.at, {dusan.knop, schiesim, ondrej.suchy}@fit.cvut.cz

Hedonic diversity games1 . The question targeted by Hedonic diversity games occurs in a number of distinct settings,
such as the Bakers and Millers game (where coalitions are
formed between two types of agents with competing preferences) (Aziz et al. 2019; Schelling 1971; Bilò et al. 2018) or
when the task is to assign guests from several backgrounds
to tables (Boehmer and Elkind 2020b; Igarashi, Sliwinski,
and Zick 2019).
Naturally, the most prominent computational question
arising from the study of Hedonic diversity games targets
the computation of an outcome that is stable under some
well-defined notion of stability. While several stability concepts have been considered in the literature including, e.g.,
envy-freeness and core stability, here we focus on the two
arguably most prominent notions of stability that have been
applied in the context of Hedonic games:

Abstract
Hedonic diversity games are a variant of the classical Hedonic games designed to better model a variety of questions
concerning diversity and fairness. Previous works mainly
targeted the case with two diversity classes (represented as
colors in the model) and provided some initial complexitytheoretic and existential results concerning Nash and individually stable outcomes. Here, we design new algorithms
accompanied with lower bounds which provide a complete
parameterized-complexity picture for computing Nash and
individually stable outcomes with respect to the most natural
parameterizations of the problem. Crucially, our results hold
for general Hedonic diversity games where the number of colors is not necessarily restricted to two, and show that—apart
from two trivial cases—a necessary condition for tractability
in this setting is that the number of colors is bounded by the
parameter. Moreover, for the special case of two colors we
resolve an open question posed in previous work.

• Nash stability, which ensures that no agent prefers leaving their coalition to join a different one, and
• individual stability, where no agent prefers leaving their
coalition to join another coalition whose members would
all appreciate or be indifferent to such a change.

Introduction
Hedonic games are the prototypical example of coalitionforming games, which are games where agents seek to form
coalitions in a way which satisfies their individual preferences (Drèze and Greenberg 1980; Elkind, Fanelli, and
Flammini 2020; Kerkmann et al. 2020; Brandt, Bullinger,
and Wilczynski 2021; Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez
2001). In classical Hedonic games, agents’ preferences over
possible coalitions take into account the specific agents
present in the hypothetical coalition. Anonymous (Hedonic) games (Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002) are a wellstudied variant of the coalition-forming game where preferences only take into account the sizes of the coalitions, not
their members.
Bredereck, Elkind, and Igarashi (2019) recently initiated
the study of a model that generalizes and conceptually combines properties of Hedonic and anonymous games. In particular, they considered the scenario where each agent is
assigned a class or color, and preference profiles are defined with respect to the ratios of classes occurring in the
coalition. Loosely following their terminology, we call these

In their pioneering work, Boehmer and Elkind (2020a)
have provided initial results on the computational complexity of computing stable outcomes for Hedonic diversity
games (a problem we hereinafter refer to as HDG), with a
particular focus on the case with 2 colors. They analyzed the
problem not only from the viewpoint of classical complexity, but also with respect to the more refined parameterized
paradigm2 ; among others, they showed that HDG is NPhard even when restricted to instances with 5 colors, and
for the case of 2 colors they obtained a polynomial time algorithm for individually stable HDG and an XP algorithm
for Nash-stable HDG when parameterized by the size of
the smaller color class (Boehmer and Elkind 2020a, Theorem 5.2). Still, our understanding of the computational aspects of HDG has up to now remained highly incomplete: no
1
This term was originally used for the special case of two
classes, and the presence of k > 2 classes was previously identified by adding “k-tuple” or “k-”(Boehmer and Elkind 2020a). Since
here we consider k to be part of the input, we use Hedonic diversity
games for the general model.
2
A brief introduction to parameterized complexity is provided
in the Preliminaries.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5034

