The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fuzzy Logic Based Logical Query Answering on Knowledge Graphs
Xuelu Chen, Ziniu Hu, Yizhou Sun
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
{shirleychen, bull, yzsun}@ucla.edu

Abstract
Answering complex First-Order Logical (FOL) queries on
large-scale incomplete knowledge graphs (KGs) is an important yet challenging task. Recent advances embed logical queries and KG entities in the same space and conduct
query answering via dense similarity search. However, most
logical operators designed in previous studies do not satisfy
the axiomatic system of classical logic, limiting their performance. Moreover, these logical operators are parameterized and thus require many complex FOL queries as training data, which are often arduous to collect or even inaccessible in most real-world KGs. We thus present FuzzQE, a
fuzzy logic based logical query embedding framework for
answering FOL queries over KGs. FuzzQE follows fuzzy
logic to define logical operators in a principled and learningfree manner, where only entity and relation embeddings require learning. FuzzQE can further benefit from labeled complex logical queries for training. Extensive experiments on
two benchmark datasets demonstrate that FuzzQE provides
significantly better performance in answering FOL queries
compared to state-of-the-art methods. In addition, FuzzQE
trained with only KG link prediction can achieve comparable
performance to those trained with extra complex query data.

Figure 1: FOL query and its dependency graph for the question “Who sang the songs that were written by John Lennon
or Paul McCartney but never won a Grammy Award?”.

Knowledge graphs (KGs), such as Freebase (Bollacker et al.
2008), YAGO (Rebele et al. 2016), and NELL (Mitchell
et al. 2018), provide structured representations of facts about
real-world entities and relations. One of the fundamental
tasks over KGs is to answer complex queries involving logical reasoning, e.g., answering First-Order Logical (FOL)
queries with existential quantification (∃), conjunction (∧),
disjunction (∨), and negation (¬). For instance, the question
“Who sang the songs that were written by John Lennon or
Paul McCartney but never won a Grammy Award?” can be
expressed as the FOL query shown in Fig 1.
This task is challenging due to the size and the incompleteness of KGs. FOL query answering has been studied
as a graph query optimization problem in the database community (Hartig and Heese 2007; Zou et al. 2011; Schmidt,
Meier, and Lausen 2010). These methods traverse the KG to
retrieve answers for each sub-query and then merge the re-

sults. Though being extensively studied, these methods cannot well resolve the above-mentioned challenges. The time
complexity exponentially grows with the query complexity
and is affected by the size of the intermediate results. This
makes them difficult to scale to modern KGs, whose entities are often numbered in millions (Bollacker et al. 2008;
Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014). For example, Wikidata is
one of the most influential KGs and reports that their query
engine fails when the number of entities in a sub-query (e.g.,
people born in Germany) exceeds a certain threshold1 . In addition, real-world KGs are often incomplete, which prevents
directly answering many queries by searching KGs. A recent
study shows that only 0.5% of football players in Wikidata
have a highly complete profile, while over 40% contain only
basic information (Balaraman, Razniewski, and Nutt 2018).
To address the challenges of time complexity and KG incompleteness, a line of recent studies (Hamilton et al. 2018;
Ren, Hu, and Leskovec 2020; Ren and Leskovec 2020) embed logical queries and entities into the same vector space.
The idea is to represent a query using a dependency graph
(Figure 1) and embed a complex logical query by iteratively
computing embeddings from anchor entities to the target
node in a bottom-up manner. The continuous and meaningful entity embeddings empower these approaches to handle
missing edges. In addition, these models significantly reduce time and space complexity for inference, as they reduce
query answering to dense similarity matching of query and

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:SPARQL query
service/query optimization

1

Introduction

3939

