The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MAPDP: Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning to Solve Pickup and
Delivery Problems
Zefang Zong1,2 , Meng Zheng3 , Yong Li1,2, * , Depeng Jin1,2
1
2

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Hitachi (China) Research & Development Corporation

Abstract

transported from specific factories and warehouses at multiple sites (Li et al. 2021b). Efficiently generating high-quality
solutions of cooperative PDP can help reduce operating expenses, improve public efficiency and thus bring significant
benefits.
Owing to the NP-hard nature, the cooperative PDP along
with other VRP variants is still difficult to be optimally
solved by exact methods (Toth and Vigo 2002; Madsen, Fisher, and Jornsten 1997). Even though numerous
heuristic-based methods are developed to compute nearoptimal solutions, the solution generation process remains
time-consuming and there is still potential to find more approximate ones. The recent development of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) offers its effectiveness in solving many
combinatorial optimization problems including VRPs, and
thus brings another perspective to solve PDP (Bello et al.
2016; Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019; Nazari et al. 2018;
Chen and Tian 2019; Lu, Zhang, and Yang 2019a). Benefiting from learning a parameterized model instead of relying
on manually constructed rules to search for solutions, DRL
has shown its appealing performance in typical routing problems. Besides, by splitting the phases of training and online
inferring, DRL can generate results with much faster computation. Inspired by both high solution quality and inference speed, it is prospective to well solve cooperative PDP
by constructing a DRL framework.
However, most existing DRL based methods can only be
applied to typical VRPs where the demands share a common final delivery site, i.e., either to be picked up or to be
delivered only. They are less effective when facing cooperative PDP with more detailed constraints and challenges
from the following two aspects. First, it is not trivial to measure and structural constraint of PDP among different nodes.
Compared to typical VRPs, complicated relations among all
nodes should be considered. Representation upon the relation between paired pickup and deliveries should differ from
that between unpaired ones. How to efficiently measure such
relations is essential for framework effectiveness. Second, it
is difficult to coordinate the cooperation within the vehicle
fleet. As all vehicles working simultaneously to accomplish
the pickup and delivery tasks, the potential decision space of
one is directly influenced by others. Optimizing the coordinated routing plans as the global objective is different from
optimizing the one of a single vehicle, where the dependence

Cooperative Pickup and Delivery Problem (PDP), as a variant of the typical Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP), is an important formulation in many real-world applications, such as
on-demand delivery, industrial warehousing, etc. It is of great
importance to efficiently provide high-quality solutions of cooperative PDP. However, it is not trivial to provide effective
solutions directly due to two major challenges: 1) the structural dependency between pickup and delivery pairs require
explicit modeling and representation. 2) the cooperation between different vehicles is highly related to solution exploration and is difficult to model. In this paper, we propose a
novel multi-agent reinforcement learning-based framework
to solve the cooperative PDP (MAPDP). First, we design a
paired context embedding to well measure the dependency of
different nodes considering their structural limits. Second, we
utilize cooperative multi-agent decoders to leverage the decision dependence among different vehicle agents based on a
special communication embedding. Third, we design a novel
cooperative A2C algorithm to train the integrated model.
We conduct extensive experiments on a randomly generated
dataset and a real-world dataset. Experiments result shown
that the proposed MAPDP outperforms all other baselines by
at least 1.64% in all settings, and shows significant computation speed during solution inference.

Introduction
Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) has shown its importance
in formulating many real-world applications, including express systems, industrial warehousing, and on-demand delivery (Zong et al. 2021). A fleet of vehicles/couriers are
managed to fulfill given demands, while the goal is to optimize the routing plan to reduce traveling expenses. In realworld scenarios, a given demand order usually has its own
origination and a designated delivery destination. Furthermore, routing tasks are usually assigned to multiple vehicles simultaneously, which forms the Pickup and Delivery
Problem (PDP) (Savelsbergh and Sol 1995). For instance,
on-demand delivery couriers need to pick up the food first
from the restaurants and then deliver it to the corresponding
customers, as shown in 1. While in industrial manufacturing, large amounts of materials, productions also need to be
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9980

