The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

OAM: An Option-Action Reinforcement Learning Framework for Universal
Multi-Intersection Control
Enming Liang1 , Zicheng Su2 , Chilin Fang3 , Renxin Zhong3∗
1

School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong
Department of Advanced Design and Systems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
3
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
eliang4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, zichengsu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, fangchlin3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhrenxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

solution to that in real-world scenarios (Wei et al. 2018,
2019b; Zheng et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Oroojlooy et al.
2020). Although the RL methods have achieved significant
improvements in intersection control, several critical issues
still need to be addressed:
(1) A paradigmatic design of state, action, and reward
function is missing. In the literature, these three components are generally designed manually based on experience,
which would result in difficulties in generalization. Specifically, an optimality-guaranteed reward function that minimizes the average travel time is still missing.
(2) A universal framework for generalization is needed.
The intersections in the real world vary in different physical capacities, topologies, and traffic flows. Besides, the
parameter-sharing approach is more realistic in application
owing to its data-efficient nature, comparing with training
the agents for each intersection separately. To this end, the
design of the RL algorithm is required to generalize to different real-life scenarios with one universal structure (Zheng
et al. 2019; Oroojlooy et al. 2020).
(3) Collaboration among multiple intersections should be
analyzed. Coordination between neighboring intersections
is essential for efficient traffic management. The centralized
approaches are computationally intractable for real-time decision making (Kuyer et al. 2008). Oppositely, the decentralized methods are more efficient by aggregating neighboring
information and by executing individually (Chen et al. 2020;
Wei et al. 2019b; Zhu et al. 2021). However, the mechanism
of coordination in different conditions under the decentralized regime is still unclear.
To address the above issues, we propose the OptionAction RL framework for universal Multiple-intersection
control (OAM). Firstly, we redesign the lane-cell-level state
representation based on cell transmission model (CTM) (Daganzo 1994), which simulates the physical traffic-flow propagation. The state design can better balance the learning
complexity and representation ability. We then reformulate
the phase actions as the constrained combinations of lane
options, where lane options are defined under different current phase as shown in Fig. 1. By disentangling the phase
action into lane-level options, the action structure can generalize to any intersection topology with any phase definition. We also propose a decomposed delay with regularizer
as the reward to facilitate temporal credit assignment and

Efficient traffic signal control is an important means to
alleviate urban traffic congestion. Reinforcement learning
(RL) has shown great potentials in devising optimal signal
plans that can adapt to dynamic traffic congestion. However, several challenges still need to be overcome. Firstly, a
paradigm of state, action, and reward design is needed, especially for an optimality-guaranteed reward function. Secondly, the generalization of the RL algorithms is hindered by
the varied topologies and physical properties of intersections.
Lastly, enhancing the cooperation between intersections is
needed for large network applications. To address these issues, the Option-Action RL framework for universal Multiintersection control (OAM) is proposed. Based on the wellknown cell transmission model, we first define a lane-celllevel state to better model the traffic flow propagation. Based
on this physical queuing dynamics, we propose a regularized
delay as the reward to facilitate temporal credit assignment
while maintaining the equivalence with minimizing the average travel time. We then recapitulate the phase actions as the
constrained combinations of lane options and design a universal neural network structure to realize model generalization
to any intersection with any phase definition. The multipleintersection cooperation is then rigorously discussed using
the potential game theory.
We test the OAM algorithm under four networks with different settings, including a city-level scenario with 2,048 intersections using synthetic and real-world datasets. The results
show that the OAM can outperform the state-of-the-art controllers in reducing the average travel time.

Introduction
With rapid urbanization and increased car ownership, traffic congestion has become one of the major issues for urban areas. Traffic control systems have shown effectiveness in improving the efficiency and robustness of road networks. Classical examples include SCATS, SCOOT, and the
more recent max-pressure controller (Varaiya 2013). With
the development of AI technology and the growing size of
traffic data, learning-based control approaches have shown
great potential in solving traffic signal control problems. In
particular, reinforcement learning (RL) seems a promising
∗

Correspondence to Renxin Zhong.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4550

