The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Active Learning on Pre-trained Language Model
with Task-Independent Triplet Loss
Seungmin Seo, Donghyun Kim, Youbin Ahn, and Kyong-Ho Lee
Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{smseo91, dhkim92, ybahn, khlee89}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

However, dependence on the fixed feature representation
of task classifiers may cause divergent issues (Wang et al.
2016). Also, it is unreliable for choosing the most informative sample based on the classifier’s unreliable response. In
summary, it is challenging to apply existing approaches to
different tasks because of their task dependency.
Another challenge is that typical active learning strategies acquire and query the informative samples one by one,
which is difficult to be used in real-world applications (Zhdanov 2019). To improve one-by-one sample acquisition,
many researchers present the batch acquisition strategies
(Kirsch, Van Amersfoort, and Gal 2019; Zhdanov 2019; Ash
et al. 2019; Gal and Ghahramani 2016). A simple approach
selects a batch sample based on the continuous one-by-one
query (Gal and Ghahramani 2016). However, this approach
tends to take redundant informative samples. Some works
consider the mutual information inherent in batch samples
to exclude redundant samples (Kirsch, Van Amersfoort, and
Gal 2019; Ash et al. 2019; Zhdanov 2019; Yuan, Lin, and
Boyd-Graber 2020), but those methods still suffer from insufficient diversity of batch samples because they do not
fully capture the data distribution.
This paper proposes a task-independent batch acquisition algorithm on a pre-trained language model with triplet
loss (BATL). Previous approaches usually require a certain
amount of labeled data at the early stage of active learning to
guarantee the ability to choose informative samples. To overcome the limitation, our model utilizes the self-supervision
of a pre-trained language model to find informative samples
in the early sampling iterations.
On the other hand, if unlabeled data is sampled only with
the self-supervision of a sentence, it can be overlooked that
different unlabeled samples have different importance for
the task model depending on a type of downstream task. Instead of relying solely on the self-supervision of a language
model, the proposed approach chooses informative samples
using both the pre-trained knowledge of the language model
and the task-related feature extracted from task classifiers.
Moreover, our method acquires diverse batch samples
with respect to data distribution. Specifically, the proposed
method utilizes triplet loss to distinguish hard samples in
the unlabeled data pool that have similar features to each
other (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017; Zeng et al. 2020). Triplet loss effec-

Active learning attempts to maximize a task model’s performance gain by obtaining a set of informative samples from an
unlabeled data pool. Previous active learning methods usually
rely on specific network architectures or task-dependent sample acquisition algorithms. Moreover, when selecting a batch
sample, previous works suffer from insufficient diversity of
batch samples because they only consider the informativeness of each sample. This paper proposes a task-independent
batch acquisition method using triplet loss to distinguish hard
samples in an unlabeled data pool with similar features but
difficult to identify labels. To assess the effectiveness of the
proposed method, we compare the proposed method with
state-of-the-art active learning methods on two tasks, relation
extraction and sentence classification. Experimental results
show that our method outperforms baselines on the benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown unprecedented breakthroughs in various research areas. Particularly in the field
of natural language processing (NLP), pre-trained language
models such as GPT (Radford et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) achieve high performance in many NLP
tasks (Conneau and Lample 2019; Vu, Phung, and Haffari
2020; Wang et al. 2019). Although a pre-trained language
model is learned with massive corpora, it still needs to obtain sufficient supervised data for a target task. To address
this low-resource problem, active learning has gradually attracted the attention of researchers.
While unsupervised and semi-supervised learning fully
utilize the unlabeled samples, active learning aims to select
a few unlabeled samples to be labeled for efficient training. The key challenge of active learning is to find the most
informative unlabeled samples that maximize the task performance when labeled and used for training. Some recent
works rely on feature representation derived from specific
network architectures such as Bayesian Neural Networks
(Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani 2017; Tran et al. 2019; Kirsch,
Van Amersfoort, and Gal 2019), or use task-dependent
algorithms to find informative samples (Ostapuk, Yang,
and Cudré-Mauroux 2019; Wang, Chiticariu, and Li 2017).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11276

