The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ACDNet: Adaptively Combined Dilated Convolution for Monocular Panorama
Depth Estimation
Chuanqing Zhuang1 * , Zhengda Lu1 * , Yiqun Wang2,3 , Jun Xiao1† , Ying Wang1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University
3
KAUST
zhuangchuanqing19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {luzhengda,xiaojun,ywang}@ucas.ac.cn, yiqun.wang@cqu.edu.cn

Input

Abstract

Ours

UniFuse

HoHoNet

Depth estimation is a crucial step for 3D reconstruction with
panorama images in recent years. Panorama images maintain the complete spatial information but introduce distortion with equirectangular projection. In this paper, we propose an ACDNet based on the adaptively combined dilated
convolution to predict the dense depth map for a monocular
panoramic image. Specifically, we combine the convolution
kernels with different dilations to extend the receptive field in
the equirectangular projection. Meanwhile, we introduce an
adaptive channel-wise fusion module to summarize the feature maps and get diverse attention areas in the receptive field
along the channels. Due to the utilization of channel-wise attention in constructing the adaptive channel-wise fusion module, the network can capture and leverage the cross-channel
contextual information efficiently. Finally, we conduct depth
estimation experiments on three datasets (both virtual and
real-world) and the experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed ACDNet substantially outperforms the current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Our codes and model parameters are accessed in https://github.com/zcq15/ACDNet.

Figure 1: Reconstructed results of different models. Left: the
panorama color image and the predicted depth maps. Right:
point clouds generated from the ground-truth and predicted
depth maps with inverse equirectangular projection. Note
that our predicted depth map has more clear edges and also
generates a more accurate point cloud in both overall shape
and object details.

Introduction
The panoramic camera is a new type of camera to capture
images with 180◦ × 360◦ field of view (FoV), which is convenient to obtain omnidirectional spatial information in a
single shot without the post-calibration and stitching. With
its wide usage in the fields such as virtual reality (VR) and
security monitoring in recent years, panorama depth estimation is a crucial step in a variety of downstream applications,
such as semantic segmentation, layout recovery, and 3D reconstruction, to name a few.
Generally, panorama images are represented as images on
the sphere grid for warp and weft by the equirectangular
projection (ERP). However, the geometric structure in the
higher latitude areas is distorted since the spatial sampling
rate changes with latitude. Therefore, accurate depth estimation is difficult with conventional convolution networks
in these areas.

Early works (Cohen et al. 2017, 2018) define the spherical CNNs to process the spherical signals but cause the
high resource expenditure. And some others (Su and Grauman 2017; Tateno, Navab, and Tombari 2018; Coors, Condurache, and Geiger 2018; Fernandez-Labrador et al. 2020)
propose the different custom convolutions to deform the
convolution kernels according to the geometric structures in
the 3D space of the ERP coordinates. These adaptive convolution kernels expand the receptive fields near the poles
according to the corresponding latitude coordinates. However, these methods still have a great potential to be further
improved.
On the other hand, BiFuse (Wang et al. 2020a) and UniFuse (Jiang et al. 2021) project the ERP image to the cube-

* Joint first authors with equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3653

