The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep One-Class Classification via Interpolated Gaussian Descriptor
Yuanhong Chen1 * , Yu Tian1 * † , Guansong Pang2 , Gustavo Carneiro1
1

2

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
{yuanhong.chen, yu.tian01, gustavo.carneiro}@adelaide.edu.au, pangguansong@gmail.com

Noise Contamination

Abstract

Small Training Set

0.85
0.8

0.8

0.75

0.75

AUC

AUC

One-class classification (OCC) aims to learn an effective data
description to enclose all normal training samples and detect
anomalies based on the deviation from the data description.
Current state-of-the-art OCC models learn a compact normality description by hyper-sphere minimisation, but they often
suffer from overfitting the training data, especially when the
training set is small or contaminated with anomalous samples. To address this issue, we introduce the interpolated
Gaussian descriptor (IGD) method, a novel OCC model that
learns a one-class Gaussian anomaly classifier trained with
adversarially interpolated training samples. The Gaussian
anomaly classifier differentiates the training samples based
on their distance to the Gaussian centre and the standard deviation of these distances, offering the model a discriminability w.r.t. the given samples during training. The adversarial
interpolation is enforced to consistently learn a smooth Gaussian descriptor, even when the training data is small or contaminated with anomalous samples. This enables our model
to learn the data description based on the representative normal samples rather than fringe or anomalous samples, resulting in significantly improved normality description. In extensive experiments on diverse popular benchmarks, including MNIST, Fashion MNIST, CIFAR10, MVTec AD and two
medical datasets, IGD achieves better detection accuracy than
current state-of-the-art models. IGD also shows better robustness in problems with small or contaminated training sets.

0.85

0.7
0.65

0.7
0.65

0.6

0.6

0.55

0.55

0.5

0.5

DSVDD
10% 5%

IGD
1%

DSVDD
20%

IGD
60%

100%

Figure 1: Mean testing AUC of DSVDD (Ruff et al. 2018),
and our proposed IGD trained with the CIFAR10 training set
contaminated with 1%, 5% and 10% of anomalous samples
(left), and small training sets, consisting of 20%, 60%, and
100% of the CIFAR10 training set (right).

State-of-the-art (SOTA) OCC models are trained by minimising the radius of a hyper-sphere to enclose all training
samples in the representation space (Ruff et al. 2018; Perera and Patel 2019; Ruff et al. 2020). To avoid catastrophic
collapse, where all training samples are projected to a single point in the representation space, these OCC models fix
the hyper-sphere centre and remove the bias terms from the
model. Even though these SOTA OCC models show accurate anomaly detection results in several benchmarks, they
can overfit the training data, particularly when the training
set is small or contaminated with anomalous samples, as
shown by the results of DSVDD (Ruff et al. 2018) in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we introduce the interpolated Gaussian descriptor (IGD) method to address the overfitting issue presented in SOTA OCC models. IGD is based on a oneclass Gaussian anomaly classifier modelled with adversarially interpolated training samples. The classifier is trained
to build a normality description to discriminate training samples based on their distance to the Gaussian centre and the
standard deviation of these distances. The smoothness of the
normality description is enforced by the adversarial interpolation of the training samples that constrains the training
of IGD to be based on representative normal samples rather
than fringe or anomalous samples. This allows the normality
description of IGD to be more robust than the SOTA OCC
models, particularly when the training set is small or contaminated with anomalous samples, as shown in Fig. 1 and
t-SNE results in appendix.

Introduction
Anomaly detection and segmentation are critical tasks in
many real-world applications, such as the identification of
defects on industry objects (Bergmann et al. 2019) or abnormalities from medical images (Schlegl et al. 2017, 2019).
Given that most of the training sets available for this task
contain only normal images, existing methods are typically
formulated as one-class classifiers (OCC) (Venkataramanan
et al. 2019; Ruff et al. 2018). OCCs aim to first learn a data
description of normal samples in the training set and then
use a criterion (e.g., distance to the one-class centre (Ruff
et al. 2018)) to detect and localise anomalies in test samples.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

383

