The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Proportional Public Decisions
Piotr Skowron, Adrian Górecki
University of Warsaw
p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl, adrian.gorecki.00@gmail.com

Abstract

proportional to their size. Similar criteria have been considered in the literature on committee elections (see the recent
survey by Lackner and Skowron (2020)). The main difference is that our concepts provide proportionality guarantees
for all groups of voters of sufficient size, while the properties formulated for committee elections typically provide
guarantees only for groups of voters which have very similar (cohesive) preferences. This difference is very important
since empirical studies suggest that groups of voters with cohesive preferences are rare (Bredereck et al. 2019), and thus
our axioms provide practically more powerful guarantees.
We explain how two rules known in the literature, Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) and the Method of Equal
Shares (MES), apply in this setting. We prove they perform
very well from the perspective of proportionality.

We consider a setting where a group of individuals make a
number of independent decisions. The decisions should proportionally represent the views of the voters. We formulate
new criteria of proportionality and analyse two rules, Proportional Approval Voting and the Metod of Equal Shares,
inspired by the corresponding committee election rules. We
prove that the two rules provide very strong proportionality
guarantees when applied to the setting of public decisions.

Introduction
We consider a model where a group of n individuals, hereinafter called voters, needs to collectively make m independent decisions. Each decision is binary—it can be either YES
or NO. This model describes numerous real scenarios, such
as negotiations within a group of people having conflicting
interests (in particular, negotiations between senators during
talks that precede formations of governing coalitions), or decisions made by housing cooperatives. The same model has
been considered by Freeman, Kahng, and Pennock (2020)
in the context of selecting a subset of candidates, where for
each candidate the voters decide if the candidate should be
included in the selected subset.
Typically, such decisions are made via majority voting,
i.e., for each issue we count the number of YES and NO ballots, and we choose the option that received more votes. This
allows even a small majority of voters to decide about all the
relevant issues. For example, if 51% of voters would like all
m decisions to be YES, and the remaining 49% would have
exactly opposite views, making decisions via majority voting would make 51% of voters fully satisfied, and 49% completely ignored. This is unfair and disproportional. Ideally, in
this example we would like roughly 51% of the decisions to
be YES and 49% to be NO.

Related Work
The model of public decisions has been considered
by Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah (2017). The authors have
also considered criteria of fairness, yet their axioms specify guarantees on satisfaction only for individual voters. Our
criteria provide guarantees also for groups of voters.
Our model and our criteria are inspired by the literature on
approval-based committee elections (Lackner and Skowron
2020). Specifically, the criteria of proportionality that we
consider in this paper are closely related to the notions of extended justified representation (EJR) (Aziz et al. 2017) and
proportionality degree (Sánchez-Fernández et al. 2017; Aziz
et al. 2018; Skowron et al. 2017; Skowron 2021). In committee elections the goal is to select a fixed-size subset of candidates based on the voters’ preferences. This corresponds to
making multiple decisions—for each candidate we need to
decide whether to include this candidate in the winning committee or not—yet, there are additional constraints that specify the total number of “yes” decisions. This perspective has
been noticed by Freeman, Kahng, and Pennock (2020), who
refer to the setting of public decisions as to committee elections with variable number of winners (i.e., where the number of winning candidates is not fixed a priori). A number of
axioms that specify proportionality guarantees for groups of
voters with cohesive preferences have been proposed in the
literature on committee elections. In this paper we consider
axioms that guarantee fair treetment for all groups of voters,
not only the cohesive ones.

Our Contribution
In this paper we propose new formal criteria of proportionality that capture the following intuition: an α fraction of
voters shall be able to influence at least α fraction of decisions. Thus, our criteria require that a rule used for making
decisions should respect minorities of voters to the extent
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5191

