The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Characterization of Incentive Compatibility of an Ex-ante Constrained Player *
Bonan Ni, Pingzhong Tang
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
bricksern@gmail.com, kenshinping@gmail.com

Abstract

classic mechanism design literature, however, are interim
constraints, which are separately evaluated for each possible
type of each player. When an ex-ante constraint on overall
expectation is binding, it is possible for the player to design more complicated misreport strategy: instead of separately maximizing the utility for each of her own type, the
player can make contingent plans about the type report over
her whole type space, so that her constraint remains satisfied, but her utility is overall better off than always reporting
truthfully. Such possibility poses new challenges to the design of incentive compatible mechanisms.
In this paper, we analyze the general mechanism design
problem with an ex-ante constraint on the outcome and payment, which is not limited to the design of single-item auctions. From a fixed player’s perspective, the mechanism is
abstracted into a pair of interim rules (but with ex-ante utility model and constraints), and we characterize interim rules
of any incentive compatible mechanism. Our first characterization in Section 4 states that, it is without loss of generality
to use the following implementation of incentive compatible
mechanism: the designer maximizes some new value-minuspayment utility on behalf of the player for every type realization of the mechanism, where the new value is defined by
linearly combining a utility term and a constraint term using
some factors that are fixed across all type realization of the
mechanism. For example, when the player is a value maximizer with budget constraint, it suffices to determine factors (α, β) and maximize α times value minus β times payment. This characterization justifies the auto-bidding technique in online advertising, where an advertiser’s evaluations for the advertisement slot’s value and contribution to
constraint are combined linearly to give input to an auction.
Our second characterization, given in Section 6, shows that
incentive compatibility can be characterized using a multidimensional payment identity, and the new payment identity
differs from the one in classic quasi-linear mechanism design literature (Myerson 1981; Manelli and Vincent 2007)
only by linearly combining the utility and constraint terms.

We consider a variant of the standard Bayesian mechanism,
where players evaluate their outcomes and constraints in an
ex-ante manner. Such a model captures a major form of modern online advertising where an advertiser is concerned with
her/his expected utility over a time period and her/his type
may change over time. We are interested in the incentive
compatibility (IC) problem of such Bayesian mechanism. Under very mild conditions on the mechanism environments,
we give a full characterization of IC via the taxation principle and show, perhaps surprisingly, that such IC mechanisms
are fully characterized by the so-called auto-bidding mechanisms, which are pervasively fielded in the online advertising
industry.

1

Introduction

In online advertisement industry, where a publisher sells advertisement slots to some advertisers, it is typical for each
advertiser to have her own account which records her remaining budget, the amount of advertisement slots allocated
so far and possibly the amount of conversions generated
through her advertisements. Slot auctions happen at almost
the same frequency as user requests, which makes it almost
impossible (and indeed unnecessary) for advertisers to evaluate utility of each auction separately. As a result, in industry, certain kinds of contracts are signed between the platform and the advertiser to guarantee overall allocation and
payment over a relatively long time period, typically one day
or one week. For example, one popular form of contract is to
limit the total amount of money spent on advertising, which
is called budget constraint in the related literature. Another
popular contract form limits the return-over-investment ratio (ROI), and examples of this form include Google’s target
CPA bidding and Facebook’s cost cap.
In the probability space consisting of all auction events
over the given time period, the constraints imposed by such
contracts are expressed in an ex-ante manner. That is, satisfaction of the constraint is evaluated by taking the expectation over the whole probability space. Most constraints in

2

* This

work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2020AAA0103401.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Works

Many recent works study the the mechanism design problems for players with various ex-ante constraints, typically
under the context of online advertisement auction. Unlike
the widely used constraint of individual rationality which
5156

