The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Participatory Budgeting with Donations and Diversity Constraints
Jiehua Chen, Martin Lackner, Jan Maly
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
jiehua.chen@tuwien.ac.at, {lackner, jmaly}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

may allow wealthier voters to donate more money than voters who are less well off and thus exert an unfairly large influence on the PB process. Therefore, one of the main goals
of the paper is to determine whether it is possible to include
donations in the PB process in a way that avoids this risk
while also achieving the advantages.
Our chosen model is based on PB with cardinal preferences (see also Peters, Pierczynski, and Skowron (2020)),
i.e., voters have numbers associated with projects that reflect their preferences. Cardinal preferences capture, e.g.,
settings with approval ballots (only 0 and 1 are used), settings where voters can distribute points to projects (where
usually the sum of points is fixed and the same for all), and
settings where these numbers accurately correspond to the
utility of voters. Further, our model allows for diversity constraints (see also (Benabbou, Chakraborty, and Zick 2019)):
Each project belongs to one or more types (based on classifications such as “youth and education” or “transport and
mobility”) and for each type there is a minimum and maximum number of projects to be funded. This added generality allows us to model many interesting variations of PB,
for example city-wide referenda where districts have their
own “project quota”. Note that it is straightforward to extend
our model to include constraints with a minimum/maximum
amount of budget spent (see also Hershkowitz et al.).
As mentioned before, the largest concern of allowing donations in PB is that voters who can afford to donate money
have additional power to influence the outcome. This may
undermine the acceptance of the process among the voters
who cannot afford to donate. Therefore, we consider the following desideratum as crucial for aggregation rules in PB
with donations.
D1 Donation-no-harm. Allowing donations should not
make any voter less satisfied (independent of whether
the voter donated herself).
A natural approach for handling donations in PB is to
reduce the cost of a project by the amount of donations
pledged to the project and then to apply a normal PB aggregation rule. In this paper, we exemplarily examine eight
standard PB aggregation rules, four based on global optimization and the remaining four on greedy optimization (see
Section 2 for the formal definitions; see also Aziz and Shah
2020). We show that this approach, however, violates D1
for all eight standard PB rules. Consequently, we propose

Participatory budgeting (PB) is a democratic process where
citizens jointly decide on how to allocate public funds to indivisible projects. In this work, we focus on PB processes
where citizens may provide additional money to projects they
want to see funded. We introduce a formal framework for this
kind of PB with donations. Our framework also allows for diversity constraints, meaning that each project belongs to one
or more types, and there are lower and upper bounds on the
number of projects of the same type that can be funded. We
propose three general classes of methods for aggregating the
citizens’ preferences in the presence of donations and analyze their axiomatic properties. Furthermore, we investigate
the computational complexity of determining the outcome of
a PB process with donations and of finding a citizen’s optimal
donation strategy.

1

Introduction

Participatory budgeting (PB) (Cabannes 2004; Shah 2007)
is a democratic tool that enables voters to directly decide
about budget spending. The general procedure of PB is that
voters are presented with a number of projects (e.g., building
a library or a park) and are asked to vote on these projects.
Then, a PB aggregation rule is used to select a subset of
projects—a so-called bundle—to be funded. This bundle has
to be feasible, which typically means that the total cost must
not exceed the available budget, and sometimes further adhere to fairness constraints.
In this paper, we propose a new addition to the participatory budgeting process, namely adding donations. In our
model, voters can pledge donations to projects they support.
If such a project is funded, the donations are levied and only
the remaining cost is covered by the public budget. Consequently, projects with donations can be funded with a reduced impact on the public budget. At first glance, allowing
donations in PB referenda brings major advantages: As the
total available budget increases, a larger overall satisfaction
is achievable. In addition, voters with an intense preference
for a project can support this project financially and thus
increase the chance of it being funded. However, allowing
donations also comes with a significant risk, namely that it
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9323

