The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Classifying Emails into Human vs Machine Category
Changsung Kang1 , Hongwei Shang2 , Jean-Marc Langlois2
1

Walmart Global Tech
2
Yahoo Research
changsung.kang@walmart.com, hongwei shang@yahoo.com, jmlanglois@yahoo.com

Abstract

such as cyber security events detection (Vinayakumar et al.
2019), commitment detection (Azarbonyad, Sim, and White
2019), intent detection (Shu et al. 2020) and online template
induction (Whittaker et al. 2019). Most of these applications depend on training high-quality classifiers on emails.
For mail classification, there has been some research efforts
to learn email embedding by leveraging various aspects/features of emails. Sun et al. (2018) used only the sequence of
B2C templates as input to learn representations. Kocayusufoglu et al. (2019) utilized HTML structure of emails to help
classify machine-generated emails. Potti et al. (2018) leveraged both text and image content of commercial emails to
classify emails.
The recent advancement in natural language processing
(NLP), especially in text classification, has proposed various
deep learning model architectures for learning text representation in place of feature engineering. Fundamental work in
this area involves with learning word representations by predicting a word’s context (Mikolov et al. 2013; Bojanowski
et al. 2017). Later work extended to learn representations
for longer sequences of text, at sentence-length level and
document-length level (Yang et al. 2016; Le and Mikolov
2014; Kiros et al. 2015; Joulin et al. 2016). Most recently,
motivated by the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.
2017), the BERT model (Devlin et al. 2018) and its variations (Yang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2020) pretrained bidirectional representations from unlabeled text.
It is an essential product requirement of Yahoo Mail
to distinguish between personal and machine-generated
emails. The model proposed by Yahoo researchers (Grbovic
et al. 2014) has been deployed into previous Yahoo Mail production system. This model relies on a large number of well
designed features for prediction, including content, sender,
behavioral, and temporal behavioral features. In spite of its
accurate prediction, this old production model has a “sender
cold-start” issue with 70% of email traffic covered (Grbovic
et al. 2014). The model may not be able to conduct appropriate learning for new senders with few associated messages,
especially when the most predictive features are historical
behavioral features and new users do not have enough history to provide reliable features. Another drawback of the
production model is that it is a simple logistic regression
model without utilizing the recent development in NLP. In
addition to considering behavior features, the previous pro-

It is an essential product requirement of Yahoo Mail to distinguish between personal and machine-generated emails. The
old production classifier in Yahoo Mail was based on a simple
logistic regression model. That model was trained by aggregating features at the SMTP address level. We propose building deep learning models at the message level. We train four
individual CNN models: (1) a content model with subject and
content as input, (2) a sender model with sender email address and name as input, (3) an action model by analyzing
email recipients’ action patterns and generating target labels
based on senders’ opening/deleting behaviors and (4) a salutation model by utilizing senders’ “explicit salutation” signal
as positive labels. Next, we train a final full model after exploring different combinations of the above four models. Experimental results on editorial data show that our full model
improves the adjusted-recall from 70.5% to 78.8% and the
precision from 94.7% to 96.0% compared to the old production model. Also, our full model significantly outperforms a
state-of-the-art BERT model at this task. Our new model has
been deployed to the current production system (Yahoo Mail
6).

Introduction
Grbovic et al. (2014) showed that today’s mail web traffic
is dominated by machine-generated messages, originating
from mass senders, such as social networks, e-commerce
sites, travel operators etc; and a classifier should first distinguish between machine and human-generated messages before attempting any finer classification. A human generated
email comes from an individual person. A machine generated email is an automatic email, a mass marketing email,
and/or a template email. The annotation guideline details
about Human/Machine email’s definition are in Appendix.
There are a lot of well-known applications on mail
area, including spam detection (Kumaresan, Saravanakumar, and Balamurugan 2019; Douzi et al. 2020; Mohammadzadeh and Gharehchopogh 2021) user’s future action
prediction (Di Castro et al. 2016), email threading (Ailon
et al. 2013) and information extraction (Agarwal and Singh
2018; Di Castro et al. 2018; Sheng et al. 2018). Recently, research community has made more interesting applications,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7069

