The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FFNet: Frequency Fusion Network for Semantic Scene Completion
Xuzhi Wang, Di Lin∗ , Liang Wan
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{wangxuzhi, di.lin, lwan}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Existing methods adopt the element-wise summation (Li
et al. 2019, 2020b,d), the weighted summation (Liu et al.
2020a) or the channel-wise concatenation (Liu et al. 2018a)
to fuse the multi-modality RGB-D data. However, these
methods ignore the large discrepancy between the RGB and
depth modalities. Note that there are many uncertainty measurements of the depth data, which is the challenge of RGBD fusion (Chen et al. 2020c; Wang et al. 2020b; Valada, Mohan, and Burgard 2020; Piao et al. 2019). Thus, the current
methods are ineffective when utilizing the RGB and depth
data to boost semantic scene completion tasks.
The pair of RGB and depth data are various representations of the same scene. RGB data is the photometric representation, while depth data is the geometric representation.
They have a strong structural similarity (Fu et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020c; Chen and Fu 2020; Lin and Huang 2019; Lin
et al. 2018, 2017). We aim at utilizing the correlation between RGB-D features for multi-modality fusion.
Motivated by the above analysis, we propose a novel
and effective Frequency Fusion Network (FFNet) to achieve
RGB-D fusion for semantic scene completion. FFNet adopts
a correlation and assistance pipeline to tackle the challenges
of RGB-D fusion. The key idea is to learn the frequency
feature to capture the correlation of RGB and depth data.
FFNet uses the correlated information to guide the computation of RGB and depth features. Our Frequency Fusion
Module leads to the structure information enhancement of
the RGB and depth features.
To achieve the correlation between the RGB and depth data for information enhancement, we propose a novel mechanism that facilitates one modality better fused with the
other. We decompose the RGB and depth features by an
elliptical mask, which is learned in a data-driven manner.
The frequency describes the spatial changing of an image. High-frequency components correspond to the rapidly
changing areas, like the edge and texture of an object. The
low-frequency components represent the smooth areas (Li
et al. 2020e). Intuitively, the similarity of different frequency
components between RGB and depth features is discrepant.
We find a more effective correlation between RGB-D features by emphasizing different frequency components.
There are two advantages of using frequency learning to
correlate the RGB-D features. First, it can explicitly find the
correlation of RGB-D data. Different from the features di-

Semantic scene completion (SSC) requires the estimation of
the 3D geometric occupancies of objects in the scene, along
with the object categories. Currently, many methods employ
RGB-D images to capture the geometric and semantic information of objects. These methods use simple but popular
spatial- and channel-wise operations, which fuse the information of RGB and depth data. Yet, they ignore the large discrepancy of RGB-D data and the uncertainty measurements
of depth data. To solve this problem, we propose the Frequency Fusion Network (FFNet), a novel method for boosting
semantic scene completion by better utilizing RGB-D data.
FFNet explicitly correlates the RGB-D data in the frequency domain, different from the features directly extracted by
the convolution operation. Then, the network uses the correlated information to guide the feature learning from the RGB and depth images, respectively. Moreover, FFNet accounts
for the properties of different frequency components of RGBD features. It has a learnable elliptical mask to decompose
the features learned from the RGB and depth images, attending to various frequencies to facilitate the correlation process of RGB-D data. We evaluate FFNet intensively on the
public SSC benchmarks, where FFNet surpasses the state-ofthe-art methods. The code package of FFNet is available at
https://github.com/alanWXZ/FFNet.

Introduction
In recent years, the vision community has witnessed tremendous progress on semantic scene completion and its applications in diverse scenarios, e.g., grasping function of robots
and obstacle avoidance of cars. The completion task aims to
infer the 3D geometry occupancy of the voxelized scene and
the semantic label of each voxel, simultaneously (Song et al.
2017; Liu et al. 2018a; Zhang et al. 2019).
It has proven that RGB and depth data are useful cues in
semantic scene completion task (Wang et al. 2019; Li et al.
2020b,d; Liu et al. 2018a). RGB images provide semantic information for classifying different objects. And depth
images provide the geometry information for inferring the
3D spatial structure and layout. In some challenging indoor
scenes, depth significantly helps semantic scene completion,
where the objects with various depth values are separated.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2550

