The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Species 3D Face Morphing via Alignment-Aware Controller
Xirui Yan, Zhenbo Yu, Bingbing Ni* , Hang Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{xiruiYan, yuzhenbo, nibingbing, Wang–Hang} @sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Source
Human

We address cross-species 3D face morphing (i.e., 3D face
morphing from human to animal), a novel problem with
promising applications in social media and movie industry.
It remains challenging how to preserve target structural information and source fine-grained facial details simultaneously.
To this end, we propose an Alignment-aware 3D Face Morphing (AFM) framework, which builds semantic-adaptive correspondence between source and target faces across species, via
an alignment-aware controller mesh ( Explicit Controller, EC)
with explicit source/target mesh binding. Based on EC, we introduce Controller-Based Mapping (CBM), which builds semantic consistency between source and target faces according to the semantic importance of different face regions. Additionally, an inference-stage coarse-to-fine strategy is exploited to produce fine-grained meshes with rich facial details
from rough meshes. Extensive experimental results in multiple people and animals demonstrate that our method produces
high-quality deformation results.

Target
Cat

Deformed
Human

Figure 1: Visualization of the proposed alignment-aware 3D
face morphing (AFM) framework. Morphing a textured human face of rich details into a cat.

human identity features, face expression, wrinkles and so
on. This task has a huge number of application potentials,
e.g., 3D animated characters (Ho, Sun, and Tsai 2019), virtual reality (Clay, König, and König 2019) and game simulation (Wang et al. 2019a). To our knowledge, it is the first
attempt at this fancy but challenging problem.
Specifically, challenges of cross-species 3D face morphing are two folds: 1) Shape alignment and human feature
preservation. Due to the large gap between the geometric
structures of 3D human faces and animal faces, it is difficult to learn the deformation that satisfies two competing
objectives simultaneously, that is animal shape alignment
and human feature preservation. Neural Cages (NC) (Wang
et al. 2020) introduces cage-based deformation to preserve
surface details regardless of the shape’s intricacy and performs well on deforming chairs, tables and cars. However,
we empirically show that NC is only capable of performing
rough deformations on human faces when applied to crossspecies 3D face morphing, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The
reason is that the cage used in NC is rough as a result of being implicitly trained in network without any cage-specific
constraints. This adds much regularization to the deformation process and limits the degrees of freedom to deform
the source objects, which makes NC lack the ability of fine
deformation. 2) Semantic consistency. Semantic mismatch

Introduction
3D face morphing with artificial design has received considerable attention in computer vision community for a long
time. Previous methods mainly fall into two categories:
1) Deforming a 3D face towards different expressions and
shapes (Smith et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Geng, Cao, and
Tulyakov 2019; Jiang et al. 2019; Ranjan et al. 2018; Chandran et al. 2020), and 2) Transferring deformations of source
faces to control a new target avatar (e.g., face retargeting
or reenactment) (Thies et al. 2016; Chaudhuri, Vesdapunt,
and Wang 2019; Ouzounis, Kilias, and Mousas 2017; Ribera
et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2020; Le and Deng
2017). These works do not consider directly morphing 3D
human faces to different structures such as human-to-animal
morphing where the structures and feature details of source
human faces and target animal faces are quite different.
In this study, we are interested in morphing a 3D human
face mesh into a specific 3D animal face mesh while preserving human features, i.e., cross-species 3D face morphing. As shown in Fig. 1, the human face mesh is morphed
into a cat while the human details are preserved, including
* Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3018

