The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Predicting Above-Sentence Discourse Structure Using Distant Supervision from
Topic Segmentation
Patrick Huber* , Linzi Xing* , Giuseppe Carenini
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
{huberpat, lzxing, carenini}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
RST-style discourse parsing plays a vital role in many NLP
tasks, revealing the underlying semantic/pragmatic structure
of potentially complex and diverse documents. Despite its
importance, one of the most prevailing limitations in modern day discourse parsing is the lack of large-scale datasets.
To overcome the data sparsity issue, distantly supervised approaches from tasks like sentiment analysis and summarization have been recently proposed. Here, we extend this line of
research by exploiting distant supervision from topic segmentation, which can arguably provide a strong and oftentimes
complementary signal for high-level discourse structures.
Experiments on two human-annotated discourse treebanks
confirm that our proposal generates accurate tree structures
on sentence and paragraph level, consistently outperforming previous distantly supervised models on the sentence-todocument task and occasionally reaching even higher scores
on the sentence-to-paragraph level.

Figure 1: Textual levels in a well-structured document and
their influence on downstream tasks and available gold-label
data.

Introduction

“plain” discourse tree structures and leave the exploration of
nuclearity and relation classification for future work.
Due to the definition of complete discourse trees in the
RST framework, tree structures become deeper as documents grow longer (as compared to the definition in PDTB,
where the aggregation stops above sentence level). Furthermore, the defining factors for the tree aggregation on higher
levels diverts considerably from the ones on lower levels
(e.g., aggregating multiple paragraphs vs. combining EDUs)
(Jiang et al. 2021). For example, suitable features for EDU
level tree aggregations (i.e., low-levels) are mostly influenced by local syntactic and semantic signals, while the tree
aggregation on paragraph level (i.e., high-levels) is likely
to follow more global features, such as major topic shifts
planned by the author for possibly complex communicative
goals (Stede 2011).
Researchers working on RST-style discourse parsing take
these considerations into account by either (1) proposing
hard constraints to construct discourse trees on distinct textual levels by using varying feature sets (Ji and Eisenstein
2014; Joty, Carenini, and Ng 2015) or (2) as done in recent
work by Wang, Li, and Wang (2017) and Guz and Carenini
(2020a), by proposing soft constraints, encoding sentenceand paragraph-breaks as input features. Furthermore, recent
work on tree-level dependent RST-style discourse parsing

The Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson 1988) is arguably one of the most popular frameworks to
represent the discourse structure of complete documents. As
such, RST has received considerable attention over the past
decades, being leveraged to benefit important NLP downstream tasks, such as text classification (Ji and Smith 2017),
sentiment analysis (Bhatia, Ji, and Eisenstein 2015; Hogenboom et al. 2015; Nejat, Carenini, and Ng 2017; Huber and
Carenini 2020a), summarization (Marcu 1999; Gerani et al.
2014; Xu et al. 2020; Xiao, Huber, and Carenini 2020) and
argumentation analysis (Chakrabarty et al. 2019).
Compared to other competing discourse theories (e.g.,
PDTB (Prasad et al. 2008)), RST postulates complete discourse trees based on clause-like Elementary Discourse
Units (abbreviated: EDUs), which are sentence fragments
on an intermediate granularity level between words and sentences. With EDUs acting as leaf nodes in RST-style discourse trees, constituents are formed by aggregating EDUs
into sub-trees containing: (1) a projective tree structure, (2) a
nuclearity assignment for each internal node and (3) rhetorical relations between siblings. In this work, we focus on
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10794

