The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning the Dynamics of Visual Relational Reasoning via
Reinforced Path Routing
Chenchen Jing1 , Yunde Jia1 , Yuwei Wu1∗ , Chuanhao Li1 , Qi Wu2
1

Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide, Australia
{chenchen.jing,jiayunde,wuyuwei,lichuanhao}@bit.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
What is the person to
Q the left of the glasses
holding? (A: Kite)

Abstract
Reasoning is a dynamic process. In cognitive theories, the dynamics of reasoning refers to reasoning states over time after
successive state transitions. Modeling the cognitive dynamics
is of utmost importance to simulate human reasoning capability. In this paper, we propose to learn the reasoning dynamics of visual relational reasoning by casting it as a path routing task. We present a reinforced path routing method that
represents an input image via a structured visual graph and
introduces a reinforcement learning based model to explore
paths (sequences of nodes) over the graph based on an input
sentence to infer reasoning results. By exploring such paths,
the proposed method represents reasoning states clearly and
characterizes state transitions explicitly to fully model the
reasoning dynamics for accurate and transparent visual relational reasoning. Extensive experiments on referring expression comprehension and visual question answering demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

G

I
(a) Inputs
selectglasses relateperson, left relateholding queryname
A

I, Q
(b) Modular

A

G, Q
(c) Holistic

A

G, Q

Introduction

(d) Path Routing (Ours)

Cognitive theories reveal that reasoning is a dynamic process
where the state of the intelligent system is always changing
over time in its state space (Engelfriet and Treur 1994; Port
and Van Gelder 1995). The dynamics of reasoning is described by sequences of reasoning states over time after successive reasoning steps (Jonker and Treur 2002). Formally, a
reasoning state is an intermediate representation of a reasoning process. A transition from one reasoning state to another
reasoning state formalizes one reasoning step. Modeling the
reasoning dynamics is critical to simulate the reasoning capability of humans (Jonker and Treur 2003).
In this paper, we propose to learn the reasoning dynamics
of visual relational reasoning by casting it as a path routing task. Visual relational reasoning involves the sequential
processing of visual information such as relationships and
objects in images. Figure 1 shows the path routing for visual
relational reasoning in the context of visual question answering (VQA). In path routing, we require a reasoning model to
explore paths, i.e., sequences of nodes, over a visual graph,
whose nodes denote objects in an image and edges denote
relationships among the objects. For example, to answer the

Figure 1: Illustrations of visual relational reasoning in the
context of visual question answering. (a) An input question,
an input image, and a graph representing the relational layout of the image. We do not show all edges in the graph
for simplicity. (b) The reasoning process of typical modular
methods. (c) The reasoning process of typical graph-based
holistic methods. (d) The path routing on the graph, where
red circles and red solid arrows comprise the explored path.
question “What is the person to the left of the glasses holding?” in Figure 1 (a), the model should progressively attend
to the glasses, the person, and the kite on the graph based on
their relationships. Different from existing modular methods (Andreas et al. 2016; Johnson et al. 2017) and holistic
methods (Guo, Xu, and Tao 2019; Hu et al. 2019) that focus
on reasoning structure modeling or contextual representations learning, we focus on reasoning dynamics learning in
path routing shown in Figure 1 (d). By exploring such paths,
the reasoning states are represented clearly and the reasoning state transitions are characterized explicitly to enable the
modeling of the reasoning dynamics.

∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1122

