The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transmission-Guided Bayesian Generative Model for Smoke Segmentation
Siyuan Yan, Jing Zhang, Nick Barnes
The Australian National University
{siyuan.yan, jing.zhang, nick.barnes}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Smoke segmentation is essential to precisely localize wildfire so that it can be extinguished in an early phase. Although deep neural networks have achieved promising results on image segmentation tasks, they are prone to be overconfident for smoke segmentation due to its non-rigid shape
and transparent appearance. This is caused by both knowledge level uncertainty due to limited training data for accurate smoke segmentation and labeling level uncertainty representing the difficulty in labeling ground-truth. To effectively model the two types of uncertainty, we introduce a
Bayesian generative model to simultaneously estimate the
posterior distribution of model parameters and its predictions.
Further, smoke images suffer from low contrast and ambiguity, inspired by physics-based image dehazing methods, we
design a transmission-guided local coherence loss to guide
the network to learn pair-wise relationships based on pixel
distance and the transmission feature. To promote the development of this field, we also contribute a high-quality smoke
segmentation dataset, SMOKE5K, consisting of 1,400 real
and 4,000 synthetic images with pixel-wise annotation. Experimental results on benchmark testing datasets illustrate
that our model achieves both accurate predictions and reliable uncertainty maps representing model ignorance about
its prediction. Our code and dataset are publicly available at:
https://github.com/redlessme/Transmission-BVM.

Image

GT

Trans.

w/o T

w/ T

Uncer.

Figure 1: Transmission loss is effective for segmenting
smoke. From left to right: input images, ground-truth, transmission map, prediction without transmission loss, prediction with transmission loss, and predicted uncertainty. Row
1: modeling transmission features using our loss is helpful
to distinguish the ambiguous boundary. Row 2: our transmission loss is effective with small smoke regions that have
low contrast due to being semi-transparent.

models for transparent objects (Xie et al. 2020; He et al.
2021) focus on rigid objects, which makes smoke segmentation a more challenging task compared with existing binary
segmentation or transparent object detection tasks.
To model smoke’s non-rigid shape and transparent appearance, we introduce a Bayesian generative model to estimate the posterior distribution of both model parameters and
its predictions. Specifically, we introduce a Bayesian variational auto-encoder (Hu et al. 2019) to produce stochastic
predictions, making it possible to capture uncertainty. Uncertainty (Der Kiureghian and Ditlevsen 2009; Kendall and
Gal 2017) is defined as model ignorance about its prediction.
(Der Kiureghian and Ditlevsen 2009) introduces two types
of uncertainty, epistemic (model) uncertainty and aleatoric
(data) uncertainty. The former is caused by ignorance about
the task, which can be reduced with more training data. The
latter is caused by labeling accuracy or ambiguity inherent
in the labeling task, which usually cannot been reduced.
For smoke segmentation, our limited knowledge about the
smoke model leads to epistemic uncertainty, while the difficulty of labeling leads to aleatoric uncertainty. We intend
to model both uncertainties within a Bayesian variational
auto-encoder to achieve both accurate smoke segmentation
and an estimation of a reliable uncertainty map representing model ignorance about its prediction given the training
dataset and learned model parameters. Further, smoke images suffer from quality degradation, i.e. low contrast due to

Introduction
Smoke segmentation (wildfire smoke in this paper) aims
to localize the scope of the smoke area, and is usually defined as a binary segmentation task. Existing solutions (Xu
et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2021) mainly focus on effective feature aggregation with larger receptive fields for multi-scale
prediction. We argue that, different from conventional binary segmentation tasks, i.e. salient object detection (Qin
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021a,c,b), background detection
(Babaee, Dinh, and Rigoll 2017), and transparent object detection (Xie et al. 2020), smoke segmentation is unique from
at least two perspectives: 1) the shape of smoke is non-rigid;
thus structure-preserving solutions (Qin et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2021a) adopted in existing binary segmentation models
may not be effective; 2) smoke can be transparent, making it
similar to transparent object detection. However, differently,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3009

