The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Labeling Framework for Novel Category Discovery over Domains
Qing Yu,1 Daiki Ikami,1,2 Go Irie,2 Kiyoharu Aizawa1
1

The University of Tokyo, Japan
2
NTT Corporation, Japan
1
{yu,ikami,aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, 2 goirie@ieee.org

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been highly successful in transferring knowledge acquired from a label-rich
source domain to a label-scarce target domain. Open-set domain adaptation (open-set DA) and universal domain adaptation (UniDA) have been proposed as solutions to the problem
concerning the presence of additional novel categories in the
target domain. Existing open-set DA and UniDA approaches
treat all novel categories as one unified unknown class and
attempt to detect this unknown class during the training process. However, the features of the novel categories learned
by these methods are not discriminative. This limits the applicability of UDA in the further classification of these novel
categories into their original categories, rather than assigning
them to a single unified class. In this paper, we propose a selflabeling framework to cluster all target samples, including
those in the “unknown” categories. We train the network to
learn the representations of target samples via self-supervised
learning (SSL) and to identify the seen and unseen (novel)
target-sample categories simultaneously by maximizing the
mutual information between labels and input data. We evaluated our approach under different DA settings and concluded
that our method generally outperformed existing ones by a
wide margin.

Figure 1: Novel category discovery goal in domain adaptation via the proposed method. While existing methods attempt to classify all “unknown” target samples into one category, our method aims to cluster all target samples according
to their semantic categories.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated excellent
training capabilities in many large-scale annotation tasks.
However, it has been observed that when the domain of
the test data differs from that of the training data, the performance of the DNNs declines significantly. Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) has achieved reasonable performance in addressing the domain shift problem without additional annotations, by learning a recognition model in
case of domain shifts between the source-domain training
data and target-domain test data (Ghifary et al. 2016; Taigman, Polyak, and Wolf 2017; Tzeng et al. 2017; Saito et al.
2018a).
Although most UDA methods assume that the categories
of the source domain are the same as those of the target domain, the target-domain sample classes are often unknown
in real-world settings. For example, certain categories in

the target domain may be absent in the source domain, i.e.,
open-set domain adaptation (open-set DA) (Panareda Busto
and Gall 2017; Saito et al. 2018b); the source domain may
contain categories that are absent in the target domain, i.e.,
partial domain adaptation (partial DA) (Cao et al. 2019), or
a mixture of open-set DA and partial DA, i.e., universal domain adaptation (UniDA) may be observed (You et al. 2019;
Saito et al. 2020). In open-set DA and UniDA, the target domain may contain samples belonging to unknown classes,
i.e., classes that do not appear in the source domain.
Although certain samples in the target domain may belong to multiple novel categories, existing open-set DA and
UniDA methods consider all unknown classes of the tar-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3161

