The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Enhanced Story Comprehension for Large Language Models through Dynamic
Document-Based Knowledge Graphs
Berkeley R Andrus, Yeganeh Nasiri, Shilong Cui, Benjamin Cullen, and Nancy Fulda
Computer Science Department, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, USA
berkeley.andrus, ynasiri, shilong, bcullen2, nfulda@byu.edu

Abstract

While language models with finite context windows are capable of generating stories of arbitrary length through iterative text predictions, these longer stories are prone to introduce information that abandons or contradicts information
present earlier in the story. Much work has been done to
increase story coherence through external knowledge bases
(Xu et al. 2020; Guan et al. 2020), but these works have focused on making stories consistent with the real world rather
than on making stories consistent with themselves.
A language model’s ability to generate internally consistent text relies on a property which we term “story comprehension”. This ability is a prerequisite to successfully completing various tasks including story completion, story generation, document summarization, question answering, etc.
It stands to reason that language models with finite context windows, including transformer-based language models, cannot comprehend more text than fits within their context windows, putting an upper limit on the story comprehension ability of these models. This poses a problem for
long-form text generation applications such as AI Dungeon1
in which end users have a vested interest in the coherency of
generated stories.
In this work we introduce a novel architecture for improving the story comprehension of large language models
through external knowledge bases. Our approach involves
extracting facts from a document and constructing a custom
dynamic knowledge graph. Then, given a story comprehension task, we extract and verbalize relevant information from
the knowledge graph and incorporate it into information-rich
prompts for a language model.
The primary contributions of this work include:

Large transformer-based language models have achieved incredible success at various tasks which require narrative comprehension, including story completion, answering questions
about stories, and generating stories ex nihilo. However, due
to the limitations of finite context windows, these language
models struggle to produce or understand stories longer than
several thousand tokens. In order to mitigate the document
length limitations that come with finite context windows, we
introduce a novel architecture that augments story processing with an external dynamic knowledge graph. In contrast to
static commonsense knowledge graphs which hold information about the real world, these dynamic knowledge graphs
reflect facts extracted from the story being processed. Our architecture uses these knowledge graphs to create informationrich prompts which better facilitate story comprehension than
prompts composed only of story text. We apply our architecture to the tasks of question answering and story completion. To complement this line of research, we introduce
two long-form question answering tasks, LF-SQuAD and LFQUOREF, in which the document length exceeds the size of
the language model’s context window, and introduce a story
completion evaluation method that bypasses the stochastic
nature of language model generation. We demonstrate broad
improvement over typical prompt formulation methods for
both question answering and story completion using GPT-2,
GPT-3 and XLNet.

Introduction
Large language models such as GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019)
have been used for a variety of story-related tasks including story completion (Xu et al. 2020; Guan et al. 2020),
reading comprehension (Radford et al. 2019; Raffel et al.
2020), and story generation (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018;
Roemmele 2016). However, previous works have mostly focused on extremely short stories that fit within the limited
context windows of transformer-based language models. For
example, several of these works use the popular ROCStories dataset (Mostafazadeh et al. 2016) which is composed
of five-sentence stories. Using GPT- 2’s tokenization rules,
the stories in this dataset have an average token length of
53.5, much smaller than most transformer context windows.

• Defining an architecture which interfaces effectively with
a large language model, providing the language model
with fact-rich prompts that enhance story comprehension
• Introducing LF-SQuAD and LF-QUOREF, two novel
evaluation tasks designed to measure long-form story
comprehension
• Introducing a new evaluation metric for story completion
that, unlike previous metrics such as BLEU, does not assume that a human-written response is the single correct
answer

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10436

https://play.aidungeon.io

