The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SPATE-GAN: Improved Generative Modeling of Dynamic Spatio-Temporal
Patterns with an Autoregressive Embedding Loss
Konstantin Klemmer,* 1,2 Tianlin Xu, * 3 Beatrice Acciaio, 4 Daniel B. Neill 2
1

University of Warwick
New York University
3
London School of Economics and Political Science
4
ETH Zurich
{k.klemmer, daniel.neill}@nyu.edu, t.xu12@lse.ac.uk, beatrice.acciaio@math.ethz.ch
2

Abstract

the capacity of deep neural networks for modeling earth
systems data. Recently, the emergence of physics-informed
deep learning has reinforced the integration of physical constraints as a research domain (Zhang and Zhao 2021; Rao,
Sun, and Liu 2020; Wang et al. 2020b; Kim et al. 2020).
In this work, we propose a novel GAN tailored to the
challenges of spatio-temporal complexities. We first devise
a novel measure of spatio-temporal association—SPATE—
expanding on the Moran’s I measure of spatial autocorrelation. SPATE uses the deviance of an observation from its
space-time expectation, and compares it to neighboring observations to identify regions of (relative) change and regions of (relative) homogeneity over time. We propose three
different approaches to calculate the space-time expectations, coming with varying assumptions and advantages for
different applications. We then encode a SPATE-based embedding into COT-GAN (Xu et al. 2020) to formulate a new
GAN framework, named SPATE-GAN. The motivation of
choosing COT-GAN as the base model is that its principle
of respecting temporal dependencies in sequential modeling
is in line with our intuition for SPATE, see details in the
methods section. Lastly, we test our approach on a range of
different datasets. Specifically, we select data characterized
by complex spatio-temporal patterns such as fluid dynamics (Wallace 2014; Wang et al. 2020b), disease spread (Brix
and Diggle 2001) or global surface temperatures (Sismanidis et al. 2018). We observe that SPATE-GAN outperforms
baseline models. This finding is particularly interesting as
we do not change the architecture of the existing COT-GAN
backbone, implying that our performance gains can be solely
attributed to our novel SPATE-based embedding loss.
To summarize, the contributions of this study are as follows:
• We introduce SPATE, a new measure of spatio-temporal
association, by expanding the intuition of the Moran’s I
metric into the temporal dimension.
• We introduce SPATE-GAN, a novel GAN for complex
spatio-temporal data utilizing SPATE to construct an embedding loss ”nudging” the model to focus on the learning of autoregressive structures.
• We test SPATE-GAN against baseline GANs designed
for image/video generation on datasets representing fluid
dynamics, disease spread and global surface temperature.

From ecology to atmospheric sciences, many academic disciplines deal with data characterized by intricate spatiotemporal complexities, the modeling of which often requires
specialized approaches. Generative models of these data are
of particular interest, as they enable a range of impactful
downstream applications like simulation or creating synthetic
training data. Recently, COT-GAN, a new GAN algorithm inspired by the theory of causal optimal transport (COT), was
proposed in an attempt to improve generation of sequential
data. However, the task of learning complex patterns over
time and space requires additional knowledge of the specific data structures. In this study, we propose a novel loss
objective combined with COT-GAN based on an autoregressive embedding to reinforce the learning of spatio-temporal
dynamics. We devise SPATE (spatio-temporal association),
a new metric measuring spatio-temporal autocorrelation. We
compute SPATE for real and synthetic data samples and use
it to compute an embedding loss that considers space-time interactions, nudging the GAN to learn outputs that are faithful
to the observed dynamics. We test our new SPATE-GAN on
a diverse set of spatio-temporal patterns: turbulent flows, logGaussian Cox processes and global weather data. We show
that our novel embedding loss improves performance without any changes to the architecture of the GAN backbone,
highlighting our model’s increased capacity for capturing autoregressive structures.

Introduction
Over the last decade, deep learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm for modeling complex data structures. It has
also found successful applications in the video domain, for
example for trajectory forecasting, video super-resolution or
object tracking. Nevertheless, data observed over (discrete)
space and time can take different shapes than just RGB
videos: many of the systems and processes governing our
planet, from ocean streams to the spread of viruses, exhibit
complex spatio-temporal dynamics. Current deep learning
approaches often struggle to account for these, as a recent
survey by Reichstein et al. (2019) highlights. The authors
call for more concerted research efforts aiming to improve
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4523

