The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Context-Aware Health Event Prediction via Transition Functions on Dynamic
Disease Graphs
Chang Lu, Tian Han, Yue Ning
Stevens Institute of Technology
{clu13, tian.han, yue.ning}@stevens.edu

Global Disease
Combination graph

Abstract
With the wide application of electronic health records (EHR)
in healthcare facilities, health event prediction with deep
learning has gained more and more attention. A common feature of EHR data used for deep-learning-based predictions is
historical diagnoses. Existing work mainly regards a diagnosis as an independent disease and does not consider clinical
relations among diseases in a visit. Many machine learning
approaches assume disease representations are static in different visits of a patient. However, in real practice, multiple
diseases that are frequently diagnosed at the same time reflect
hidden patterns that are conducive to prognosis. Moreover,
the development of a disease is not static since some diseases
can emerge or disappear and show various symptoms in different visits of a patient. To effectively utilize this combinational disease information and explore the dynamics of diseases, we propose a novel context-aware learning framework
using transition functions on dynamic disease graphs. Specifically, we construct a global disease co-occurrence graph with
multiple node properties for disease combinations. We design dynamic subgraphs for each patient’s visit to leverage
global and local contexts. We further define three diagnosis
roles in each visit based on the variation of node properties to
model disease transition processes. Experimental results on
two real-world EHR datasets show that the proposed model
outperforms state of the art in predicting health events.

Local Neighbors Local Diagnoses
(Potential impact) (Direct impact)
Heart failure

Hypertension

Diabetes

Asthma

Visit 1
subgraph

Asthma

Visit 2

Hypertension
Diabetes

Heart failure subgraph

Figure 1: An example of a disease combination graph of
an EHR dataset and subgraphs of two visits. Nodes are diseases. Edges denote disease co-occurrence. The red and gray
nodes represent diagnoses and neighbors in a visit. White
nodes are other diseases. Darker red nodes denote higherpriority diagnoses.

success in health event predictions, there are still several
challenges in learning with diagnosis features.
Q1: How to effectively utilize disease combination information? In medical practice, disease combinations refer
to a group of diseases that are diagnosed in the same patient
such as hypertension and heart failure. Disease combinations appearing in all patients’ visits naturally form a global
graph structure, as shown in Figure 1 (left). This structure
reflects hidden patterns among diseases. A visit can be regarded as local subgraphs containing diagnoses and their
neighbors in the combination graph. Neighbor nodes refer
to disease that are not diagnosed in the current visit for the
current patient, but diagnosed in other patients’ visits. The
visit subgraphs enable us to estimate prognosis for future
visits from neighbors. For example, in Figure 1 (right), we
may successfully predict heart failure in visit 2 given the relations among heart failure, hypertension, and asthma in the
combination graph. However, this graph structure is not utilized in popular deep learning models for health event predictions including GRAM (Choi et al. 2017), Timeline (Bai
et al. 2018), and G-BERT (Shang et al. 2019).

Introduction
Electronic health records (EHR) have been widely applied
in healthcare facilities as a system to record patients’ visit
information. EHR provide valuable data sources for researchers to predict health events, such as diagnosis (Choi
et al. 2017), mortality (Darabi et al. 2020), and readmission (Nguyen et al. 2017). These kinds of health event predictions are beneficial to both healthcare providers and patients to achieve preventative health monitoring and personalized care plans. A common approach in deep-learningbased health event predictions is mining temporal features
of a patient, especially patterns of historical diagnoses, to
predict future risks. Although deep learning models such as
recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Bai et al. 2018), convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Nguyen et al. 2017), and
attention-based models (Shang et al. 2019) have shown great

Q2: How to explore the dynamic scheme of diseases?
During the development stage of a disease, the impact of
this disease on a patient may not be static. EHR datasets like
MIMIC-III (Johnson et al. 2016) provide an indicator for diagnosis priority in each visit. It is common that the same
diagnosis has different priorities in different visits. Moreover, even if a disease does not appear in a previous visit, it

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4567

