The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Search in Local Branching
Defeng Liu 1 , Matteo Fischetti 2 , Andrea Lodi 1, 3
1

Department of Mathematics and Industrial Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal, Canada
2
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy
3
Jacobs Technion-Cornell Institute, Cornell Tech and Technion – IIT, USA
defeng.liu@polymtl.ca, matteo.fischetti@unipd.it, andrea.lodi@cornell.edu

Abstract

computation. In fact, it is also appealing to discover early incumbent solutions in the exact enumerate scheme, which improves the primal bound and reduces the size of the branchand-bound tree by pruning more nodes (Berthold 2013).
In this respect, the concept of heuristic is well rooted as a
principle underlying the search of high-quality solutions. In
the literature, a variety of heuristic methods have proven to
be remarkably effective, e.g., local branching (Fischetti and
Lodi 2003), feasibility pump (Fischetti et al. 2005), proximal search (Fischetti and Monaci 2014), large neighborhood search (Gendreau et al. 2010), etc. For more details
of these methods, the reader is referred to the surveys (Fischetti and Lodi 2010; Gendreau et al. 2010). In this paper,
we focus on local branching, a refinement heuristic that iteratively produces improving solutions by exploring suitably
predefined solution neighborhoods.
Local branching (LB) was one of the first methods using
a generic MILP solver as a black-box tool inside a heuristic framework. Given an initial feasible solution, the method
first defines a solution neighborhood through the so-called
local branching constraint, then explores the resulting subproblem by calling a black-box MILP solver. For a LB algorithm, the choice of neighborhood size is crucial to performance. In the original LB algorithm (Fischetti and Lodi
2003), the size of neighborhood is mostly initialized by a
small value, then adjusted in the subsequent iterations. Although these conservative settings have the advantage of
yielding a series of easy-to-solve subproblems, each leading to a small progress of the objective, there is still a lot
of space for improvement. As discussed in (Fischetti and
Monaci 2014), a significantly better performance can be potentially achieved with an ad-hoc tuning of the size of the
neighborhood. Our observation also shows that the “best”
size is strongly dependent on the particular MILP instance.
To illustrate this, the performance of different LB neighborhood size settings for two MILP instances are compared in
Figure 1. In principle, it is desirable to have neighborhoods
to be relatively small to allow for an efficient computation,
but still large enough to be effective for finding improved solutions. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to believe that the size
of an ideal neighborhood is correlated with the characteristics of the particular problem instance.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that, in many applications,
instances of the same problem are solved repeatedly. Prob-

Finding high-quality solutions to mixed-integer linear programming problems (MILPs) is of great importance for many
practical applications. In this respect, the refinement heuristic
local branching (LB) has been proposed to produce improving solutions and has been highly influential for the development of local search methods in MILP. The algorithm iteratively explores a sequence of solution neighborhoods defined
by the so-called local branching constraint, namely, a linear
inequality limiting the distance from a reference solution. For
a LB algorithm, the choice of the neighborhood size is critical
to performance. Although it was initialized by a conservative
value in the original LB scheme, our new observation is that
the “best” size is strongly dependent on the particular MILP
instance. In this work, we investigate the relation between the
size of the search neighborhood and the behavior of the underlying LB algorithm, and we devise a leaning based framework for guiding the neighborhood search of the LB heuristic. The framework consists of a two-phase strategy. For the
first phase, a scaled regression model is trained to predict the
size of the LB neighborhood at the first iteration through a
regression task. In the second phase, we leverage reinforcement learning and devise a reinforced neighborhood search
strategy to dynamically adapt the size at the subsequent iterations. We computationally show that the neighborhood size
can indeed be learned, leading to improved performances and
that the overall algorithm generalizes well both with respect
to the instance size and, remarkably, across instances.

Introduction
Mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) is a principal
optimization formulation for modeling complex combinatorial problems. The exact solution of a MILP model is
generally attempted by a branch-and-bound (or branch-andcut) (Land et al. 2010) framework. Although state-of-the-art
MILP solvers experienced a dramatic performance improvement over the past decades, due to the NP-hardness nature
of the problem, the computation load of finding a provable
optimal solution for the resulting models can be heavy. In
many practical cases, feasible solutions are often required
within a very restricted time frame. Hence, one is interested
in finding solutions of good quality at the early stage of the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3796

