The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Image-to-Video Scene Graph Generation via Knowledge Reasoning and
Adversarial Learning
Jin Chen, Xiaofeng Ji, Xinxiao Wu*
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{chen jin, jixf, wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene graph in a video conveys a wealth of information about
objects and their relationships in the scene, thus benefiting
many downstream tasks such as video captioning and visual question answering. Existing methods of scene graph
generation require large-scale training videos annotated with
objects and relationships in each frame to learn a powerful model. However, such comprehensive annotation is timeconsuming and labor-intensive. On the other hand, it is much
easier and less cost to annotate images with scene graphs, so
we investigate leveraging annotated images to facilitate training a scene graph generation model for unannotated videos,
namely image-to-video scene graph generation. This task
presents two challenges: 1) infer unseen dynamic relationships in videos from static relationships in images due to
the absence of motion information in images; 2) adapt objects and static relationships from images to video frames
due to the domain shift between them. To address the first
challenge, we exploit external commonsense knowledge to
infer the unseen dynamic relationship from the temporal evolution of static relationships. We tackle the second challenge
by hierarchical adversarial learning to reduce the data distribution discrepancy between images and video frames. Extensive experiment results on two benchmark video datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

{Person, Ride front, Person} {Person, Ride left, Person} {Person, Ride behind, Person}
Static relationship of Person and Person: Ride front → Ride left → Ride behind

Dynamic relationship: {Person, Ride past, Person}

Figure 1: An example of inferring the dynamic relationship
from static relationships on the time dimension. The subject
and object are denoted in the brown box and the purple box,
respectively.

tated image datasets such as Visual Genome (Krishna et al.
2017) and Visual Relationship Dataset (Lu et al. 2016).
Therefore, we investigate exploiting existing annotated
images to facilitate training a video scene graph generation model without video annotations, called image-to-video
scene graph generation, which breaks the heavy dependency
on the large-scale annotated training videos. This new task
introduces two challenges. First, since the temporal motion
information is absent in images, it is difficult for a scene
graph generation model trained using images to capture the
dynamic object relationships in videos. Second, the domain
shift between images and video frames makes the difficulty
to adapt the detection models of objects and static relationships from images to videos.
To address the first challenge, we propose knowledge reasoning to infer unseen dynamic relationships in videos. Our
insight is that a dynamic relationship can be inferred from
the temporal evolution of related static relationships. As illustrated in Figure 1, the dynamic relationship {person, ride
past, person} can be inferred from sequential static relationships: {person, ride front, person} → {person, ride left, person} → {person, ride behind, person}. We denote such association between static and dynamic relationships as commonsense knowledge that can be exploited from many external text resources such as Action genome (Ji et al. 2020)
and Wikipedia (Pataki, Vajna, and Marosi 2012). To be more
specific, starting with learning a shared embedding space between visual features and language features of relationships,

Introduction
The task of generating a scene graph in a video aims to detect objects and their relationships on both spatial and temporal dimensions, which provides a fine-grained representation of the video and underpins numerous downstream visual
tasks, such as action recognition (Girdhar et al. 2017),video
captioning (Xu et al. 2019; Hao, Zhou, and Li 2020; Cao,
Zhao, and Fu 2020), video retrieval (Girdhar et al. 2017)
and visual question answering (Liu and Huet 2016). Existing methods require a large number of training videos to be
annotated with objects and their relationships in each video
frame. However, it is a time-consuming and labor-intensive
process to acquire such comprehensive annotation. On the
other hand, it is much easier and less cost to annotate scene
graphs in images and also there exist several available anno* Corresponding author: Xinxiao Wu
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

276

