The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CF-DETR: Coarse-to-Fine Transformers for End-to-End Object Detection
Xipeng Cao1∗ , Peng Yuan2† , Bailan Feng2 , Kun Niu1†
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{xpcao,niukun}@bupt.edu.cn, {yuanpeng126,fengbailan}@huawei.com

Abstract

rely on NMS. It utilizes object queries that contain properties of objects (feature, shape, location, etc.), to query from
a global context through a cross-attention mechanism. Although DETR achieves promising performance for end-toend object detection, it is thought to have relatively poor detection performance on small objects and suffers from slow
convergence.
However, when observing the COCO-style metric Average Precision (AP) at different IOU thresholds, we get more
insights into DETR’s behavior. As illustrated in Figure 1,
we calculated the AP results on COCO validation set at various IoU thresholds for three methods: DETR-R50, Sparse
R-CNN-R50, and Faster R-CNN-R101. Note that the chosen three methods have similar performances measured with
conventional AP50:95 . Figure 1(a) shows that DETR performs much better than other methods when measuring AP
with low IoU thresholds. Figure 1(b) further shows AP results on small objects at different IoU thresholds. While
DETR indeed performs poorly at high IoU thresholds (e.g.
from 0.5 to 0.9), it performs surprisingly well (even better
than Sparse R-CNN-R50 with FPN) when measuring AP
with low IoU thresholds (e.g. from 0.1 to 0.4). We also summarize the AP scores at different ranges in Table 1, which
clearly shows the superiority of DETR when measuring AP
in the low IOU thresholds range. This phenomenon implies
the strong perception ability of DETR even for small objects, and the reason why DETR is poorer on small objects is
that the bounding box location is not accurate enough compared with Region of Interests (RoI) feature based methods
(like Faster R-CNN and Sparse R-CNN). And that the key
to improving DETR is simply to refine the coarse predicted
locations by introducing local information
Several methods have been proposed to explore local information in DETR architecture (Zhu et al. 2020; Sun et al.
2020; Gao et al. 2021). Deformable DETR (Zhu et al. 2020)
leverages multi-scale deformable encoder and sparse sampling for local information rather than global information.
Instead of using the cross-attention module, TSP (Sun et al.
2020) combines R-CNN- or FCOS-based (Tian et al. 2019)
methods with the Transformer encoder to focus on local information. Different from the above methods, this paper proposes a new way to fully utilize the global context information and local information in a coarse-to-fine manner. Although this approach is not proposed directly to solve the

The recently proposed DEtection TRansformer (DETR)
achieves promising performance for end-to-end object detection. However, it has relatively lower detection performance
on small objects and suffers from slow convergence. This paper observed that DETR performs surprisingly well even on
small objects when measuring Average Precision (AP) at decreased Intersection-over-Union (IoU) thresholds. Motivated
by this observation, we propose a simple way to improve
DETR by refining the coarse features and predicted locations.
Specifically, we propose a novel Coarse-to-Fine (CF) decoder
layer constituted of a coarse layer and a carefully designed
fine layer. Within each CF decoder layer, the extracted local
information (region of interest feature) is introduced into the
flow of global context information from the coarse layer to
refine and enrich the object query features via the fine layer.
In the fine layer, the multi-scale information can be fully
explored and exploited via the Adaptive Scale Fusion(ASF)
module and Local Cross-Attention (LCA) module. The multiscale information can also be enhanced by another proposed
Transformer Enhanced FPN (TEF) module to further improve
the performance. With our proposed framework (named CFDETR), the localization accuracy of objects (especially for
small objects) can be largely improved. As a byproduct, the
slow convergence issue of DETR can also be addressed. The
effectiveness of CF-DETR is validated via extensive experiments on the coco benchmark. CF-DETR achieves state-ofthe-art performance among end-to-end detectors, e.g., achieving 47.8 AP using ResNet-50 with 36 epochs in the standard
3x training schedule.

Introduction
Object detection which involves classification and localization subtasks is a fundamental problem in the field of Computer Vision (Zou et al. 2019; Zaidi et al. 2021). The modern object detectors (Liu et al. 2016; Redmon et al. 2016; Lin
et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2017; He et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2020)
rely on post-processing (e.g., ”non-maximum suppression”
or NMS) to get robust detection results. Recently, DEtection TRansformer (DETR) (Carion et al. 2020) has been proposed as a fully end-to-end object detector, which does not
∗
This work is done when Xipeng Cao was an intern in Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

185

