The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Augmentation-Free Self-Supervised Learning on Graphs
Namkyeong Lee1 , Junseok Lee1 , Chanyoung Park1,2 *
1

Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
namkyeong96@kaist.ac.kr, junseoklee@kaist.ac.kr, cy.park@kaist.ac.kr

2

Abstract

(a) Image

Random Cropping

(c) Social Graph
Drop Edge

Color Distortion

Community 1

Inspired by the recent success of self-supervised methods
applied on images, self-supervised learning on graph structured data has seen rapid growth especially centered on
augmentation-based contrastive methods. However, we argue that without carefully designed augmentation techniques,
augmentations on graphs may behave arbitrarily in that the
underlying semantics of graphs can drastically change. As
a consequence, the performance of existing augmentationbased methods is highly dependent on the choice of augmentation scheme, i.e., hyperparameters associated with augmentations. In this paper, we propose a novel augmentation-free
self-supervised learning framework for graphs, named AFGRL. Specifically, we generate an alternative view of a graph
by discovering nodes that share the local structural information and the global semantics with the graph. Extensive experiments towards various node-level tasks, i.e., node classification, clustering, and similarity search on various realworld datasets demonstrate the superiority of AFGRL. The
source code for AFGRL is available at https://github.com/
Namkyeong/AFGRL.

O

OH

O
O

O

OH

O

alkene

Perturb Edge
OH

O

O

O
O

aspirin

Bob

(b) Molecular

Drop Node

O

Alice

O
O

O

aspirin

Community 2

𝜸 - lactone

Community 3

Figure 1: Augmentations on images ((a)) keep the underlying semantics, whereas augmentations on graphs ((b),(c))
may unexpectedly change the semantics.

Although self-supervised contrastive methods have been
shown to be effective on various graph-related tasks, they
pay little attention to the inherent distinction between images and graphs: while augmentation is well defined on images, it may behave arbitrarily on graphs. For example, in
the case of images, even after randomly cropping and rotating them, or distorting their color, their underlying semantic is hardly changed (Figure 1 (a)), and even if the semantic changes, humans can readily recognize the change
visually, and choose an alternative augmentation approach
that preserves the semantic. On the other hand, when we
perturb (drop or add) edges/nodes, and their features of a
graph, we cannot ascertain whether the augmented graph
would be positively related to the original graph, and what
is worse, it is non-trivial to verify the validity of the augmented graph since graphs are hard to visualize. For example, in molecular graphs, dropping a carbon atom from the
phenyl ring of aspirin breaks the aromatic system and results in a alkene chain (Figure 1(b)). Moreover, perturbing
the connection of aspirin might introduce a molecule of totally different property, namely, five-membered lactone (Sun
et al. 2021a). Likewise, in social graphs, randomly dropping
edges might also lead to semantic changes, especially when
these edges are related to hub nodes. For example, as shown
in Figure 1(c), if the edge between Bob and Alice is dropped,
it would take much longer distance for Bob to reach Community 3 (i.e., from 2-hops to 5-hops), which also alters the
relationship between Community 1 and Community 3. We
argue that this is mainly because graphs contain not only the

Introduction
Recently, self-supervised learning paradigm (Liu et al.
2021), which learns representation from supervision signals derived from the data itself without relying on
human-provided labels, achieved great success in many domains including computer vision (Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018; Noroozi and Favaro 2016), signal processing (Banville et al. 2021, 2019), and natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Brown et al. 2020). Specifically, contrastive methods, which are at the core of selfsupervised learning paradigm, aim to build effective representation by pulling semantically similar (positive) pairs together and pushing dissimilar (negative) pairs apart (Hjelm
et al. 2018; Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018), where two augmented versions of an image are considered as positives, and
the remaining images are considered as negatives. Inspired
by the success of the contrastive methods in computer vision applied on images, these methods have been recently
adopted to graphs (Xie et al. 2021).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7372

