The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Not All Voxels Are Equal: Semantic Scene Completion
from the Point-Voxel Perspective
Jiaxiang Tang1,* , Xiaokang Chen1,* , Jingbo Wang2* , Gang Zeng 1
1

Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of AI, Peking University,
2
Chinese University of Hong Kong
{tjx, pkucxk}@pku.edu.cn, wj020@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, zeng@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We revisit Semantic Scene Completion (SSC), a useful task
to predict the semantic and occupancy representation of 3D
scenes, in this paper. A number of methods for this task are
always based on voxelized scene representations for keeping
local scene structure. However, due to the existence of visible empty voxels, these methods always suffer from heavy
computation redundancy when the network goes deeper, and
thus limit the completion quality. To address this dilemma, we
propose our novel point-voxel aggregation network for this
task. Firstly, we transfer the voxelized scenes to point clouds
by removing these visible empty voxels and adopt a deep point
stream to capture semantic information from the scene efficiently. Meanwhile, a light-weight voxel stream containing
only two 3D convolution layers preserves local structures of
the voxelized scenes. Furthermore, we design an anisotropic
voxel aggregation operator to fuse the structure details from
the voxel stream into the point stream, and a semantic-aware
propagation module to enhance the up-sampling process in
the point stream by semantic labels. We demonstrate that our
model surpasses state-of-the-arts on two benchmarks by a
large margin, with only depth images as the input.

(a) Input

(b) Ground Truth

(c) 3D-Sketch

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Visualization of Semantic Scene Completion task.
Our method generates more reasonable results compared to
3D-Sketch (Chen et al. 2020a) while significantly lowering
the computational costs.

Introduction
With a partial 2D observation, humans are capable of understanding the 3D space and inferring the objects behind
the occlusion. Similarly, the capability to capture the structure and semantic information of 3D scenes is beneficial for
many real-world applications, including robotics, virtual reality, and interior design. To achieve this goal, we need to
perform scene completion and scene labeling tasks, which
are proved to be closely correlated by (Song et al. 2017).
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) is therefore put forward
to predict 3D geometry and semantics simultaneously from
a partial observation, which is an emerging topic in recent
years.
Previously, most methods (Song et al. 2017; Guo and Tong
2018; Garbade et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018) solve this challenging problem with voxelized partial observations. To handle
these voxelized scenes, 3D convolution networks are always
adopted by these methods to learn the occupancy and semantic information of each voxel. Although voxel representations

preserve abundant structure details of the partial 2D observation, not all voxels are of equal importance in this volume.
In particular, there exist lots of visible empty voxels (e.g.,
atmosphere in the visible region) in the voxelized SSC data
by nature. These voxel-based methods have to perform unnecessary calculations on them in forward propagation, but
ignore them in backward propagation since the labels are
already known. Therefore, they always suffer from heavy
computation redundancy, especially for trying to keep the
high scene resolution in a deep 3D convolution network. To
solve this problem, an efficient sparse data structure should
be used, such as the point cloud or voxel octree (Liu et al.
2020; Takikawa et al. 2021). An early attempt (Zhong and
Zeng 2020) removes these visible empty voxels and adopts a
point cloud based network to extract features from this nongrid data for SSC task, but it is intrinsically weak in local
structure modeling since the point cloud representation is
sparse.
Therefore, it is crucial to consider the complementarity
between voxel-based and point-based scene representation
into the SSC framework. Unlike most other 3D computer

* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2352

