The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

From One to All: Learning to Match Heterogeneous
and Partially Overlapped Graphs
Weijie Liu,1,2,3 Hui Qian,2,3,6 Chao Zhang,2,3 Jiahao Xie,2,3 Zebang Shen, 4 Nenggan Zheng 1,2,3,5*
1

Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
4
University of Pennsylvania
5
Zhejiang Lab
6
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
{westonhunter,qianhui,zczju,xiejh}@zju.edu.cn, zebang@seas.upenn.edu, zng@cs.zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Grossglauser 2011; Yartseva and Grossglauser 2013; Sun
et al. 2015). In general, incorrectly matched pairs could
cause more mismatching in future steps, i.e., a cascade of
errors (KAZEMI 2016). (ii) The other is the searching strategy, which explores the entire alignment space and returns
the one with the highest score based on a specific objective.
In this paradigm, a few recent researches have shifted focus
to settings in which the best searching is rephrased in the
framework of optimal transport (OT) and the resulting algorithms have achieved the state-of-the-art performance (Xu
et al. 2019; Titouan et al. 2019; Barbe et al. 2020), compared
with its traditional counterparts such as simulated annealing (Mamano and Hayes 2017), genetic algorithm (Vijayan,
Saraph, and Milenković 2015), or gradient-based optimization (Konar and Sidiropoulos 2020).
Despite this recent activity, the advances in methodology have been confined almost exclusively to the matching of homogeneous (containing only one type of nodes)
or fully overlapped graphs, and none of existing methods
has demonstrated its effectiveness on real-world alignment
tasks in which graphs are both heterogeneous and partially
overlapped. Such real-world tasks may include knowledge
graph alignment (Li et al. 2018), matching of biological networks (Sharan and Ideker 2006), and disambiguating entities (Zhang, Swami, and Chawla 2019). We illustrate this
situation in Figure 1 and depict technical details of these two
challenges in the following paragraphs.

Recent years have witnessed a flurry of research activity in
graph matching, which aims at finding the correspondence of
nodes across two graphs and lies at the heart of many artificial
intelligence applications. However, matching heterogeneous
graphs with partial overlap remains a challenging problem in
real-world applications. This paper proposes the first practical learning-to-match method to meet this challenge. The
proposed unsupervised method adopts a novel partial optimal
transport paradigm to learn a transport plan and node embeddings simultaneously. In a from-one-to-all manner, the entire
learning procedure is decomposed into a series of easy-tosolve sub-procedures, each of which only handles the alignment of a single type of nodes. A mechanism for searching the transport mass is also proposed. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-ofthe-art graph matching methods.

1

Introduction

Graph matching (network alignment), aiming to determine
the correspondence of nodes across two related graphs, lies
at the heart of a wide range of artificial intelligence applications, including network retrieval (Berretti, Del Bimbo,
and Vicario 2001; Özer, Wolf, and Akansu 2002), machine
translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Chen et al.
2020), and visual tracking (Xiong et al. 2012; Wang and
Ling 2017), to name a few. Two main algorithmic components, the node conservation and the matching strategy, constitute the graph matching method, where the former measures the similarity between pairs of nodes from different
networks, and the later maximizes total node conservation
over aligned nodes and the amount of conserved edges (Gu
et al. 2018).
Mainstream methods of graph matching have followed
two directions that correspond to different matching strategies. (i) One is the seed-and-extend strategy, which recursively matches nodes adjacent to the currently aligned
subgraphs (Narayanan and Shmatikov 2009; Pedarsani and

Heterogeneity. Most existing methods consider graphs
with only one type of nodes. Directly applying these methods to heterogeneous graphs leads to inferior performance
and type mismatch. Gu et al. (2018) propose the first practical heterogeneous graph matching method based on manually designed features, called colored graphlet degree vectors (CGDV), and extend a large body of homogeneous algorithms (Sun et al. 2015; Vijayan, Saraph, and Milenković
2015; Mamano and Hayes 2017) into heterogeneous variants. The designed features, however, are expensive to obtain
since the computational complexity for generating CGDV is
practically O(V 5 ), where V is the number of nodes of the
graph. Apparently, as V increases, their performances will
deteriorate rapidly. Besides, these methods cannot guarantee

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4109

