The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Automated Discovery of God-Like Folk Algorithms for Rubik’s Cube
Garrett E. Katz, Naveed Tahir
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, 13244
{gkatz01,ntahir}@syr.edu

Abstract

for a human. In a more recent approach, the pattern database
was replaced by deep reinforcement learning to approximate
the heuristic function used by best-first search (Agostinelli
et al. 2019; McAleer et al. 2019). This approach was fairly
god-like (finding optimal solution paths 60.3% of the time),
and has some relevance to human solving insofar as the
heuristic function is approximated with neuro-inspired techniques. However, the best-first search component is not folklike, and the learned weights of the function approximator
are not easily distilled into algorithmic instructions that a
human could understand.
Instead of mapping states to heuristic values, an alternative approach maps each state to a useful action sequence,
also called a “macro” (Fikes and Nilsson 1971), that should
be performed in that state (Korf 1982). Multiple states that
share some common features (e.g., a subset of matching cubies) are mapped to the same macro. We refer to this approach as a “macro database.” Macro databases are akin
to folk algorithms, particularly if the number of records is
reasonably small. They are god-like to whatever extent the
macros are leading portions of optimal solution paths.
Automated discovery of macros has proven effective in
several AI planning domains (Botea et al. 2005; Chrpa and
Vallati 2019). This suggests a question which is the focus
of this paper: whether we can automate discovery of macro
databases that are both god-like and folk-like. Automated
macro database discovery is a meta-search, in that it does not
search for solutions for specific states, but rather it searches
for solvers (in the form of macro databases) that generate
solutions for any state. The meta-search is a multi-objective
optimization problem (Marler and Arora 2004; Deb et al.
2000) with two objectives, because it seeks macro database
algorithms that are both god-like (generating short solution paths) and folk-like (using small macro databases). The
Pareto optima are those algorithms that cannot be made
more godly without becoming less folksy, and vice versa.
Considerations of Pareto optimality arise naturally in
multi-objective problems, where the focus shifts from the
decision variable space to the objective space (Miettinen
2012). The solutions obtained are seldom optimal for all
the given objectives and usually characterized by tradeoffs
between competing objectives. Multi-objective optimization
problems can also be transformed into one or more singleobjective problems using so-called “scalarization” tech-

We present a multi-objective meta-search procedure that constructs candidate algorithms for state-space search puzzles
like Rubik’s cube. The candidate algorithms take the form
of macro databases, i.e., rule tables that specify sequences
of actions to perform in different states. Rules are repeatedly
applied until the puzzle is solved. The objectives favor candidates that are god-like (solving the puzzle in fewer steps) and
folk-like (having fewer rules in the macro database). We build
each candidate with a non-deterministic rule table construction, and then optimize over the non-deterministic choice
points to find candidates near the Pareto-optimal trades-offs
between godliness and folksiness. We prove that the rule table
construction is correct: it always terminates and solves every
state at termination. This is verified empirically on the full
2×2×2 “pocket” cube, where correct (but unoptimized) constructions take under one hour and the total number of rules
is less than 10% the number of possible states. We also empirically assess the multi-objective optimization on restricted
variants of the cube with up to 29K possible states, showing
relative improvements in the objectives between 14-20%. Avenues for scaling up the method in future work are discussed.

Introduction
A “god algorithm” for a puzzle like Rubik’s cube is one that
always transforms the puzzle into its solved state using as
few actions as possible. With unlimited time and memory,
a god algorithm could be implemented by a giant rule table
that maps each possible state to an optimal solution path.
In contrast, humans often memorize smaller rule tables that
map states to leading portions of sub-optimal solution paths,
and repeatedly execute rules until a given problem instance
is solved. These are termed “folk” algorithms because they
are feasible for humans to learn and execute.
Optimally solving the general n × n × n Rubik’s cube
is known to be NP-hard (Demaine, Eisenstat, and Rudoy
2018). A classic AI approach to the 3×3×3 cube used iterative deepening best-first search, guided by a pattern database
heuristic that mapped states to solution path lengths (Korf
1997). This algorithm was godly (found optimal solution
paths), but not folksy, because the memory requirements of
the pattern database and best-first search render it infeasible
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10210

