The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PEA∗ +IDA∗ : An Improved Hybrid Memory-Restricted Algorithm
Frederico Messa, André Grahl Pereira
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
{frederico.messa, agpereira}@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract

re-expansions of the same nodes due to its iterative behavior, especially those close to the root node. Thus, pure IDA∗
needs, frequently, orders of magnitude more expansions than
A∗ to solve optimality challenging state-space tasks.
Many algorithms were proposed to solve state-space tasks
optimally using less memory than A∗ and making fewer
node expansions than IDA∗ , such as MREC (Sen and Bagchi
1989), MA∗ (Chakrabarti et al. 1989), SMA∗ (Russell
1992), SMAG∗ (Kaindl and Khorsand 1994), BAI (Kaindl
et al. 1995), BIDA∗ (Manzini 1995), AL∗ (Stern et al. 2010;
Bu et al. 2014), and PEA∗ (Yoshizumi, Miura, and Ishida
2000). Some of them have a high polynomial-time overhead per node expansion or generation compared to A∗ ,
such as MA∗ , SMA∗ , and SMAG∗ . Some have the performance depending on the quality of hyper-parameter values
that are hard to define, such as the AL∗ algorithm. Others
like PEA∗ (Yoshizumi, Miura, and Ishida 2000) cannot be
restricted to a specific memory limit. Finally, many are relatively difficult to understand or implement. Because of these
issues, these algorithms are less frequently used in practice.
Bu and Korf (2019) presented a new algorithm combining
A∗ and IDA∗ in a hybrid algorithm with two phases called
A∗ +IDA∗ . Their new approach does not have the mentioned
disadvantages since it is simple to understand, easy to implement, has low overhead per node, and limits the memory required. A∗ +IDA∗ can achieve speed-ups around five
times over IDA∗ for specific domains. Bu and Korf explain
that the main advantage of A∗ +IDA∗ is that it starts performing IDA∗ iterations from nodes with higher depth than
the pure IDA∗ algorithm (which starts from the root node).
They assert that avoiding some IDA∗ iteration is less impactful since the last two layers of IDA∗ iterations dominate the
search. Although the A∗ +IDA∗ algorithm avoids failing due
to memory limits, its second phase still has the drawbacks
of the pure IDA∗ algorithm.
In this paper, we propose the use of the Partial Expansion
A∗ (PEA∗ ) as the first phase algorithm (instead of A∗ ), creating the PEA∗ +IDA∗ algorithm. Partial Expansion A∗ is an
algorithm based on A∗ that avoids storing all generated children of expanded nodes, thus reducing its memory requirements. PEA∗ +IDA∗ is a new hybrid algorithm that is as simple and intuitive as A∗ +IDA∗ . With the trade-off of possibly
having more expansions in the first phase, PEA∗ +IDA∗ generally reduces the number of IDA∗ iterations and expansions

It is well-known that the search algorithms A∗ and Iterative
Deepening A∗ (IDA∗ ) can fail to solve state-space tasks optimally due to time and memory limits. The former typically
fails in memory-restricted scenarios and the latter in timerestricted scenarios. Therefore, several algorithms were proposed to solve state-space tasks optimally using less memory than A∗ and less time than IDA∗ , such as A∗ +IDA∗ , a
hybrid memory-restricted algorithm that combines A∗ and
IDA∗ . In this paper, we present a hybrid memory-restricted
algorithm that combines Partial Expansion A∗ (PEA∗ ) and
IDA∗ . This new algorithm has two phases, the same structure
as the A∗ +IDA∗ algorithm. The first phase of PEA∗ +IDA∗
runs PEA∗ until it reaches a memory limit, and the second
phase runs IDA∗ without duplicate detection on each node
of PEA∗ ’s Open. First, we present a model that shows how
PEA∗ +IDA∗ can perform better than A∗ +IDA∗ although pure
PEA∗ usually makes more expansions than pure A∗ . Later,
we perform an experimental evaluation using three memory limits and show that, compared to A∗ +IDA∗ on classical
planning domains, PEA∗ +IDA∗ has higher coverage and expands fewer nodes. Finally, we experimentally analyze both
algorithms and show that having higher F -limits and better
priority-queue composition given by PEA∗ have a considerable impact on the performance of the algorithms.

Introduction
∗

A (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) is one of the most
popular best-first heuristic search algorithms due to its capability to time-efficiently solve state-space tasks optimally
while being intuitive and simple to understand. It expands
first nodes with better estimates and stores all generated
nodes until expanding and replacing the stored nodes with
their children. Since the node estimates given by efficient
heuristic functions are imperfect, A∗ often fails to solve
challenging state-space tasks, even in scenarios with large
memory limits. Iterative Deepening A∗ (IDA∗ ) overcomes
the memory limitations of A∗ (Korf 1985), as it is a heuristic search algorithm with low memory requirement, linear in
the depth of the search. However, IDA∗ has no duplicate detection without using extra memory. Thus, it may frequently
expand nodes with the same states. Also, it requires multiple
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10291

