The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Fast Local Search Algorithm for the Latin Square Completion Problem
Shiwei Pan, Yiyuan Wang* , Minghao Yin∗
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
pansw779@nenu.edu.cn, yiyuanwangjlu@126.com, ymh@nenu.edu.cn

sell, and Sundaram 1999). Afterwards, an e/(e − 1)–
approximation algorithm was presented based on the linear programming relaxation of a packing linear programming formulation (Gomes, Regis, and Shmoys 2004). Hajirasouliha et al. (2007) introduced a (2/3−ε)–approximation
algorithm for the PLSE problem. It is common to see that
approximation algorithms usually have poor performance
in practice. There are mainly two types of algorithms for
the LSC problem, i.e., exact algorithms and heuristic algorithms.
In the recent decade, several exact algorithms have been
proposed for solving the LSC problem. Gomes and Shmoys
(2002) proposed three exact algorithms for solving the LSC
problem, including a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP)
based algorithm, a hybrid algorithm based on linear programming and CSP as well as a SAT-based algorithm. In
this work, a common feature of these proposed search algorithms is the careful use of randomization and restarts to
obtain some robust solvers, while maintaining the completeness of backtrack search approaches. A systematic comparison of SAT and CSP models was proposed for the LSC problem (Ansótegui et al. 2004). Results show that the above exact algorithms can only solve instances with small sizes.
For solving instances with large sizes, some heuristic LSC
algorithms have been proposed, which can obtain an approximate solution within reasonable time. Representative
heuristic algorithms for the LSC problem mainly used some
neighborhood search techniques. For example, Haraguchi
(2015; 2016) designed three efficient neighborhood search
algorithms called 1-ILS*, 2-ILS and 3-ILS. Besides, the author also proposed a novel swap operation called Trellisswap, resulting in a novel Trellis-neighborhood search algorithm named Tr-ILS*. According to the literature, the
current best heuristic algorithm for the LSC problem is
called MMCOL (Jin and Hao 2019), which is mainly based
on a constraint propagation technique, a problem-specific
crossover operator, an iterated tabu search procedure and
a distance-quality-based pool updating strategy. Besides, a
transformation method is also proposed to convert an LSC
instance to a domain-constrained Latin square graph (Jin and
Hao 2019). Although the MMCOL algorithm performs very
well on some hard graphs, it has to cost lots of computation
time for obtaining an arbitrary legal solution.
Although previous works made progress in solving the

Abstract
The Latin square completion (LSC) problem is an important
NP-complete problem with numerous applications. Given its
theoretical and practical importance, several algorithms are
designed for solving the LSC problem. In this work, to further improve the performance, a fast local search algorithm
is developed based on three main ideas. Firstly, a reduction
reasoning technique is used to reduce the scale of search
space. Secondly, we propose a novel conflict value selection heuristic, which considers the history conflicting information of vertices as a selection criterion when more than
one vertex have equal values on the primary scoring function.
Thirdly, during the search phase, we record previous history
search information and then make use of these information to
restart the candidate solution. Experimental results show that
our proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the stateof-the-art heuristic algorithms on almost all instances in terms
of success rate and run time.

Introduction
A Latin square of order n is an array of n symbols (i.e.,
{1, 2, . . . , n}) in which each symbol occurs exactly once in
each row and exactly once in each column. If some grids
are empty, then the Latin square complete (LSC) problem
of order n aims to complete the empty grids with n symbols to obtain an arbitrary legal Latin square. In the past
decades, the LSC problem has been already used in various fields (Laywine and Mullen 1998; Lakić 2001; Gogate
and Dechter 2011), such as optical networks (Kumar, Russell, and Sundaram 1999), error correcting codes (Colbourn,
Klove, and Ling 2004) and combinatorial designs (Colbourn
2010). Also, the LSC problem can be modeled as the formulas of Boolean satisfiability (SAT) using the extended encoding proposed by (Gomes and Shmoys 2002).
As is known, the LSC problem has been shown to be
an NP-complete problem (Colbourn 1984). For the optimized version of the LSC problem, i.e., the partial Latin
square extension (PLSE) problem, researchers have designed many approximation algorithms. For example, two
classical approximation algorithms were proposed with nontrivial worst-case performance guarantees (Kumar, Rus* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10327

