The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Reinforcement Learning Policies Learn Shared Adversarial Features across
MDPs
Ezgi Korkmaz

Abstract

The existence in standard datasets of non-robust features,
which both generalize well but are simultaneously highly
sensitive to small perturbations, raise serious concerns about
the way that DNN models are currently trained and tested.
On the one hand, since non-robust features are actually useful in classification, current training methods which optimize for classification accuracy have no reason to ignore
them. On the other hand, since these features can be altered with visually imperceptible perturbations they present
a formidable obstacle to constructing models that behave
anything like humans. Instead, models trained in the presence of non-robust features are likely to have directions
of high-sensitivity (or equivalently small margin) correlated
with these features.
In the reinforcement learning setting, where policies are
generally trained in simulated environments, the presence
of non-robust features leading to high-sensitivity directions
for neural network policies raises serious concerns about the
ability of these policies to generalize beyond their training
simulations. Consequently, identifying the presence of nonrobust features in simulated training environments and understanding their effects on neural-network policies is an
important first step in designing algorithms for training reinforcement learning agents which can perform well in realworld settings.
In this paper we study the decision boundaries of neural
network policies in deep reinforcement learning. In particular, we ask: how are high-sensitivity directions related to the
actions taken across states for a neural network policy? Are
high-sensitivity directions correlated between neural policies trained in different MDPs? Do state-of-the-art adversarially trained deep reinforcement learning policies inherit
similar high-sensitivity directions to vanilla trained deep reinforcement learning policies? Do non-robust features exist
in the deep reinforcement learning training environments?
To answer these questions, we propose a framework based
on identifying directions of low distance to the neural policy
decision boundary, and investigating how these directions
affect the decisions of the agents across states and MDPs.
Our main contributions are as follows:

The use of deep neural networks as function approximators
has led to striking progress for reinforcement learning algorithms and applications. Yet the knowledge we have on decision boundary geometry and the loss landscape of neural policies is still quite limited. In this paper, we propose a framework to investigate the decision boundary and loss landscape
similarities across states and across MDPs. We conduct experiments in various games from Arcade Learning Environment, and discover that high sensitivity directions for neural policies are correlated across MDPs. We argue that these
high sensitivity directions support the hypothesis that nonrobust features are shared across training environments of
reinforcement learning agents. We believe our results reveal
fundamental properties of the environments used in deep reinforcement learning training, and represent a tangible step towards building robust and reliable deep reinforcement learning agents.

1

Introduction

Building on the success of DNNs for image classification,
deep reinforcement learning has seen remarkable advances
in various complex environments Mnih et al. (2015); Schulman et al. (2017); Lillicrap et al. (2016). Along with these
successes come new challenges stemming from the current
lack of understanding of the structure of the decision boundary and loss landscape of neural network policies. Notably, it
has been shown that the high sensitivity of DNN image classifiers to imperceptible perturbations to inputs also occurs
for neural policies Huang et al. (2017); Lin et al. (2017);
Korkmaz (2020). This lack of robustness is especially critical for deep reinforcement learning, where the actions taken
by the agent can have serious real-life consequences Levin
and Carrie (2018).
Recent work has shown that adversarial examples are a
consequence of the existence of non-robust (i.e. adversarial)
features of datasets used in image classifier training Ilyas
et al. (2019). That is, there are certain features which are actually useful in classifying the data, but are extremely sensitive to small perturbations, and thus incomprehensible to
humans.

• We introduce a framework based on computing a highsensitivity direction in one state, and probing the decision
boundary of the neural policy along this direction as the
neural policy is executed in a set of carefully controlled

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7229

