The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Delving into Probabilistic Uncertainty for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Person Re-identification
Jian Han, Ya-Li Li* , Shengjin Wang
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
hanj19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

(𝒙𝒊 , 𝒚෥𝒊 )

Abstract
Clustering-based unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) person re-identification (ReID) reduces exhaustive annotations.
However, owing to unsatisfactory feature embedding and imperfect clustering, pseudo labels for target domain data inherently contain an unknown proportion of wrong ones, which
would mislead feature learning. In this paper, we propose
an approach named probabilistic uncertainty guided progressive label refinery (P2 LR) for domain adaptive person reidentification. First, we propose to model the labeling uncertainty with the probabilistic distance along with ideal singlepeak distributions. A quantitative criterion is established to
measure the uncertainty of pseudo labels and facilitate the
network training. Second, we explore a progressive strategy
for refining pseudo labels. With the uncertainty-guided alternative optimization, we balance between the exploration of
target domain data and the negative effects of noisy labeling. On top of a strong baseline, we obtain significant improvements and achieve the state-of-the-art performance on
four UDA ReID benchmarks. Specifically, our method outperforms the baseline by 6.5% mAP on the Duke2Market
task, while surpassing the state-of-the-art method by 2.5%
mAP on the Market2MSMT task. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/JeyesHan/P2LR.

𝒇𝒊
Mean teacher

Q(𝒙𝒊 , 𝒚෥𝒊 ): Ideal
probability distribution

Classifier
𝒄𝒍𝒔

𝒘

…

P(𝒙𝒊 , 𝒚෥𝒊 ): Predicted
probability distribution
Probabilistic
Uncertainty

𝒚෥𝒊

𝒚෥𝒊

Figure 1: Probabilistic uncertainty in P2 LR. For a target domain image xi with pseudo label ỹi , we extract its feature fi
and obtain the predicted distribution P (xi , ỹi ). We estimate
the uncertainty of (xi , ỹi ) by calculating the KL probabilistic distance with the ideal distribution Q(xi , ỹi ).
based methods (Zhong et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Yu
et al. 2019), and clustering based methods (Fan et al. 2018;
Lin et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2019; Ge, Chen, and Li 2020; Zhai
et al. 2020b). In general, clustering based methods can obtain superior performance. Typically, clustering based methods consist of three stages, i.e., i) pre-training with labeled
source domain images, ii) generating pseudo labels for target
domain images by clustering, and iii) fine-tuning with target
domain images. The first stage is conducted only once and
the latter two stages are repeated several times for mutual
promotion. However, owing to unsatisfactory feature embedding and imperfect clustering quality, we are supposed
to tackle an unknown proportion of wrong pseudo labels.
On one hand, such noisy labels inherent with cross-domain
pseudo labeling would mislead the network optimization in
the fine-tuning stage. On the other hand, the negative effects
caused by wrong pseudo labels will propagate and amplify
as the training procedure proceeds. Therefore, it is crucial to
identify wrong pseudo labels and alleviate the uncertainty of
pseudo labeling to promote the UDA person ReID.
This paper addresses two key issues for clustering-based
methods: 1) how to identify the wrong pseudo labels. 2) how
to reduce the negative effects of wrongly-labeled samples in
optimization. For the first issue, we observe that the probability distribution among identities of wrong-labeled sam-

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve all images
of the target person from non-overlapping camera views.
It has broad applications in smart retail, searching missing
children, and other person related scenarios. Although existing deep learning methods (Zhang, Zhang, and Liu 2021;
Isobe et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017) have achieved remarkable performance, these methods rely heavily on manual annotations.
Furthermore, they fail to generalize on other datasets when
domain gap between the source and target domain exists. To
address this critical issue, UDA person ReID where labeled
source images and unlabeled target images are presented has
attracted great attention in recent years.
UDA person ReID methods include domain transfer
based methods (Huang et al. 2020b; Ge et al. 2020; Deng
et al. 2018; Wei et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 2018), ranking
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

790

