The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Combating Collusion Rings is Hard but Possible
Niclas Boehmer1 , Robert Bredereck2 , André Nichterlein1
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Faculty IV, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Berlin, Germany
2
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Informatik, Algorithm Engineering, Berlin, Germany
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de, robert.bredereck@hu-berlin.de, andre.nichterlein@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

ways (see the surveys of Shah (2021) and Price and Flach
(2017) for details). Still there is huge potential for improving processes and further computational support is urgently
requested (Price and Flach 2017; Shah 2021).
When aiming to prevent collusion rings, one of the most
basic properties one can request from a review assignment
is that the assignment does not contain any review cycle of
length z, that is, a sequence of z agents each reviewing a paper authored by the next agent in the sequence (with the last
agent reviewing a paper authored by the first). This property
is of high practical relevance: For example, in the AAAI’21
review assignment the non-existence of review cycles of
length at most z = 2 was a soft constraint (Leyton-Brown
and Mausam 2021). Yet, there is a lack of systematic studies
concerning the computation of such assignments. Motivated
by this, we propose and analyze C YCLE -F REE R EVIEWING,
the problem of computing an assignment of papers to agents
that is free of review cycles of length at most z, both from a
theoretical and practical perspective.

A recent report of Littmann published in the Communications
of the ACM outlines the existence and the fatal impact of collusion rings in academic peer reviewing. We introduce and
analyze the problem C YCLE -F REE R EVIEWING that aims at
finding a review assignment without the following kind of
collusion ring: A sequence of reviewers each reviewing a paper authored by the next reviewer in the sequence (with the
last reviewer reviewing a paper of the first), thus creating a
review cycle where each reviewer gives favorable reviews. As
a result, all papers in that cycle have a high chance of acceptance independent of their respective scientific merit.
We observe that review assignments computed using a standard Linear Programming approach typically admit many
short review cycles. On the negative side, we show that
C YCLE -F REE R EVIEWING is NP-hard in various restricted
cases (i.e., when every author is qualified to review all papers
and one wants to prevent that authors review each other’s or
their own papers or when every author has only one paper and
is only qualified to review few papers). On the positive side,
among others, we show that, in some realistic settings, an assignment without any review cycles of small length always
exists. This result also gives rise to an efficient heuristic for
computing (weighted) cycle-free review assignments, which
we show to be of excellent quality in practice.

1

Related Work. The literature is rich in the general context of peer reviewing (see, e. g., the works of Goldsmith
and Sloan (2007); Taylor (2008); Garg et al. (2010); Long
et al. (2013); Lian et al. (2018); Kobren, Saha, and McCallum (2019); Stelmakh, Shah, and Singh (2021) on computational aspects of finding a “good” review assignment, and
the survey of Shah (2021)). Closest to our work are Barrot
et al. (2020) and Guo et al. (2018). In the context of product reviewing, among others, Barrot et al. (2020) propose
and analyze a restricted case which translates to our setting
as follows: Given a set of single-author papers and a set of
agents each writing a single paper and each having some
conflicts of interest over papers, find a review assignment of
papers to agents, where each agent serves as a reviewer providing one review and each paper must receive one review.
They show that in this setting finding an assignment without review cycles of length at most z corresponds to finding a 2-factor without cycles of length at most z, which is
known to be NP-hard for z ≥ 5 but polynomial-time solvable for z ≤ 3 (Hell et al. 1988). Closer to our setting is
that of Guo et al. (2018), who also consider the computation
of cycle-free review assignments. They propose two simple
heuristics and conduct experiments measuring the quality of
their heuristics and the number of review cycles in a weight-

Introduction

As recently pointed out by Littman (2021), the integrity and
legitimacy of scientific conference publications (particularly
important in the context of computer science) is threatened
by so-called “collusion rings”, which are sets of authors that
unethically review and support each other while breaking
anonymity and hiding conflicts of interest. Despite the fact
that details are usually not disclosed for various reasons, it
is inevitable that the process of assigning papers to reviewers is the key point to engineer technical barriers against
such incidents. Whereas assignments at very small venues
could be performed manually, support by (semi-)automatic
systems becomes necessary already for medium-size conferences. Today computational support for finding review
assignments is well-established and has improved the quality of the reviewing and paper assignment process in many
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4843

