The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Disentangled Spatiotemporal Graph Generative Models
Yuanqi Du1 , Xiaojie Guo2 * , Hengning Cao1 , Yanfang Ye3 , Liang Zhao4†
2

1
George Mason University, Fairfax, US
JD.COM Silicon Valley Research Center, Mountain View, CA, US
3
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, US
4
Emory University, Atlanta, US
ydu6@gmu.edu, liang.zhao@emory.edu

Abstract

tiotemporal graphs. Spatiotemporal graph represents a vital
data structure where the nodes and edges are embedded and
evolve in a geometric space, as shown in Fig. 1. Nowadays,
spatiotemporal graph data is becoming increasingly popular
and important, ranging from epidemic, transportation to biological network modeling (Dye and Gay 2003; Ingraham
et al. 2019; Stopher and Meyburg 1975; Teng 1985; Guo
et al. 2020a; Fu, Xiao, and Sun 2020; Du et al. 2020; Xu
et al. 2021a,b; Rahman et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2021b; Zhao
2021; Fu et al. 2021a). For example, the epidemic spreading
network and the protein folding process can both be represented as spatiotemporal graphs, respectively. Spatiotemporal graphs cannot be modeled using either the spatial, graph,
or temporal information individually, but require the simultaneous characterization of both the data and their interactions, which results in various patterns (Barthélemy 2011).
Spatial and graph aspects of information are usually correlated. For example, geographically nearby people tend to
befriend in a social network. A pair of atoms that are very
close in space tend to have a bond. Moreover, the above interplay between spatial and graph aspects is a dynamic process, thus, the consideration in time aspect is inevitable for a
comprehensive modeling. Recently, although spatiotemporal graph deep learning has stimulated a surge of research
for graph representation learning (Cui et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2019; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017; Khodayar et al. 2019; Roy
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2019; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017; Fu et al.
2021c), however, deep generative models for spatiotemporal
graph have not been well explored.

Spatiotemporal graph represents a crucial data structure
where the nodes and edges are embedded in a geometric
space and can evolve dynamically over time. Nowadays,
spatiotemporal graph data is becoming increasingly popular
and important, ranging from microscale (e.g. protein folding), to middle-scale (e.g. dynamic functional connectivity),
to macro-scale (e.g. human mobility network). Although disentangling and understanding the correlations among spatial,
temporal, and graph aspects have been a long-standing key
topic in network science, they typically rely on network processing hypothesized by human knowledge. This usually fit
well towards the graph properties which can be predefined,
but cannot do well for the most cases, especially for many key
domains where the human has yet very limited knowledge
such as protein folding and biological neuronal networks. In
this paper, we aim at pushing forward the modeling and understanding of spatiotemporal graphs via new disentangled
deep generative models. Specifically, a new Bayesian model
is proposed that factorizes spatiotemporal graphs into spatial,
temporal, and graph factors as well as the factors that explain
the interplay among them. A variational objective function
and new mutual information thresholding algorithms driven
by information bottleneck theory have been proposed to maximize the disentanglement among the factors with theoretical
guarantees. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on both
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed model over the state-of-the-arts by up to
69.2% for graph generation and 41.5% for interpretability.

Introduction

Modeling and understanding the generative process of
spatiotemporal graphs are a long-lasting research topic in
domains such as graph theory and network science. Traditional methods usually extend and integrate network models
in spatial networks (e.g., protein and molecule structures)
and temporal graphs (e.g., traffic networks and epidemic
spreading networks) into spatiotemporal graphs which captures some predefined properties of a graph, e.g., degree distribution, structure of community, clustering patterns. However, these models heavily rely on the predefined network
process and rich knowledge of the graph properties, while
the network properties and generation principles always remain unknown in the real-world applications, such as models that explain the mechanisms of mental diseases in brain
networks during an activity of human beings and protein

There are two major directions on graph learning research
in machine learning: 1) graph representation learning (Kipf
and Welling 2016a; Veličković et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017), which aims at encoding graph structural information into (low-dimensional) vector space, and
2) graph generation (You et al. 2018; Simonovsky and
Komodakis 2018), which reversely aims at constructing a
graph-structured data from low-dimensional space containing the graph generation rules or distribution. In this paper, we focus on the second direction, specifically for spa* Equally contributing as first author
†

The corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6541

