The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Random CNN Sees Objects: One Inductive Bias of CNN and Its Applications
Yun-Hao Cao, Jianxin Wu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
caoyh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

CUB200

Abstract

VOC2007

ImageNet

This paper starts by revealing a surprising finding: without
any learning, a randomly initialized CNN can localize objects
surprisingly well. That is, a CNN has an inductive bias to
naturally focus on objects, named as Tobias (“The object is at
sight”) in this paper. This empirical inductive bias is further
analyzed and successfully applied to self-supervised learning.
A CNN is encouraged to learn representations that focus on the
foreground object, by transforming every image into various
versions with different backgrounds, where the foreground
and background separation is guided by Tobias. Experimental
results show that the proposed Tobias significantly improves
downstream tasks, especially for object detection. This paper
also shows that Tobias has consistent improvements on training sets of different sizes, and is more resilient to changes in
image augmentations.

Figure 1: Visualization of localization heatmaps using
SCDA (Wei et al. 2017) for a randomly initialized ResNet-50.
Best viewed in color when zoomed in.
rely on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015) pretrained models
and non-trivial learning steps.
In this paper, we first show that focusing its attention to
objects is a born gift of CNNs even without any training,
i.e., it is CNN’s inductive bias (or one inductive bias out of
many) from an empirical perspective! A randomly initialized
CNN has surprisingly good localization ability, as shown in
Figure 1. We name this phenomenon “The object is at sight”,
or “Tobias” for short. The object(s) miraculously pop out
(“at sight”) without any need for learning. Our conjecture
is: the background is relatively texture-less compared to the
objects, and texture-less regions have higher chances to be
deactivated by activation functions like ReLU.
Tobias then lends us ‘free’ (free of labels and pretrained
models) and relatively accurate supervision for where objects
are. Hence, a natural application of Tobias is self-supervised
learning (SSL), which aims to learn useful representations
without requiring labels. After the emerging of the InfoNCE
loss (van den Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018) and the contrastive
learning paradigm, many SSL algorithms have been published, such as MoCo (He et al. 2020), SimCLR (Chen et al.
2020a), BYOL (Grill et al. 2020), and many more. In this
paper, we propose to probabilistically change an image’s
background (selected from other images) while keeping the
foreground objects by using Tobias. We thus force the model
to learn representations focusing on the objects.
We evaluate the representation learned by Tobias SSL on
ImageNet and other vision benchmarks. Our method achieves
consistent improvements on various benchmarks, especially
on object detection because our method can better capture the

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
great success in various computer vision tasks. However, as
of today we still know little about what makes a CNN suitable for analyzing natural images, i.e., what is its inductive
bias. The inductive bias of a learning algorithm specifies
constraints on the hypothesis space, and a model can only
be instantiated from the hypothesis space that satisfies these
constraints. It is easy to reveal the inductive bias of certain
learning algorithms (e.g., a linear classifier specifies a linear
relationship between the features and the target variable).
But, the inductive bias of complex CNNs is still hidden in
the fog (Cohen and Shashua 2017). Successfully identifying
CNN’s inductive bias will not only deepen our theoretical understanding of this complex model, but also lead to potential
important algorithmic progresses.
Objects are the key in most natural images, and CNNs are
good at recognizing, detecting and segmenting objects. For instance, weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) (Zhou
et al. 2016; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Zhang, Cao, and Wu 2020)
and unsupervised object localization (USOL) methods (Wei
et al. 2017, 2019) can even localize objects without training
on bounding box annotations. All these methods, however,
* J. Wu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

194

