The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Convolutional Neural Network Compression through
Generalized Kronecker Product Decomposition
Marawan Gamal Abdel Hameed 1,2 * , Marzieh S. Tahaei1† , Ali Mosleh1 , Vahid Partovi Nia1
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies Canada
2
University of Waterloo
marawan.abdelhameed@uwaterloo.ca, {marzieh.tahaei, ali.mosleh, vahid.partovinia}@huawei.com

Original Tensor

Abstract
Modern Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures,
despite their superiority in solving various problems, are
generally too large to be deployed on resource constrained
edge devices. In this paper, we reduce memory usage and
floating-point operations required by convolutional layers in
CNNs. We compress these layers by generalizing the Kronecker Product Decomposition to apply to multidimensional
tensors, leading to the Generalized Kronecker Product Decomposition (GKPD). Our approach yields a plug-and-play
module that can be used as a drop-in replacement for any
convolutional layer. Experimental results for image classification on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets using ResNet,
MobileNetv2 and SeNet architectures substantiate the effectiveness of our proposed approach. We find that GKPD outperforms state-of-the-art decomposition methods including
Tensor-Train and Tensor-Ring as well as other relevant compression methods such as pruning and knowledge distillation.

Reconstructed Tensor Reconstruction Error

(a) SVD (Tucker)

(b) GKPD - 1

(c) GKPD - 8

Figure 1: A compression rate of 2× achieved for an arbitrary tensor from the first layer of ResNet18 using SVD
(Tucker) in (a), and the proposed GKPD in (b) and (c). A
larger summation, GKPD-8 achieves a lower reconstruction
error in comparison with both a smaller summation, GKPD1, as well as SVD (Tucker) decomposition.

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of computer vision tasks such as image classification (He et al. 2016), video
recognition (Feichtenhofer et al. 2019) and object detection
(Ren et al. 2015). Despite achieving remarkably low generalization errors, modern CNN architectures are typically
over-parameterized and consist of millions of parameters.
As the size of state-of-the-art CNN architectures continues
to grow, it becomes more challenging to deploy these models on resource constrained edge devices that are limited in
both memory and energy. Motivated by studies demonstrating that there is significant redundancy in CNN parameters
(Denil et al. 2013), model compression techniques such as
pruning, quantization, tensor decomposition and knowledge
distillation have emerged to address this problem.
Decomposition methods have gained more attention in recent years as they can achieve higher compression rates in
comparison to other approaches. Namely, Tucker (Kim et al.
2016), CP (Lebedev et al. 2015), Tensor-Train (Garipov

et al. 2016) and Tensor-Ring (Wang et al. 2018) decompositions have been widely studied for DNNs. However, these
methods still suffer significant accuracy loss for computer
vision tasks.
Kronecker Product Decomposition (KPD) is another decomposition method that has recently shown to be very effective
when applied to RNNs (Thakker et al. 2019). KPD leads to
model compression via replacing a large matrix with two
smaller Kronecker factor matrices that best approximate the
original matrix. In this work, we generalize KPD to tensors, yielding the Generalized Kronecker Product Decomposition (GKPD), and use it to decompose convolution tensors. GKPD involves finding the summation of Kronecker
products between factor tensors that best approximates the
original tensor. We provide a solution to this problem called
the Multidimensional Nearest Kronecker Product Problem.
By formulating the convolution operation directly in terms

* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

771

