The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Orthogonal Graph Neural Networks
Kai Guo1 , Kaixiong Zhou2 , Xia Hu2 , Yu Li3 , Yi Chang1,4 , Xin Wang1 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, USA
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
4
International Center of Future Science, Jilin University
guokai20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, Kaixiong.Zhou@rice.edu, xia.hu@rice.edu, liyu18@mails.jlu.edu.cn, yichang@jlu.edu.cn,
xinwang@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

with layer stacking. Most of the previous studies (Chen et al.
2020a; Li, Han, and Wu 2018; Oono and Suzuki 2019; Zhou
et al. 2021a) attribute this limitation to the over-smoothing
issue, which indicates that the node representations become
indistinguishable due to the recursive neighbor aggregation
upon the graph structure. A number of models have been
recently proposed to alleviate the over-smoothing issue, including skip connection (Chen et al. 2020c,b; Li et al. 2019)
and graph augmentation (Rong et al. 2020). Their main ideas
are to avoid the overwhelming amount of neighborhood information, and strengthen the specific node features of themselves at each graph convolutional layer.
In contrast to the previous extensive studies of oversmoothing for the extremely deep GNNs, we transfer the
research attendance to explore the primary factor compromising the performance of shallow GNNs. Our research is
motivated by an inconsistent observation in Figure 1.(d): the
node classification accuracy of GNNs drops rapidly once the
model depth is slightly enhanced (e.g., up to 8 layers), where
the over-smoothing status should be far from being reached.
By simply removing the feature transformation module from
GNNs, it is further observed that GNNs surprisingly perform
steadily even with tens of graph convolutional layers. This
motivates us to pose the following research question: does
the stable feature transformation play the dominating role in
affecting the model performance of shallow GNNs?
Forward and backward signaling analysis. To answer
this question, we first systematically analyze the steadiness
of feature transformation from both the forward inference
and backward gradient directions. We apply two corresponding steadiness metrics: one measuring the signal magnifications of forward node embeddings and the other evaluating the norms of backward gradients. As shown in Figure 1.(a) and (b), it is empirically demonstrated that vanilla
GNNs suffer from the forward embedding explosion and
backward gradient vanishing. While the forward explosion
greatly shifts the internal embedding distributions among
layers to make the model training inefficient (Ioffe and
Szegedy 2015), the gradient vanishing hampers the tuning
of feature transformation module to adapt the downstream
tasks. Therefore, we conclude and argue that the vanilla feature transformation damages the steady model signaling at
both the forward and backward directions, which in turn degrades the performance especially for shallow GNNs.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have received tremendous
attention due to their superiority in learning node representations. These models rely on message passing and feature
transformation functions to encode the structural and feature
information from neighbors. However, stacking more convolutional layers significantly decreases the performance of
GNNs. Most recent studies attribute this limitation to the
over-smoothing issue, where node embeddings converge to
indistinguishable vectors. Through a number of experimental observations, we argue that the main factor degrading
the performance is the unstable forward normalization and
backward gradient resulted from the improper design of the
feature transformation, especially for shallow GNNs where
the over-smoothing has not happened. Therefore, we propose
a novel orthogonal feature transformation, named OrthoGConv, which could generally augment the existing GNN
backbones to stabilize the model training and improve the
model’s generalization performance. Specifically, we maintain the orthogonality of the feature transformation comprehensively from three perspectives, namely hybrid weight initialization, orthogonal transformation, and orthogonal regularization. By equipping the existing GNNs (e.g. GCN,
JKNet, GCNII) with Ortho-GConv, we demonstrate the generality of the orthogonal feature transformation to enable stable training, and show its effectiveness for node and graph
classification tasks.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) and
their variants have been widely applied to analyze graphstructured data, such as social networks (Tian et al. 2019),
molecular networks (Zhou et al. 2021b) and citation networks (Zhou et al. 2021a, 2019). Based upon the input node
features and graph topology, GNNs apply neighbor aggregation and feature transformation schemes to update the representation of each node recursively. While the neighbor
aggregation passes neighborhood messages along the adjacency edges, the feature transformation aims to project node
embedding to improve models’ learning ability.
Despite their superior effectiveness, a key limitation of
GNNs is that their performance would decrease significantly
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3996

