The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepVisualInsight: Time-Travelling Visualization for Spatio-Temporal Causality
of Deep Classification Training
Xianglin Yang1 * , Yun Lin1† * , Ruofan Liu1 , Zhenfeng He1 , Chao Wang1 ,
Jin Song Dong1 , Hong Mei2
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Key Lab of High-Confidence Software Technology, MoE (Peking University), China
xianglin@u.nus.edu, {dcsliny, dcslirf}@nus.edu.sg, {he.zhenfeng, wang.chao}@u.nus.edu, dcsdjs@nus.edu.sg,
hongmei@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

prediction (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Chattopadhyay et al. 2019; Kapishnikov et al. 2019; Simonyan,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Chattopadhay et al. 2018);

Understanding how the predictions of deep learning models
are formed during the training process is crucial to improve
model performance and fix model defects, especially when
we need to investigate nontrivial training strategies such as
active learning, and track the root cause of unexpected training results such as performance degeneration.
In this work, we propose a time-travelling visual solution
DeepVisualInsight (DVI), aiming to manifest the spatiotemporal causality while training a deep learning image classifier. The spatio-temporal causality demonstrates how the
gradient-descent algorithm and various training data sampling techniques can influence and reshape the layout of
learnt input representation and the classification boundaries
in consecutive epochs. Such causality allows us to observe
and analyze the whole learning process in the visible low dimensional space. Technically, we propose four spatial and
temporal properties and design our visualization solution to
satisfy them. These properties preserve the most important information when projecting and inverse-projecting input samples between the visible low-dimensional and the invisible
high-dimensional space, for causal analyses. Our extensive
experiments show that, comparing to baseline approaches, we
achieve the best visualization performance regarding the spatial/temporal properties and visualization efficiency. Moreover, our case study shows that our visual solution can well
reflect the characteristics of various training scenarios, showing good potential of DVI as a debugging tool for analyzing
deep learning training processes.

• Training data slicing: identifying the most influential
training samples that impact the model (Sagadeeva and
Boehm 2021; Bhatt et al. 2021; Koh and Liang 2017);
• Model abstraction: abstracting simplified and explainable models (e.g., SVMs and decision trees) to explain the
deep learning models (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Frosst and Hinton 2017; Zhang et al. 2019).
Despite those techniques are useful for explaining a
trained model, few works are proposed to explain how the
model predictions are formed during the training process.
While some works focusing on the progressive training information (e.g., loss and accuracy) can be useful, they fail
to abstract the underlying model evolving semantics. The
semantic questions can be (but not limited to): (1) how the
(re)training process gradually improves the model robustness, and reshapes the classification boundary? (2) how the
model gradually makes a trade-off to fit some samples while
sacrificing the others? (3) how the model struggles to fit and
learn the hard samples?
In this work, we design a time-travelling visualization
solution DeepVisualInsight (DVI), focusing on manifesting
the spatio-temporal causality of the training progress of deep
learning classifiers. DVI projects the learned input representation and their classification landscape into a visible
low dimensional space, showing how model predictions are
formed during training process, from both spatial and temporal perspectives. Spatially, DVI visualizes (1) the layout of
learned input representation and (2) the classification landscape describing the “territory” of each class. Temporally,
DVI visualizes (1) how the classification landscape and the
training input representation evolve over the training and (2)
how the new sampled training inputs reshape the classification boundaries. The spatio-temporal information allows us
to observe training anomalies (e.g. noisy dataset) and verify
some specific training strategies (e.g. effectiveness of active
learning sampling strategies).
Comparing to designing measurements to analyze specific sample or model properties (e.g., Shapley value (An-

Introduction
Interpreting model predictions is a well-reconsigned challenge when training and analyzing deep learning models
(Zhang et al. 2021). Various explainable AI techniques have
been proposed to understand model predictions including
input attribution analysis, training data analysis, model abstraction, etc. Generally, existing solutions focus on:
• Individual prediction analysis: identifying the most important features of an individual input to explain a model
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5359

