The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semi-supervised Conditional Density Estimation
with Wasserstein Laplacian Regularisation
Olivier Graffeuille1 , Yun Sing Koh1 , Jörg Wicker1 , Moritz Lehmann2
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland
Xerra Earth Observation Institute, The University of Waikato
ogra439@aucklanduni.ac.nz, y.koh@auckland.ac.nz, j.wicker@auckland.ac.nz, mlehmann@waikato.ac.nz
2

Abstract

CDE estimation
Training data

y

Conditional Density Estimation (CDE) has wide-reaching applicability to various real-world problems, such as spatial
density estimation and environmental modelling. CDE estimates the probability density of a random variable rather than
a single value and can thus model uncertainty and inverse
problems. This task is inherently more complex than regression, and many algorithms suffer from overfitting, particularly when modelled with few labelled data points. For applications where unlabelled data is abundant but labelled data
is scarce, we propose Wasserstein Laplacian Regularisation,
a semi-supervised learning framework that allows CDE algorithms to leverage these unlabelled data. The framework minimises an objective function which ensures that the learned
model is smooth along the manifold of the underlying data,
as measured by Wasserstein distance. When applying our
framework to Mixture Density Networks, the resulting semisupervised algorithm can achieve similar performance to a
supervised model with up to three times as many labelled
data points on baseline datasets. We additionally apply our
technique to the problem of remote sensing for chlorophyll-a
estimation in inland waters.

x

Figure 1: CDE model learns ill-posed relationship between
x and y in 1D synthetic Gaussians dataset, by estimating
distributions of y conditioned on x.

ently a more complex task than regression and many CDE
techniques suffer from overfitting and require large datasets.
Many applications lack labelled data, thus it is desirable to
use methods that exploit unlabelled data to improve learning
(Levatić et al. 2020). Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) approaches make assumptions about the relationship between
the underlying data distribution and the output variable to
gain information from unlabelled data (Luo et al. 2017; Li,
Zha, and Zhou 2017). We hypothesise that by leveraging unlabelled data, we can use regularisation to reduce overfitting
and improve the performance of CDE algorithms.
Currently, some deep generative models for conditional
distributions (Mirza and Osindero 2014; Sohn, Lee, and Yan
2015) use unlabelled data to improve performance (Shu,
Bui, and Ghavamzadeh 2017). However, these models require structured outputs and are unable to model univariate or low-dimensional outputs, which is restrictive to realworld applicability. Additionally, these models cannot estimate tractable densities, which makes them less informative.
Other related work includes Huang (2021), who used normalising flows to estimate conditional densities of missing
features and perform imputation and classification simultaneously in a SSL setting. Khan and Sugiyama (2012) extended Least Squares CDE to learn from unlabelled data,
however this approach does not have the expressive power
of deep learning CDE techniques (Sugiyama et al. 2010).
To bridge this gap, our research aims to leverage unlabelled data to improve performance of CDE techniques. Intuition of our approach can be gained by looking to the

Introduction
Conditional Density Estimation (CDE) is the task of estimating the probability density p(y|x) of a random continuous variable y given an input x, as opposed to regression
where we estimate a single value f (y|x). Approaches to
CDE include Mixture Density Networks (MDNs) (Bishop
1994), discretised histograms (Van Oord, Kalchbrenner, and
Kavukcuoglu 2016), Normalising Flows (NFs) (Trippe and
Turner 2018) and the Uncountable Mixture of Asymmetric
Laplacians (UMAL) model (Brando et al. 2019). By producing a probability density around a response variable, CDE allows practitioners to make informed decisions relating to the
range of predicted outcomes. Another benefit of CDE is the
ability to model inverse problems. Inverse problems estimate
the causal agents that lead to an observed state in a response
variable (Bishop 2006) and are often ill-posed as they do not
have a unique solution for a given observation. By generating a probability density, CDE is able to model this nonuniqueness, as shown in Figure 1. However, CDE is inherCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6746

