The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Monocular Camera-Based Point-Goal Navigation by
Learning Depth Channel and Cross-Modality Pyramid Fusion
Tianqi Tang1 * , Heming Du2 * , Xin Yu1 , Yi Yang1†
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
Australian National University
Tang@student.uts.edu.au, heming.du@anu.edu.au, {xin.yu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Target

Abstract

Visited Node
Action

For a monocular camera-based navigation system, if we could
effectively explore scene geometric cues from RGB images,
the geometry information will significantly facilitate the efficiency of the navigation system. Motivated by this, we
propose a highly efficient point-goal navigation framework,
dubbed Geo-Nav. In a nutshell, Geo-Nav consists of two
parts: a visual perception part and a navigation part. In the
visual perception part, we firstly propose a Self-supervised
Depth Estimation network (SDE) specially tailored for the
monocular camera-based navigation agent. SDE learns a
mapping from an RGB input image to its corresponding depth
image by exploring scene geometric constraints in a selfconsistency manner. Then, in order to achieve a representative visual representation from the RGB inputs and learned
depth images, we propose a Cross-modality Pyramid Fusion
module (CPF). Concretely, CPF computes a patch-wise crossmodality correlation between different modal features and exploits the correlation to fuse and enhance features at each
scale. Thanks to the patch-wise nature of CPF, we can fuse
feature maps at high resolution, allowing the visual network
to perceive more image details. In the navigation part, the
extracted visual representations are fed to a navigation policy network to learn how to map the visual representations to
agent actions effectively. Extensive experiments on the Gibson benchmark demonstrate that Geo-Nav outperforms the
state-of-the-art in terms of efficiency and effectiveness.

TurnLeft

TurnRight MoveForward

Cross-modality Pyramid Fusion

Policy Network

RGB

Monocular depth

Figure 1: Illustration of Geo-Nav framework. An agent predicts monocular depth by Self-supervised Depth Estimation
network (SDE). The agent applies Cross-modality Pyramid
Fusion module (CPF) to merge features from the RGB image and estimated depth map into an informative visual representation. Then, the agent produces a navigation policy
and selects an action, e.g., TurnLeft. The red point represents the target position, and visited nodes are highlighted
by blue points in one episode.
.

Introduction

pre-train agents with auxiliary tasks, e.g., depth prediction,
to exploit geometric information. However, such navigation
systems may suffer from severe performance degradation
when depth information is not available. Unlike previous
works that require ground-truth depth, we develop a monocular camera-based navigation framework named Geo-Nav,
which can efficiently explore scene geometric cues without
relying on ground-truth depth information.
Geo-Nav consists of two parts: a visual perception part
and a navigation part. In the visual perception part, we
firstly introduce a Self-supervised Depth Estimation network (SDE) to comprehend scene geometric structure from
RGB observations by estimating dense depth maps of
scenes. To be specific, SDE learns to map monocular RGB
images to depth maps from the visual observation differences between consecutive frames. We adopt an encoderdecoder architecture to estimate scene depth by satisfying

Point-goal visual navigation aims to instruct an agent to
move towards a target position based on RGB observations
and directional indications. Apart from the indications, fully
understanding scene geometry plays a critical role in navigation action reasoning. Particularly, sensing scene geometry significantly facilitates the efficiency of the navigation
system, such as avoiding obstacles.
Recent works validate the importance of depth information in visual navigation. For example, previous methods (Chen et al. 2019; Wijmans et al. 2020) employ RGBD images to learn expressive visual representations. Some
navigation systems (Gordon et al. 2019; Sax et al. 2018)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5422

