The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contrastive Spatio-Temporal Pretext Learning for
Self-Supervised Video Representation
Yujia Zhang1∗ , Lai-Man Po1 , Xuyuan Xu2 , Mengyang Liu2 ,
Yexin Wang2 , Weifeng Ou1 , Yuzhi Zhao1 , Wing-Yin Yu1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
AI Technology Center, OVB, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
{yzhang2383-c,weifengou2-c,yzzhao2-c,wingyinyu8-c}
@my.cityu.edu.hk, eelmpo@cityu.edu.hk, {xuyuanxu2,yexin.w}@gmail.com, myleonliu@tencent.com
Abstract

downstream tasks without human-annotated labels (Fernando et al. 2017; Benaim et al. 2020; Behrmann, Gall, and
Noroozi 2021). Recently, with the success of contrastive
learning in self-supervised image classification, this method
has been widely expended in video self-supervised learning (Chen et al. 2021; Alwassel et al. 2019; Sermanet et al.
2018).
However, there are obvious limitations in these works.
Firstly, previous works only explored discriminating similar features from dissimilar ones while ignoring the intermediate state of learned representations such as the similarity degree, which limits the overall performance. Secondly,
less effort has been put on the mutual influence of multiple
pretext tasks and various contrastive learning schemes for
spatio-temporal representation learning.
To address these problems, we propose a novel pretext task, i.e., Spatio-Temporal Overlap Rate (STOR) prediction to percept the similarity degree as the intermediate state
to favor contrastive learning and propose a joint optimization framework of contrastive learning and multiple pretext
tasks to further enhance the spatio-temporal representation
learning. It is observed that given a set of two clips at a specific overlap rate, humans can discriminate the overlap rate
when providing candidates (see Figure 1). We assume that
humans can make it due to their favorable spatio-temporal
representation ability. Built upon the observation, we believe that CNNs can learn video representations better by
discriminating such overlap rates. The assumption is that CNNs can only succeed in such a spatio-temporal overlap rate
reasoning task when it learns representative spatio-temporal
features. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
that attempts to capture the spatio-temporal degree of similarity between generated samples for self-supervised learning. Moreover, we propose a new and effective data augmentation method for the pretext task. This data augmentation method can generate samples with random overlapped
spatio-temporal regions, while keeping the randomness of
samples.
In order to study the mutual influence of contrastive learning and pretext tasks for better spatio-temporal representation learning, we comprehensively study the joint optimization scheme. Specifically, we study four popular contrastive
learning frameworks, i.e., SimCLR (Chen et al. 2020), MoCo (He et al. 2020), BYOL (Grill et al. 2020) and SimSi-

Spatio-temporal representation learning is critical for video
self-supervised representation. Recent approaches mainly use
contrastive learning and pretext tasks. However, these approaches learn representation by discriminating sampled instances via feature similarity in the latent space while ignoring the intermediate state of the learned representations,
which limits the overall performance. In this work, taking into account the degree of similarity of sampled instances as the
intermediate state, we propose a novel pretext task - spatiotemporal overlap rate (STOR) prediction. It stems from the
observation that humans are capable of discriminating the
overlap rates of videos in space and time. This task encourages the model to discriminate the STOR of two generated
samples to learn the representations. Moreover, we employ
a joint optimization combining pretext tasks with contrastive
learning to further enhance the spatio-temporal representation learning. We also study the mutual influence of each
component in the proposed scheme. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed STOR task can favor both
contrastive learning and pretext tasks. The joint optimization
scheme can significantly improve the spatio-temporal representation in video understanding. The code is available at
https://github.com/Katou2/CSTP.

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been proven
to be successful in supervised video representation learning with numerous human-annotated labels (Carreira and
Zisserman 2017; Feichtenhofer et al. 2019). Videos contain
more complex spatio-temporal contents and a larger data
volume. Billions of unlabeled videos emerge on the Internet every day, making supervised video analysis expensive
and time-consuming. Thus, how to effectively learn video
representations without annotations is an important yet challenging task. Among effective unsupervised learning methods, self-supervised learning has proven to be a promising
methodology (Chen et al. 2020; He et al. 2020; Feichtenhofer et al. 2021).
Early video self-supervised learning approaches proposed
proper tasks with automatically generated labels, thereby
encouraging CNNs to learn the transferable features for
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3380

