The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ProtGNN: Towards Self-Explaining Graph Neural Networks
Zaixi Zhang1 , Qi Liu1 * , Hao Wang1 , Chengqiang Lu1 , Cheekong Lee2∗
1

Anhui Province Key Lab. of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Tencent America
{zaixi, wanghao3, lunar}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn
cheekonglee@tencent.com
Abstract

Recently, extensive efforts have been made to study explanation techniques for GNNs (Yuan et al. 2020b). These methods can explain the predictions of node or graph classifications of trained GNNs with different strategies. For example, GNNExplainer (Ying et al. 2019) and PGExplainer (Luo
et al. 2020) are proposed to select a compact subgraph structure that maximizes the mutual information with the GNN’s
predictions as the explanation. PGM-Explainer (Vu and Thai
2020) firstly obtains a local dataset by random node feature
perturbation. Then it employs an interpretable Bayesian network to fit the local dataset and to explain the predictions
of the original GNN model. In addition, XGNN (Yuan et al.
2020a) generates graph patterns to maximize the predicted
probability for a certain class and provides model-level explanation. Despite the tremendous developments in the interpretation of GNNs, most existing approaches can be classified as post-hoc explanations where another explanatory
model is used to provide explanations for a trained GNN.
Post-hoc explanations can be inaccurate or incomplete in revealing the actual reasoning process of the original model
(Rudin 2018). Therefore, it is more desirable to build models with inherent interpretability where the explanations are
generated by the model themselves.

Despite the recent progress in Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), it remains challenging to explain the predictions
made by GNNs. Existing explanation methods mainly focus
on post-hoc explanations where another explanatory model
is employed to provide explanations for a trained GNN. The
fact that post-hoc methods fail to reveal the original reasoning process of GNNs raises the need of building GNNs with
built-in interpretability. In this work, we propose Prototype
Graph Neural Network (ProtGNN), which combines prototype learning with GNNs and provides a new perspective on
the explanations of GNNs. In ProtGNN, the explanations are
naturally derived from the case-based reasoning process and
are actually used during classification. The prediction of ProtGNN is obtained by comparing the inputs to a few learned
prototypes in the latent space. Furthermore, for better interpretability and higher efficiency, a novel conditional subgraph
sampling module is incorporated to indicate which part of
the input graph is most similar to each prototype in ProtGNN+. Finally, we evaluate our method on a wide range of
datasets and perform concrete case studies. Extensive results
show that ProtGNN and ProtGNN+ can provide inherent interpretability while achieving accuracy on par with the noninterpretable counterparts.

We leverage the concept of prototype learning to construct
GNNs with built-in interpretability (i.e. self-explaining
GNNs). In contrast to post-hoc explanation methods, the explanations generated by self-explaining GNNs are actually
used during classification and are not generated post-hoc.
Prototype learning is a form of case-based reasoning (Kolodner 1992; Schmidt et al. 2001), which makes the predictions
for new instances by comparing them with several learned
exemplar cases (i.e. prototypes). It is a natural practice in
solving problems with graph-structured data. For example,
chemists identify potential drug candidates based on known
functional groups (i.e. key subgraphs) in molecular graphs
(He et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2021c). Prototype learning
provides better interpretability by imitating such a human
problem-solving process. Recently the concept of the prototype has been incorporated in convolutional neural networks
to build interpretable image classifiers (Chen et al. 2018; Rymarczyk et al. 2021). However, so far prototype learning is
not yet explored for explaining GNNs.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become increasingly
popular since many real-world relational data can be represented as graphs, such as social networks (Bian et al. 2020),
molecules (Lu et al. 2019) and financial data (Yang et al.
2020). Following a message passing paradigm to learn node
representations, GNNs have achieved state-of-the-art performance in node classification, graph classification, and link
prediction (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2017;
Xu et al. 2019). Despite the remarkable effectiveness of
GNNs, explaining predictions made by GNNs remains a
challenging open problem. Without understanding the rationales behind the predictions, these black-box models cannot
be fully trusted and widely applied in critical areas such as
medical diagnosis. In addition, model explanations can facilitate model debugging and error analysis. These indicate
the necessity of investigating the explainability of GNNs.
* Qi Liu and Cheekong Lee are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Building self-explaining GNNs based on prototype learning
brings unique challenges. First, the discreteness of the edges
9127

