The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

LUNAR: Unifying Local Outlier Detection Methods via Graph Neural Networks
Adam Goodge1,3 , Bryan Hooi 1,2 , See-Kiong Ng 1,2 , Wee Siong Ng 3
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
adam.goodge@u.nus.edu, {dcsbhk, seekiong}@nus.edu.sg, wsng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract

parameters. They are mostly designed for highly structured,
high-dimensional data such as images, but their performance
often struggles for the less structured, feature-based data that
is commonly used in many applications. As such, local outlier methods remain the default choice is many areas.
A range of local outlier methods have been developed,
each with its own unique formulation and properties. However, many of them also share common characteristics with
each other. In this paper, our first contribution is to unify local outlier methods under a simple, general framework based
on the message passing scheme used in graph neural networks (GNN). We demonstrate that many popular methods,
such as KNN, LOF and DBSCAN, can be seen as particular cases of this more general message passing framework.
Despite their popularity, local outlier methods lack the
capacity to learn to optimise for or adapt to a particular set of data, e.g. through trainable parameters. Furthermore, in an unsupervised setting, there is no straightforward way to find optimal hyper-parameter settings, such as
the number of nearest neighbours, which is extremely important and greatly affects performance. In this paper, we
also propose a novel method named LUNAR (Learnable
Unified Neighbourhood-based Anomaly Ranking), which is
based on the same message passing framework for local outlier methods but addresses their shortcomings by enabling
learnability via graph neural networks.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

Many well-established anomaly detection methods use the
distance of a sample to those in its local neighbourhood: socalled ‘local outlier methods’, such as LOF and DBSCAN.
They are popular for their simple principles and strong performance on unstructured, feature-based data that is commonplace in many practical applications. However, they cannot
learn to adapt for a particular set of data due to their lack of
trainable parameters. In this paper, we begin by unifying local
outlier methods by showing that they are particular cases of
the more general message passing framework used in graph
neural networks. This allows us to introduce learnability into
local outlier methods, in the form of a neural network, for
greater flexibility and expressivity: specifically, we propose
LUNAR, a novel, graph neural network-based anomaly detection method. LUNAR learns to use information from the
nearest neighbours of each node in a trainable way to find
anomalies. We show that our method performs significantly
better than existing local outlier methods, as well as state-ofthe-art deep baselines. We also show that the performance of
our method is much more robust to different settings of the
local neighbourhood size.

Introduction
Unsupervised anomaly detection is the task of detecting
anomalies within a set of data without relying on ground
truth labels of known anomalies. It is an extremely important task in a wide range of practical applications and has
therefore received a great amount of research interest. As
anomalies tend to be much rarer than normal data, labelled
anomalies are difficult to obtain in the quantity needed to
adequately train supervised techniques.
Many well-established unsupervised methods detect
anomalies by measuring the distance of a point to its nearest
neighbouring points: so-called local outlier methods, such
as LOF and DBSCAN. These methods are very popular in
practice due to their straightforward principles and assumptions, as well as their interpretable outputs. In our experiments, we also find that their performance also holds up
favourably against more recent, deep learning-based methods. The latter have to fully embed knowledge about normal and abnormal regions of the data space in their network

• We show that many popular local outlier methods, such
as KNN, LOF and DBSCAN, can be unified under a
single framework based on graph neural networks.
• We use this framework to develop a novel, GNN-based
anomaly detection method (LUNAR) which is more
flexible and adaptive to a given set of data than local outlier methods due to its trainable parameters.
• We show that our method gives better performance1 than
popular classical methods, including local outlier methods, as well as state-of-the-art deep learning-based methods in anomaly detection. We also show that its performance is much more robust to different settings of the
local neighbourhood size than local outlier methods.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6737

Code available at https://github.com/agoodge/LUNAR

