The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Distinguishing Homophenes Using Multi-Head
Visual-Audio Memory for Lip Reading
Minsu Kim, Jeong Hun Yeo, Yong Man Ro*
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{ms.k, sedne246, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

due to the following two reasons. First is the inherent information insufficiency of lip movements. The speech is jointly
produced with various human organs such as vocal folds,
larynx, tongue, and lips (Sataloff 1992). Therefore, watching lip movements individually might be insufficient to fully
represent the speech. The second is the existence of homophenes. The homophenes refer to some different pronunciations that show the same lip movements. Therefore, the
same lip movements can be observed from different pronunciations. In other words, the viseme-to-phoneme mapping is
one-to-many which places a challenge on lip reading.
Recently, deep memory network (Weston, Chopra, and
Bordes 2014; Sukhbaatar et al. 2015a) that remembers valuable information learned during training and exploits the
stored knowledge on a given task shows powerful performances on diverse applications such as question answering (Miller et al. 2016), video prediction (Lee et al. 2021),
and retrieval (Song, Wang, and Tan 2018; Huang and Wang
2019). Especially, a cross-modal memory network (Zhang
et al. 2020a) that saves different modal information in distinct memories shows promising results on informationlimited situation such as few-shot learning scenario. By using a cross-modal memory network, it is possible to read one
modal feature from another modal feature as being inputs,
which is a highly attractive characteristic when applied to a
task where only a single modal input is available. Therefore,
the cross-modal memory seems valuable to be extended to
the lip reading task using the audio-visual modalities (Kim
et al. 2021b), and to fulfill insufficient information of lip
movement with the saved audio information read from the
memory. However, directly applying the cross-modal memory into lip reading is not trivial due to the existence of homophenes. Since the visual features of homophenes are similar, they might point to the same value memory slots when
addressing the memory. In other words, the same audio features could be obtained by different lip movement videos of
homophenes, preventing the lip reading system from fully
utilizing the audio information. Therefore, in order to take
full advantage of the cross-modal memory, a method of considering the homophenes while bringing the audio information through memory is necessary.
In this paper, we propose Multi-head Visual-audio Memory (MVM) for lip reading, to mitigate the two aforementioned challenges, homophenes and information insuf-

Recognizing speech from silent lip movement, which is
called lip reading, is a challenging task due to 1) the inherent
information insufficiency of lip movement to fully represent
the speech, and 2) the existence of homophenes that have similar lip movement with different pronunciations. In this paper, we try to alleviate the aforementioned two challenges in
lip reading by proposing a Multi-head Visual-audio Memory
(MVM). Firstly, MVM is trained with audio-visual datasets
and remembers audio representations by modelling the interrelationships of paired audio-visual representations. At the
inference stage, visual input alone can extract the saved audio representation from the memory by examining the learned
inter-relationships. Therefore, the lip reading model can complement the insufficient visual information with the extracted
audio representations. Secondly, MVM is composed of multihead key memories for saving visual features and one value
memory for saving audio knowledge, which is designed to
distinguish the homophenes. With the multi-head key memories, MVM extracts possible candidate audio features from
the memory, which allows the lip reading model to consider
the possibility of which pronunciations can be represented
from the input lip movement. This also can be viewed as
an explicit implementation of the one-to-many mapping of
viseme-to-phoneme. Moreover, MVM is employed in multitemporal levels to consider the context when retrieving the
memory and distinguish the homophenes. Extensive experimental results verify the effectiveness of the proposed method
in lip reading and in distinguishing the homophenes.

Introduction
Lip reading, also known as Visual Speech Recognition
(VSR), is a task that recognizes speech by watching lip
movements only. It has a wide range of positive applications such as conversation with people who cannot make
a voice (e.g., aphonia), an auxiliary technology for audiobased speech recognition in a noisy environment, and video
conference in a crowded or silent environment. With the
diverse applications, it has drawn big attention for a long
time. However, compared to audio-based Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR), it is still regarded as a challenging task
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1174

