The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Spatial Frequency Bias in Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks
Mahyar Khayatkhoei, Ahmed Elgammal
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
New Brunswick, New Jersey
{m.khayatkhoei, elgammal}@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract

are the foremost generative models for generating image distributions, and while many of their limitations have been
studied from the perspective of probability theory and manifold learning (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017; Arora et al. 2017;
Khayatkhoei, Singh, and Elgammal 2018), their spectral
limitations remain understudied. Importantly, the theory of
GANs (Goodfellow et al. 2014), and its many variants, do
not suggest any spectral limitation. Nevertheless, the progression of GAN research over the recent years reflects a
constant effort for generating better details while generating general form and color seems to be quite easy (Karras et al. 2020; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2017). In this work,
we investigate whether this difficulty can be linked to a spatial frequency bias. In particular, we find that high and low
spatial frequencies are not treated equally by convolutional
GANs, and that the information carried by high frequencies
are more prone to loss. Our findings imply that when convolutional GANs are used as part of any detail-sensitive application, for example in augmenting or correcting medical
and satellite images, generated fine details are not as reliable
as the overall shape and form.
Very relevant to this work, two recent concurrent works
(Dzanic, Shah, and Witherden 2020; Durall, Keuper, and
Keuper 2020) have observed that high-frequency discrepancies can be utilized to easily distinguish GAN generated images from natural images. Specifically, Dzanic et al. (2020)
have shown that these discrepancies can be removed by directly modifying the spectrum of generated images in postprocessing. Our findings in this work are consistent with
these observations, but further suggest that such discrepancies are the consequence of an underlying spatial frequency
bias against learning high frequencies. As such, the issue
is not merely that GANs generate high-frequency artifacts
on datasets with little to no high-frequency content (e.g.
high resolution natural images), which can be removed by
modifying the generated spectrum after training, rather that
GANs tend to lose the information carried by high frequencies, which is not recoverable in post-processing. The main
findings and contributions of this work are listed below:

Understanding the capability of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) in learning the full spectrum of spatial frequencies, that is, beyond the low-frequency dominant spectrum of natural images, is critical for assessing the reliability of GAN-generated data in any detail-sensitive application. In this work, we show that the ability of convolutional
GANs to learn an image distribution depends on the spatial
frequency of the underlying carrier signal, that is, they have
a bias against learning high spatial frequencies. Our findings
are consistent with the recent observations of high-frequency
artifacts in GAN-generated images, but further suggest that
such artifacts are the consequence of an underlying bias. We
also provide a theoretical explanation for this bias as the manifestation of linear dependencies present in the spectrum of
filters of a typical generative Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Finally, by proposing a proof-of-concept method that
can effectively manipulate this bias towards other spatial frequencies, we show that the bias is not fixed and can be exploited to explicitly direct computational resources towards
any specific spatial frequency of interest in a dataset, with
minimal computational overhead.

1

Introduction

The information contained in an image is carried by a set
of spatial frequencies, that is, a set of planar sinusoids with
unique frequencies and directions. Intuitively, we associate
the high frequencies with the details of the image, and the
low frequencies with its general form; however, neither frequencies should be treated as more important by a generative model seeking to learn a distribution. To make this
more clear, consider a two-dimensional planar cosine wave
defined over a 128 × 128 image, and assume that we sample
the magnitude of this static wave from a Gaussian distribution. Whether this wave completes 64 periods across the image (i.e. high frequency), or 3 periods (i.e. low frequency),
ideally should not affect a generative model’s learning of the
underlying Gaussian distribution (see Appendix 1 for an empirical realization of this thought experiment).
Convolutional Generative Advarsarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015)

• Convolutional GANs trained on natural images do not
learn high spatial frequencies as well as low spatial frequencies, suggesting the existence of a spatial frequency
bias (Section 3.1).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Extended version available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.01473

7152

