The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dual Contrastive Learning for General Face Forgery Detection
Ke Sun1 , Taiping Yao2 , Shen Chen2 , Shouhong Ding2∗ , Jilin Li 2 , Rongrong Ji1 ∗
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent, China
skjack@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
{taipingyao, kobeschen, ericshding, jerolinli}@tecent.com

Abstract

manifest similar data distributions. However, faces in real
applications are varied from that in training set in terms of
the camera type, pre-processing, compression rate, and attack method, e.t.c. These unseen domain gaps bring severe
performance drops, thus limiting broader applications.
Recently, several works (Li et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2021a) are devoted to general face forgery detection (Sun et al. 2021) to relieve the generalizing problem. Face X-ray (Li et al. 2020) designs supervision named
face X-ray, which focuses on the blending boundary induced by the image blending process. LTW (Sun et al. 2021)
weights training samples via meta-learning. Besides, some
attempt to obtain information from frequency domains, such
as DCT (Qian et al. 2020), spatial-phase (Liu et al. 2021a)
and SRM (Luo et al. 2021). However, these methods can be
attributed to a binary classification network based on crossentropy loss, which we argue is not suitable for general
face forgery detection. Specifically, traditional cross-entropy
based methods assume that all instances within each category should be close in feature distribution while ignoring
the unique information of each sample. This information is
proven in (Zhao et al. 2020) that could provide transferability knowledge for unseen forgery faces. Without additional
constraints, a common cross-entropy classification framework is prone to overfitting on specific forged patterns (Luo
et al. 2021). Moreover, the quality of forgery faces is different, and optimizing each sample equally as in the traditional framework makes it difficult to uncover the underlying forgery clues and is not conducive to generalization (Liu
et al. 2021b; Sun et al. 2021). Therefore, a new framework
is urgently needed to address the above issues.
In this paper, motivated by contrastive learning (He et al.
2020) that has been shown to outperform its supervised
counterpart in transfer learning (Zhao et al. 2020), we propose a Dual Contrast Learning (DCL) framework for general
facial forgery detection, as shown in Fig. 1. Since DCL requires two samples from different views of the same image
as inputs, we first generate different data views as positive
pairs via specially designed data transformations which can
eliminate the task-independent information, such as background and face structure, e.t.c. Second, to preserve the
instance transferability, we design the Inter-instance Contrastive Learning (Inter-ICL) to mine the association between instances. Specifically, Inter-ICL pulls the positive

With various facial manipulation techniques arising, face
forgery detection has drawn growing attention due to security concerns. Previous works always formulate face forgery
detection as a classification problem based on cross-entropy
loss, which emphasizes category-level differences rather than
the essential discrepancies between real and fake faces, limiting model generalization in unseen domains. To address
this issue, we propose a novel face forgery detection framework, named Dual Contrastive Learning (DCL), which specially constructs positive and negative paired data and performs designed contrastive learning at different granularities
to learn generalized feature representation. Concretely, combined with the hard sample selection strategy, Inter-Instance
Contrastive Learning (Inter-ICL) is first proposed to promote
task-related discriminative features learning by especially
constructing instance pairs. Moreover, to further explore the
essential discrepancies, Intra-Instance Contrastive Learning
(Intra-ICL) is introduced to focus on the local content inconsistencies prevalent in the forged faces by constructing localregion pairs inside instances. Extensive experiments and visualizations on several datasets demonstrate the generalization
of our method against the state-of-the-art competitors. Our
Code is available at https://github.com/Tencent/TFace.git.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, face forgery methods have achieved
significant success and received lots of attention in the computer vision community (Thies et al. 2015; Rossler et al.
2019; Dolhansky et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Gu et al.
2021). As such techniques can generate high-quality fake
videos that are even indistinguishable for human eyes, they
can easily be abused by malicious users to cause severe societal problems or political threats. To mitigate such risks, it
is of paramount importance to develop effective methods for
detecting face forgery.
Early works (Afchar et al. 2018; Stehouwer et al. 2019;
Dolhansky et al. 2020) treat face forgery detection as a binary classification problem and use the convolutional neural network (CNN) to distinguish the authenticity of the
face. These methods achieve considerable performance in
the intra-domain scenario, where the training and test sets
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2316

