The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NSGZero: Efficiently Learning Non-exploitable Policy in Large-Scale Network
Security Games with Neural Monte Carlo Tree Search
Wanqi Xue, Bo An, Chai Kiat Yeo
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wanqi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, boan@ntu.edu.sg, asckyeo@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

plex games, with successful applications surpassing human
performance in Go (Silver et al. 2016), chess (Silver et al.
2018), poker (Moravčı́k et al. 2017) and video games (Mnih
et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2019; Ecoffet et al. 2021). Deep
neural networks (DNNs), with strong representation ability,
are able to capture underlying structures of enormous game
state spaces when empowered with sufficient computational
resources. NSG-NFSP (Xue et al. 2021), a DL-based approach for solving NSGs, integrates representation learning
with the framework of NFSP (Heinrich and Silver 2016) and
enables NFSP with high-level actions to achieve efficient exploration in large-scale NSGs.
Although DL provides a powerful approach to dealing
with large-scale NSGs, existing approaches, e.g., NSGNFSP, have largely neglected intrinsic properties of the environment’s dynamics. Concretely, when a player in NSGs
selects an action (the node it will move to), the next state
of the game can be partially determined 1 , because the next
location of the player can be inferred from the chosen action. However, in NSG-NFSP, it samples many rounds of
the game and uses Monte Carlo method to estimate the distribution of the next state from scratch, leading to poor data
efficiency. Another problem is that the centralized control
of security resources in NSG-NFSP will inevitably result in
combinatorial explosion in action space (Oliehoek, Spaan,
and Vlassis 2008), making the algorithm unsuitable for handling scenarios where there are many resources.
In this work, we propose a DL-based method, NSGZero,
for efficiently approaching a non-exploitable defender policy in NSGs. NSGZero improves data efficiency by modeling the dynamics of NSGs and performing planning with
neural Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom 2007).
Our key contributions are in three aspects. First, we design
three DNNs, namely the dynamics network, the value network and the prior network, to model environment dynamics, predict state values, and guide exploration, respectively,
which unlock the use of efficient MCTS in NSGs. Second,
we enable decentralized control in neural MCTS, to improve
the scalability of NSGZero and make it applicable to NSGs
with a large number of security resources. Third, we de-

How resources are deployed to secure critical targets in networks can be modelled by Network Security Games (NSGs).
While recent advances in deep learning (DL) provide a powerful approach to dealing with large-scale NSGs, DL methods such as NSG-NFSP suffer from the problem of data inefficiency. Furthermore, due to centralized control, they cannot
scale to scenarios with a large number of resources. In this paper, we propose a novel DL-based method, NSGZero, to learn
a non-exploitable policy in NSGs. NSGZero improves data
efficiency by performing planning with neural Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS). Our main contributions are threefold.
First, we design deep neural networks (DNNs) to perform
neural MCTS in NSGs. Second, we enable neural MCTS with
decentralized control, making NSGZero applicable to NSGs
with many resources. Third, we provide an efficient learning
paradigm, to achieve joint training of the DNNs in NSGZero.
Compared to state-of-the-art algorithms, our method achieves
significantly better data efficiency and scalability.

Introduction
Network Security Games (NSGs) have been used to model
the problem of deploying resources to protect important targets in networks (Okamoto, Hazon, and Sycara 2012; Wang,
Yin, and An 2016; Wang et al. 2020). Many real-world
security problems, including infrastructure protection (Jain
et al. 2011), wildlife conservation (Fang, Stone, and Tambe
2015) and traffic enforcement (Zhang et al. 2017, 2019; Xue
et al. 2021), can be boiled down to NSGs. In NSGs, a defender, controlling several security resources, interacts adversarially with an attacker. The objective of the attacker
is to take a path from the starting point to a target without being intercepted by the defender. The defender’s goal
is to develop a resource allocation policy to interdict the attacker. Traditionally, mathematical programming-based approaches, e.g., the incremental strategy generation algorithm (Bosansky et al. 2014), are proposed to compute the
optimal policy for the defender. However, limited scalability
prevents programming-based approaches from being applicable to complex and real-world NSGs (Xue et al. 2021).
Recent advances in deep learning (DL) and reinforcement
learning have led to remarkable progress in playing com-

1

The next state cannot be fully determined because players in
NSGs act simultaneously. No player can know what action its opponent will take in the next step.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4646

