The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive and Universal Algorithms for Variational Inequalities with Optimal
Convergence
Alina Ene∗1 , Huy L. Nguyen∗2
1

Boston University,
Northeastern University
aene@bu.edu, hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu
2

Abstract

generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Daskalakis et al.
2018; Yadav et al. 2018; Chavdarova et al. 2019; Gidel et al.
2019; Mertikopoulos et al. 2019). In this context, due to
the large scale of the problems, several important issues are
brought to the fore. First, the algorithms typically require
careful settings of the step sizes based on the parameters
of the problems such as smoothness, especially for high dimensional problems where the smoothness varies for different coordinates. Second, classical methods based on the extra gradient algorithm (Korpelevich 1976) or the more general mirror prox algorithm (Nemirovski 2004) requires two
gradient computations per iteration, which is the dominant
factor in the running time, making them twice as slow as
typical gradient descent methods. To rectify the first issue,
several works have been developed to design adaptive algorithms that automatically adapt to the smoothness of the
problem (Bach and Levy 2019; Ene, Nguyen, and Vladu
2021). These works build upon the impressive body of works
that brought about adaptive algorithms for convex optimization methods (see e.g. (McMahan and Streeter 2010; Duchi,
Hazan, and Singer 2011; Kingma and Ba 2014)). A different line of work focused on reducing the number of gradient
computation to one per iteration (Popov 1980; Gidel et al.
2019; Hsieh et al. 2019; Chambolle and Pock 2011; Malitsky 2015; Cui and Shanbhag 2016; Daskalakis et al. 2018;
Mokhtari, Ozdaglar, and Pattathil 2020). It is worth noting
that in practice, especially in the context of training GANs,
these methods are almost always used in a heuristic fashion
along with adaptive techniques such as Adam (Kingma and
Ba 2014).

We develop new adaptive algorithms for variational inequalities with monotone operators, which capture many problems
of interest, notably convex optimization and convex-concave
saddle point problems. Our algorithms automatically adapt
to unknown problem parameters such as the smoothness and
the norm of the operator, and the variance of the stochastic
evaluation oracle. We show that our algorithms are universal and simultaneously achieve the optimal convergence rates
in the non-smooth, smooth, and stochastic settings. The convergence guarantees of our algorithms improve over existing
adaptive methods and match the optimal non-adaptive algorithms. Additionally, prior works require that the optimization
domain is bounded. In this work, we remove this restriction
and give algorithms for unbounded domains that are adaptive and universal. Our general proof techniques can be used
for many variants of the algorithm using one or two operator evaluations per iteration. The classical methods based on
the ExtraGradient/MirrorProx algorithm require two operator
evaluations per iteration, which is the dominant factor in the
running time in many settings.

1

Introduction

Variational inequalities with monotone operators are a general framework for solving problems with convex structure including convex minimization, convex-concave saddle point problems, and finding convex Nash equilibrium
(Nemirovski 2004; Juditsky, Nemirovski, and Tauvel 2011).
Given a convex domain X ⊆ Rd and a monotone mapping
F : X → Rd ,
hF (x) − F (y), x − yi ≥ 0 ∀x, y ∈ X

In this work, we develop new algorithms achieving the
best of both worlds: our algorithms automatically adapt to
the smoothness of the problem and require only one gradient computation per iteration. We include two variants of
the core algorithm, one variant adapts to a single shared
smoothness parameter for all coordinates and the other variant adapts simultaneously to different smoothness parameters for different coordinates. Our algorithms can be viewed
as adaptive versions of the past extra-gradient method developed by Popov (1980) and further analyzed by many subsequent works including most recently (Gidel et al. 2019;
Hsieh et al. 2019). Our algorithms are universal: they work
simultaneously for non-smooth functions, smooth functions,
and with stochastic oracle access. In each of these settings,

we are interested in finding an approximation to a solution
x∗ such that1
hF (x∗ ), x∗ − xi ≤ 0 ∀x ∈ X
More recently, algorithms developed in this framework are
also applied to non-convex problems including optimizing
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Such a solution is called a strong solution. Following previous
work, we design algorithms that converge to a weak solution. If F
is monotone and continuous, a weak solution is a strong solution
and vice-versa. We defer the formal definitions to Section 2.

6559

