The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

OneRel: Joint Entity and Relation Extraction with One Module in One Step
Yu-Ming Shang1 , Heyan Huang1,2 , Xian-Ling Mao1 *
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Engineering Research Center of High Volume Language Information Processing
and Cloud Computing Applications, Beijing, China
{ymshang, hhy63, maoxl}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Joint entity and relation extraction is an essential task in natural language processing and knowledge graph construction.
Existing approaches usually decompose the joint extraction
task into several basic modules or processing steps to make it
easy to conduct. However, such a paradigm ignores the fact
that the three elements of a triple are interdependent and indivisible. Therefore, previous joint methods suffer from the
problems of cascading errors and redundant information. To
address these issues, in this paper, we propose a novel joint
entity and relation extraction model, named OneRel, which
casts joint extraction as a fine-grained triple classification
problem. Specifically, our model consists of a scoring-based
classifier and a relation-specific horns tagging strategy. The
former evaluates whether a token pair and a relation belong
to a factual triple. The latter ensures a simple but effective decoding process. Extensive experimental results on two widely
used datasets demonstrate that the proposed method performs
better than the state-of-the-art baselines, and delivers consistent performance gain on complex scenarios of various overlapping patterns and multiple triples.

Figure 1: The extraction processes of existing approaches
and our method. The dotted arrow indicates the dependencies between triple elements. Note that there are various extraction paradigms in multi-module multi-step approaches,
e.g., (h, t) → r, h → r → t, r → (h, t). We just use
h → r → t to illustrate the shortcomings of this kind of
methods.

Introduction
Extracting pairs of entities and their relations in the form of
(head, relation, tail) or (h, r, t) from unstructured text is an
important task in natural language processing and knowledge graph construction. Traditional pipeline approaches
(Zelenko, Aone, and Richardella 2003; Zhou et al. 2005;
Chan and Roth 2011) treat entity recognition and relation
classification as two separate sub-tasks. Although flexible,
pipeline methods ignore the interactions between the two
sub-tasks and are susceptible for the problem of error propagation (Li and Ji 2014). Therefore, recent studies focus on
building joint models to obtain entities together with their
relations through a unified architecture.
To make the complex task easy to conduct, existing studies usually decompose the joint extraction into several basic modules or processing steps (Yu et al. 2020; Zhao et al.
2021b). As shown in Figure 1, according to the extraction
procedure of triple elements, these approaches fall into two
categories: multi-module multi-step and multi-module onestep. The first category utilizes different modules in the

framework of cascading classification (Fu, Li, and Ma 2019;
Yuan et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Zhao
et al. 2021a,b) or text generation (Zeng et al. 2018; Zeng,
Zhang, and Liu 2020; Ye et al. 2021) to obtain entities
and relations step-by-step. Although promising, this kind of
models suffers from the problem of cascading errors since
mistakes in early steps may affect the prediction results of
later steps. The second category attempts to identify entities and relations separately, and then combine them into
triples based on their latent correlations (Wang et al. 2020;
Sui et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021). However, due to insufficient mutual constraints between entities and relations in the
separate recognition process, such methods tend to produce
redundant information, leading to errors when assembling
triples (Zheng et al. 2017).
In fact, the fundamental reason for the above problems is
that the decomposition-based paradigm ignores an important

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11285

