The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Unseen Emotions from Gestures via Semantically-Conditioned
Zero-Shot Perception with Adversarial Autoencoders
Abhishek Banerjee, Uttaran Bhattacharya, Aniket Bera
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland 20742, USA
{abanerj8, uttaranb, bera}@umd.edu

Abstract
We present a novel generalized zero-shot algorithm to recognize perceived emotions from gestures. Our task is to map
gestures to novel emotion categories not encountered in training. We introduce an adversarial autoencoder-based representation learning that correlates 3D motion-captured gesture
sequences with the vectorized representation of the naturallanguage perceived emotion terms using word2vec embeddings. The language-semantic embedding provides a representation of the emotion label space, and we leverage this
underlying distribution to map the gesture sequences to the
appropriate categorical emotion labels. We train our method
using a combination of gestures annotated with known emotion terms and gestures not annotated with any emotions. We
evaluate our method on the MPI Emotional Body Expressions Database (EBEDB) and obtain an accuracy of 58.43%.
We see an improvement in performance compared to current
state-of-the-art algorithms for generalized zero-shot learning
by an absolute 25–27%. We also demonstrate our approach
on publicly available online videos and movie scenes, where
the actors’ pose has been extracted and mapped to their respective emotive states.

Figure 1: Generalized zero-shot Emotion Recognition from
gestures1 : We use gesture sequences from both seen and
unseen classes of emotions as inputs to our AAE-based
representation learning algorithm. We capture the spatialtemporal representation of 3D motion-captured gesture sequences in our network and correlate them with the semantic representation of the corresponding perceived emotion
term. Our network can accurately recognize emotions not
seen during training and has an overall accuracy of 58.43%.

Introduction
Emotion learning as an area of research is integral to
a variety of domains, including human-computer interaction, robotics (Liu et al. 2017) and affective computing (Yates et al. 2017). Existing research in emotion recognition has leveraged aspects such as facial expressions (Liu
et al. 2017), speech (Jacob and Mythili 2015), gestures and
gaits (Bhattacharya et al. 2020a) to gauge an individual’s
emotional state. Studies in psychology indicate that humans
perceive emotions by observing affective features such as
arm swing rate, posture, and frequency of movements. Recent work such as that by Bhattacharya et al. (2020a) combine such affective features with pose dynamics extracted
using spatial-temporal graph convolutional networks (STGCN) (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018) to map pose sequences
to labeled emotions.
A major challenge in these machine learning-based
emotion recognition algorithms is the requirement for
significantly-sized, well-labeled datasets to build classifi-

cation algorithms on previously labeled emotions. However, considering the wide spectrum of emotions for humans (Zhou et al. 2016) and different emotion representations, it is tedious and often prohibitively expensive to develop large-scale datasets with an adequate number of instances for every emotion. Zero-shot learning has recently
drawn considerable attention to overcome such issues where
labels of different classes are unavailable. It provides an alternative methodology that does not rely on existing labels.
Instead, it relies on utilizing the relationships between various seen and unseen classes to automatically determine the
appropriate labels.
In the generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) paradigm,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3

https://gamma.umd.edu/unseen gesture emotions

