The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Identify Top Elo Ratings:
A Dueling Bandits Approach
Xue Yan1,2 , Yali Du * 3 , Binxin Ru 4 , Jun Wang 5 , Haifeng Zhang1,2 , Xu Chen6
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK
4
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford, UK
5
Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK
6
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, China
yanxue2021@ia.ac.cn, yali.du@kcl.ac.uk, robin@robots.ox.ac.uk,
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk, haifeng.zhang@ia.ac.cn, xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

proposes multidimensional Elo (mElo), which decomposes
a game into transitive and cyclic parts to handle intransitive
skills and evaluates different strategies by computing Nashaveraging.
In practical settings when a competition is expensive to
conduct, updating Elo rating in a sample efficient way is
highly valuable. To achieve such sample efficiency, we need
a way to select the most informative pairs for evaluation.
Two popular sampling approaches are Round-robin (Rasmussen and Trick 2008) and Elimination tournament (Groh
et al. 2012); The Round-robin (Rasmussen and Trick 2008)
is widely used in sport scheduling to balance the total time,
venue usage and fairness of tournaments. It would arrange
each team to play against all the others in as few as possible
days while satisfying some constraints such as each team
not playing twice in the same day to promote game fairness. By contrast, the Elimination tournament (Groh et al.
2012) only allows the winners at each round to proceed to
the next round, so the stronger team will have the chance
to play more times. A recent approach, RG-UCB, Rowland
et al. (2019) introduces an adaptive sampling scheme to estimate the accurate ranking among all agents. RG-UCB considers sampling of agent match-ups as a collection of pure
exploration bandit problems (Bubeck, Munos, and Stoltz
2011) and requires enough pairwise comparison for estimating each pair of strategies.
However, these tournament matching/sampling methods
suffer from two major limitations which prohibit their wide
usage in the modern large scale evaluations. Firstly, both the
Round-robin and the Elimination tournament organise competitions following a pre-designed schedule, and the Elimination tournament scheduling may need some prior knowledge on the players’ skill. Also each pair of players only
compete once in both schemes so the results can be highly
noisy. Secondly, the main idea behind the matching schemes
of the RG-UCB and the Round-robin is random sampling,
which fails to pay more attention to more promising players and/or pairs with higher uncertainty in competition outcome. Thus, they are less sample efficient in identifying the
best players.

The Elo rating system is widely adopted to evaluate the skills
of (chess) game and sports players. Recently it has been also
integrated into machine learning algorithms in evaluating the
performance of computerised AI agents. However, an accurate estimation of the Elo rating (for the top players) often requires many rounds of competitions, which can be expensive
to carry out. In this paper, to improve the sample efficiency of
the Elo evaluation (for top players), we propose an efficient
online match scheduling algorithm. Specifically, we identify
and match the top players through a dueling bandits framework and tailor the bandit algorithm to the gradient-based update of Elo. We show that it reduces the per-step memory and
time complexity to constant, compared to the traditional likelihood maximization approaches requiring
√ O(t) time. Our algorithm has a regret guarantee of Õ( T ), sublinear in the
number of competition rounds and has been extended to the
multidimensional Elo ratings for handling intransitive games.
We empirically demonstrate that our method achieves superior convergence speed and time efficiency on a variety of
gaming tasks.

Introduction
In this paper, we investigate the selection of best multi-agent
strategies under the Elo rating systems. The evaluation of
the competition outcome has received lots of attention, especially in view of the successful usage of reinforcement
learning in StarCraft (Vinyals et al. 2019; Han et al. 2019;
Du et al. 2019), Game of Go (Silver et al. 2017) and video
games (Mnih et al. 2015). The Elo rating system (Elo 1978)
is a predominant and valuable algorithm for evaluating and
ranking agents. In the widely adopted Bradley-Terry model
(Hunter et al. 2004) for Elo, each player is assigned a numerical rating which is updated with competition outcomes
via online stochastic gradient descent. Further, for dealing
with non-transitive relations between interacting agents such
as the game of Rock-Paper-Scissors, Balduzzi et al. (2018)
* Corresponding to Yali Du ⟨yali.du@kcl.ac.uk⟩.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8797

