The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Laneformer: Object-Aware Row-Column Transformers for Lane Detection
Jianhua Han1 , Xiajun Deng2 , Xinyue Cai1 , Zhen Yang1 , Hang Xu1 , Chunjing Xu1 , Xiaodan Liang2 *
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{hanjianhua4, caixinyue1, yang.zhen, xu.hang, xuchunjing}@huawei.com,
dengxj9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liangxd9@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Direct lane detection without NMS

We present Laneformer, a conceptually simple yet powerful transformer-based architecture tailored for lane detection
that is a long-standing research topic for visual perception in
autonomous driving. The dominant paradigms rely on purely
CNN-based architectures which often fail in incorporating relations of long-range lane points and global contexts induced
by surrounding objects (e.g., pedestrians, vehicles). Inspired
by recent advances of the transformer encoder-decoder architecture in various vision tasks, we move forwards to design
a new end-to-end Laneformer architecture that revolutionizes
the conventional transformers into better capturing the shape
and semantic characteristics of lanes, with minimal overhead
in latency. First, coupling with deformable pixel-wise selfattention in the encoder, Laneformer presents two new row
and column self-attention operations to efficiently mine point
context along with the lane shapes. Second, motivated by the
appearing objects would affect the decision of predicting lane
segments, Laneformer further includes the detected object instances as extra inputs of multi-head attention blocks in the
encoder and decoder to facilitate the lane point detection by
sensing semantic contexts. Specifically, the bounding box locations of objects are added into Key module to provide interaction with each pixel and query while the ROI-aligned features are inserted into Value module. Extensive experiments
demonstrate our Laneformer achieves state-of-the-art performances on CULane benchmark, in terms of 77.1% F1 score.
We hope our simple and effective Laneformer will serve as
a strong baseline for future research in self-attention models
for lane detection.

Detection attention

Row attention

Column attention

Figure 1: Sketch map of proposed detection attention and
row-column attention in Laneformer. Given the detected person and vehicle instances, detection attention is performed
to capture the implicit relationship between them and lanes,
e.g., lanes are more likely to appear next to cars. Row attention is proposed to catch the information from the nearby
rows since pixels in the same lane will not be far from each
other between adjacent rows. On the other hand, noticed that
different columns may across different lanes, the knowledge
sharing of these columns may capture different lane features
to construct better representations.

Introduction
Lane detection has been a long-standing task for visual perception in autonomous driving scenarios, targeting at precisely distinguishing lane segments from complicated road
scenes(Hou et al. 2019; Wang, Shen, and Teoh 2000; Narote
et al. 2018). It plays a crucial role towards a safe and reliable
auto-driving system widely used in intelligent cars to assist
drivers with modern technologies such as adaptive cruise
control, lane departure warning, and traffic understanding.
The most state-of-the-art lane detection methods (Lee
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2020; Chen, Liu, and Lian 2019)

take advantage of CNN architectures and exceed the traditional methods(Niu et al. 2016; Narote et al. 2018; Wang,
Shen, and Teoh 2000) by a large margin. However, the existing CNN-based methods usually need complicated postprocessing procedures like non-maximal suppression or
clustering. In addition, the fixed receptive field of CNN architecture limits the ability to incorporate relations for longrange lane points, making them hard to capture well the
characteristics of lanes since the shapes are conceptually
long and thin. Several attention-based lane detection models (Lee et al. 2021; Tabelini et al. 2020b; Liu et al. 2021)
have been also proposed to capture the long-range information. Nevertheless, the fixed attention routines can not adap-

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

799

