The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Width & Depth Pruning for Vision Transformers
Fang Yu1,2 , Kun Huang3 , Meng Wang3 , Yuan Cheng3 * , Wei Chu3 , Li Cui1∗
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Science
3
Ant Financial Services Group
{yufang,lcui}@ict.ac.cn, {hunterkun.hk,darren.wm,chengyuan.c,weichu.cw}@antgroup.com

Abstract

There are emerging efforts to improve the efficiency of
transformers. A common approach to compress transformers is known as weight pruning (Han et al. 2015). Though
theoretically plausible, the weight pruning results in unstructured sparse matrices that are difficult to support on common hardware, making it challenging to obtain inference
speedups despite a significant reduction in model size. In
contrast, another common practice for efficient transformers
is to prune the structures that are of less importance, such
as rows of weight matrix, token embeddings or whole selfattentions matrices. The model pruned by structured pruning
is hardware-friendly and can be well supported by various
off-the-shelf computing platforms.
In this context, some structured pruning methods have
been proposed for transformer-like models. Designed for
NLP tasks, PoWER (Goyal et al. 2020) progressively eliminates the word tokens during the forward pass and accelerates the BERT models (Devlin et al. 2018). Yao et al. proposed MLPruning (Yao et al. 2021), a multilevel pruning
framework, to prune the structure of BERT-related transformer. Michel et al. proposed to prune self-attention head
(Michel, Levy, and Neubig 2019) and observe that pruning
a large percentages of attention heads in BERT model has
little impact on the performance. However, with the emergence of vision transformers variants such as Swin Transformers (Liu et al. 2021a) and VOLO (Yuan et al. 2021),
some novel attention mechanisms (e.g., shift-window attention, outlook attention) are proposed. The previous pruning
methods are not to be performed in such variant structures.
Designed for vision transformers, VTP (Zhu et al. 2021) extends network slimming (Liu et al. 2017) to reduce the output dimension of the linear matrix by training, pruning and
fine-tuning. Specifically, the vision transformers need to be
learned by imposing the structured sparsity regularization on
soft mask scores. After training, VTP discards the small soft
mask scores with values below a manually chosen threshold, and fine-tunes the injured models. In addition, the previous practices for pruning transformers take one dimension
of network width (e.g., linear matrix) into consideration and
ignore network depth (e.g., transformer block), which is another important dimension for pruning model. In practice,
we found that depth pruning could achieve larger parallelism
efficiency than width pruning under the same pruning rate
because of the less synchronization and fragmentation.

Transformer models have demonstrated their promising potential and achieved excellent performance on a series of
computer vision tasks. However, the huge computational cost
of vision transformers hinders their deployment and application to edge devices. Recent works have proposed to find
and remove the unimportant units of vision transformers. Despite achieving remarkable results, these methods take one dimension of network width into consideration and ignore network depth, which is another important dimension for pruning vision transformers. Therefore, we propose a Width &
Depth Pruning (WDPruning) framework that reduces both
width and depth dimensions simultaneously. Specifically, for
width pruning, a set of learnable pruning-related parameters
is used to adaptively adjust the width of transformer. For
depth pruning, we introduce several shallow classifiers by using the intermediate information of the transformer blocks,
which allows images to be classified by shallow classifiers
instead of the deeper classifiers. In the inference period, all
of the blocks after shallow classifiers can be dropped so they
don’t bring additional parameters and computation. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method can significantly reduce the computational
costs of mainstream vision transformers such as DeiT and
Swin Transformer with a minor accuracy drop. In particular,
on ILSVRC-12, we achieve over 22% pruning ratio of FLOPs
by compressing DeiT-Base, even with an increase of 0.14%
Top-1 accuracy.

Introduction
The transformer architecture has been widely adopted in natural language processing (NLP) tasks and obtained superior results. Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) and its follow-ups have demonstrated the
state-of-the-art results in image classification (Jiang et al.
2021; Meng 2021; Hassani et al. 2021), object detection
(Carion et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020) and instance segmentation (Wang et al. 2021). However, the transformer variants
require intensive computation resources, run-time memory
and storage requirements, hindering their practical applications on the edge devices with limited storage and computation resources.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3143

