The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Training Robust Deep Models for Time-Series Domain:
Novel Algorithms and Theoretical Analysis
Taha Belkhouja, Yan Yan, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{taha.belkhouja, yan.yan1, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

Abstract

the brittleness of DNNs and motivated methods to improve
their robustness. Therefore, training robust deep models is
a necessary requirement when we deploy DNNs over timeseries data in critical and high-stakes applications (e.g., mobile health (Belkhouja and Doppa 2020)). Real-world deployment of deep models for time-series data pose several
robustness challenges. First, labeled training set for timeseries domain tend to be smaller when compared to image
and text domains. Consequently, the learned DNNs may not
perform well on unseen data drawn from the same distribution. Second, disturbances due to noisy sensor observations or different sampling frequencies can potentially result
in poor performance of DNN models. Third, adversarial attacks for malicious purposes to break DNN models can pose
security threats.
Prior work on robustness for image data considers training DNNs to be robust to adversarial attacks in a Lp ball
and input perturbations. Algorithms to improve robustness
of DNNs fall into two broad categories. First, adversarial
training using data augmentation (e.g., adversarial examples or input perturbations). Second, optimizing an explicit
loss function for robustness criterion (e.g., similar input images should produce similar DNN outputs). Almost all prior
methods are designed for images and are based on the Lp
norm distance. Since time-series data has unique characteristics (e.g., sparse peaks, fast oscillations), Lp distance can
rarely capture the true similarity between time-series pairs
and prior methods are likely to fail on time-series data, as
demonstrated by results in Fig. 1. The main question of this
paper is: what are good methodologies to train robust DNNs
for time-series domain by handling its unique challenges?
To answer this question, we propose a novel and principled framework referred as RObust Training for TimeSeries (RO-TS) to create robust DNNs for time-series data.
We employ additive noise variables to simulate perturbations within a small neighborhood around each training example. We incorporate these additive noise variables to formulate a min-max optimization problem to reason about the
robustness criteria in terms of disturbances to time-series
inputs by minimizing the worst-case risk. To capture the
special characteristics of time-series signals, we employ
the global alighnment kernel (GAK) based distance (Cuturi et al. 2007) to define neighborhood regions for training examples. We show the generality and advantage of our

Despite the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) for
real-world applications over time-series data such as mobile
health, little is known about how to train robust DNNs for
time-series domain due to its unique characteristics compared
to images and text data. In this paper, we fill this gap by
proposing a novel algorithmic framework referred as RObust
Training for Time-Series (RO-TS) to create robust deep models for time-series classification tasks. Specifically, we formulate a min-max optimization problem over the model parameters by explicitly reasoning about the robustness criteria in terms of additive perturbations to time-series inputs
measured by the global alignment kernel (GAK) based distance. We also show the generality and advantages of our
formulation using the summation structure over time-series
alignments by relating both GAK and dynamic time warping (DTW). This problem is an instance of a family of compositional min-max optimization problems, which are challenging and open with unclear theoretical guarantee. We propose a principled stochastic compositional alternating gradient descent ascent (SCAGDA) algorithm for this family of
optimization problems. Unlike traditional methods for timeseries that require approximate computation of distance measures, SCAGDA approximates the GAK based distance onthe-fly using a moving average approach. We theoretically
analyze the convergence rate of SCAGDA and provide strong
theoretical support for the estimation of GAK based distance.
Our experiments on real-world benchmarks demonstrate that
RO-TS creates more robust deep models when compared to
adversarial training using prior methods that rely on data
augmentation or new definitions of loss functions. We also
demonstrate the importance of GAK for time-series data over
the Euclidean distance.

Introduction
Predictive analytics over time-series data enables many
important real-world applications including mobile health,
smart grid management, smart home automation, and finance. In spite of the success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) (Wang, Yan, and Oates 2017), very little is known
about the robustness of DNNs for time-series data. Recent
work on adversarial examples for image (Kolter and Madry
2018) and text data (Wang, Singh, and Li 2019) exposed
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6055

