The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Safe Online Convex Optimization with Unknown Linear Safety Constraints
Sapana Chaudhary 1 , Dileep Kalathil 1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA
sapanac@tamu.edu, dileep.kalathil@tamu.edu

Abstract

In many real-world applications, however, the actions selected by the decision maker must satisfy some necessary
safety constraints over the set X . For example, in power
systems, the control actions that decide the demand management should not violate the line flow and the voltage
regulation constraints (Dobbe et al. 2020). In communication networks, the transmission rate is limited by constraints
on the maximum allowable radiated power due to interference and human safety considerations (Luong et al. 2019).
In robotics applications, the control actions should maintain
the closed-loop stability of the system (Åström and Murray
2010). Typically, such constraints are represented as a safe
set X s and the control action xt must lie inside X s for all t
for the safe operation of the system.
Often, the safe set X s is determined by the parameters of
the system that are typically unknown to the decision maker
a-priori. For example, in power systems, the constraints on
the control actions depend on the line parameters, which
are typically unknown. In robotics, designing a closed-loop
stable controller requires the dynamic model of the robot,
which may be unknown. Thus, the decision maker has to
learn the unknown parameters to characterize the unknown
safe set. While an exploration algorithm can be used to estimate these parameters, such algorithms often take random
actions for efficient estimation that may violate the safety
constraints. Moreover, taking actions with respect to an estimated safe set may still violate the safety constraints due to
the unavoidable estimation errors.
In this paper, we address the problem of safe online convex optimization with an unknown safe set, where the decision maker has access to only noisy observations of the
safety constraints (that define the safe set) for the chosen actions. Our goal is to design an algorithm that minimizes the
regret while satisfying the safety constraints at all time steps.
While there are many works in the OCO literature that
address the problem with safety constraints (see the related
works section below), they typically allow constraint violations during learning/optimization. The main goal of such
algorithms is then to obtain a (sublinear) bound on the cumulative constraint violations, in addition to the standard regret. In sharp contrast to such works, we focus on designing
an algorithm that satisfies the safety constraints at all time
steps while providing a provable guarantee on the regret.
In this paper, we restrict ourselves to the setting where

We study the problem of safe online convex optimization,
where the action at each time step must satisfy a set of linear safety constraints. The goal is to select a sequence of actions to minimize the regret without violating the safety constraints at any time step (with high probability). The parameters that specify the linear safety constraints are unknown to
the algorithm. The algorithm has access to only the noisy observations of constraints for the chosen actions. We propose
an algorithm, called the Safe Online Projected Gradient Descent (SO-PGD) algorithm, to address this problem. We show
that, under the assumption of availability of a safe baseline
action, the SO-PGD algorithm achieves a regret O(T 2/3 ).
While there are many algorithms for online convex optimization (OCO) problems with safety constraints available in the
literature, they allow constraint violations during learning/optimization, and the focus has been on characterizing the cumulative constraint violations. To the best of our knowledge,
ours is the first work that provides an algorithm with provable
guarantees on the regret, without violating the linear safety
constraints (with high probability) at any time step.

Introduction
Online learning/optimization is a sequential decision making paradigm, where the decision maker adaptively selects a sequence of actions based on the past observations
(Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006). Online convex optimization (OCO) is an important class of online optimization
problems, where the cost function faced by the decision
maker at each time step is an arbitrarily-varying convex
function (Hazan 2016; Shalev-Shwartz 2011). In the OCO
problem, a sequence of arbitrarily-varying convex cost functions {ft , t = 1, . . . , T } are revealed, one per time step, to
the decision maker. The decision maker selects an action
xt from a convex set X , before the cost function ft is revealed. The typical performance objective is to minimize the
regret, which characterizes the difference between cumulative cost incurred by the decision maker and that of an oracle
algorithm that employs the best fixed action in hindsidght at
all time steps. There are a number of OCO algorithms that
achieve different sublinear regret guarantees with different
computational complexity (Hazan 2016).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6175

