The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Enhancing Column Generation by a Machine-Learning-Based
Pricing Heuristic for Graph Coloring
Yunzhuang Shen1 , Yuan Sun2 , Xiaodong Li1 , Andrew Eberhard3 , Andreas Ernst4
1

2

School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Australia
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
3
School of Science, RMIT University, Australia
4
School of Mathematics, Monash University, Australia
s3640365@student.rmit.edu.au, yuan.sun@unimelb.edu.au,
{xiaodong.li, andy.eberhard}@rmit.edu.au, andreas.ernst@monash.edu
Abstract

Dual solution

Column Generation (CG) is an effective method for solving
large-scale optimization problems. CG starts by solving a subproblem with a subset of columns (i.e., variables) and gradually includes new columns that can improve the solution of the
current subproblem. The new columns are generated as needed
by repeatedly solving a pricing problem, which is often NPhard and is a bottleneck of the CG approach. To tackle this, we
propose a Machine-Learning-based Pricing Heuristic (MLPH)
that can generate many high-quality columns efficiently. In
each iteration of CG, our MLPH leverages an ML model to
predict the optimal solution of the pricing problem, which is
then used to guide a sampling method to efficiently generate
multiple high-quality columns. Using the graph coloring problem, we empirically show that MLPH significantly enhances
CG as compared to six state-of-the-art methods, and the improvement in CG can lead to substantially better performance
of the branch-and-price exact method.

Restricted master problem

Pricing problem

Columns

Figure 1: Illustration of column generation.

proportion of columns with non-zero values, CG is expected
to solve the LP to optimality without the need to explicitly
consider all the columns (Lübbecke 2010).
In the CG approach, repeatedly solving the pricing problem is typically a bottleneck (Lübbecke and Desrosiers 2005),
because the pricing problem is often NP-hard. To attain computational advantage, heuristic methods are often preferred to
trade column quality for computational efficiency. An exact
method is usually used only if a heuristic method failed to
generate any column with a negative reduced cost (Lübbecke
2010). Existing studies have explored a variety of pricing
heuristics, such as greedy search (Mehrotra and Trick 1996;
Mourgaya and Vanderbeck 2007) and metaheuristics (Taillard
1999; Malaguti, Monaci, and Toth 2011; Beheshti and Hejazi
2015). Based on past computational experience, Lübbecke
(2010) notes that including multiple columns to the RMP at
an iteration of CG can often speed up the progress of CG.
In this paper, we propose a novel Machine-Learning-based
Pricing Heuristic (MLPH) for efficiently solving pricing problems. Specifically, we train an ML model offline using a set
of solved pricing problems with known optimal solutions.
For an unseen pricing problem at an iteration of CG, we use
this ML model to predict the optimal solution of the pricing
problem, which is then used to guide the search method to
generate high-quality columns. To gain efficiency, we employ a linear Support Vector Machine (Boser, Guyon, and
Vapnik 1992) for prediction and a sampling method for generating columns. As our method can potentially generate many
columns, we introduce several column-selection strategies to
form the new RMP to start the next iteration of CG.
By harnessing the knowledge learned from historical data,
our MLPH has several advantages over existing pricing methods: (1) compared to sampling-based methods (Dorigo, Birattari, and Stützle 2006; Cai and Lin 2016), MLPH can

Introduction
Branch-and-price is a widely-used exact method for solving
combinatorial optimization problems (Barnhart et al. 1998)
in the general form of Dantzig–Wolfe reformulation (Vanderbeck 2000). This formulation often provides a much stronger
Linear-Programming relaxation (LP) bound than the more
compact formulations of the same problem, which may lead
to a significant reduction in the problem’s search space. However, solving the LP can be challenging, because it typically
has an exponential number of variables (or columns) that
cannot be considered all at once.
Column Generation (CG) is an iterative method for solving
large-scale LPs. As illustrated in Figure 1, CG starts by solving a subproblem with a small fraction of the columns in an
LP, commonly referred to as the Restricted Master Problem
(RMP). Then, the optimal dual solution of the RMP is used
to set up a pricing problem to search for the column with the
least reduced cost. If that column has a negative reduced cost,
the column is included in the RMP to further improve its
solution. Otherwise, the RMP has captured all the columns
with non-zero values in the optimal solution of the original
LP. Since an optimal LP solution typically has only a small
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9926

