The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CC-Cert: A Probabilistic Approach to Certify General Robustness of Neural
Networks
Mikhail Pautov1 , Nurislam Tursynbek1 , Marina Munkhoeva1 ,
Nikita Muravev2,3 , Aleksandr Petiushko2,3,4 , Ivan Oseledets1
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
2
Lomonosov MSU
3
Huawei Moscow Research Center
4
AIRI, Moscow
mikhail.pautov@skoltech.ru, nurislam.tursynbek@gmail.com, marina.munkhoeva@skolkovotech.ru,
muravev.nikita@huawei.com, petyushko@yandex.ru, I.Oseledets@skoltech.ru
Abstract

and Feizi 2020), but then it was successfully generalized to
a much more general class of transforms such as translations or rotations (Balunović et al. 2019; Fischer, Baader,
and Vechev 2020). A recent work (Li et al. 2021) and its
follow-up (Alfarra et al. 2021) study a general smoothing
framework that is able to provide useful certificates for the
most common synthetic image modifications and their compositions.
However, a drawback of smoothing methods is that they
can only certify a smoothed model which is significantly
slower than the original one due to a large number of samples to approximate the expectation. Thus, we need a method
that a) can certify any given black-box model, and b) is general and not tailored to a specific threat model (such as smallnorm perturbations). Providing an exact rigorous certification in this setting is a very challenging task.
Instead, in this paper, we propose and investigate a probabilistic approach that produces robustness guarantees of a
black-box model against different threat models. In this approach, we estimate the probability of misclassification, if
the attack is sampled randomly from the admissible set of
attacks. We bound this quantity by the probability of the
large deviation of a certain random variable Z, which is derived from the distance between the probability vectors (see
Lemma 1). To estimate the probability of the large deviation,
we propose to use the empirical version of the ChernoffCramer bound and show that under the additional assumption on Z this bound holds with high probability (see Theorem 1).
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a new framework called Chernoff-Cramer
Certification (CC-Cert) for probabilistic robustness
bounds and theoretically justify them based on the empirical version of Chernoff-Cramer inequality;
• We test those bounds and demonstrate their efficacy
for several models trained in different ways for single
semantic parametric transformations and some of their
compositions.

In safety-critical machine learning applications, it is crucial
to defend models against adversarial attacks — small modifications of the input that change the predictions. Besides rigorously studied ℓp -bounded additive perturbations, semantic
perturbations (e.g. rotation, translation) raise a serious concern on deploying ML systems in real-world. Therefore, it
is important to provide provable guarantees for deep learning models against semantically meaningful input transformations. In this paper, we propose a new universal probabilistic certification approach based on Chernoff-Cramer bounds
that can be used in general attack settings. We estimate the
probability of a model to fail if the attack is sampled from a
certain distribution. Our theoretical findings are supported by
experimental results on different datasets.

Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) models have achieved tremendous success in many tasks. On the other hand, it is well
known that they are intriguingly susceptible to adversarial
attacks of different kinds (Szegedy et al. 2013), thus there
is a pressing lack of models that are robust to such attacks.
Several mechanisms are proposed as empirical defenses to
various known adversarial perturbations. However, these defenses have been later were circumvented by new more aggressive attacks (Carlini and Wagner 2017b,a; Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018; Tramer et al. 2020).
Therefore, a natural question arises: given a DNN model
f , can we provide any provable guarantee on its prediction
under a certain threat model, i.e. f (x) = f (xT ), where xT
is a transformed input? This is precisely the topic of a growing field of certified robustness. A part of the existing research relies on the analysis of the Lipschitz properties of a
classifier: its output’s Lipschitz-continuity leads to a robustness certificate for additive attacks (Anil, Lucas, and Grosse
2019; Li et al. 2019; Serrurier et al. 2021). Another excellent
tool for such a task is smoothing: the inference of the model
is replaced by averaging of predictions over the set of transformed inputs. First, this approach was developed for smallnorm attacks (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019; Levine

Preliminaries
We consider the classification task with fixed set of data
samples S = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym )} where xi ∈ RD is

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7975

