The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Seizing Critical Learning Periods in Federated Learning
Gang Yan1 , Hao Wang2 and Jian Li1
1

SUNY-Binghamton University
2
Louisiana State University
gyan2@binghamton.edu, haowang@lsu.edu, lij@binghamton.edu

Abstract

extensive deployment of FL that trains deep learning models on sensitive private data, such as Google Keyboard (Yang
et al. 2018).
The distributed nature of FL raises a series of new challenges in terms of system performance and data statistics. In
FL systems, clients are typically loosely-connected mobile
devices with limited communication bandwidth, computation power, and battery life. Unlike traditional centralized
machine learning, data samples of each client in FL follow
a non-identical and independent distribution (non-IID), introducing bias that slows down or even fails the training. A
few recent studies have been proposed to address these challenges by model compression (Konečnỳ et al. 2016; Suresh
et al. 2017), communication frequency optimization (Wang
and Joshi 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Karimireddy et al. 2020),
and client selections (Lai et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020a;
Xiong, Yan, and Li 2021).
However, existing studies have not yet explored the significance of critical learning periods. Recent works have
revealed that the first few training epochs—known as critical learning periods—determine the final quality of a deep
neural network (DNN) model in traditional centralized
ML (Achille, Rovere, and Soatto 2019; Jastrzebski et al.
2019; Golatkar, Achille, and Soatto 2019; Jastrzebski et al.
2021). During a critical period, deficits such as low quality or quantity of training data will cause irreversible model
degradation, no matter how much additional training is performed after the period. The existence of critical periods in
FL remains an open question due to the unique distributed
nature of FL.
In this paper, we seek critical learning periods in FL with
systematic experiments and theoretical analysis, and we emphasize the necessity of seizing the critical learning periods to improve FL training efficiency. Specifically, through
a range of carefully designed experiments on different ML
models and datasets, we observe the consistent existence of
critical learning periods in the FL training process. We further propose a new metric named Federated Fisher Information Matrix (FedFIM) to describe and explain this phenomenon. FedFIM is calculated based on a classical statistics notion of Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) (Amari and
Nagaoka 2000) that approximates the local curvature of the
loss surface in FL efficiently. We show that the phenomenon
of critical learning periods in FL can be explained using the

Federated learning (FL) is a popular technique to train machine learning (ML) models with decentralized data. Extensive works have studied the performance of the global model;
however, it is still unclear how the training process affects the
final test accuracy. Exacerbating this problem is the fact that
FL executions differ significantly from traditional ML with
heterogeneous data characteristics across clients, involving
more hyperparameters. In this work, we show that the final
test accuracy of FL is dramatically affected by the early phase
of the training process, i.e., FL exhibits critical learning periods, in which small gradient errors irrecoverably impact the
final test accuracy. To further explain this phenomenon, we
generalize the trace of Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) to
FL and define a new notion called FedFIM, a quantity reflecting the local curvature of each client from the beginning
of training in FL. Our findings suggest that the initial learning phase plays a critical role in understanding the FL performance. This is in contrast to many existing works which
generally do not connect the final accuracy of FL to the early
phase training. Finally, seizing critical learning periods in FL
is of independent interest and could be useful for other problems such as the choices of hyperparameters including but not
limited to the number of client selected per round, batch size,
so as to improve the performance of FL training and testing.

Introduction
The ever-growing attention to data privacy and the popularity of mobile computing have impelled the rise of Federated
learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Imteaj et al. 2021),
a new distributed machine learning paradigm on decentralized data. A typical FL system consists a central server and
multiple decentralized clients (e.g., smartphones and IoT
devices). The central server initiates federated learning by
sending a global model to clients. The clients then use their
local data samples to train the received model with common
deep learning algorithms and aggregate their local models
to the central server. The central server updates the global
model by aggregating the received local models and sends it
to clients for further training. By repeating the local training
and global aggregation, the central server obtains a global
model jointly trained by decentralized clients without leaking any raw data. This unique distributed nature enables an
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8788

