The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pushing the Limits of Rule Reasoning in Transformers
through Natural Language Satisfiability
Kyle Richardson, Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, WA, USA
{kyler,ashishs}@allenai.org

Sample hard instances of P

Abstract
Investigating the reasoning abilities of transformer models,
and discovering new challenging tasks for them, has been a
topic of much interest. Recent studies have found these models
to be surprisingly strong at performing deductive reasoning
over formal logical theories expressed in natural language.
A shortcoming of these studies, however, is that they do not
take into account that logical theories, when sampled uniformly at random, do not necessarily lead to hard instances.
We propose a new methodology for creating challenging algorithmic reasoning datasets that focus on natural language
satisfiability (NLSat) problems. The key idea is to draw insights from empirical sampling of hard propositional SAT
problems and from complexity-theoretic studies of language.
This methodology allows us to distinguish easy from hard
instances, and to systematically increase the complexity of
existing reasoning benchmarks such as RuleTaker. We find
that current transformers, given sufficient training data, are
surprisingly robust at solving the resulting NLSat problems of
substantially increased difficulty. They also exhibit some degree of scale-invariance—the ability to generalize to problems
of larger size and scope. Our results, however, reveal important
limitations too: a careful sampling of training data is crucial
for building models that generalize to larger problems, and
transformer models’ limited scale-invariance suggests they are
far from learning robust deductive reasoning algorithms.

Hard Combinatorial Problem P
(e.g., SAT, 3-Coloring)

Natural Language Probing Task
T (e.g., deductive inference,
syntactic processing,...)

Find fragments of T grounded in P

NL Theory

Conjectures
Satisfiability

Γ ={ Bob is round. Alan is blue, rough and
young. If someone is round then they are big.
All rough people are green. Big people are
not green. }
1. Alan is green (entailment, Γ |= 1)
2. Bob is green (contradiction)
Γ has an interpretation (sat)
Γ ∪ {¬1} (unsat), indirectly proves Γ |= 1
Γ ∪ {2} (unsat), indirectly proves Γ |= ¬2

Figure 1: TOP: An illustration of our general methodology
for constructing hard natural language reasoning problems
for a task T , by grounding them into a hard combinatorial
problem P and sampling hard instances of P. BOTTOM: An
example of a natural language (NL) theory (i.e., set of arbitrary facts and rules) Γ along with two example conjectures
(i.e., propositions to be proved) and the relationship between
entailment and satisfiability.

Introduction
Motivated by the impressive performance of recent pretrained transformers (Devlin et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020)
on a wide range of natural language understanding (NLU)
benchmarks (Wang et al. 2019b,a; Xu et al. 2020), there
has much been recent interest in investigating the linguistic and reasoning abilities of state-of-the-art neural models
(Linzen, Dupoux, and Goldberg 2016; Talmor et al. 2020;
Kassner, Kroje, and Schütze 2020; Yanaka et al. 2020; Hupkes et al. 2020; Richardson et al. 2020, inter alia). One particular thread of work focuses on probing whether transformers
can perform logical reasoning over formal theories expressed
in natural language (Clark, Tafjord, and Richardson 2020).
Specifically, given a set of systematically constructed natural
language theories consisting of a set of explicitly stated rules
and facts (e.g., the NL Theory in the bottom part of Figure 1
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11209

containing fictional rules about characters Bob and Alan), the
goal is to see whether a model can learn to perform deductive
reasoning over such theories by correctly answering queries
that require making novel inferences (e.g., predicating that
Alan is green is true based on knowing that Alan is rough
and applying the rule All rough people are green).
While much of this recent work on behavioral probing has
centered around small synthetic domains and datasets (see
also Weston et al. (2015); Lake and Baroni (2018); Sinha
et al. (2019)), the appeal of such testing is that it can allow us
to uncover the strengths and weaknesses of models in a costeffective and controlled manner, and ultimately determine
whether models are inherently capable of solving certain algorithmic problems. Given that most behavioral probing studies
are performed in a black-box fashion (Ribeiro et al. 2020)

