The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Heterogeneous Peer Effects in the Linear Threshold Model
Christopher Tran, Elena Zheleva
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL
{ctran29, ezheleva}@uic.edu

Abstract

According to LTM, an individual is influenced to adopt a
product or idea if the proportion of their friends who have
already adopted that product or idea is above some threshold. LTM is a popular model used in many settings, such
as modeling the spread of ideas (Rogers 2010), predicting
diffusion (Soni, Ramirez, and Eisenstein 2019), and the development of many prominent influence maximization algorithms (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Chen, Yuan,
and Zhang 2010; Goyal, Lu, and Lakshmanan 2011; Li et al.
2018). However, node thresholds are typically assumed to
either be the same for all nodes or randomly distributed.
Moreover, there are no methods for estimating individual
thresholds (Talukder et al. 2019), even though different individuals may have different susceptibility to social influence.
Moreover, LTM has not been studied through a causal inference lens, even though LTM captures a causal concept:
“how many friends does it take to buy a product before they
cause an individual to buy the same product?” In our work,
we seek to address these shortcomings.
We develop two models for estimating individual-level
thresholds from data. Our models reflect real-world scenarios in which some individuals are more easily influenced
than others or differently by specific friends. To address the
variety of characteristics and behaviors of individuals, we
propose a new concept, heterogeneous peer effects (HPEs)
in networks, and contrast it with heterogeneous treatment effects for IID data. While recent work has developed methods
for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects in networks,
they only consider the network structure as a confounder
or as a proxy to latent confounders for individual-level effects and do not estimate heterogeneous peer effects (Veitch,
Wang, and Blei 2019; Guo, Li, and Liu 2020).
To facilitate the estimation of peer effects, we develop
a Structural Causal Model (SCM) that is specific to LTM
and encodes interference by contagion. Interference is the
influence of treatments or outcomes of peers on an individual, and contagion is the process of friends’ outcomes
influencing an individual’s outcome (Ogburn and VanderWeele 2014). For example, a user (e.g., Angelo in Figure 1) might buy sunglasses (outcome) if their friends already bought them (contagion). Prior work has studied the
role of SCMs in the presence of interference (Ogburn and
VanderWeele 2014; Bhattacharya, Malinsky, and Shpitser
2020) and the estimation of average peer effects (Arbour,

The Linear Threshold Model is a widely used model that describes how information diffuses through a social network.
According to this model, an individual adopts an idea or product after the proportion of their neighbors who have adopted it
reaches a certain threshold. Typical applications of the Linear
Threshold Model assume that thresholds are either the same
for all network nodes or randomly distributed, even though
some people may be more susceptible to peer pressure than
others. To address individual-level differences, we propose
causal inference methods for estimating individual thresholds
that can more accurately predict whether and when individuals will be affected by their peers. We introduce the concept
of heterogeneous peer effects and develop a Structural Causal
Model which corresponds to the Linear Threshold Model and
supports heterogeneous peer effect identification and estimation. We develop two algorithms for individual threshold estimation, one based on causal trees and one based on causal
meta-learners. Our experimental results on synthetic and realworld datasets show that our proposed models can better
predict individual-level thresholds in the Linear Threshold
Model and thus more precisely predict which nodes will get
activated over time.

Introduction
Social networks play a vital role in spreading information,
ideas, and behaviors. For example, medical and agricultural
innovations can spread through the world (Rogers 2010),
and new products can spread via word of mouth or viral
marketing (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). Emotions
such as happiness (Fowler and Christakis 2008) and hatefulness (Ribeiro et al. 2018) have also been observed to spread
through social networks. These processes, known as information diffusion, have traditionally been studied in the social
sciences (Granovetter 1978), but more recently have motivated applications in viral marketing (Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos 2003) and recommender systems (Nikolakopoulos et al. 2019). Many models exist that capture the diffusion
process, including epidemic models (Kermack and McKendrick 1927), voter models (Clifford and Sudbury 1973),
the Independent Cascade (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos
2003), and the Linear Threshold Model (LTM) (Granovetter 1978). In this work, we focus on LTM.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4175

