The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semantic-Aware Representation Blending
for Multi-Label Image Recognition with Partial Labels
Tao Pu 1 , Tianshui Chen 2 , Hefeng Wu 1 , Liang Lin 1 *
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Guangdong University of Technology
putao3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, tianshuichen@gmail.com, wuhefeng@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Training the multi-label image recognition models with partial labels, in which merely some labels are known while
others are unknown for each image, is a considerably challenging and practical task. To address this task, current algorithms mainly depend on pre-training classification or similarity models to generate pseudo labels for the unknown labels. However, these algorithms depend on sufficient multilabel annotations to train the models, leading to poor performance especially with low known label proportion. In
this work, we propose to blend category-specific representation across different images to transfer information of known
labels to complement unknown labels, which can get rid
of pre-training models and thus does not depend on sufficient annotations. To this end, we design a unified semanticaware representation blending (SARB) framework that exploits instance-level and prototype-level semantic representation to complement unknown labels by two complementary
modules: 1) an instance-level representation blending (ILRB)
module blends the representations of the known labels in an
image to the representations of the unknown labels in another
image to complement these unknown labels. 2) a prototypelevel representation blending (PLRB) module learns more
stable representation prototypes for each category and blends
the representation of unknown labels with the prototypes of
corresponding labels to complement these labels. Extensive
experiments on the MS-COCO, Visual Genome, Pascal VOC
2007 datasets show that the proposed SARB framework obtains superior performance over current leading competitors
on all known label proportion settings, i.e., with the mAP improvement of 4.6%, 4.6%, 2.2% on these three datasets when
the known label proportion is 10%. Codes are available at
https://github.com/HCPLab-SYSU/HCP-MLR-PL.

[a]

[b]

person
giraffe
car
zebra
boat

1
-1
1
1
-1

0
0
1
0
-1

elephant

-1

0

Figure 1: An MLR image with complete labels [a], partial
labels [b], in which 1 represents the corresponding category
exists, -1 represents it does not exist, and 0 represents it is
unknown.

sue, recent works tend to study the task of multi-label image
recognition with partial labels (MLR-PL), in which merely a
few positive and negative labels are provided whereas other
labels are unknown (see Figure 1). MLR-PL is more practical to real-world scenarios because it does not require complete multi-label annotations for each image.
Previous works (Sun et al. 2017; Joulin et al. 2016) simply
ignore the unknown labels or treat them as negative, and they
adopt traditional MLR algorithms to address this task. However, it may lead to poor performance because it either loses
some annotations or even incurs some incorrect labels. More
recent works (Durand, Mehrasa, and Mori 2019; Huynh and
Elhamifar 2020) propose to train classification or similarity
models with given labels, and use these models to generate pseudo labels for the unknown labels. Despite achieving
impressive progress, these algorithms depend on sufficient
multi-label annotation for model training, and they suffer
from obvious performance drop if decreasing the known label proportion to a small level.
Fortunately, a specific label c that is unknown in one image I n may be known in another image I m . We can extract
the information of label c from image I m , blend this information to image I n , and in this way complement the unknown label c for image I n . Previous works (Zhang et al.
2017) utilize mixup algorithm to blend two images and generate a new image with semantic information from both
images to help regularize training single-label recognition
models. However, a multi-label image generally has multiple semantic objects scattering over the whole image, and

Introduction
Multi-label image recognition (MLR) (Chen et al. 2019d,b;
Wu et al. 2020), which aims to find out all semantic labels
from the input image, is a more challenging and practical
task compared with the single-label counterpart. Due to the
complexity of the input images and output label spaces, collecting a large-scale dataset with complete multi-label annotation is extremely time-consuming. To deal with this is* Tao Pu and Tianshui Chen contribute equally to this work and
share first authorship. Corresponding author is Liang Lin.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2091

