The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Deep Keyphrase Generation
Xianjie Shen1 , Yinghan Wang2 * , Rui Meng3† , Jingbo Shang4‡
1,4

University of California, San Diego
2
Amazon.com Inc
3
Salesforce Research
{xishen, jshang}@eng.ucsd.edu, yinghanw@amazon.com, ruimeng@salesforce.com,

Abstract
Keyphrase generation aims to summarize long documents
with a collection of salient phrases. Deep neural models have
demonstrated remarkable success in this task, with the capability of predicting keyphrases that are even absent from a
document. However, such abstractiveness is acquired at the expense of a substantial amount of annotated data. In this paper,
we present a novel method for keyphrase generation, AutoKeyGen, without the supervision of any annotated doc-keyphrase
pairs. Motivated by the observation that an absent keyphrase
in a document may appear in other places, in whole or in
part, we construct a phrase bank by pooling all phrases extracted from a corpus. With this phrase bank, we assign phrase
candidates to new documents by a simple partial matching algorithm, and then we rank these candidates by their relevance
to the document from both lexical and semantic perspectives.
Moreover, we bootstrap a deep generative model using these
top-ranked pseudo keyphrases to produce more absent candidates. Extensive experiments demonstrate that AutoKeyGen
outperforms all unsupervised baselines and can even beat a
strong supervised method in certain cases.

Introduction
The goal of keyphrase generation is to produce a list of
phrases to summarize and characterize a long document
(e.g., research papers and news articles). It has a wide spectrum of downstream applications, to name a few, information retrieval (Jones and Staveley 1999), text summarization (Zhang, Zincir-Heywood, and Milios 2004), and text
categorization (Hulth and Megyesi 2006).
The trade-off between the capability of generating absent
keyphrases (i.e., phrases do not appear in the original document) and the reliance on document-keyphrase supervision
has long existed among keyphrase generation methods. Meng
et al. (2017) have shown that in scientific documents, up to
50% of keyphrases are absent from the source text, yet they
can be helpful for downstream applications such as search
and recommendation (Boudin and Gallina 2021). With the
advance of deep neural networks, recent studies (Meng et al.
* Work completed before joining Amazon.
†

The research was accomplished at University of Pittsburgh.
Jingbo Shang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

11303

2017; Chen et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Alzaidy, Caragea,
and Giles 2019; Yuan et al. 2018; Meng et al. 2019, 2020)
are capable of generating keyphrases, according to their semantic relevance to a document, no matter they are present or
not. Although these methods have achieved state-of-the-art
performance, they require a tremendous number of documentkeyphrase pairs to supervise the training, and the data is typically expensive and laborious to collect. For example, Meng
et al. (2017) utilized half a million scientific papers with
author-annotated keyphrases to train a Sequence-to-Sequence
model. Similarly, Xiong et al. (2019) collected 68,000 web
pages and have them annotated by professional annotators.
While many extractive methods (Hasan and Ng 2010; Shang
et al. 2018; Bennani-Smires et al. 2018) do not need any direct supervision and demonstrate robust performance across
various datasets, they can only predict phrases that appear in
the original document. There are several extractive studies
that try to recall absent phrases by including related documents as additional inputs (Wan and Xiao 2008; Florescu and
Caragea 2017), however, compared with supervised generative methods, their performance is not competitive.
In this paper, we aim to alleviate this trade-off by proposing
an unsupervised method that can generate both present and
absent keyphrases without utilizing any human annotation.
We observe that absent keyphrases of a document can be
present in other documents. Also, some absent keyphrases
actually appear in the original document in part (as separate
tokens). For example, in the test split of Inspec dataset, a
popular benchmark dataset for keyphrase generation, bvcc02
Motivated by these observations, we propose a novel unsupervised deep keyphrase generation method AutoKeyGen as
illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, we first follow previous
works (Hasan and Ng 2010; Shang et al. 2018; BennaniSmires et al. 2018) to extract candidate present keyphrases
from all documents and pool them together into a phrase
bank. From this present phrase bank, we can draw candidate
absent keyphrases for each document through a partial matching process, requiring each stemmed word in the candidate
phrase must exist in the input document. To rank both types
of keyphrases, we fuse two types of similarity: the TF-IDF
score at the lexical level and the embedding similarity at the
semantic level. We further utilize these top-ranked present
and absent candidates as “silver” data to train a deep generative model. This generative model is expected to augment

