The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NukCP: An Improved Local Search Algorithm for Maximum k-Club Problem
Jiejiang Chen1 , Yiyuan Wang1,3 * , Shaowei Cai2,4 , Minghao Yin1,3∗ ,
Yupeng Zhou1,3∗ , Jieyu Wu1
1

School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
chenjj016@nenu.edu.cn, yiyuanwangjlu@126.com, caisw@ios.ac.cn, {ymh, zhouyp605}@nenu.edu.cn, wjy4204@163.com
2

Abstract

functional modules by mining important substructures in biological network (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Trukhanov
2005; Jia et al. 2018).
Given a graph G = (V, E) and a fixed integer k, a kclub S is a subset of vertices inducing a subgraph of diameter at most k. It is easy to see that 1-club is a clique. The
MkCP aims to identify the k-club with the maximum size in
a graph. It is NP-hard, even for any fixed k > 1 (Bourjolly,
Laporte, and Pesant 2002). Up to now, there are mainly two
types of algorithms for the MkCP, i.e., exact algorithms and
heuristic algorithms.
Several exact algorithms have been designed to solve the
MkCP. Bourjolly et al. (2002) proposed a classic branchand-bound algorithm for the MkCP and could solve the instances involving up to 200 vertices. The branch-and-bound
algorithms for the MkCP were further improved by considering the k-coloring number as an upper bound (Pajouh and
Balasundaram 2012) and designing a dynamic data structure
(Chang et al. 2013). Recently, another paradigm solved the
MkCP by using different integer linear programming formulations (Almeida and Carvalho 2012, 2014a; Veremyev et al.
2021). Although exact algorithms can guarantee the optimality of their solutions, they may fail to solve the problem
within acceptable time, especially for large-scale instances.
In practice, for solving the large-scale MkCP instances,
researchers resort to designing heuristic algorithms for obtaining good solutions. Bourjolly et al. (2000) proposed
three simple and effective heuristic algorithms for the
MkCP, including Constellation, Drop and k-Clique & Drop.
Shahinpour and Butenko (2013a) developed a variable
neighborhood search called VNS for the MkCP and firstly
tested the performance of VNS on the DIMACS benchmark.
Afterwards, two hybrid algorithms including mS IP specialized for the 2-club problem and mB IP specialized for
the 3-club problem were introduced by combining heuristic algorithms and integer linear programming formulations
(Almeida and Carvalho 2014b). In the same work, Almeida
and Carvalho (2014b) also proposed a heuristic algorithm
called Backbone and proved its superiority over the previous algorithm Constellation on the 3-club problem. Moradi
and Balasundara (2018) proposed a heuristic algorithm for
the MkCP called ITDBC which used a combination of graph
decomposition and model decomposition techniques. In the
ITDBC, a reduction method called TRIM played an impor-

The maximum k-club problem (MkCP) is an important clique
relaxation problem with wide applications. Previous MkCP
algorithms only work on small-scale instances and are not applicable for large-scale instances. For solving instances with
different scales, this paper develops an efficient local search
algorithm named NukCP for the MkCP which mainly includes two novel ideas. First, we propose a dynamic reduction
strategy, which makes a good balance between the time efficiency and the precision effectiveness of the upper bound calculation. Second, a stratified threshold configuration checking strategy is designed by giving different priorities for the
neighborhood in the different levels. Experiments on a broad
range of different scale instances show that NukCP significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art MkCP algorithms on
most instances in terms of solution quality.

Introduction
A clique is a subset of vertices of an undirected graph in
which each pair of vertices are adjacent. Clique is one of the
basic concepts of graph theory and has been widely studied (Ouyang et al. 1997; Butenko and Wilhelm 2006). However, the constraint condition of clique model is too strict for
many real-world applications since the aim of these applications is to find some dense structures rather than a complete
subgraph. These structures can usually be seen as clique relaxation models and are mainly divided into two categories:
density-based models such as k-plex (Gao et al. 2018) and
quasi-clique (Chen et al. 2021) as well as diameter-based
models such as k-clique (Cavique, Mendes, and Santos
2009) and k-club (Shahinpour and Butenko 2013b).
In this paper, we focus on studying the maximum k-club
problem (MkCP) which has been used in various domains.
For example, the MkCP can help to facilitate the search on
the internet since it can cluster topically related information
(Pattillo, Youssef, and Butenko 2013). In social network, the
well-known “a friend of a friend” concept can be modeled
as k-club and the problem of finding a low-diameter community can be encoded to the MkCP (Goodreau, Kitts, and
Morris 2009). The MkCP is also used to analyze the roles of
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10146

