The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CMUA-Watermark: A Cross-Model Universal Adversarial Watermark for
Combating Deepfakes
Hao Huang,1,2 Yongtao Wang,1,2 * Zhaoyu Chen,3 Yuze Zhang,1 Yuheng Li,1 Zhi Tang,1,2
Wei Chu,4 Jingdong Chen,4 Weisi Lin,5 Kai-Kuang Ma5
1
Peking University
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence Production Technology and Systems
3
Fudan University
4
Ant Group
5
Nanyang Technological University
huanghao@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wyt, kevinzyz, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn, zhaoyuchen20@fudan.edu.cn,
yuhengli2021@outlook.com, {weichu.cw, jingdongchen.cjd}@antgroup.com, {wslin, ekkma}@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Malicious applications of deepfakes (i.e., technologies generating target facial attributes or entire faces from facial images)
have posed a huge threat to individuals’ reputation and security. To mitigate these threats, recent studies have proposed
adversarial watermarks to combat deepfake models, leading
them to generate distorted outputs. Despite achieving impressive results, these adversarial watermarks have low imagelevel and model-level transferability, meaning that they can
protect only one facial image from one specific deepfake
model. To address these issues, we propose a novel solution that can generate a Cross-Model Universal Adversarial Watermark (CMUA-Watermark), protecting a large number of facial images from multiple deepfake models. Specifically, we begin by proposing a cross-model universal attack
pipeline that attacks multiple deepfake models iteratively.
Then, we design a two-level perturbation fusion strategy to
alleviate the conflict between the adversarial watermarks generated by different facial images and models. Moreover, we
address the key problem in cross-model optimization with
a heuristic approach to automatically find the suitable attack step sizes for different models, further weakening the
model-level conflict. Finally, we introduce a more reasonable
and comprehensive evaluation method to fully test the proposed method and compare it with existing ones. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed CMUAWatermark can effectively distort the fake facial images generated by multiple deepfake models while achieving a better
performance than existing methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/VDIGPKU/CMUA-Watermark.

Figure 1: Passive Defense using a deepfake detector can only
posteriorly lessen deepfake’s harms by detecting the modified images, while active defense uses adversarial watermarks to disrupt the deepfake model to generate perceptibly
distorted outputs, thus mitigating risk in advance.

Introduction
Recently, improvements of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown impressive results in virtual content generation, creating considerable economic and entertainment value. However, deepfakes, deep learning based
face modification networks using GANs to generate fake
content of target persons or target attributes, have caused
great harm to people’s privacy and reputation. On one hand,

fake images and videos can show things that a person has
never said or done, causing damage to his or her reputation,
especially when involving pornography or politics (Tolosana
et al. 2020). On the other hand, fake facial images with target attributes may pass the biometric authentication of commercial applications, potentially breaching security (Korshunov and Marcel 2018). Hence, defending threats brought
by deepfakes requires not only distorting the modified images and lowering their visual quality to aid humans in distinguishing them from realistic images, but also ensuring

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

989

