The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Solve Routing Problems via Distributionally Robust Optimization
†

Yuan Jiang1* , Yaoxin Wu1* , Zhiguang Cao2 , Jie Zhang3
1

SCALE@NTU Corp Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, A*STAR, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
jiang.yuan@ntu.edu.sg, wuyaoxin@ntu.edu.sg, zhiguangcao@outlook.com, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

to the highly optimized conventional heuristic solvers including Concorde (Applegate et al. 2006) and LKH (Helsgaun 2000), a large number of efforts have been performed
to invent various deep models to solve the VRP variants,
i.e., traveling salesman problem (TSP) and capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP) (Khalil et al. 2017; Kool, van
Hoof, and Welling 2019; Chen and Tian 2019; Hottung and
Tierney 2020; Ma et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Kwon et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021; Xin et al. 2021b).
Although much success has been achieved, existing deep
models always assume a pure spatial distribution of nodes
(customers) for training, i.e., uniform distribution, which
severely limits their applications given the impaired crossdistribution generalization ability. While it is natural to stipulate that a majority of typical instances follow an identical distribution, a minority of atypical (yet important) instances which follow different one(s) may always exist in
reality (Hashimoto et al. 2018). In this sense, the monotraining paradigm in existing deep models may cause inferior performance or even failures for those atypical instances. E.g., a trained routing policy may offer unreasonable routes to serve a group of (important) customers whose
location pattern differs from the ones used in training. Intuitively, an alternative is to force the model to homogeneously treat all the instances of different distributions for
training. However, it does not necessarily enhance the crossdistribution generalization performance in our view, as it
may suffer high losses on the group of the atypical instances.
To address this issue, we propose an approach by exploiting group distributionally robust optimization (group DRO)
to jointly train the deep models on instances of different
groups (more than one group), where each group follows
a distribution. In particular, we aim at minimizing the loss
for the worst-case group during training, where we optimize
the weights for different groups of instances and the parameters for the deep model in an interleaved manner. More importantly, we do not need to label the distribution for each
group during inference. In addition, we also leverage convolution neural network (CNN) to learn initial representations of VRP instances so that the distribution-aware features in spatial patterns could be favorably captured to boost
the performance further. The experimental results show that,
our approach not only achieves superior performances on
the overall instances and the worst-case performance on the

Recent deep models for solving routing problems always assume a single distribution of nodes for training,
which severely impairs their cross-distribution generalization ability. In this paper, we exploit group distributionally robust optimization (group DRO) to tackle
this issue, where we jointly optimize the weights for
different groups of distributions and the parameters for
the deep model in an interleaved manner during training. We also design a module based on convolutional
neural network, which allows the deep model to learn
more informative latent pattern among the nodes. We
evaluate the proposed approach on two types of wellknown deep models including GCN and POMO. The
experimental results on the randomly synthesized instances and the ones from two benchmark dataset (i.e.,
TSPLib and CVRPLib) demonstrate that our approach
could significantly improve the cross-distribution generalization performance over the original models.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) with NPhardness are always featured by discrete search space and
intractable computation to seek the optimal solution. As
a fundamental COP in logistics, the vehicle routing problem (VRP) (Dantzig and Ramser 1959) concerns the costoptimal delivery of items from the depot to a set of geographically scattered customers through vehicle(s). It has
been extensively investigated for decades and found widespread applications in reality, such as waste collection (Han
and Ponce Cueto 2015), dial-a-ride (Malheiros et al. 2021)
and courier delivery (Steever, Karwan, and Murray 2019).
The studies on VRP with deep (reinforcement) learning is emerging in recent years. Different from the conventional methods, this line of works aims at automatically searching heuristic policies by using neural networks
to learn the underlying patterns in instances, which could be
used to discover better policies than hand-crafted ones (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021). Towards reducing the gaps
* Yuan Jiang and Yaoxin Wu contributed equally.
†

Zhiguang Cao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9786

