The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Concentration Network for Reinforcement Learning
of Large-Scale Multi-Agent Systems
Qingxu Fu1,2 , Tenghai Qiu1,* , Jianqiang Yi1,2 , Zhiqiang Pu1,2 , Shiguang Wu 1,2
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
fuqingxu2019@ia.ac.cn, tenghai.qiu@ia.ac.cn, jianqiang.yi@ia.ac.cn,
zhiqiang.pu@ia.ac.cn, shiguang.wu@outlook.com
Abstract

For simplicity, we refer to the former as mini-MAS, the latter as small-MAS.

When dealing with a series of imminent issues, humans can
naturally concentrate on a subset of these concerning issues by prioritizing them according to their contributions
to motivational indices, e.g., the probability of winning a
game. This idea of concentration offers insights into reinforcement learning of sophisticated Large-scale Multi-Agent
Systems (LMAS) participated by hundreds of agents. In such
an LMAS, each agent receives a long series of entity observations at each step, which can overwhelm existing aggregation networks such as graph attention networks and cause
inefficiency. In this paper, we propose a concentration network called ConcNet. First, ConcNet scores the observed entities considering several motivational indices, e.g., expected
survival time and state value of the agents, and then ranks,
prunes, and aggregates the encodings of observed entities
to extract features. Second, distinct from the well-known attention mechanism, ConcNet has a unique motivational subnetwork to explicitly consider the motivational indices when
scoring the observed entities. Furthermore, we present a concentration policy gradient architecture that can learn effective policies in LMAS from scratch. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the presented architecture has excellent scalability and flexibility, and significantly outperforms existing
methods on LMAS benchmarks.

Large-Scale MAS. In this paper, we focus on the third
type of MAS, which is participated by more than 100 agents.
The complexity of such large-scale MAS (LMAS) increases
quadratically as the agent number increases considering the
agent-wise relationships. While LMAS creates the possibility for the emergence of very sophisticated cooperative behavior, RL algorithms need to search a much large jointpolicy space to find a satisfying policy. So far, there has been
little research on the RL algorithms of LMAS. The related
studies focus on oversimplified tasks such as gridworld dotfighting and geometrical pattern-forming (Zheng et al. 2018;
Diallo and Sugawara 2020; Rubenstein, Cornejo, and Nagpal 2014).
An RL algorithm in LMAS faces following challenges:
• (C1) Partially observable environment. An agent is influenced by a large number of entities, which means the
collection of other agents and non-agent elements in the
environment. However, not all the state of entities are observable to this agent (Oliehoek and Amato 2016).
• (C2) Decentralized execution. The algorithm is restricted by the paradigm of centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE), which is widely accepted
since (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Kraemer and
Banerjee 2016).
• (C3) Huge observation space and observation uncertainty. Each agent observes a long series of entities at
each time step due to an exploding agent number. Moreover, because of (C1), the number of observable entities
changes dynamically over an episode. Till now, to deal
with this challenge, it is inevitable to use sequence modeling tools from the natural language processing (NLP)
domain (Vaswani et al. 2017), such as attention mechanism and graph networks.
• (C4) Scalability and dynamic agent number. The algorithm should at least provide two kinds of scalability, namely, the ability to adapt to scenarios that are diverse in initial agent number before training (TrainingScalability) and after training (Testing-Scalability). Furthermore, the available agent number changes dynamically during an episode because most agents can be disabled or eliminated under certain conditions in LMAS.

Introduction
Multi-agent systems (MAS) from different areas have great
disparity with each other, considering the number of participating agents. On one hand, MAS tasks like DouDizhu
and Hide-and-Seek involve only 2 to 4 agents (Zha et al.
2021; Baker et al. 2019). On the other hand, other multiagent challenges such as StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
(SMAC), Predators-Pray, Navigating, Attacker-Defender,
and Formation-Control are usually participated by 10 to
30 agents (Vinyals et al. 2017; Lowe et al. 2017; Chen
et al. 2019; Deka and Sycara 2021; Agarwal, Kumar, and
Sycara 2019). In reinforcement learning (RL), these two
types of problems are investigated from different perspectives with distinct methods. Because the growth of the number of agents gradually shifts the core of the challenges from
agent-environment relationships to agent-wise interactions.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9341

