The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Logit Adjustment Loss for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Yan Zhao1 , Weicong Chen2 , Xu Tan3 , Kai Huang2 , Jihong Zhu1 *
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Bytedance, 3 Microsoft
zhao-y18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {chenweicong.do, huangkai.honka}@bytedance.com, xuta@microsoft.com,
jhzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Data in the real world tends to exhibit a long-tailed label
distribution, which poses great challenges for the training
of neural networks in visual recognition. Existing methods
tackle this problem mainly from the perspective of data quantity, i.e., the number of samples in each class. To be specific,
they pay more attention to tail classes, like applying larger
adjustments to the logit. However, in the training process,
the quantity and difficulty of data are two intertwined and
equally crucial problems. For some tail classes, the features
of their instances are distinct and discriminative, which can
also bring satisfactory accuracy; for some head classes, although with sufficient samples, the high semantic similarity
with other classes and lack of discriminative features will
bring bad accuracy. Based on these observations, we propose Adaptive Logit Adjustment Loss (ALA Loss) to apply an adaptive adjusting term to the logit. The adaptive adjusting term is composed of two complementary factors: 1)
quantity factor, which pays more attention to tail classes,
and 2) difficulty factor, which adaptively pays more attention to hard instances in the training process. The difficulty
factor can alleviate the over-optimization on tail yet easy instances and under-optimization on head yet hard instances.
The synergy of the two factors can not only advance the performance on tail classes even further, but also promote the accuracy on head classes. Unlike previous logit adjusting methods that only concerned about data quantity, ALA Loss tackles the long-tailed problem from a more comprehensive, finegrained and adaptive perspective. Extensive experimental results show that our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on challenging recognition benchmarks, including
ImageNet-LT, iNaturalist 2018, and Places-LT.

high similarity

241: EntleBucher

Head class & low accuracy
indistict feature
low discrimination

Tail class & high accuracy
distinct feature
high discrimination

240: Appenzeller

100: Black Swan

Figure 1: Per-class accuracy of Cross Entropy (CE) method
on ImageNet-LT dataset. The x-axis represents the class index sorted by the sample number. The y-axis shows the perclass accuracy. Best view in color and zoom in.
occupy relatively few samples (Liu et al. 2019; Gupta, Dollar, and Girshick 2019). Unfortunately, confronted with such
imbalanced distribution, the performance of these neural
networks is found to degrade notably, especially on tail
classes (Cao et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
Most existing long-tailed visual recognition methods address the problem by emphasizing the optimization on tail
classes. These works can be roughly divided into three
paradigms: re-sampling the training data (Buda, Maki, and
Mazurowski 2018; Chawla et al. 2002; Wallace et al. 2011),
re-weighting the coefficients of loss formulations (Menon
et al. 2013; Cui et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2018) and adjusting the logit (Cao et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2020; Menon et al.
2020). Data re-sampling increases the sampling rate for tail
classes and decreases it for head classes. Loss re-weighting
guides the network to pay more attention to tail samples by

Introduction
With the development of deep learning, the computer vision community has witnessed the immense breakthrough
of visual recognition on the classic benchmarks, such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015), COCO (Lin et al. 2014)
and Places (Zhou et al. 2017). In contrast to these artificially
balanced datasets, real-world scenarios usually subject to a
long-tailed label distribution. A few classes (head classes)
contain most of the data, while most classes (tail classes)
* Jihong Zhu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3472

