The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast Graph Neural Tangent Kernel via Kronecker Sketching
Shunhua Jiang1 , Yunze Man2 , Zhao Song3 , Zheng Yu4 , Danyang Zhuo5
1

Columbia University
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Adobe Research
4
Princeton University
5
Duke University
sj3005@columbia.edu, yman@cs.cmu.edu, zsong@adobe.com, zhengy@princeton.edu, danyang@cs.duke.edu
2

Abstract

relentless growth in the model complexity and dataset sizes,
both in terms of the number of graphs in a dataset and the
sizes of the graphs.
Recently, a new direction for fast GNN training is to use
Graph Neural Tangent Kernel (GNTK). (Du et al. 2019a) has
shown that GNTK can achieve similar accuracy as GNNs
on many important learning tasks. At that same time, GNTK
regression is significantly faster than iterative stochastic gradient descent optimization because solving the parameters in
GNTK is just a single-step kernel regression process. Further,
GNTK can scale with GNN model sizes because the regression running time grows only linearly with the complexity of
GNN models.
Meanwhile, sketching has been increasingly used in optimization problems (Clarkson and Woodruff 2013; Nelson
and Nguyên 2013; Meng and Mahoney 2013; Boutsidis and
Woodruff 2014; Song, Woodruff, and Zhong 2017; Andoni
et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2021; Dong, Lee, and Ye 2021),
including linear regression, kernel regression and linear programming. Various approaches have been proposed either
to sketch down the dimension of kernel matrices then solve
the low-dimensional problem, or to approximate the kernel
matrices by randomly constructing low-dimensional feature
vectors then solve using random feature vectors directly.
It is natural to think about whether we can use sketching
to improve the running time of GNTK regression. Given n
graphs where each graph has N nodes, the kernel matrix has a
size of n×n. Given the kernel matrix is already constructed, it
is well-known that using sketching can reduce the regression
time from O(n3 ) to o(n3 ) under certain conditions. However,
in the context of GNTK, the construction of the kernel matrix
need the running time of O(n2 N 4 ) to begin with. This is
because for each pair of graphs, we need to compute the
Kronecker product of those two graphs. There are n2 pairs in
total and each pair requires N 4 time computation. The endto-end GNTK regression time is sum of the time for kernel
matrix construction time and the kernel regression time. This
means, the kernel matrix construction can be a major barrier
for adopting sketching to speed up the end-to-end GNTK
regression time, especially when we need to use GNTK for
large graphs (large N ).
This raises an important question:
Can we speed up the kernel matrix construction time?
This question is worthwhile due to two reasons. First, cal-

Many deep learning tasks have to deal with graphs (e.g., protein structures, social networks, source code abstract syntax
trees). Due to the importance of these tasks, people turned to
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) as the de facto method for
learning on graphs. GNNs have become widely applied due
to their convincing performance. Unfortunately, one major
barrier to using GNNs is that GNNs require substantial time
and resources to train. Recently, a new method for learning on
graph data is Graph Neural Tangent Kernel (GNTK) (Du et al.
2019a). GNTK is an application of Neural Tangent Kernel
(NTK) (Jacot, Gabriel, and Hongler 2018) (a kernel method)
on graph data, and solving NTK regression is equivalent to
using gradient descent to train an infinite-wide neural network.
The key benefit of using GNTK is that, similar to any kernel
method, GNTK’s parameters can be solved directly in a single
step. This can avoid time-consuming gradient descent. Meanwhile, sketching has become increasingly used in speeding
up various optimization problems, including solving kernel
regression. Given a kernel matrix of n graphs, using sketching
in solving kernel regression can reduce the running time to
o(n3 ). But unfortunately such methods usually requires extensive knowledge about the kernel matrix beforehand, while
in the case of GNTK we find that the construction of the kernel matrix is already O(n2 N 4 ), assuming each graph has N
nodes. The kernel matrix construction time can be a major
performance bottleneck when the size of graphs N increases.
A natural question to ask is thus whether we can speed up the
kernel matrix construction to improve GNTK regression’s endto-end running time. This paper provides the first algorithm to
construct the kernel matrix in o(n2 N 3 ) running time.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have quickly become a popular method for machine learning on graph data. GNNs have
delivered ground-breaking results in many important areas
of AI, including social networking (Yang et al. 2020a), bioinformatics (Zitnik and Leskovec 2017; Yue et al. 2020),
recommendation systems (Ying et al. 2018), and autonomous
driving (Weng et al. 2020a; Yang et al. 2020b). Given the importance of GNNs, how to train GNNs efficiently has become
one of the most important problems in the AI community.
However, efficient GNN training is challenging due to the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7033

