The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Learning of Compositional Scene Representations from
Multiple Unspecified Viewpoints
Jinyang Yuan, Bin Li* , Xiangyang Xue*
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{yuanjinyang, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

scene

obj 1

obj 2

obj 3

obj 4

bck

view 1

Abstract

view 3

view 2

Visual scenes are extremely rich in diversity, not only because
there are infinite combinations of objects and background, but
also because the observations of the same scene may vary
greatly with the change of viewpoints. When observing a visual scene that contains multiple objects from multiple viewpoints, humans are able to perceive the scene in a compositional way from each viewpoint, while achieving the socalled “object constancy” across different viewpoints, even
though the exact viewpoints are untold. This ability is essential for humans to identify the same object while moving and
to learn from vision efficiently. It is intriguing to design models that have the similar ability. In this paper, we consider
a novel problem of learning compositional scene representations from multiple unspecified viewpoints without using
any supervision, and propose a deep generative model which
separates latent representations into a viewpoint-independent
part and a viewpoint-dependent part to solve this problem.
To infer latent representations, the information contained in
different viewpoints is iteratively integrated by neural networks. Experiments on several specifically designed synthetic datasets have shown that the proposed method is able
to effectively learn from multiple unspecified viewpoints.

Figure 1: Humans are able to perceive visual scenes compositionally, while maintaining object constancy across different viewpoints (indexes of objects are arbitrarily chosen).
In addition, humans have the ability to achieve the socalled “object constancy” in visual perception, i.e., recognizing the same object from different viewpoints (Turnbull, Carey, and McCarthy 1997), possibly because of the
mechanisms such as performing mental rotation (Shepard
and Metzler 1971) or representing objects in a viewpointindependent way (Marr 1982). When observing a multiobject scene from multiple viewpoints, humans are able to
separate different objects from one another, and identify the
same one from different viewpoints. As shown in Figure 1,
given three images of the same visual scene observed from
different viewpoints (column 1), humans are capable of decomposing each image into complete objects (columns 2-5)
and background (column 6) that are consistent across viewpoints, even though the viewpoints are unknown, the poses
of the same object may be significantly different across
viewpoints, and some objects may be partially (object 2 in
viewpoint 1) or even completely (object 3 in viewpoint 3)
occluded. Observing visual scenes from multiple viewpoints
gives humans a better understanding of the scenes, and it
is intriguing to design compositional scene representation
methods that are able to achieve object constancy and effectively learn from multiple viewpoints like humans.
In recent years, a variety of deep generative models have
been proposed to learn compositional representations without object-level supervision. Most methods, such as AIR
(Eslami et al. 2016), N-EM (Greff, van Steenkiste, and
Schmidhuber 2017), MONet (Burgess et al. 2019), IODINE

Introduction
Vision is an important way for humans to acquire knowledge
about the world. Due to the diverse combinations of objects
and background that constitute visual scenes, it is hard to
model the whole scene directly. In the process of learning
from the world, humans are able to develop the concept of
object (Johnson 2010), and is thus capable of perceiving visual scenes compositionally, which in turn leads to more efficient learning compared with perceiving the entire scene
as a whole (Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988). Compositionality is
one of the fundamental ingredients for building artificial intelligence systems that learn efficiently and effectively like
humans (Lake et al. 2017). Therefore, instead of learning
a single representation for the entire visual scene, it is desirable to build compositional scene representation models
which learn object-centric representations (i.e., learn separate representations for different objects and background),
so that the combinational property can be better captured.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8971

