The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dual Task Framework for Improving Persona-Grounded Dialogue Dataset
Minju Kim* 1 , Beong-woo Kwak∗1 , Youngwook Kim1 , Hong-in Lee1
Seung-won Hwang2 and Jinyoung Yeo†1
2

1
Yonsei University
Seoul National University

PRIMARY TASK
Persona-Chat

Abstract
This paper introduces a simple yet effective data-centric approach for the task of improving persona-conditioned dialogue agents. Prior model-centric approaches unquestioningly depend on the raw crowdsourced benchmark datasets
such as Persona-Chat. In contrast, we aim to fix annotation artifacts in benchmarking, which is orthogonally applicable to
any dialogue model. Specifically, we augment relevant personas to improve dialogue dataset/agent, by leveraging the
primal-dual structure of the two tasks, predicting dialogue
responses and personas based on each other. Experiments
on Persona-Chat show that our approach outperforms pretrained LMs by an 11.7 point gain in terms of accuracy.

Dialogue history

Personas

What do you do?

I am a doctor
I don’t eat meat

I am a doctor.

New Persona

I work at hospital

Do you like meat?
New Response

𝑓𝜃

I don’t eat any meat.

I am vegan

Query
Augment

I work at hospital

𝑔𝜃

𝑢𝑡
I am vegan
PKB

Debiased personas

DUAL TASK
Persona-Link

Introduction
In personalized dialogue agents, persona grounding has
been a long-standing goal to improve both human-likeness
and dialogue consistency. For example, when given a profile description such as “I am a doctor.” and “I don’t
eat meat”, dialogue agents aim to plausibly respond to dialogue context while endowing the machine with the persona,
e.g., “I am now working at hospital” and “I went vegan.”
respectively. To learn and evaluate such grounding, recent
research (Kim, Kim, and Kim 2020; Li et al. 2020; Song
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019) has proposed to encode personas based on pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2019), and
many persona-conditioned dialogue benchmarks have been
released such as Persona-Chat (Zhang et al. 2018), where
crowdworkers role-play following the given description of
personas to populate dialogues.
In spite of such recent significant progress, we argue that
there is much room for improving persona-grounded dialogue agents in the data-centric view. Specifically, as crowdworkers often miss out on stating detailed experience and
knowledge, it is reported that several linguistic biases exist in the persona-grounded dialogue datasets, for example,
crowdworkers tend to reuse some terms of persona descriptions to script dialogue utterances, e.g., “I am a doctor.”,
in which words trivially overlap to a persona sentence, or

Figure 1: Illustration of the primal-dual task pipeline

merely script utterances as a paraphrase, e.g., “I work as a
doctor.” or “I don’t eat any meat.”.
Such annotation artifacts can be a bottleneck for learning to ground more engaging utterances and adversarially
learning not to make contradictory utterances to personas.
In practice, dialogue agents hardly respond in an engaging
manner, e.g., “I am now working at hospital.”, loosening
the linguistic ties from the given persona (Ghazarian et al.
2021). Also, on a challenging question such as “Are you vegan?” and “Do you like steak?”, dialogue agents may violate
consistency (Welleck et al. 2018), e.g., responding “No” and
“Yes” respectively. A straightforward way to mitigate these
phenomena is to manually fix the dataset with additional annotation costs (Bowman and Dahl 2021), by asking another
crowdworkers to rewrite/augment the dialogue utterances,
but it is too expensive on a large scale.
As motivated above, in this work, we propose to automatically improve the persona-conditioned dialogue dataset
to learn better persona-grounded dialogue agents. As illustrated in Figure 1, our key idea is to infer and add new personas from a dialogue, e.g., “I am a doctor.” 7→ I work at
hospital or “I don’t eat any meat.” 7→ I am vegan. For
that, we present a novel dual task framework, where the primal task Persona-Chat is learning persona-conditioned dialogue models (i.e., predicting utterances based on persona),

* The authors contribute equally to this paper.
†

Corresponding author (Email: jinyeo@yonsei.ac.kr)
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10912

