The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The SoftCumulative Constraint with Quadratic Penalty
Yanick Ouellet, Claude-Guy Quimper
Université Laval, Québec, Canada
yanick.ouellet.2@ulaval.ca, claude-guy.quimper@ift.ulaval.ca

Abstract

clause generation solvers in Section 6. Section 7 shows how
relevant our algorithms are in practice before concluding.

The C UMULATIVE constraint greatly contributes to the success of constraint programming at solving scheduling problems. S OFT C UMULATIVE, a version of the C UMULATIVE
constraint where overloading the resource incurs a penalty
is, however, less studied. We introduce a checker and a filtering algorithm for S OFT C UMULATIVE, which are inspired
by the energetic reasoning rule for the C UMULATIVE. Both
algorithms can be used with a classic linear penalty function,
but also with a quadratic penalty function, where the penalty
of overloading the resource increases quadratically with the
amount of the overload. We show that these algorithms are
more general than existing algorithms and outperform a decomposition of S OFT C UMULATIVE in practice.

1

2

Background

Scheduling
Consider a set I of n tasks. Each task i ∈ I has to be executed between its earliest starting time esti and its latest
completion time lcti and has for processing time pi . During its execution, the task requires hi units of a resource
at each time point. Let a task i be represented by the tuple hesti , lcti , pi , hi i. From these parameters, it is possible
to compute the earliest completion time ecti = esti +pi and
the latest starting time lsti = lcti −pi of a task i. The energy ei = pi · hi represents the total amount of resource consumed during the execution of the task. The earliest starting
time estΩ = mini∈Ω (esti ) of the set of tasks Ω ⊆ I is the
earliest time point at which any task in Ω can start. Similarly,
the latest completion time lctΩ = maxi∈Ω (lcti ) of Ω is the
latest time point at which any task in Ω can end.
A task i has a compulsory part in the interval [lsti , ecti )
if lsti < ecti . The task must necessarily execute during its
compulsory part since it cannot start later than its latest starting time and cannot end before its earliest completion time.
Using constraint programming, one can use the C U MULATIVE ( ~
S, p~, ~h, C) constraint (Aggoun and Beldiceanu
1993) to enforce that, at any time point, the resource consumption of the tasks in execution is less than or equal to
the capacity C of a resource. The constraint uses one starting
time variable Si ∈ [esti , lsti ] for each task i in the problem,
as well as parameters for their processing times, heights, and
the capacity of the resource.
Deciding whether the C UMULATIVE constraint can be
satisfied is NP-Complete (Aggoun and Beldiceanu 1993).
Filtering algorithms for the constraint can neither enforce
domain or bounds consistency in polynomial time. Instead,
it is necessary to rely on detection and filtering rules that
work on a relaxation of the constraint. Many such rules have
been introduced over the years. Rules relevant to this paper are presented below. Some rules have faster algorithms
to apply them while others are slower but produce stronger
inconsistency detection and filtering.
The Time-Tabling rule (1) (Beldiceanu and Carlsson
2002) uses a reasoning based on the compulsory parts of the

Introduction

Scheduling problems where tasks share a finite amount of
resources are everywhere in the industry. For instance, a university might want to schedule courses in classrooms or a
factory might need to plan its production to minimize the
peak in the power usage of its machines. The constraint programming community invested significant efforts in developing the C UMULATIVE constraint to help solve problems
where the capacity of a resource can never be overloaded.
However, a less studied but as important problem is to allow
the resource to be overloaded in exchange of a penalty. For
instance, a pharmaceutical company could ask its workers
to work overtime to ensure that enough doses of a COVID
vaccine are produced before a deadline.
We present a checker and a filtering algorithm for the
S OFT C UMULATIVE constraint, a generalization of the well
known C UMULATIVE that allows resource overloads. Our
algorithms are based on the energetic reasoning rule used
by C UMULATIVE. The algorithms work for both linear and
quadratic penalty functions. To the best of our knowledge, a
quadratic penalty function cannot currently be modelled by
using an existing global constraint.
Section 2 presents a background from the literature. We
introduce our version of S OFT C UMULATIVE (Section 3),
present our checker (Section 4) and filtering (Section 5) algorithms. We explain how to use our algorithms with lazy
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3813

