The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Regularizing End-to-End Speech Translation with Triangular
Decomposition Agreement
Yichao Du1 , Zhirui Zhang2 , Weizhi Wang3 , Boxing Chen2 , Jun Xie2 and Tong Xu1 *
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba DAMO Academy 3 Rutgers University, New Brunswick, USA
1
duyichao@mail.ustc.edu.cn 1 tongxu@ustc.edu.cn
2
{zhirui.zzr, boxing.cbx, qingjing.xj}@alibaba-inc.com 3 weizhi.wang@rutgers.edu
Transcription z in English

Abstract

<2en> I like dogs!
ASR

End-to-end speech-to-text translation (E2E-ST) is becoming
increasingly popular due to the potential of its less error propagation, lower latency, and fewer parameters. Given the triplet
training corpus ⟨speech, transcription, translation⟩, the
conventional high-quality E2E-ST system leverages the
⟨speech, transcription⟩ pair to pre-train the model and
then utilizes the ⟨speech, translation⟩ pair to optimize it
further. However, this process only involves two-tuple data
at each stage, and this loose coupling fails to fully exploit
the association between triplet data. In this paper, we attempt
to model the joint probability of transcription and translation
based on the speech input to directly leverage such triplet
data. Based on that, we propose a novel regularization method
for model training to improve the agreement of dual-path decomposition within triplet data, which should be equal in theory. To achieve this goal, we introduce two Kullback-Leibler
divergence regularization terms into the model training objective to reduce the mismatch between output probabilities of
dual-path. Then the well-trained model can be naturally transformed as the E2E-ST models by the pre-defined early stop
tag. Experiments on the MuST-C benchmark demonstrate that
our proposed approach significantly outperforms state-of-theart E2E-ST baselines on all 8 language pairs, while achieving
better performance in the automatic speech recognition task.

BT

BT

ST

Triangular Decomposition Agreement
Speech Input
MT
ST

MT

ASR

<2de> Ich mag hunde!

Translation y in German

Figure 1: A training exemplar of English-to-German speechto-text task based on triangular decomposition. We can follow ASR-MT (in blue line) and ST-BT (in red line) decoding paths respectively to model the joint probability of transcription and translation given the speech input. According
to the chain decomposition rule, the probability distribution
of these two ways is equivalent.

intermediate transcriptions. Thus, various techniques have
been proposed to ease the training process by using source
transcriptions, including pre-training (Bansal et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2020b,c), multi-task learning (Anastasopoulos
and Chiang 2018; Sperber et al. 2019), meta-learning (Indurthi et al. 2020), consecutive decoding (Dong et al.
2021a), and interactive decoding (Liu et al. 2020). Among
them, the pre-training strategy is a simple yet effective
way, which is widely used to build the high-quality E2EST system in practice. Specifically, given the triplet training dataset ⟨speech, transcription, translation⟩, the pretraining method first leverages the ⟨speech, transcription⟩
pair to pre-train the E2E-ST model via ASR and then further fine-tunes it with the ⟨speech, translation⟩ pair. However, these methods only utilize two-tuple data at each stage,
failing to fully explore the association relationship in triplet
data. Therefore, how to fully mine the associations between
the triplet data still remains a crucial issue to improve the
performance of the E2E-ST model.
In this paper, we attempt to directly learn the joint probability of transcription and translation by a single unified
encoder-decoder model and successive decoding to involve
the whole triplet data. Actually, as shown in Figure 1, there
are two different paths in the decoding process to fit this
joint probability according to the triangular decomposition:
(a) The speech signal x is first converted into source tran-

Introduction
Speech-to-text translation (ST) processes speech signals in a
source language and generates the text in a target language.
Traditional ST approaches cascade automatic speech recognition (ASR) and machine translation (MT) (Ney 1999;
Sperber et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019a; Iranzo-Sánchez et al.
2020). With the rapid development of deep learning, the neural networks which are widely used in ASR and MT have
been adapted to construct a new end-to-end speech-to-text
translation (E2E-ST) paradigm (Liu et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020b; Dong et al. 2021b). This approach aims to overcome
known limitations of the cascade one and learns a single unified encoder-decoder model, which is easier to deploy, has
lower latency and has less error propagation.
Despite the potential benefits, it is very challenging to
develop a well-trained E2E-ST model that does not use
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10590

