The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Modal Federated Human Activity Recognition via Modality-Agnostic and
Modality-Specific Representation Learning
Xiaoshan Yang1,3,4 , Baochen Xiong2,4 , Yi Huang1,3 , Changsheng Xu1,3,4 *
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Zhengzhou University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
Abstract

In this paper, we propose a new task of cross-modal federated human activity recognition (CMF-HAR), which is conducive to promote the large-scale use of the HAR model on
more local devices. To address the new task, we propose a
feature-disentangled activity recognition network (FDARN),
which has five important modules of altruistic encoder, egocentric encoder, shared activity classifier, private activity classifier and modality discriminator. The altruistic encoder aims
to collaboratively embed local instances on different clients
into a modality-agnostic feature subspace. The egocentric encoder aims to produce modality-specific features that cannot
be shared across clients with different modalities. The modality discriminator is used to adversarially guide the parameter
learning of the altruistic and egocentric encoders. Through
decentralized optimization with a spherical modality discriminative loss, our model can not only generalize well across
different clients by leveraging the modality-agnostic features
but also capture the modality-specific discriminative characteristics of each client. Extensive experiment results on four
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed CMF-HAR task.
the first federated learning (FL) algorithm, FedAvg, which
can aggregate the gradients of models independently learned
from different local clients to establish a global model. Afterwards, the FedAvg has also been successfully applied to
HAR (Sozinov, Vlassov, and Girdzijauskas 2018). As an improvement, Li et al. (2021a) propose to leverage meta learning to learn an embedding network for addressing the heterogeneity in both label and sample distributions.
Although existing FL-based HAR methods (Sozinov,
Vlassov, and Girdzijauskas 2018; Ek et al. 2020; Jain et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021a) have achieved important progress,
they only consider the case where the local data of different clients are from the same modality. e.g., sensor signals.
It is still questionable whether existing FL methods can be
directly used in a more common scenario where local data
are from different modalities, e.g., some local clients may
provide sensor signals while others can only provide visual
data. We believe that this scenario deserves more attention
because it is conducive to distributively learn or apply the
HAR model on more local devices. Therefore, in this paper,
we propose a new task of cross-modal federated human
activity recognition (CMF-HAR), which focuses on distributively aggregating local models learned on clients with
different modalities as shown in Figure 1.
Compared with conventional FL, the CMF-HAR task
has at least two more challenges. (1) How to collaboratively build a common feature subspace for different clients
that have cross-modal heterogeneity. In conventional FLbased HAR (Sozinov, Vlassov, and Girdzijauskas 2018; Li
et al. 2021a), local data are collected from the same type
of sensor and the heterogeneity in sample distributions is

Introduction
Human activity recognition (HAR) aims at identifying the
types of activities performed by humans based on information received from different devices, e.g., cameras and
motion sensors. It has attracted increasing attention due to
its promising application in many fields, such as security
monitoring, health management and smart home. Nowadays, the popular use of mobile phones and smart bracelets
makes it much easier to collect video and sensor data,
which has significantly inspired the research on visionbased (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Song et al. 2016a),
sensor-based (Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele 2014) and multimodal (Nakamura et al. 2017; Possas, Pinto-Caceres, and
Ramos 2018) activity recognition approaches.
Most existing HAR methods assume that all data samples collected from local devices should be uniformly stored
and processed on a central server, which may lead to the
leakage of private user information. To avoid uploading local data to central servers, McMahan et al. (2017) propose
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3063

