The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Metric Distortion of Multiwinner Voting
Ioannis Caragiannis,1 Nisarg Shah,2 Alexandros A. Voudouris3
1
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
3
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex
iannis@cs.au.dk, nisarg@cs.toronto.edu, alexandros.voudouris@essex.ac.uk
2

Abstract

welfare (the total utility of the agents). Under minimal assumptions, this framework offers a quantitative comparison
of voting rules. It has been used successfully to analyze the
distortion of well-known methods (Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011) and to identify voting rules with optimal distortion (Boutilier et al. 2015). The framework has also been extended to multiwinner voting (Caragiannis et al. 2017) and
participatory budgeting (Benadè et al. 2017), under the assumption that the utility of an agent for a set of alternatives is
the maximum and the sum of her utilities for the alternatives
in the set, respectively.
Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl (2015) built on this
idea to propose the metric distortion framework, in which
agents and alternatives are embedded in an underlying metric space, and the cost of an agent for an alternative is the
distance between them. An agent still ranks the alternatives,
but now in a non-decreasing order of their distance from her.
Instead of maximizing the social welfare, the goal is now to
minimize the social cost (the total cost of the agents). Like in
the utilitarian case, scholars have analyzed the metric distortion of prominent voting rules (Skowron and Elkind 2017;
Goel, Krishnaswamy, and Munagala 2017; Munagala and
Wang 2019; Kempe 2020a) and identified rules with optimal metric distortion (Gkatzelis, Halpern, and Shah 2020).
For a detailed overview, we refer the reader to the survey by
Anshelevich et al. (2021).
The goal of our work is to extend the metric distortion
framework to multiwinner voting, where the objective is
to select a subset of k alternatives (committee) for a given
k > 1. To the best of our knowledge, the only prior works
to address multiwinner voting with general metric costs are
those of Goel, Hulett, and Krishnaswamy (2018) and Chen,
Li, and Wang (2020). Both focus on a model in which an
agent’s cost for a committee is the sum of her distances to
the alternatives in the committee. In a sense, this assumes
that an agent cares equally about all the alternatives chosen
in the committee.
However, in many applications, an agent may care only
about a few alternatives in the committee, typically the ones
she prefers more. For example, when parliament members
are chosen in a political election, each voter may associate
with just one (or a few) of the elected candidates as her representative(s). Similarly, if a city builds parks at multiple locations, each resident may only be able to access a few parks

We extend the recently introduced framework of metric distortion to multiwinner voting. In this framework, n agents and
m alternatives are located in an underlying metric space. The
exact distances between agents and alternatives are unknown.
Instead, each agent provides a ranking of the alternatives, ordered from the closest to the farthest. Typically, the goal is to
select a single alternative that approximately minimizes the
total distance from the agents, and the worst-case approximation ratio is termed distortion. In the case of multiwinner voting, the goal is to select a committee of k alternatives that (approximately) minimizes the total cost to all agents. We consider the scenario where the cost of an agent for a committee
is her distance from the q-th closest alternative in the committee. We reveal a surprising trichotomy on the distortion of
multiwinner voting rules in terms of k and q: The distortion
is unbounded when q ⩽ k/3, asymptotically linear in the
number of agents when k/3 < q ⩽ k/2, and constant when
q > k/2.

Introduction
The most canonical problem in voting theory is to aggregate ranked preferences of n individual agents over a set of
m alternatives to reach a collective decision. Examples of
such decisions include selecting a single alternative (singlewinner voting), selecting k out of m alternatives for a fixed
k > 1 (multiwinner voting), and selecting a set of costly alternatives subject to a budget constraint (participatory budgeting). In centuries of research on voting, perhaps the most
prominent approach to designing voting rules has been the
axiomatic approach, in which one fixes several qualitative
axioms and seeks voting rules satisfying them. Unfortunately, this approach has often led to impossibility results,
such as Arrow’s impossibility theorem (Arrow 1951).
To circumvent this, Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006)
proposed the (utilitarian) distortion framework for analyzing, comparing, and designing single-winner voting rules.
Under this framework, the ordinal preferences expressed
by agents are viewed as proxies for their underlying cardinal utilities, and the goal of a voting rule is to optimize
the worst-case approximation ratio (distortion) of the social
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4900

