The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Temporal Video Grounding with Deep Semantic Clustering
†

†

†

Daizong Liu1,2 , Xiaoye Qu2 , Yinzhen Wang3 , Xing Di4 , Kai Zou4 , Yu Cheng5 ,
Zichuan Xu6 , Pan Zhou1*
1

The Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Electronic Information and Communication, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
ProtagoLabs Inc 5 Microsoft Research 6 Dalian University of Technology
{dzliu, xiaoye, yinzhenwang, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, {xing.di, kz}@protagolabs.com,
yu.cheng@microsoft.com, z.xu@dlut.edu.cn
Query: She begins to play with her hair, separating part of it and braiding it.
Abstract

Temporal video grounding (TVG) aims to localize a target
segment in a video according to a given sentence query.
Though respectable works have made decent achievements in
this task, they severely rely on abundant video-query paired
data, which is expensive and time-consuming to collect in
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we explore whether a
video grounding model can be learned without any paired annotations. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first
work trying to address TVG in an unsupervised setting. Considering there is no paired supervision, we propose a novel
Deep Semantic Clustering Network (DSCNet) to leverage all
semantic information from the whole query set to compose
the possible activity in each video for grounding. Specifically,
we first develop a language semantic mining module, which
extracts implicit semantic features from the whole query set.
Then, these language semantic features serve as the guidance
to compose the activity in video via a video-based semantic
aggregation module. Finally, we utilize a foreground attention branch to filter out the redundant background activities
and refine the grounding results. To validate the effectiveness of our DSCNet, we conduct experiments on both ActivityNet Captions and Charades-STA datasets. The results
demonstrate that DSCNet achieves competitive performance,
and even outperforms most weakly-supervised approaches.

Annotations

30.71s

72.05s

(a) An example of temporal video grounding
Fully-supervised

Weakly-supervised

Unsupervised

Segments

Videos

Videos

Videos

Queries

Queries

Queries

Training Process

(b) Different settings in temporal video grounding

Figure 1: (a) An example of temporal video grounding. (b)
Different from the fully-supervised (paired video-query and
detailed segment annotations) and weakly-supervised (only
paired video-query knowledge) settings in TVG, there is no
supervised information in unsupervised setting.
the best candidate. Others (Chen et al. 2019; Mun, Cho, and
Han 2020; Zeng et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020) directly predict the temporal boundary of the video segment. However,
these methods are data-hungry, requiring a large amount of
fully annotated data. For instance, the widely used ActivityNet Captions dataset contains 20,000 videos and 100,000
matched sentence queries with their corresponding segment
boundaries. Manually annotating such a huge amount of data
is very time-consuming and labor-intensive. To alleviate this
problem, recent works explore a weakly-supervised setting
(Bojanowski et al. 2015; Mithun, Paul, and Roy-Chowdhury
2019; Song et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020b) where only
paired videos and queries are available in the training stage.
Though they leave out the segment annotations in training,
these methods still need to access the abundant knowledge
of the matched video-query pairs.
In this paper, we focus on how to learn a video grounding
model without any supervision, which excludes both paired
video-query knowledge and corresponding segment annotations, as shown in Figure 1 (b). Considering there is no annotated information, what we can access to is only the internal
information in the queries and videos. As different words or

Introduction
Temporal video grounding (TVG) is an important yet challenging task in video understanding, which has drawn increasing attention due to its vast potential applications, such
as activity detection (Zhao et al. 2017) and human-computer
interaction (Singha, Roy, and Laskar 2018). As depicted in
Figure 1 (a), it aims to localize a segment in a video according to the semantic of a sentence query.
Most previous methods (Wang, Ma, and Jiang 2020a; Liu
et al. 2021b; Zhang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020b; Wang, Ma,
and Jiang 2020b; Chen et al. 2020) proposed for this task
are under fully-supervised setting. Some of them (Liu et al.
2021b; Zhang et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2020b) match the predefined segment proposals with the query and then select
†

Equal contributions. *Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1683

