The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

When Shift Operation Meets Vision Transformer:
An Extremely Simple Alternative to Attention Mechanism
Guangting Wang1 * , Yucheng Zhao1 * , Chuanxin Tang2 * , Chong Luo2 , Wenjun Zeng2
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{flylight, lnc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {chutan, cluo}@microsoft.com, zengw2011@hotmail.com

Abstract
Attention mechanism has been widely believed as the key
to success of vision transformers (ViTs), since it provides
a flexible and powerful way to model spatial relationships.
However, is the attention mechanism truly an indispensable
part of ViT? Can it be replaced by some other alternatives?
To demystify the role of attention mechanism, we simplify
it into an extremely simple case: ZERO FLOP and ZERO
parameter. Concretely, we revisit the shift operation. It does
not contain any parameter or arithmetic calculation. The only
operation is to exchange a small portion of the channels
between neighboring features. Based on this simple operation, we construct a new backbone network, namely ShiftViT,
where the attention layers in ViT are substituted by shift operations. Surprisingly, ShiftViT works quite well in several
mainstream tasks, e.g., classification, detection, and segmentation. The performance is on par with or even better than
the strong baseline Swin Transformer. These results suggest
that the attention mechanism might not be the vital factor that
makes ViT successful. It can be even replaced by a zeroparameter operation. We should pay more attentions to the
remaining parts of ViT in the future work. Code is available
at github.com/microsoft/SPACH.

Attention

Feed-forward
network

(a) Standard attention building block.

Shift

Height

Width

Feed-forward
network

Shift

Channel

(b) Our shift building block.

Figure 1: An illustration of our shift building block. We propose to replace the attention layer with a simple shift operation in vision transformers. It spatially shifts a small portion of the channels along four directions, and the rest of the
channels remain unchanged.

Introduction
Designing backbone networks plays a fundamental role
in computer vision. Since the revolutionary progress of
AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), convolution neural networks (CNNs) have dominated this area
for nearly 10 years. However, the recently developed Vision
Transformers (ViTs) have shown potential to challenge this
throne. The advantage of ViT was first demonstrated in image classification task (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), where the
ViT backbone outperforms its CNN counterparts by a remarkable margin. Thanks to the promising results, the flourish of ViT variants rapidly broadcasts to many other computer vision tasks, such as object detection, semantic segmentation, and action recognition.
Despite the impressive performances of recent ViT variants, it is still not yet clear what makes ViT good for vi-

sual recognition tasks. Some conventional wisdom leans to
credit the success to the attention mechanism, since it provides a flexible and powerful way to model spatial relationships. Concretely, the attention mechanism leverages a selfattention matrix to aggregate features from arbitrary locations. Compared with the convolution operation in CNN, it
has two significant strengths. First, this mechanism opens a
possibility to simultaneously capture both short- and longranged dependencies, and get rid of the local restriction of
the convolution. Second, the interaction between two spatial
locations dynamically depends on their own features, rather
than a fixed convolutional kernel. Due to such good properties, some pieces of work believe it is the attention mechanism that facilitates the powerful expressive ability of ViTs.
However, are these two advantages truly the key to success? The answer is probably NOT. Some existing work
proves that, even without these properties, the ViT variants
can still work well. For the first one, the fully-global dependencies may not be inevitable. More and more ViTs intro-

* These authors contributed equally.
†
This work was done during the internship of Guangting and
Yucheng at MSRA
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2423

