The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Efficient Combinatorial Optimization Model Using Learning-to-Rank
Distillation
Honguk Woo1 * , Hyunsung Lee2 † , Sangwoo Cho1 †
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Kakao Corporation
hwoo@skku.edu, iggy.ll@kakaocorp.com, jsw7460@skku.edu

Abstract

learning-based COP approaches, it is challenging to build
a training dataset with optimal labels, because many COPs
are computationally infeasible to find exact solutions. Reinforcement learning (RL) is considered viable for such problems as neural architecture search (Zoph and Le 2017), device placement (Mirhoseini et al. 2017), games (Silver et al.
2017) where collecting supervised labels is expensive or infeasible.
As the RL action space of COPs can be intractably large
(e.g., 100! possible solutions for ranking 100-items), it is
undesirable to use a single probability distribution on the
whole action space. Thus, a sequential structure, in which a
probability distribution of an item to be selected next is iteratively calculated to represent a one-step action, becomes
a feasible mechanism to establish RL-based COP solvers,
as have been recently studied in (Bello et al. 2017; Vinyals
et al. 2019). The sequential structure is effective to produce
a permutation comparable to optimal solutions, but it often
suffers from long inference time due to its iterative nature.
Therefore, it is not suitable to apply these approaches to the
field of mission critical applications with strict service level
objectives and time constraints. For example, task placement
in SoC devices necessitates fast inferences in a few milliseconds, but the inferences by a complex model with sequential
processing often take a few seconds, so it is rarely feasible to
employ deep learning-based task placement in SoC (YkmanCouvreur et al. 2006; Shojaei et al. 2009).
In this paper, we present RLRD, an RL-to-rank distillation framework to address COPs, which enables the lowlatency inference in online system environments. To do so,
we develop a novel ranking distillation method and focus on
two COPs where each problem instance can be treated as
establishing the optimal policy about ranking items or making priority orders. Specifically, we employ a differentiable
relaxation scheme for sorting and ranking operations (Blondel et al. 2020) to expedite direct optimization of ranking
objectives. It is combined with a problem-specific objective to formulate a distillation loss that corrects the rankings
of input items, thus enabling the robust distillation of the
ranking policy from sequential RL to a non-iterative, scorebased ranking model. Furthermore, we explore the efficient
sampling technique with Gumbel trick (Jang, Gu, and Poole
2017; Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2020) on the scores generated by the distilled model to expedite the generation of

Recently, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has proven its
feasibility in solving combinatorial optimization problems
(COPs). The learning-to-rank techniques have been studied
in the field of information retrieval. While several COPs can
be formulated as the prioritization of input items, as is common in the information retrieval, it has not been fully explored how the learning-to-rank techniques can be incorporated into deep RL for COPs. In this paper, we present the
learning-to-rank distillation-based COP framework, where a
high-performance ranking policy obtained by RL for a COP
can be distilled into a non-iterative, simple model, thereby
achieving a low-latency COP solver. Specifically, we employ
the approximated ranking distillation to render a score-based
ranking model learnable via gradient descent. Furthermore,
we use the efficient sequence sampling to improve the inference performance with a limited delay. With the framework,
we demonstrate that a distilled model not only achieves comparable performance to its respective, high-performance RL,
but also provides several times faster inferences. We evaluate the framework with several COPs such as priority-based
task scheduling and multidimensional knapsack, demonstrating the benefits of the framework in terms of inference latency
and performance.

Introduction
In the field of computer science, it is considered challenging
to tackle combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) that
are computationally intractable. While numerous heuristic approaches have been studied to provide polynomialtime solutions, they often require in-depth knowledge
on problem-specific features and customization upon the
changes of problem conditions. Furthermore, several heuristic approaches such as branching (Chu and Beasley 1998)
and tabu-search (Glover 1989) to solving COPs explore
combinatorial search spaces extensively, and thus render
themselves limited in large scale problems.
Recently, deep learning techniques have proven their feasibility in addressing COPs, e.g., routing optimization (Kool,
van Hoof, and Welling 2019), task scheduling (Lee et al.
2020), and knapsack problem (Gu and Hao 2018). For deep
* Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.
†

Lead authors, equally contributed.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8666

