The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Pairwise Weights for Temporal Credit Assignment
Zeyu Zheng1 * , Risto Vuorio2 * , Richard Lewis1 , Satinder Singh1
1

University of Michigan
2
University of Oxford
zeyu@umich.edu, risto.vuorio@cs.ox.ac.uk, rickl@umich.edu, baveja@umich.edu

Abstract

It is important, however, to also note that this heuristic has
not in any way shown to be the “optimal” way for TCA. In
particular, in the umbrella problem the action of taking the
umbrella on a cloudy morning will be assigned credit for
the rewards achieved during the workday early on in learning and it is only after a lot of learning that this effect will
diminish. Nevertheless, the recency and frequency heuristic
has been adopted in most modern RL algorithms because it
is so simple to implement, with just one hyperparameter, and
because it has been shown to allow for asymptotic convergence to the true value function under certain circumstances.

How much credit (or blame) should an action taken in a
state get for a future reward? This is the fundamental temporal credit assignment problem in Reinforcement Learning
(RL). One of the earliest and still most widely used heuristics
is to assign this credit based on a scalar coefficient, lambda
(treated as a hyperparameter), raised to the power of the time
interval between the state-action and the reward. In this empirical paper, we explore heuristics based on more general
pairwise weightings that are functions of the state in which
the action was taken, the state at the time of the reward, as
well as the time interval between the two. Of course it isn’t
clear what these pairwise weight functions should be, and
because they are too complex to be treated as hyperparameters we develop a metagradient procedure for learning these
weight functions during the usual RL training of a policy.
Our empirical work shows that it is often possible to learn
these pairwise weight functions during learning of the policy
to achieve better performance than competing approaches.

1

In this empirical paper, we present two new families of
algorithms for addressing TCA: one that generalises TD(λ)
and a second that generalises a Monte-Carlo algorithm.
Specifically, our generalisation introduces pairwise weightings that are functions of the state in which the action was
taken, the state at the time of the reward, and the time interval between the two. Of course, it isn’t clear what this
pairwise weight function should be, and it is too complex to
be treated as a hyperparameter (in contrast to the scalar λ
in TD(λ)). We develop a metagradient approach to learning
the pairwise weight function at the same time as learning the
policy of the agent. Like other metagradient algorithms, our
algorithm has two loops: an outer loop that periodically updates the pairwise weight function in order to optimize the
usual RL loss (policy gradient loss in our case) and an inner loop where the policy parameters are updated using the
pairwise weight function set by the outer loop.

Introduction

The following umbrella problem (Osband et al. 2019) illustrates a fundamental challenge in most reinforcement learning (RL) problems, namely the temporal credit assignment
(TCA) problem. An RL agent takes an umbrella at the start
of a cloudy morning and experiences a long day at work
filled with various rewards uninfluenced by the umbrella,
before needing the umbrella in the rain on the way home.
The agent must learn to credit the take-umbrella action in
the cloudy-morning state with the very delayed reward at
the end of the day, while also learning to not credit the action with the many intervening rewards, despite their occurring much closer in time. More generally, the TCA problem is how much credit or blame should an action taken
in a state get for a future reward. One of the earliest and
still most widely used heuristics for TCA comes from the
celebrated TD(λ) (Sutton 1988) family of algorithms, and
assigns credit based on a scalar coefficient λ raised to the
power of the time interval between the state-action and the
reward. Note that this is a recency and frequency heuristic,
in that it assigns credit based on how recently and how frequently a state-action pair has occurred prior to the reward.

Our main contribution in this paper is a family of algorithms that contains within it the theoretically well understood TD(λ) and Monte-Carlo algorithms. We show that the
additional flexibility of our algorithms can yield benefit analytically in a simple illustrative example intended to build intuition and then empirically in more challenging TCA problems. A second contribution is the metagradient algorithm
to learn such the pairwise-weighting function that parameterises our family of algorithms. Our empirical work is
geared towards answering two questions: (1) Are the proposed pairwise weight functions able to outperform the best
choice of λ and other baselines? (2) Is our metagradient
algorithm able to learn the pairwise weight functions fast
enough to be worth the extra complexity they introduce?

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9225

