The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Context-Aware Transfer Attacks for Object Detection
Zikui Cai1 , Xinxin Xie2 , Shasha Li2 , Mingjun Yin2 , Chengyu Song2 ,
∗
Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy2 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1 , M. Salman Asif1
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Riverside
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California Riverside
{zcai032, xxie039, sli057, myin013}@ucr.edu, {csong, krish}@cs.ucr.edu, {amitrc, sasif}@ece.ucr.edu
2

Abstract

objects to enhance the holistic context consistency; these associated objects are called helper objects. The helpers are
selected based on the context graphs, which capture the cooccurrence relationships and relative location and size of objects in the image. The context graphs can be learned empirically from natural image datasets. The nodes of a context
graph are object classes, and each edge weight captures the
co-occurrence, relative distance, and size likelihood of one
object conditioned on the other. The intuition is that each
class is often associated with certain classes, and unlikely to
be associated with certain others.
Our interest lies in blackbox attacks where the perturbations generated for an image are effective on a variety of detectors that may not be known during the perturbation generation process. The conceptual idea of our proposed approach
is to generate perturbations with an ensemble of detectors
and subsequently test them on an unknown detector. Such
attacks are referred to as transfer attacks, and we refer to the
unknown detector we seek to fool as the victim blackbox
model. To achieve this goal, we propose a novel sequential strategy to generate these attacks. We sequentially add
perturbations to cause the modification of the labels of the
victim and helper objects, based on the co-occurrence object relation graph of the victim object. This strategy is the
first to use explicit context information of an image to generate a blackbox attack plan. Note that the sequential strategy
makes a small number of queries (2–6 in our experiments)
to the blackbox detector as new helper objects are added in
the attack plan. The blackbox detector provides hard labels
and locations of detected objects. We use this information
only as a stopping criterion for the attack generation, unlike
query-based approaches (Wang et al. 2020b) that often need
to use thousands of queries to estimate local gradients. The
framework is illustrated in Figure 1.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows.
• This is the first work that considers co-occurrence between different object classes in complex images with
multiple objects to generate transferable adversarial attacks on blackbox object detectors.
• We show how to generate context-aware attack plans
for targeted mis-categorization attacks. The attacks generated using context-aware attack plans provide significantly better transfer success rates on blackbox detectors
than those generated by methods that are agnostic to con-

Blackbox transfer attacks for image classifiers have been extensively studied in recent years. In contrast, little progress
has been made on transfer attacks for object detectors. Object detectors take a holistic view of the image and the detection of one object (or lack thereof) often depends on
other objects in the scene. This makes such detectors inherently context-aware and adversarial attacks in this space are
more challenging than those targeting image classifiers. In
this paper, we present a new approach to generate contextaware attacks for object detectors. We show that by using cooccurrence of objects and their relative locations and sizes
as context information, we can successfully generate targeted
mis-categorization attacks that achieve higher transfer success rates on blackbox object detectors than the state-of-theart. We test our approach on a variety of object detectors
with images from PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets
and demonstrate up to 20 percentage points improvement in
performance compared to the other state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Generating adversarial attacks (and defending against such
attacks) has recently gained a lot of attention. An overwhelming majority of work in these areas have considered
cases when images contain one predominant object (e.g.,
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) data), and the goal is to perturb
an image to change its label. In real-life situations, we usually encounter images with many objects. Object detectors
take a holistic view of the image and the detection of one object (or lack thereof) depends on other objects in the scene.
This is why object detectors are inherently context-aware
and adversarial attacks are more challenging than those targeting image classifiers (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Carlini
and Wagner 2017; Liu et al. 2017).
In this paper, we focus on the problem of generating
context-aware adversarial attacks on images to affect the
performance of object detectors. Our approach is to craft an
attack plan for each object, which not only perturbs a specific victim object to the target class, but also perturbs other
objects in the image to specific labels or inserts phantom
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

149

