The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Noise-Robust Learning from Multiple Unsupervised Sources of Inferred Labels
Amila Silva, Ling Luo, Shanika Karunasekera, Christopher Leckie
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Victoria, Australia
{amila.silva@student., ling.luo@, karus@, caleckie@}unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) generally require large-scale
datasets for training. Since manually obtaining clean labels
for large datasets is extremely expensive, unsupervised models based on domain-specific heuristics can be used to efficiently infer the labels for such datasets. However, the labels
from such inferred sources are typically noisy, which could
easily mislead and lessen the generalizability of DNNs. Most
approaches proposed in the literature to address this problem assume the label noise depends only on the true class
of an instance (i.e., class-conditional noise). However, this
assumption is not realistic for the inferred labels as they are
typically inferred based on the features of the instances. The
few recent attempts to model such instance-dependent (i.e.,
feature-dependent) noise require auxiliary information about
the label noise (e.g., noise rates or clean samples). This work
proposes a theoretically motivated framework to correct label
noise in the presence of multiple labels inferred from unsupervised models. The framework consists of two modules: (1)
M ULTI -IDNC, a novel approach to correct label noise that
is instance-dependent yet not class-conditional; (2) M ULTI CCNC, which extends an existing class-conditional noiserobust approach to yield improved class-conditional noise
correction using multiple noisy label sources. We conduct
experiments using nine real-world datasets for three different classification tasks (images, text and graph nodes). Our
results show that our approach achieves notable improvements (e.g., 6.4% in accuracy) against state-of-the-art baselines while dealing with both instance-dependent and classconditional noise in inferred label sources.

Figure 1: Examples of 8 (first row) and 3 (second row) in
MNIST. The label noise could depend on its actual class
labels (i.e., CCN) as there are semantically similar classes
(e.g., 8 and 3). It is not the only factor to determine label
noise as label noise could depend on the features of the instances (i.e., IDN) too – e.g., the last instance in each row.
bels from such unsupervised models are typically noisy. As
found by recent studies (Zhang et al. 2021; Reed et al. 2015),
DNNs can overfit the noise in such noisy labels, which substantially degrades their performance. As a result, learning
robust DNNs using noisy labels has recently become a critical problem attracting considerable research effort (Berthelot et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2018; Lyu et al.
2020; Yu et al. 2019). Nevertheless, almost all the existing
noisy-robust learning strategies do not focus on datasets with
multiple noisy inferred labels that are produced using multiple unsupervised models. The availability of multiple noisy
label sources could be useful to address several limitations
of the existing robust learning techniques based on one noisy
label source. This work aims to address this research gap by
proposing a noise-robust learning paradigm for DNNs using multiple sources of noisy inferred labels. Such a learning technique could be practically significant for ensembling
of multiple unsupervised label sources with a proper understanding of their noise, while alleviating the following limitations in existing noise-robust learning techniques.
First, most existing works (Liu et al. 2020; Menon et al.
2020; Ma et al. 2020; Patrini et al. 2017) assume that the
noise in the labels (i.e., the probability of flipping to a different label from actual label) are independent of input feature
given the actual class labels. However, the study in (Chen
et al. 2021) shows that noisy labels in real-world datasets do
not follow this assumption. This is because the instances of
the same class could have different label noise based on their
features as can be seen in Fig. 1. In this work, we decompose
the noise in inferred labels into two components: (1) classconditional noise (CCN), the noise component that is independent from input features given the actual class labels; (2)

Introduction
Motivation. DNNs have achieved remarkable success in
a wide range of applications. However, their performance
largely relies on the availability of large-scale labeled
datasets. Getting manual labels for large datasets is extremely expensive and time-consuming. As a solution, previous works (Niu et al. 2021; Silva et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2019; Veličković et al. 2019) propose various unsupervised
models based on domain-specific heuristics to label large
datasets in a time- and cost-effective manner. Such inferred labels generated without manual effort could be subsequently used to learn supervised DNNs. However, the laCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8315

