The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hybrid Instance-Aware Temporal Fusion for Online Video Instance Segmentation
Xiang Li, 1,2 * Jinglu Wang, 2 Xiao Li,2 Yan Lu 2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
xl6@andrew.cmu.edu, {jinglwa, xili11, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Reference Frame

Abstract

Code-to-Pixel Attention
K
Q

Recently, transformer-based image segmentation methods
have achieved notable success against previous solutions.
While for video domains, how to effectively model temporal
context with the attention of object instances across frames
remains an open problem. In this paper, we propose an online video instance segmentation framework with a novel
instance-aware temporal fusion method. We first leverage the
representation, i.e., a latent code in the global context (instance code) and CNN feature maps to represent instance- and
pixel-level features. Based on this representation, we introduce a cropping-free temporal fusion approach to model the
temporal consistency between video frames. Specifically, we
encode global instance-specific information in the instance
code and build up inter-frame contextual fusion with hybrid
attentions between the instance codes and CNN feature maps.
Inter-frame consistency between the instance codes is further
enforced with order constraints. By leveraging the learned
hybrid temporal consistency, we are able to directly retrieve
and maintain instance identities across frames, eliminating
the complicated frame-wise instance matching in prior methods. Extensive experiments have been conducted on popular VIS datasets, i.e. Youtube-VIS-19/21. Our model achieves
the best performance among all online VIS methods. Notably,
our model also eclipses all offline methods when using the
ResNet-50 backbone.

Feature Map
Instance Code
Target Frame

Code-to-Code Attention
K
Q

Instance Code

Pixel-to-Code Attention
K
Q

Feature Map

𝑡−1

𝑡−2

𝑡−3

Figure 1: Visualization of attention maps in inter-frame attention layers. The red and green colors in the instance code
and feature map indicate different instances. “Q” and “K”
represent the Query and Key operations respectively. All
queries come from the target frame and keys from reference
frames. We can find the attention responding on references
{t − 1, t − 2, t − 3} are consistent.
tion in modeling frame-to-frame (F2F) communications. We
focus on F2F communications for online VIS task.
Some online methods (Yang et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021b) model F2F communication only at pixel
level. Modeling higher level semantics including instanceaware information is limited and expensive. Other methods
(Li et al. 2021a; Gong et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2020) model F2F
communication at instance level by first cropping out RoI
features with detected boxes to obtain instance-level proxies and then associating or fusing such cropped features.
The F2F communication of box-based method heavily relies on the detection accuracy. Although sophisticated feature alignment can be employed, the F2F communication is
still incomplete and biased because the cropped instances
are isolated from the global context. All prior methods either model the F2F communication at solely pixel or instance level, while no joint communications at hybrid levels
are discussed.
In this work, we focus on improving online VIS by introducing novel hybrid instance-aware F2F communications.
Considering the limitation of box-based methods in video
frame communication, we build up our method based on
the state-of-the-art box-free image segmentation framework,

Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS), aiming at simultaneously classifying, segmenting, and tracking object instances,
attracts increasing attention recently due to boosting interest in video analysis. VIS methods are categorized into offline and online methods according to two kinds of inputs,
i.e., clip- and frame-wise inputs respectively. Offline methods obtain impressive accuracy thanks to modeling spatialtemporal correlation throughout the whole clip (Bertasius
and Torresani 2020; Athar et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b),
but they inevitably show limitations on real streaming applications. Online methods are more practical for streaming
applications, but their performance of existing methods are
far from that of offline methods because of their imperfec* This work was done when Xiang Li was an intern at MSRA.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1429

