The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Algorithmic Concept-Based Explainable Reasoning
Dobrik Georgiev1 , Pietro Barbiero1 , Dmitry Kazhdan1 , Petar Veličković2 , Pietro Liò1
1

University of Cambridge
2
DeepMind
{dgg30, pb737, dk525}@cam.ac.uk, petarv@deepmind.com, pl219@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

applications, such as healthcare. Furthermore, this lack of interpretability also makes it difficult to extract the knowledge
learned by such models, which prevents users from better
understanding the corresponding tasks (Adadi and Berrada
2018; Molnar 2020; Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017).
Recent work on Explainable AI (XAI) introduced a novel
type of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) explanation approach, referred to as concept-based explainability (Koh et al.
2020; Kazhdan et al. 2020b; Ghorbani et al. 2019; Kazhdan
et al. 2021). Concept-based explanation approaches provide
model explanations in terms of human-understandable units,
rather than individual features, pixels, or characters (e.g., the
concepts of a wheel and a door are important for the detection of cars) (Kazhdan et al. 2020b). In particular, work
on Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) relies on concepts
and introduces a novel type of interpretable-by-design CNN,
which perform input processing in two distinct steps: computing a set of concepts from an input, and then computing
the output label from the concepts (Koh et al. 2020).
In this paper, we apply the idea of CBMs to GNN models,
by introducing Concept Bottleneck Graph Neural Networks
(CBGNNs). In particular, we rely on the encode-processdecode paradigm (Hamrick et al. 2018), and apply concept
bottleneck layers before the output of GNN models – see Figure 1. By doing this we are able to extract update/termination
rules for the step updates of step-level combinatorial optimisation approaches (Veličković et al. 2020b,a; Deac et al.
2020; Strathmann et al. 2021).
Importantly, we show that by relying on a suitable set of
concepts and supervising on them, we are capable of deriving
the rules of classical algorithms such as breadth-first search
(Moore 1959), and Kruskal’s algorithm (Kruskal 1956), as
well as more advanced heuristics such as parallel graph coloring (Jones and Plassmann 1993). Furthermore, we present an
approach to utilise node-level concepts for extracting graphlevel rules. Our evaluation experiments demonstrate that all
of our extracted rules strongly generalise to graphs of 5×
larger size.
To summarise, we make the following contributions in this
work:

Recent research on graph neural network (GNN) models successfully applied GNNs to classical graph algorithms and
combinatorial optimisation problems. This has numerous benefits, such as allowing applications of algorithms when preconditions are not satisfied, or reusing learned models when
sufficient training data is not available or can’t be generated.
Unfortunately, a key hindrance of these approaches is their
lack of explainability, since GNNs are black-box models that
cannot be interpreted directly. In this work, we address this
limitation by applying existing work on concept-based explanations to GNN models. We introduce concept-bottleneck
GNNs, which rely on a modification to the GNN readout mechanism. Using three case studies we demonstrate that: (i) our
proposed model is capable of accurately learning concepts
and extracting propositional formulas based on the learned
concepts for each target class; (ii) our concept-based GNN
models achieve comparative performance with state-of-the-art
models; (iii) we can derive global graph concepts, without
explicitly providing any supervision on graph-level concepts.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have successfully been applied to problems involving data with irregular structure, such
as quantum chemistry (Gilmer et al. 2017), drug discovery
(Stokes et al. 2020), social networks (Pal et al. 2020) and
physics simulations (Battaglia et al. 2016). One of the latest
areas of GNN research focuses on using GNNs for emulation
of classical algorithms (Cappart et al. 2021). In particular,
this research explored applications of GNNs to iterative algorithms (Veličković et al. 2020b; Georgiev and Liò 2020),
pointer-based data structures (Veličković et al. 2020a; Strathmann et al. 2021), and even planning tasks (Deac et al. 2020).
Importantly, these works demonstrate that GNNs are capable
of strongly generalising to input graphs much larger than the
ones seen during training.
Unfortunately, in all of the aforementioned cases, these
state-of-the-art GNN models are black-boxes, whose behaviour cannot be understood/intepreted directly. In practice,
this can lead to a lack of trust in such models, making it challenging to apply and regulate these models in safety-critical

• Present Concept Bottleneck Graph Neural Networks
(CBGNN), a novel type of GNN relying on intermediate concept processing. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to apply concept bottleneck approaches

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6685

