The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Inference and Learning with Model Uncertainty
in Probabilistic Logic Programs
Victor Verreet,1,2 Vincent Derkinderen,1,2 Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires,1,2 Luc De Raedt 1,2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Belgium
2
Leuven.AI - KU Leuven Institute for AI, Belgium
3
Center for Applied Autonomous Systems, Örebro University, Sweden
{victor.verreet, vincent.derkinderen, pedro.zudo, luc.deraedt}@kuleuven.be
Abstract

not exactly defined. In contrast, BetaProbLog has a welldefined semantics rooted in probability theory. Second, although convex sets of distributions can suffice to make more
informed decisions, CS lacks the ability to calculate expectation values. With so-called second-order queries, BetaProbLog can calculate any expectation value, offering a
vast range of query types. Third, we provide an easy to interpret Monte Carlo inference algorithm for BetaProbLog
based on knowledge compilation (Darwiche and Marquis
2002) combined with parallelized tensor operations, implemented with PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2019). This leads to an
inference algorithm that is more than an order of magnitude
faster than the one proposed by Cerutti et al. (2019). Fourth,
we tackle (discriminative) parameter learning with epistemic
uncertainty. To our knowledge, learning in second-order networks has so far been limited to networks of only two
nodes (Kaplan et al. 2020). Our algorithm can handle networks of any size, by combining stochastic gradient descent
with sampling and the reparametrization trick (Kingma and
Welling 2014). We empirically evaluate our work on probabilistic inference tasks in second-order Bayesian networks,
digit classification, and by performing parameter learning in
the presence of epistemic uncertainty.
Consider the example of tossing two coins with unknown
probabilities. We know that the queried probability of a single heads is in [0.5, 0.6] and of two heads is in [0.3, 0.4].
From this information we want to learn a distribution over
the coin probabilities. We can use BetaProbLog, SL or CS.
However, SL can make a considerable approximation error
in this case. CS returns intervals for the probabilities, but
not their full distribution. With Bayesian learning probabilities are learned from data counts instead of target intervals,
making it unfit for this type of problem. Using a loss that penalizes probabilities outside the target interval, BetaProbLog
can learn the full distribution, allowing more queries to be
answered, such as finding moments or quantiles. This helps
users make decisions when it is important to know whether
some probability lies below a given threshold.

An issue that has so far received only limited attention in
probabilistic logic programming (PLP) is the modeling of
so-called epistemic uncertainty, the uncertainty about the
model itself. Accurately quantifying this model uncertainty
is paramount to robust inference, learning and ultimately decision making. We introduce BetaProbLog, a PLP language
that can model epistemic uncertainty. BetaProbLog has sound
semantics, an effective inference algorithm that combines
Monte Carlo techniques with knowledge compilation, and
a parameter learning algorithm. We empirically outperform
state-of-the-art methods on probabilistic inference tasks in
second-order Bayesian networks, digit classification and discriminative learning in the presence of epistemic uncertainty.

Introduction
Uncertainty is often described as being either aleatoric or
epistemic in nature (Hüllermeier and Waegeman 2021). The
former is the intrinsic uncertainty that a probabilistic model
brings and that cannot be reduced with further observations
of the world. For example, the outcome of a coin toss is intrinsically uncertain and consequently the model of the toss
will be probabilistic. In contrast, epistemic uncertainty, also
called model uncertainty, stems from the lack of knowledge
about the true underlying model and can be reduced with
more observations. Explicitly modeling both types of uncertainty is important for gauging the uncertainty of learned
probabilistic models and allows for reasoning over the robustness of subsequent predictions. It allows the user to
avoid risky decisions when a learner is uncertain about its
results or to perform probabilistic inference even when the
probabilistic model is not exactly known.
Modeling epistemic uncertainty explicitly is studied in the
fields of credal sets (CS) (Levi 1983) and subjective logic
(SL) (Jøsang 2016). CS models the epistemic uncertainty
by reasoning over convex sets of distributions, whereas SL
uses beliefs. Both fields have issues that we address by introducing BetaProbLog, an extension of the probabilistic
logic programming (PLP) language ProbLog. The first issue
is that the field of SL often uses approximating operators.
Cerutti et al. (2019) introduce SLProbLog, whose semantics
rely on such approximations. As a result the semantics are

Background
Inference in ProbLog
ProbLog is a PLP language that allows users to compactly
write down complex relational probabilistic models while

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10060

