The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Missing Value Imputation and Change Point Detection
with the Gaussian Copula
Yuxuan Zhao∗ , Eric Landgrebe∗ , Eliot Shekhtman, Madeleine Udell
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
{yz2295, ecl93,ess239,udell}@cornell.edu

Abstract

valued responses such as age and weight, and ordinal responses on a Likert scale measuring how strongly a respondent agrees with certain stated opinions. A Gaussian copula
imputation model, which adapts to the distribution of values
in each column, has recently shown state-of-the-art performance on a variety of long skinny mixed datasets (Zhao and
Udell 2020b). Our work builds on the success of this model,
which we describe in greater detail below.
Missing values also appear in online data, generated by
sensor networks, or ongoing surveys, as sensors fail or survey respondents fail to respond. In this setting, online (immediate) imputation for new data points is important to facilitate online decision-making processes. However, most
missing value imputation methods, including missForest
(Stekhoven and Bühlmann 2012) and MICE (Buuren and
Groothuis-Oudshoorn 2010), cannot easily update model
parameters with new observation in the online setting. Reapplying offline methods after seeing every new observation
consumes too much time and space. Online methods, which
incrementally update the model parameters every time new
data is observed, enjoy lower space and time costs and can
adapt to changes in the data, and hence are sometimes preferred even in the offline setting.
Another common interest for online data (or time series)
is change point detection: does the data distribution change
abruptly, and can we pinpoint when the change occurs?
While there are many different types of temporal changes,
we focus on changes in the dependence structure of the data,
a crucial issue for many real world applications. For example, classic Markowitz portfolio design uses the dynamic
correlation structure of exchange rates and market indexes
to design a portfolio of assets that balances risk and reward (Markowitz 1991). In practice, the presence of missing
values and mixed data handicaps most conventional change
point detection approaches.
In this paper, we address all these challenges: our online algorithm can impute missing values and detect changes
in the dependency structure of long skinny mixed data, including real-valued data and ordinal data as special cases.
Our online imputation method builds on the offline Gaussian copula imputation model (Zhao and Udell 2020b). This
model posits that each data point is generated by drawing a
latent Gaussian vector. This latent Gaussian vector is then
transformed to match the marginal distribution of each ob-

Missing value imputation is crucial for real-world data science workflows. Imputation is harder in the online setting, as
it requires the imputation method itself to be able to evolve
over time. For practical applications, imputation algorithms
should produce imputations that match the true data distribution, handle data of mixed types, including ordinal, boolean,
and continuous variables, and scale to large datasets. In this
work we develop a new online imputation algorithm for
mixed data using the Gaussian copula. The online Gaussian
copula model meets all the desiderata: its imputations match
the data distribution even for mixed data, improve over its offline counterpart on the accuracy when the streaming data has
a changing distribution, and on the speed (up to an order of
magnitude) especially on large scale datasets. By fitting the
copula model to online data, we also provide a new method
to detect change points in the multivariate dependence structure with missing values. Experimental results on synthetic
and real world data validate the performance of the proposed
methods.

Introduction
Many modern datasets contain missing values; yet many
machine learning algorithms require complete data. Hence
missing value imputation is an important preprocessing step.
The progress in low rank matrix completion (LRMC) (Candes and Plan 2010; Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo 2010) has led
to widespread use in diverse applications (Bell and Koren
2007; Yang et al. 2019). LRMC succeeds when the data matrix can be well approximated by a low rank matrix. While
this assumption is often reasonable for sufficiently large data
matrices (Udell and Townsend 2019), it usually fails when
one dimension of the data matrix is much larger than the
other. We refer to such matrices as long skinny datasets, or
high rank matrices.When a long skinny dataset has mixed
type, consisting of a combination of ordinal, binary, and
continuous (or real-valued) variables, the imputation challenge is even greater, and successful methods must account
for the different distribution of each column. For example,
survey dataset may contain millions of respondents but only
dozens of questions. The questions may include both real∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9199

