The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Few-Shot Cross-Lingual Stance Detection with Sentiment-Based Pre-training
Momchil Hardalov1,2 , Arnav Arora1,3 , Preslav Nakov1,4 , Isabelle Augenstein1,3
1
Checkstep Research
Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Bulgaria
3
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
4
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Doha, Qatar
{momchil, arnav, preslav.nakov, isabelle}@checkstep.com
2

Abstract

As online speech gets democratised, we see an ever-growing
representation of non-English languages. Yet, for stance detection, multilingual resources remain scarce (Joshi et al.
2020). While English datasets exist for various domains and
of different sizes, non-English and multilingual datasets are
often small —under a thousand examples (Lai et al. 2018,
2020; Lozhnikov, Derczynski, and Mazzara 2020; Alhindi
et al. 2021)—, and focus on narrow, potentially country- or
culture-specific topics, such as a referendum (Taulé et al.
2017; Lai et al. 2018), a person (Hercig et al. 2017; Darwish
et al. 2020; Lai et al. 2020), or a notable event (Swami et al.
2018), with few exceptions (Vamvas and Sennrich 2020).
Traditionally, the task was addressed using models trained
on mid-size datasets (Mohtarami et al. 2018). However,
more recently, notable research progress was made in zeroand few-shot learning scenarios.

In particular, pattern-based training approaches (Brown
et al. 2020; Schick and Schütze 2021a; Gao, Fisch, and
Chen 2021) have been shown very effective in low-resource
scenarios, and an ideal option for modelling cross-lingual
stance. Yet, previous work mostly focused on single-task
and single-language scenarios. In contrast, here we study
their multilingual performance, and their ability to transfer
knowledge across tasks and datasets. Moreover, a limitation
of these approaches, especially for pattern-exploiting training, or PET, (Schick and Schütze 2021a), is the need for label verbalisation, i.e., to identify single words describing the
labels. This can be inconvenient for label-rich and nuanced
tasks. We overcome this by introducing a label encoder.
Other studies showed that multi-task and multi-dataset
learning can improve the accuracy and the robustness
of stance detection models (Schiller, Daxenberger, and
Gurevych 2021; Hardalov et al. 2021a). Nonetheless, pretraining should not necessarily be performed on the same
task; in fact, it is important to select the auxiliary task to
pre-train on carefully (Poth et al. 2021). Auxiliary data from
a similar task can also improve performance, and an appealing candidate for stance detection is sentiment analysis, due
to its semantic relationship to stance (Ebrahimi, Dou, and
Lowd 2016; Sobhani, Mohammad, and Kiritchenko 2016).
Our work makes the following contributions:
• We present the largest study of cross-lingual stance detection, covering 15 datasets in 12 diverse languages
from 6 language families.1
• We explore the capabilities of pattern training both in a
few-shot and in a full-resource cross-lingual setting.
• We introduce a novel label-encoding mechanism to overcome the limitations of predicting multi-token labels and
the need for verbalisation (single-token labels).
• We diverge from stance-to-stance transfer by proposing
a novel semi-supervised approach to produce automatically labelled instances with a trained sentiment model,
leading to sizeable improvement over strong baselines.
• We show that our newly introduced semi-supervised approach outperforms models fine-tuned on few shots from
multiple cross-lingual datasets, while being competitive
with pre-trained models on English stance datasets.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The datasets and code are available for research purposes:
https://github.com/checkstep/senti-stance

The goal of stance detection is to determine the viewpoint expressed in a piece of text towards a target. These viewpoints
or contexts are often expressed in many different languages
depending on the user and the platform, which can be a local news outlet, a social media platform, a news forum, etc.
Most research on stance detection, however, has been limited
to working with a single language and on a few limited targets, with little work on cross-lingual stance detection. Moreover, non-English sources of labelled data are often scarce
and present additional challenges. Recently, large multilingual language models have substantially improved the performance on many non-English tasks, especially such with a
limited number of examples. This highlights the importance
of model pre-training and its ability to learn from few examples. In this paper, we present the most comprehensive study
of cross-lingual stance detection to date: we experiment with
15 diverse datasets in 12 languages from 6 language families, and with 6 low-resource evaluation settings each. For our
experiments, we build on pattern-exploiting training (PET),
proposing the addition of a novel label encoder to simplify the
verbalisation procedure. We further propose sentiment-based
generation of stance data for pre-training, which shows sizeable improvement of more than 6% F1 absolute in few-shot
learning settings compared to several strong baselines.

1

Introduction

10729

