The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SepFusion: Finding Optimal Fusion Structures for Visual Sound Separation
Dongzhan Zhou1 * , Xinchi Zhou1 * , Di Hu2† , Hang Zhou3 , Lei Bai1 , Ziwei Liu4 , Wanli Ouyang1
1

2

The University of Sydney,
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China,
3
Baidu Inc.,
4
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University
{d.zhou, xinchi.zhou1, lei.bai, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au,
dihu@ruc.edu.cn, zhouhang09@baidu.com, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

ImageGuided Sound
Separation

Abstract
Multiple modalities can provide rich semantic information;
and exploiting such information will normally lead to better
performance compared with the single-modality counterpart.
However, it is not easy to devise an effective cross-modal
fusion structure due to the variations of feature dimensions
and semantics, especially when the inputs even come from
different sensors, as in the field of audio-visual learning. In
this work, we propose SepFusion, a novel framework that
can smoothly produce optimal fusion structures for visualsound separation. The framework is composed of two components, namely the model generator and the evaluator. To
construct the generator, we devise a lightweight architecture
space that can adapt to different input modalities. In this way,
we can easily obtain audio-visual fusion structures according
to our demands. For the evaluator, we adopt the idea of neural architecture search to select superior networks effectively.
This automatic process can significantly save human efforts
while achieving competitive performances. Moreover, since
our SepFusion provides a series of strong models, we can utilize the model family for broader applications, such as further promoting performance via model assembly, or providing suitable architectures for the separation of certain instrument classes. These potential applications further enhance the
competitiveness of our approach.

SkeletonGuided Sound
Separation

Stereo
Generation

SepFusion
Architecture
Space

Image

NAS

Skeleton

Spectrum

Figure 1: We propose SepFusion to smoothly construct optimal fusion structures for visual-guided audio processing
tasks. We devise an attention-based architecture space for
fusion structure generation and adopt Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) algorithms to select the good architectures
among all candidates. Our approach enjoys the advantage
of flexibility, which can be deployed on different modalities
and various separation scenarios.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great development of audiovisual learning, where deep neural networks perform an important role as feature encoders and decoders. Such intelligent systems could perceive the world synthetically by processing various input information from multiple modalities
simultaneously, which have benefited broad applications in
many fields such as sound recognition, music source separation, stereo sound generation, and so on.
Visual cues play an important role in the audio analysis system, especially for the visual sound separation task.
For example, it can provide knowledge about object appearances and textures to guide the sound separation process (Zhao et al. 2018; Gao and Grauman 2019b; Zhao et al.

2019; Ephrat et al. 2018). One of the most important issues in visual sound separation is how to effectively fuse
vision information into the audio backbone. However, the
cross-modality fusion is never easy due to the complex feature structure and diverse semantic context, e.g. it is hard to
combine a visual feature whose pixels have spatial relations
with an audio feature containing frequency-related information. While previous methods have proposed different fusion
techniques with diverse visual modalities (Gao and Grauman 2019b; Zhao et al. 2019; Gan et al. 2020), their design
procedures of fusion modules are laborious and require extensive prior knowledge from human experts.
Naturally, a question arises from such a situation: Is there

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Di Hu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3544

