The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

STEPS: Semantic Typing of Event Processes
with a Sequence-to-Sequence Approach
Sveva Pepe, Edoardo Barba, Rexhina Blloshmi, Roberto Navigli
Sapienza NLP Group, Sapienza University of Rome
pepe.1743997@studenti.uniroma1.it, {barba,blloshmi}@di.uniroma1.it, navigli@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

per preference, the overall intent is that of COOKING PASTA,
where COOK is the action and PASTA is the object. While
this might be easy to deduce for humans, it is a challenging
task for machines as, for instance, the action and object types
may not appear in the event sequence. Event understanding,
and especially intent inference, can potentially benefit several downstream applications of Natural Language Understanding (NLU), from commonsense reasoning to dialogue
systems. Indeed, successful NLP applications that rely on
event understanding include story comprehension for narrative prediction (Chaturvedi, Peng, and Roth 2017), machine
reading comprehension for information extraction in biological processes (Berant et al. 2014), and more recently video
segmentation (Zhukov et al. 2019; Fried et al. 2020). However, despite the wide range of NLP applications benefiting
from event processes understanding, the recent task of event
process typing is still understudied, and the currently existing approach to it (Chen et al. 2020) suffers from three main
shortcomings: i) it relies on indirect supervision from action/object glosses1 to rank their types based on the similarity with input events, thus requiring a third-party Word
Sense Disambiguation (WSD) system to assign a gloss to
each action and object, ii) it requires a fixed sense inventory
to define the possible action and object types, a binding not
in line with the free-form nature of the classes, and finally,
iii) it breaks the procedural flow of events by filtering out
different steps due to harsh dataset filtering, thus harming
their sequential nature. With the aim of overcoming these
problems, this paper makes the following contributions:
1. we reformulate the Multi-axis Event Process Typing task
as a sequence generation problem which maintains and
benefits from the free-form nature of the types;
2. we present S TEPS, a sequence-to-sequence model that
accepts a sequence of events and produces the overall
human intent in terms of actions and objects only, thus
eliminating the need for their glosses;
3. we do away with various constraints set on the existing
dataset and provide an extensive study about the effect
these constraints have on the overall performance of the
models;
4. we advance the state of the art by a large margin, even
when switching in low-data and few-shot settings.

Enabling computers to comprehend the intent of human actions by processing language is one of the fundamental goals
of Natural Language Understanding. An emerging task in this
context is that of free-form event process typing, which aims
at understanding the overall goal of a protagonist in terms of
an action and an object, given a sequence of events. This task
was initially treated as a learning-to-rank problem by exploiting the similarity between processes and action/object textual definitions. However, this approach appears to be overly
complex, binds the output types to a fixed inventory for possible word definitions and, moreover, leaves space for further
enhancements as regards performance. In this paper, we advance the field by reformulating the free-form event process
typing task as a sequence generation problem and put forward
S TEPS, an end-to-end approach for producing user intent in
terms of actions and objects only, dispensing with the need
for their definitions. In addition to this, we eliminate several
dataset constraints set by previous works, while at the same
time significantly outperforming them. We release the data
and software at https://github.com/SapienzaNLP/steps.

Introduction
Event understanding is a core process of the human perceptual system, which, while conceiving event processes, makes
continuous predictions about what will happen next. In fact,
cognitive studies state that the perception of events is highly
correlated with the prior knowledge about the event parts
and the inference of performer’s intent and plans (Zacks
et al. 2007). In the context of Natural Language Processing (NLP), the Multi-axis Event Process Typing task aims at
automatically understanding the overall goal of a performer
relying on a set of systematically connected events (Chen
et al. 2020). More formally, given a sequence of events,
i.e., partially ordered events that are centered around common protagonists (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008), event process typing is defined as a free-form labeling task along two
axes: the type of action the event process seeks to complete, and the type of object which is affected by the action
of the performer. For instance, if a performer takes the following steps, 1. boil the water, 2. add salt, 3. add pasta,
4. leave for 12 minutes, 5. drain the water, 6. add sauce as
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11156

We use the terms gloss and definition interchangeably.

