The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Memory-Based Jitter: Improving Visual Recognition on Long-Tailed Data with
Diversity in Memory
Jialun Liu1,2 * , Wenhui Li1† , Yifan Sun2
1

Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineer, Jilin University, Changchun, China
2
Baidu Research, China
jialun18@mails.jlu.edu.cn, liwh@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

(Liu et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2016; Thomee
et al. 2016). To make our method general, this paper considers long-tailed visual recognition on these two elemental
tasks with a uniform motivation.
We recognize the insufficient within-class diversity of the
tail classes as the most prominent reason that hinders longtailed deep visual recognition. In the deeply-embedded feature space, a tail class is under-represented and thus hard to
be recognized. To validate this point, we visualize the deep
embedding of CIFAR-10 dataset in Fig. 1. When a specified
class (“ID-10”) degrades from head (Fig.1 (a)) to tail (Fig.1
(b)), its visual concept collapses into a very limited scope in
the deep embedding. Consequentially, when we employ the
model for inference, samples from “ID-10” may exceed the
already-learned scope and are thus easily mis-classified. Intuitively, a radical solution is to augment the tail classes with
higher diversity.
We notice two phenomena which are potential for enhancing the tail data diversity, i.e., the weight jitter and the feature
jitter. During training, the deep model constantly changes its
parameters after every iteration, yielding the phenomenon
of weight jitter. Consequentially, given a same image as the
input, the models at two different iterations generate two different feature representations in the deeply-embedded space,
resulting in the phenomenon of feature jitter.
Since these jitters are distributed among historical models, we need to accumulate them across multiple training
iterations for diversity enhancement. To this end, we employ a memory bank to store the desired jitters, and get the
so-called Memory-based Jitter (MBJ). With slight modifications, MBJ is capable to accommodate two elemental visual
recognition tasks, i.e., deep image classification and deep
metric learning. On deep image classification, MBJ collects the historical features (i.e., feature jitters). Consequentially, the feature memory bank accumulates abundant tailfeature jitters, and improves the classification accuracy on
tail classes, as shown in Fig. 1(c)). On deep metric learning,
MBJ collects the weight vectors of the classifier layer instead of the features. Each weight vector is typically viewed
as the prototype of a training class, so we name the corresponding memory bank as the prototype memory bank.
Besides the accumulated jitter, MBJ is benefited from a
novel re-sampling effect between head and tail classes. On
both the classification and the deep metric learning task,

This paper considers deep visual recognition on long-tailed
data. To make our method general, we tackle two applied
scenarios, i.e., deep classification and deep metric learning.
Under the long-tailed data distribution, the most classes (i.e.,
tail classes) only occupy relatively few samples and are prone
to lack of within-class diversity. A radical solution is to
augment the tail classes with higher diversity. To this end,
we introduce a simple and reliable method named Memorybased Jitter (MBJ). We observe that during training, the deep
model constantly changes its parameters after every iteration, yielding the phenomenon of weight jitters. Consequentially, given a same image as the input, two historical editions
of the model generate two different features in the deeplyembedded space, resulting in feature jitters. Using a memory
bank, we collect these (model or feature) jitters across multiple training iterations and get the so-called Memory-based
Jitter. The accumulated jitters enhance the within-class diversity for the tail classes and consequentially improves longtailed visual recognition. With slight modifications, MBJ is
applicable for two fundamental visual recognition tasks, i.e.,
deep image classification and deep metric learning (on longtailed data). Extensive experiments on five long-tailed classification benchmarks and two deep metric learning benchmarks demonstrate significant improvement. Moreover, the
achieved performance are on par with the state of the art on
both tasks.

Introduction
In visual recognition tasks, the long-tailed distribution of the
data is a common and natural problem under realistic scenarios (Van Horn and Perona 2017; Lin et al. 2014; Everingham
et al. 2010; Guo et al. 2016). A few categories (i.e., the head
classes) occupy most of the data while the most categories
(i.e., the tail classes) only occupy relatively few data. Such
long-tailed distribution significantly challenges deep visual
recognition, including both deep image classification (Zhou
et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2019; Van Horn
and Perona 2017; Buda, Maki, and Mazurowski 2018a; Cui
et al. 2019; Zhu and Yang 2020) and deep metric learning
* Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1720

