The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

JAKET: Joint Pre-training of Knowledge Graph and
Language Understanding
Donghan Yu1 * , Chenguang Zhu2 * , Yiming Yang1 , Michael Zeng2
1

2

Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Cognitive Services Research Group
dyu2@cs.cmu.edu, chezhu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs) contain rich information about world
knowledge, entities, and relations. Thus, they can be great
supplements to existing pre-trained language models. However, it remains a challenge to efficiently integrate information
from KG into language modeling. And the understanding of
a knowledge graph requires related context. We propose a
novel joint pre-training framework, JAKET, to model both the
knowledge graph and language. The knowledge module and
language module provide essential information to mutually
assist each other: the knowledge module produces embeddings for entities in text while the language module generates
context-aware initial embeddings for entities and relations in
the graph. Our design enables the pre-trained model to easily
adapt to unseen knowledge graphs in new domains. Experiment results on several knowledge-aware NLP tasks show that
our proposed framework achieves superior performance by
effectively leveraging knowledge in language understanding.

Introduction
Pre-trained language models (PLM) leverage large-scale unlabeled corpora to conduct self-supervised training. They have
achieved remarkable performance in various NLP tasks, exemplified by BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019b), XLNet (Yang et al. 2019), and GPT series (Radford
et al. 2018, 2019; Brown et al. 2020). It has been shown that
PLMs can effectively characterize linguistic patterns in text
and generate high-quality context-aware representations (Liu
et al. 2019a). However, these models struggle to grasp world
knowledge about entities and relations (Poerner, Waltinger,
and Schütze 2019; Talmor et al. 2019), which are clearly
important for language understanding.
Knowledge graphs (KGs) represent entities and relations
in a structural way. They can also solve the sparsity problem
in text modeling. For instance, a language model may require
many instances of the phrase “labrador is a kind of dog”
in its training corpus before it implicitly learns this fact. In
comparison, a knowledge graph can use two entity nodes
“labrador”, “dog” and a relation edge “is a” between these
nodes to precisely represent this fact.
* Equal contribution. Work done while Donghan Yu was an intern
at Microsoft.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11630

Recently, some efforts have been made to integrate knowledge graphs into PLM. Most of them combine the token
representations in PLM with embeddings of aligned KG entities. The entity embeddings in those methods are either
pre-computed based on an external source by a separate
model (Zhang et al. 2019; Peters et al. 2019), which may
not be easily aligned with the PLM embeddings, or directly
learned as model parameters (Févry et al. 2020; Verga et al.
2020), which often have an over-parameterization issue due
to the large number of entities. Moreover, all the previous
works share a common challenge: when the pre-trained model
is fine-tuned in a new domain with a previously unseen knowledge graph, it struggles to adapt to the new entities, relations
and structure.
Therefore, we propose JAKET, a Joint pre-trAining framework for KnowledgE graph and Text. Our framework contains a knowledge module and a language module, which
mutually assist each other by providing required information
to achieve more effective semantic analysis. The knowledge
module is based on a graph attention network (Velickovic
et al. 2018) to provide structure-aware entity embeddings
for language modeling. And the language module produces
contextual representations as initial embeddings for KG entities and relations given their descriptive text. Thus, in both
modules, content understanding is based on related knowledge and rich context. On one hand, the joint pre-training
effectively projects entities/relations and text into a shared
semantic latent space, which eases the semantic matching
between them. On the other hand, as the knowledge module
produces representations from descriptive text, it solves the
over-parameterization issue since entity embeddings are no
longer part of the model’s parameters.
In order to solve the cyclic dependency between the two
modules, we propose a novel two-step language module LM1
and LM2 , respectively. LM1 provides embeddings for both
LM2 and KG. The entity embeddings from KG are also fed
into LM2 , which produces the final representation. LM1 and
LM2 can be easily established as the first several transformer
layers and the rest layers of a pre-trained language model
such as BERT and RoBERTa. Furthermore, we design an entity context embedding memory with periodic update which
speeds up the pre-training by about 15x.
The pre-training tasks are all self-supervised, including
entity category classification and relation prediction for the

