The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

VACA: Designing Variational Graph Autoencoders for Causal Queries
Pablo Sánchez-Martin∗12 , Miriam Rateike∗12 , Isabel Valera2
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Department of Computer Science of Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
psanchez@tue.mpg.de, mrateike@tue.mpg.de, ivalera@cs.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

density estimator that leverages a priori graph structure–
must fulfill so that it can approximate causal interventions
(do-operator) and abduction-action-prediction steps (Pearl
2009b). The resulting Variational Causal Graph Autoencoder, referred to as VACA, enables approximating the observational, interventional and counterfactual distributions
induced by a causal model with unknown structural equations. We remark that parametric assumptions on the structural causal equations are in general not testable, may thus
not hold in practice (Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017)
and may lead to inaccurate results, if misspecified. VACA
addresses this limitation by including uncertainty, i.e., a
probabilistic model, in the estimation of the causal-parent
relationships.
We show in extensive synthetic experiments that VACA
outperforms competing methods (Karimi et al. 2020; Khemakhem et al. 2021) on complex datasets at estimating not
only the mean of the interventional/counterfactual distribution (as in previous work), but also the overall distribution
(measured in terms of Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Gretton et al. 2012)). Finally, we show a practical use-case in
which VACA is used to assess counterfactual fairness of different classifiers trained on the real-world German Credit
dataset (Dua and Graff 2019a), as well as to learn counterfactually fair classifiers without compromising performance.

In this paper, we introduce VACA, a novel class of variational graph autoencoders for causal inference in the absence of hidden confounders, when only observational data
and the causal graph are available. Without making any parametric assumptions, VACA mimics the necessary properties
of a Structural Causal Model (SCM) to provide a flexible
and practical framework for approximating interventions (dooperator) and abduction-action-prediction steps. As a result,
and as shown by our empirical results, VACA accurately approximates the interventional and counterfactual distributions
on diverse SCMs. Finally, we apply VACA to evaluate counterfactual fairness in fair classification problems, as well as to
learn fair classifiers without compromising performance.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a powerful tool for
graph representation learning and have been proven to excel in practical complex problems like neural machine translation (Bastings et al. 2017), traffic forecasting (DerrowPinion et al. 2021; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018) or drug discovery
(Gilmer et al. 2017).
In this work, we investigate to which extent the inductive bias of GNNs–encoding the causal graph information–
can be exploited to answer interventional and counterfactual
queries. More specific, to approximate the interventional and
counterfactual distributions induced by interventions on a
casual model. To this end, we assume i) causal sufficiency–
i.e., absence of hidden confounders; and, ii) access to observational data and the true causal graph. We stress that
the causal graph can often be inferred from expert knowledge (Zheng and Kleinberg 2019) or via one of the approaches for causal discovery (Glymour, Zhang, and Spirtes
2019; Vowels, Camgoz, and Bowden 2021). With this analysis we aim to complement the concurrent line of research
that theoretically studies the use of Neural Networks (NN)
(Xia et al. 2021), and more recently GNNs (Zečević et al.
2021), for causal inference.
To this end, we describe the architectural design conditions that a variational graph autoencoder (VGAE)–as a

Related Work
Deep generative models are enjoying increasing attention
for causal queries in complex data (Moraffah et al. 2020;
Parafita and Vitria 2019a). Existing approaches for causal
inference focus on i) estimating the Average Treatment Effect (ATE)–a specific type of group-level causal queries–by
assuming a fixed causal graph that includes a treatment variable (Kim et al. 2021; Louizos et al. 2017; Rakesh et al.
2018; Schwab, Linhardt, and Karlen 2018; Vowels, Camgoz,
and Bowden 2020; Zhang, Zhang, and Li 2020); ii) discovering and intervening on the causal latent structure of the (e.g.,
image) data (Kim et al. 2021; Parafita and Vitria 2019a,b;
Shen et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020); or iii) addressing interventional and/or counterfactual queries by fitting a conditional model for each observed variable given its causal
parents (Garrido et al. 2021; Karimi et al. 2020; Kocaoglu
et al. 2018; Parafita and Vitria 2020; Pawlowski, Coelho de
Castro, and Glocker 2020).

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8159

