The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Logit Perturbation
Mengyang Li1,2 , Fengguang Su2 , Ou Wu2 * , Ji Zhang3
1
Jiuantianxia Inc., China
National Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, China
3
The University of Southern Queensland, Australia
limengyang99@gmail.com, {fengguangsu, wuou}@tju.edu.cn, Ji.Zhang@usq.edu.au
2

Abstract
where x is the input or the hidden feature, δ is the perturbation term, ϵ is the perturbation bound, y is the label, and
xadv is the generated adversarial sample. A number of methods have been proposed to optimize Eq. (1) (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018). Adversarial
samples can be used to train more robust models.
In label perturbation, the labels are modified or corrected
to avoid overfitting and noises. For example, a popular yet
simple training trick, label smoothing (Szegedy et al. 2016),
generates a new label for each sample according to y ′ =
y + λ( CI − y), where C is the number of categories, I is a
vector with all elements equaling to 1, ( CI − y) is the perturbation term, and λ is a hyper-parameter. Other methods
such as Boostrapping loss (Reed et al. 2015), label correction (Patrini et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2021), and Meta label
corrector (Wu et al. 2021b) can be seen as a type of label
perturbation. Mixup (Zhang et al. 2018) can be attributed to
the combination of feature and label perturbation.
Logit vectors (or logits) are the outputs of the final feature
encoding layer in almost deep neural networks (DNNs). Although logits are important in the DNN data pipeline, only
several learning methods in data augmentation and longtail classification directly (without optimization) or implicitly employ class-level logit perturbation. Based on the loss
variations of these methods, the loss variations incurred by
logit perturbation are highly related to the purpose of positive/negative augmentation1 on training data. Accordingly,
a new method is proposed to learn a class-level logit perturbation (LPL) in this study. A comparative analysis is conducted for two classical methods and our LPL method. Extensive experiments are run on benchmark data sets. The results show the competitiveness of our method. The contributions of our study are as follows:

Features, logits, and labels are the three primary data when
a sample passes through a deep neural network. Feature perturbation and label perturbation receive increasing attention
in recent years. They have been proven to be useful in various deep learning approaches. For example, (adversarial) feature perturbation can improve the robustness or even generalization capability of learned models. However, limited studies have explicitly explored for the perturbation of logit vectors. This work discusses several existing methods related to
logit perturbation. Based on a unified viewpoint between positive/negative data augmentation and loss variations incurred
by logit perturbation, a new method is proposed to explicitly
learn to perturb logits. A comparative analysis is conducted
for the perturbations used in our and existing methods. Extensive experiments on benchmark image classification data sets
and their long-tail versions indicated the competitive performance of our learning method. In addition, existing methods
can be further improved by utilizing our method.

Introduction
There are several main paradigms (which may overlap)
among numerous deep learning studies, including new network architecture, new training loss, new training data perturbation scheme, and new learning strategy (e.g., weighting). Training data perturbation mainly refers to feature and
label perturbations.
In feature perturbation, many data augmentation tricks
can be viewed as feature perturbation methods when the
input is the raw feature (i.e., raw samples). For example,
cropped or rotated images can be seen as the perturbed
samples of the raw images in computer vision; sentences
with modified words can also be seen as the perturbed texts
in text classification. Another well-known feature perturbation technique is about the generation of adversarial training
samples (Madry et al. 2018), which attracts great attention
in various AI applications especially in computer vision (Xie
et al. 2020) and natural language processing (Jin et al. 2020).
Adversarial samples are those that can fool the learned models. They can be obtained by solving the following objective
function:
xadv = x + arg max l(f (x + δ), y),

• A new method is proposed to learn to perturb logits
which can be used in data augmentation and long-tail
classification contexts. Experimental results show that
our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods related to logit perturbation in both contexts.
• Several classical methods are re-discussed in terms of

(1)

∥δ∥≤ϵ

1

In this study, negative augmentation denotes the augmentation
which aims to reduce the (relative) performances of some categories. Accordingly, existing augmentation methods are positive.

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1359

