The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Planning with Explanations for Finding Desired Meeting Points on Graphs
Keisuke Otaki
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc.
otaki@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization problems are ubiquitous for decision making in planning social infrastructures. In real-world
scenarios, a decision-maker needs to solve his/her problem iteratively until he/she satisfies solutions, but such an iterative
process remains challenging. This paper studies a new explainable framework, particularly for finding meeting points,
which is a key optimization problem for designing facility locations. Our framework automatically fills the gap between its input instance and instances from which a user
could obtain the desired outcome, where computed solutions
are judged by the user. The framework also provides users
with explanations, representing the difference of instances for
deeply understanding the process and its inside. Explanations
are clues for users to understand their situation and implement
suggested results in practice (e.g., designing a coupon for free
travel). We experimentally demonstrate that our search-based
framework is promising to solve instances with generating
explanations in a sequential decision-making process.

Figure 1: The interaction for explainable planning from the
input OMP instance P1 to P ⋆ . After the user accepts the
final instance Pn = P ⋆ , the system generates an explanation
from the inside trace to implement the output in real-world.

is paid to the whole system and its explanations. That is,
it remains difficult to understand the process itself with
explanations. In applications (e.g., transportation services),
decision-makers often require some explanations on the optimization (e.g., why this solutions is selected).
Although we have various problems, we focus on the
problem of finding meeting points (OMP) on graphs (Li
et al. 2015; Yan, Zhao, and Ng 2015; Atzmon et al. 2020), as
its formal definition is given later. This is because 1) transportation is a basic function in cities and residents, 2) it is
along with road networks, and 3) finding a meeting point is
an essential task for designing city functions or trips (Shang
et al. 2015). Better facility locations (e.g., hospitals, bus
stops, etc.) benefit residents, and then decision-makers often
face this problem. Note that we could replace OMPs with
other problems according to applications and targeting scenarios. First, we show an example scenario and our approach
to build a decision making process with Fig. 1.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems are ubiquitous for
both personality and society (Korte et al. 2011). A decisionmaker (e.g., a designer, experts, etc.) could discuss his/her
decision via optimization. For example, we could discuss
transportation services using routing problems (e.g., diala-ride problems) (Toth and Vigo 2014). Decision variables
represent options, locations, and things that a planner could
plan or operate from a macroscopic perspective. Different
objective functions (e.g., cost, fairness, etc.) represent individual purposes. Decision making with optimization consists of various steps such as modeling, solving instances,
evaluations of solutions, and updating models/instances.
Our research question is (RQ1) how to model a crystal
clear decision making process in a computational manner,
and (RQ2) how to make the process useful for decisionmakers by providing explanations about the process itself.
Typical decision making processes should be iterative and
could run as a human-in-the-loop framework (Fisher 1985;
Meignan et al. 2015; Miettinen, Ruiz, and Wierzbicki 2008),
but such iterations and interactions among decision-makers
and systems remain challenging. Relatively little attention

Example 1. A trip planner decides a new meeting spot to install a bus stop in the target area G; G has 21 vertices and 42
edges, and four customer demands are observed on vertices
as U = {3, 8, 15, 19}. Using OMPs, the planner finds that
Ams (G, U ) = 19 and Amm (G, U ) = 4. Here, the cost from
8 to 19 is much larger than others, and we assume that the
planner wants to know how to make the two meeting points
the same due to the fairness in terms of travel costs.
Based on this requirement, our system automatically
searches the instance space of OMPs. The beginning of the
search is P1 . The space consists of negative and positive in-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10319

