The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bounds on Causal Effects and Application to High Dimensional Data
Ang Li,1 Judea Pearl1
1

Cognitive Systems Laboratory, Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, USA.
{angli, judea}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

U

This paper addresses the problem of estimating causal effects
when adjustment variables in the back-door or front-door criterion are partially observed. For such scenarios, we derive
bounds on the causal effects by solving two non-linear optimization problems, and demonstrate that the bounds are sufficient. Using this optimization method, we propose a framework for dimensionality reduction that allows one to trade bias
for estimation power, and demonstrate its performance using
simulation studies.

W
X

Y

Figure 1: Needed the causal effects of X on Y when U is
unobserved. The dot line between U and W means either U
affects W , W affects U , or U and W are independent.

Introduction
Bounding has been proven to be useful in causal inference. (Balke and Pearl 1997) provided bounds on causal
effects with imperfect compliance, (Tian and Pearl 2000)
proposed bounds on probabilities of causation, (Cai et al.
2008) provided bounds on causal effects with the presence of
confounded intermediate variables, and (Li and Pearl 2019)
proposed bounds on the benefit function of a unit selection
problem.
Although P (U ) is assumed to be given, it is usually known
regardless of the model itself (e.g., U stands for gender, gene
type, blood type, or age). Alternatively, if costs permit, one
can estimate P (U ) by re-testing within a small sampled subpopulation.
A second problem considered in this paper is that of estimating causal effects when a sufficient set Z of confounders
is fully observable (see Figure 2), but with a high dimensionality (e.g., Z has 1024 instantiates). In such a case, a
prohibitively large sample size would be required, which is
generally recognized to be impractical. We propose a new
framework that transforms the problem associated with Figure 2 into an equivalent problem associated with Figure 3
containing W and U , which have much smaller dimensionalities (e.g., W and U have 32 instantiates). We then estimate
bounds on causal effects of the equivalent problem and take
the midpoints as the effect estimates. We demonstrate through
a simulation that this method can deliver good estimates of
causal effects of the original problem.

Estimating causal effects has been encountered in many areas
of industry, marketing, and health science, and it is the most
critical problem in causal inference. Pearl’s back-door and
front-door criteria, along with the adjustment formula (Pearl
1995), are powerful tools for estimating causal effects. In
this paper, the problem of estimating causal effects when
adjustment variables in the back-door or front-door criterion
are partially observable, or when the adjustment variables
have high dimensionality, is addressed.
Consider the problem of estimating the causal effects of X
on Y when a sufficient set W ∪ U of confounders is partially
observable (see Figure 1). Because W ∪ U is assumed to be
sufficient, the causal effects are identified from measurements
on X, Y, W, and U and can be written as
X
P (y|x, w, u)P (w, u)
P (y|do(x)) =
w,u

=

X P (x, y, w, u)P (w, u)
w,u

P (x, w, u)

.

However, if U is unobserved, d-separation tells us immediately that adjusting for W is inadequate by leaving the
back-door path X ←
−U −
→ Y unblocked. Therefore, regardless of sample size, the causal effects of X on Y cannot be
estimated without bias. However, it turns out that when given
a prior distribution P (U ), we can obtain bounds on the causal
effects. We will demonstrate later that the midpoints of the
bounds are sufficient for estimating the causal effects.

Preliminaries & Related Works
In this section, we review the back-door and front-door criteria and their associated adjustment formulas (Pearl 1995). We

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5773

