The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Perceptual Quality Assessment of Omnidirectional Images
Yuming Fang1 , Liping Huang1 , Jiebin Yan1 * , Xuelin Liu1 , Yang Liu2
1

Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, Nanchang, China
2
SANY Heavy Industry Co., Ltd., China
fa0001ng@e.ntu.edu.sg, {lphuang19, jiebinyan, xuelinliu-bill}@foxmail.com, liuy2655@sany.com.cn

Abstract

scene with the help of head-mounted displays (HMDs). During the exploration, we can get the quality of experience as
if we are in the real world. However, this immersive experience puts high demands on the fidelity and resolution of
omnidirectional images, bringing a huge burden on storage
and transmission. In each stage of omnidirectional image
processing (Wang and Rehman 2017), distortions may be
introduced due to the diverse environmental conditions, algorithm defects, etc., leading to a degradation of the users’
Quality of Experience (QoE). How to measure the quality
of omnidirectional images accurately plays a critical role in
system optimization.
The research on omnidirectional image quality assessment (OIQA) can be divided into two categories: subjective and objective OIQA. Subjective OIQA refers to constructing large-scale databases as well as collecting human ratings. There have been several omnidirectional image
quality (OIQ) databases proposed, e.g. (Upenik, Řeřábek,
and Ebrahimi 2016), (Sun et al. 2017), and (Duan et al.
2018). Most of the existing OIQA databases focus on the
visual quality of omnidirectional images with uniformly distributed distortions, while ignoring the impact of user viewing behavior. Existing objective OIQA methods can be classified into three categories: sampling-related (Yu, Lakshman, and Girod 2015; Sun, Lu, and Yu 2017; Zakharchenko,
Choi, and Park 2016), patch-based (Kim, Lim, and Ro 2020;
Lim, Kim, and Ra 2018) and viewport-based (Sun et al.
2020; Xu, Zhou, and Chen 2021). Sampling-related methods are mainly designed based on existing 2D quality metrics such as peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR) and structural
similarity (SSIM), which are feasible with available reference information. Patch-based methods ignore the fact that
subjects explore an omnidirectional image from viewports
rather than patches. Although viewport-based methods can
well solve the aforementioned issue, most of the viewportbased methods do not regard the exploration of omnidirectional images as a continuous process, which may lead to unsatisfied results. (Sui et al. 2020) made an initial attempt to
investigate the relationship between user viewing behavior
and the perceived quality of omnidirectional images. They
built an OIQ database and designed an OIQA method by
taking full advantage of the temporal properties. However,
the scale of this dataset is small, and the omnidirectional images are only with two types of distortions, while does not

◦

Omnidirectional images, also called 360 images, have attracted extensive attention in recent years, due to the rapid
development of virtual reality (VR) technologies. During omnidirectional image processing including capture, transmission, consumption, and so on, measuring the perceptual quality of omnidirectional images is highly desired, since it plays
a great role in guaranteeing the immersive quality of experience (IQoE). In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive
study on the perceptual quality of omnidirectional images
from both subjective and objective perspectives. Specifically,
we construct the largest so far subjective omnidirectional image quality database, where we consider several key influential elements, i.e., realistic non-uniform distortion, viewing
condition, and viewing behavior, from the user view. In addition to subjective quality scores, we also record head and eye
movement data. Besides, we make the first attempt by using
the proposed database to train a convolutional neural network
(CNN) for blind omnidirectional image quality assessment.
To be consistent with the human viewing behavior in the VR
device, we extract viewports from each omnidirectional image and incorporate the user viewing conditions naturally in
the proposed model. The proposed model is composed of two
parts, including a multi-scale CNN-based feature extraction
module and a perceptual quality prediction module. The feature extraction module is used to incorporate the multi-scale
features, and the perceptual quality prediction module is designed to regress them to perceived quality scores. The experimental results on our database verify that the proposed
model achieves the competing performance compared with
the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
With the advancement of 5G commercialization, virtual reality (VR) has been used in many applications with new
vitality, and omnidirectional images have drawn much attention. Omnidirectional images are taken by cameras with
multiple lenses covering the entire 360◦ scene. Multiple images captured simultaneously by different lenses are then
stitched together to form an omnidirectional image. An omnidirectional image is shown in spherical form covering
360×180 viewing range, and thus we can freely explore the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

580

