The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Linearity-Aware Subspace Clustering
Yesong Xu1 , Shuo Chen1 * , Jun Li1 , Jianjun Qian1∗
1

PCA Lab† , Nanjing University of Science and Technology
yesong xu@163.com, {shuochen, junli, csjqian}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

whole samples are drawn from a union of multi-subspace,
and its purpose is to find these subspaces and arrange each
sample into its corresponding subspace.
In the past several years, several subspace clustering algorithms have been developed (Nie et al. 2020; Kang et al.
2020b; Li et al. 2021). Among them, the spectral-based
method has achieved promising performance in the realworld (Zhang et al. 2021; Lv et al. 2021). Especially, it is
well known that the Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Li, Kong, and Fu 2017) and LowRank Representation (LRR) (Liu et al. 2013; Li et al. 2016)
are the state-of-the-art approaches and have the theoretical
guarantee, which belongs to the spectral-based method. In
addition, the spectral-based method is consists of two steps.
Firstly, learning a similarity matrix to represent the similarity between samples by utilizing the original data. Then,
the spectral clustering algorithm is employed to segment the
learned similarity matrix and obtain the final clustering result. Moreover, it is worth noting that the success of subspace clustering generally relies on the learned similarity
matrix.
For the spectral-based method, SSC exploits the ℓ1 -norm
to find a sparse representation from the original samples.
LRR adopts the nuclear norm to regularize the similarity
matrix for capturing the correlation structure of the original
data. Least Squares Regression (LSR) employs the Frobenius norm to learn the similarity matrix. Its purpose is to encourage the grouping effect, which can group highly correlated samples together (Lu et al. 2012). Block Diagonal Representation (BDR) utilizes the k-block diagonal regularizer
to directly pursue a similarity matrix with a block-diagonal
structure (Lu et al. 2018).
In summary, all the above mentioned methods utilize
the self-expressive property of linear subspaces to generate the similarity matrix, that is, let the original n samples
X = [x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ] as a set of basis, the similarity matrix C = [c1 , c2 , · · · , cn ] can be learned by exploiting the
basis {x1 , x2 , · · · , xn } to represent itself linearly. Mathematically, the self-expressive is expressed as xi ≈ Xci for
i-th sample (You et al. 2020; Kang et al. 2020a; Peng et al.
2021). Moreover, different methods use various regularizations on C, their purpose is to make each sample to be represented only by samples in its own subspace. In many practical application scenarios, considering that real-world sam-

Obtaining a good similarity matrix is extremely important
in subspace clustering. Current state-of-the-art methods learn
the similarity matrix through self-expressive strategy. However, these methods directly adopt original samples as a set
of basis to represent itself linearly. It is difficult to accurately
describe the linear relation between samples in the real-world
applications, and thus is hard to find an ideal similarity matrix. To better represent the linear relation of samples, we
present a subspace clustering model, Linearity-Aware Subspace Clustering (LASC), which can consciously learn the
similarity matrix by employing a linearity-aware metric. This
is a new subspace clustering method that combines metric
learning and subspace clustering into a joint learning framework. In our model, we first utilize the self-expressive strategy to obtain an initial subspace structure and discover a
low-dimensional representation of the original data. Subsequently, we use the proposed metric to learn an intrinsic similarity matrix with linearity-aware on the obtained subspace.
Based on such a learned similarity matrix, the inter-cluster
distance becomes larger than the intra-cluster distances, and
thus successfully obtaining a good subspace cluster result.
In addition, to enrich the similarity matrix with more consistent knowledge, we adopt a collaborative learning strategy
for self-expressive subspace learning and linearity-aware subspace learning. Moreover, we provide detailed mathematical
analysis to show that the metric can properly characterize the
linear correlation between samples.

Introduction
Subspace clustering has emerged as a powerful technique for
a variety of computer vision applications, including image
processing (Li et al. 2020a; Zhou et al. 2020; Lu 2021), motion segmentation (Liu et al. 2013), face clustering (Zhang
et al. 2020b,a; Peng et al. 2021), and gene expression analysis (McWilliams and Montana 2014), etc. Generally, subspace clustering models are based on the assumption that the
* Corresponding author.
†

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8770

