The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Q-Ball: Modeling Basketball Games Using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Chen Yanai, Adir Solomon, Gilad Katz, Bracha Shapira, Lior Rokach
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
{chenyan,adirsolo,liorrk}@post.bgu.ac.il, {giladkz,bshapira}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

(Sicilia, Pelechrinis, and Goldsberry 2019), and providing
different tools for improving their game.
While previous studies (Neiman and Loewenstein 2011;
Wang et al. 2018) did use deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) on basketball games, their goals were limited to modeling a specific and relatively small set of player actions. In
this study we propose a DRL-based framework for modeling full basketball games. As a result, we were able to develop the Q-Ball measure, which quantifies the impact of
actions by specific players on a given game. Using Q-Ball
could be beneficial for several common scenarios; during a
recess, the coach can “replay” recent states and present alternatives should they happen again. In addition, when considering tactics for the remainder of the game (during timeouts, quarters intermissions, and halftime break), the coach
can explore alternative moves. Q-Ball could also be beneficial when changing players, the coach can better evaluate
which player will be most effective on average in the current lineup. Moreover, using Q-Ball offline can allow scouts
and managers to identify potential recruits with promising
decision-making skills.
Our novel approach enables us to jointly model not only
the discrete actions players make during the game (e.g., pass,
shot), but also continuous aspects such as player velocity.
Moreover, our framework relies on the rich contextual information such as players’ attributes (e.g., height and weight),
players and teams identifiers, the quarter and shot clocks,
etc. Thus, the Q-Ball measure is able to capture and model
latent connections among multiple contextual factors and
their discrete and continues actions. These capabilities enable us to accurately model the quality of various aspects
of the game, from a single action to the performance of an
entire team.
We evaluate our approach on a dataset comprised of
619 real NBA games in the 2015-16 season, derived from
the SportVU system and play-by-play, which describes the
events that occur during a game, e.g., shots, steals, and rebounds (Vračar, Štrumbelj, and Kononenko 2016). Merging
the data derived from the SportVU system and the play-byplay results in a high-resolution information dataset that captures both players’ movements and events. This study’s main
contributions are as follows:
• We use a novel method that enables us to combines
the discrete actions and continuous actions of basketball

Basketball is one of the most popular types of sports in the
world. Recent technological developments have made it possible to collect large amounts of data on the game, analyze it,
and discover new insights. We propose a novel approach for
modeling basketball games using deep reinforcement learning. By analyzing multiple aspects of both the players and
the game, we are able to model the latent connections among
players’ movements, actions, and performance, into a single
measure – the Q-Ball. Using Q-Ball, we are able to assign
scores to the performance of both players and whole teams.
Our approach has multiple practical applications, including
evaluating and improving players’ game decisions and producing tactical recommendations. We train and evaluate our
approach on a large dataset of National Basketball Association games, and show that the Q-Ball is capable of accurately
assessing the performance of players and teams. Furthermore,
we show that Q-Ball is highly effective in recommending alternatives to players’ actions.

Introduction
Basketball is one of the most popular sports around the
world. Its wide popularity has contributed to the growth
of the US National Basketball Association (NBA) (Manner
2016). The NBA is the most important and influential professional basketball league in the world (Manner 2016).The
rise of the game’s popularity sparked rapid growth both in
data collection and the development of advanced methods
for evaluating different aspects of the game (Torres 2013;
Macdonald 2020; Sampaio et al. 2015).
One of the most important and innovative developments
in sports-related data collection is the SportVU player tracking system1 2 . SportVU records all player positions on the
court, as well as the ball’s, and it does so with a very high
resolution of 25 frames per second. At the beginning of the
2013-14 NBA season, every team in the league installed the
SportVU system on its court. Analyzing this type of data enables us to evaluate players’ movements and game decisions
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://grantland.com/features/the-toronto-raptors-sportvucameras-nba-analytical-revolution
2
https://www.espn.com/blog/playbook/tech/post/ /id/492/492

8806

