The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Geometry-Contrastive Transformer for Generalized 3D Pose Transfer
Haoyu Chen1 Hao Tang2 Zitong Yu1 Nicu Sebe3 Guoying Zhao* 1
1
CMVS, University of Oulu
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
3
DISI, University of Trento
chen.haoyu@oulu.fi, hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch, zitong.yu@oulu.fi, nicu.sebe@unitn.it, guoying.zhao@oulu.fi
2

Abstract

der the guidance of the pose mesh with their global geometric contrasts. Locally, we introduce a novel central geodesic
contrastive loss to improve the geometric representation by
considering the regional contrast of all the geodesic directions of each vertex as back-propagation gradients. Furthermore, we present a latent isometric regularization module
to stabilize the unreliable performance of cross-dataset pose
transfer problems.
Moreover, we present a new 3D mesh dataset, i.e., SMG3D, for quantitatively evaluating the 3D pose transfer with
unknown spaces. The SMG-3D is based on daily spontaneously performed body gestures with more plausible and
challenging body movements and different than those wellperformed poses (Mahmood et al. 2019; Bogo et al. 2017).
We use a semi-synthesis way to build the dataset to provide
necessary GT meshes for training and validating. Our SMG3D dataset can be jointly combined with other existing body
mesh datasets for cross-dataset qualitative analysis.
A natural question to ask is: why not simply use purely
synthesized meshes to train and evaluate the model? The
short answer is that models trained on purely synthesized
meshes cannot cover the whole latent space and will fail
in the cross-dataset task. Indeed, using mesh synthesizing
models like the SMPL series (Bogo et al. 2016; Zuffi et al.
2017; Pavlakos et al. 2019) can synthesize unlimited poses
that can cover the whole latent space, or a large-scale dataset
AMASS (Mahmood et al. 2019) to eliminate the inconsistencies with unknown dataset space. However, in practice,
even for a small dataset FAUST with only 10 pose categories, it takes more than 26 hours to train a model (Cosmo
et al. 2020) to fully learn the latent space. Thus, due to the
staggering variability of poses and movements, it’s not feasible to train the model with synthesized samples covering
the whole pose space. It’s desirable that a model can be directly generalized to unknown latent spaces in a more efficient way. To this end, we propose the SMG-3D dataset to
tackle the cross-dataset learning issue. It can provide challenging latent distribution allocates on natural and plausible body poses with occlusions and self-contacts instead
of well-posed body moves like AMASS (Mahmood et al.
2019), which could advance the research to real-world scenarios one step further.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• A novel geometry-contrastive Transformer of positional

We present a customized 3D mesh Transformer model for
the pose transfer task. As the 3D pose transfer essentially
is a deformation procedure dependent on the given meshes,
the intuition of this work is to perceive the geometric inconsistency between the given meshes with the powerful
self-attention mechanism. Specifically, we propose a novel
geometry-contrastive Transformer that has an efficient 3D
structured perceiving ability to the global geometric inconsistencies across the given meshes. Moreover, locally, a simple
yet efficient central geodesic contrastive loss is further proposed to improve the regional geometric-inconsistency learning. At last, we present a latent isometric regularization module together with a novel semi-synthesized dataset for the
cross-dataset 3D pose transfer task towards unknown spaces.
The massive experimental results prove the efficacy of our approach by showing state-of-the-art quantitative performances
on SMPL-NPT, FAUST and our new proposed dataset SMG3D datasets, as well as promising qualitative results on MGcloth and SMAL datasets. It’s demonstrated that our method
can achieve robust 3D pose transfer and be generalized to
challenging meshes from unknown spaces on cross-dataset
tasks. The code and dataset are made available. Code is available: https://github.com/mikecheninoulu/CGT.

Introduction
Pose transfer, applying the desired pose of a source mesh to
a target mesh, is a promising and challenging task in 3D
computer vision, which can be widely applied to various
industrial fields. However, existing methods (Wang et al.
2020; Cosmo et al. 2020; Zhou, Bhatnagar, and Pons-Moll
2020; Chen et al. 2021b) can only perform well within given
datasets of synthesized/known pose and shape space, and
fail to be generalized to other unknown spaces with robust
performances, which severely limits the further real-world
implementations.
To achieve robust performances on unknown latent spaces
and other domains as shown in Fig. 1, we propose a novel
Transformer network targeting generalized 3D mesh pose
transfer. Specifically, a novel geometry-contrastive Transformer with geometrically structured encoders is designed
that aims to enhance the identity mesh representation un* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

258

