The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Boosting Generative Zero-Shot Learning by Synthesizing Diverse Features with
Attribute Augmentation
Xiaojie Zhao1 * , Yuming Shen2 * , Shidong Wang3 , Haofeng Zhang1†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
3
School of Engineering, Newcastle University, UK
zhaoxj@njust.edu.cn, yuming.shen@eng.ox.ac.uk, shidong.wang@newcastle.ac.uk, zhanghf@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

through the seen class instances and class attributes. Then,
it caches the generated samples of the unseen class with
the trained generator and the class attributes of the unseen
classes. Finally, a held-out classifier can be trained together
with the seen and synthesized unseen instances, mimicking
a supervised classification scheme.
Our work mainly focuses on the generation method.
When using semantic attributes to generate samples, the existing generation methods use complete semantic attributes,
including all attribute information of corresponding class.
Theoretically, when we generate visual features with complete semantic attributes, the generated visual features also
contain complete attribute information, as depicted in Figure
1. However, the actual situation is that the visual features of
categories do not always describe all the category attribute
information. Let us imagine a picture of a horse in front. We
cannot see the horse’s tail, so the visual features extracted
from this picture must lack the characteristic information of
the tail. When generating pictures, the complete semantic attributes of horses are used, and the generated visual features
must be complete, which must include the characteristics of
tails. It is obviously contrary and harmful to classification
learning as shown in Figure 1. The classification boundary
obtained from the visual features generated by a single attribute has great fluctuation, which is different from the real
classification boundary, will lead to the sample being misclassified.
In order to simulate the real situation and generate a variety of visual features, so that the generated visual features contain the class-level attribute information of various
situations, we propose Synthesizing Diverse Features with
Attribute Augmentation (SDFA2 ). When generating visual
features, our method better utilizes incomplete semantic attributes, which selectively masks out some bins of the semantic attributes. This simulates the absence of some attributes of visual features of real samples, so as to generate
visual features closer to the real situation. Taking the semantic attribute of horse as an example, the dimension representing the tail in the semantic attribute of horse is set to 0 to
represent the lack of tail attribute. The visual features of the
horse generated by this incomplete semantics will also lose
the attribute information of the tail. By means of this, the
visual features generated by unseen classes can be closer to
the real ones, and the held-out classifier trained on them ob-

The recent advance in deep generative models outlines a
promising perspective in the realm of Zero-Shot Learning
(ZSL). Most generative ZSL methods use category semantic attributes plus a Gaussian noise to generate visual features. After generating unseen samples, this family of approaches effectively transforms the ZSL problem into a supervised classification scheme. However, the existing models
use a single semantic attribute, which contains the complete
attribute information of the category. The generated data also
carry the complete attribute information, but in reality, visual
samples usually have limited attributes. Therefore, the generated data from attribute could have incomplete semantics.
Based on this fact, we propose a novel framework to boost
ZSL by synthesizing diverse features. This method uses augmented semantic attributes to train the generative model, so
as to simulate the real distribution of visual features. We evaluate the proposed model on four benchmark datasets, observing significant performance improvement against the state-ofthe-art.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning evolves rapidly. While it facilitates the utilization of vast data for modelling, a new
problem appears that the training phase only covers limited
scopes of samples, which requires an additional generalization stage to mitigate the gap between the seen concepts for
training and the unseen ones during inference. Zero-Shot
Learning (ZSL) then emerges accordingly. ZSL recognizes
categories that do not belong to the training set through the
auxiliary semantic attributes of sample categories (Zhang
et al. 2019).
Existing ZSL approaches can be roughly divided into two
categories according to training methods. One uses the mapping method to map between visual space and attribute space
(Cacheux, Borgne, and Crucianu 2019; Bucher, Herbin, and
Jurie 2016; Fu et al. 2015a; Kodirov, Xiang, and Gong 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018). The other method is the generation
method (Wang et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2020; Narayan et al.
2020; Yu et al. 2020). It firstly trains the sample generator
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3454

