The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TDv2: A Novel Tree-Structured Decoder for Offline Mathematical Expression
Recognition
Changjie Wu1 , Jun Du1∗ , Yunqing Li1 , Jianshu Zhang2 , Chen Yang1 , Bo Ren3 , Yiqing Hu3
1

NEL-SLIP Lab, University of Science and Technology of China
2
iFLYTEK Research
3
Tencent Youtu
wucj@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jundu@ustc.edu.cn, lyq123@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jszhang6@iflytek.com, yc24@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
timren@tencent.com, hooverhu@tencent.com
Abstract

et al. 2017a; Zhang, Du, and Dai 2019). They do not independently model the spatial relationship of mathematical expressions, so the generalization of the model is often poor. When recognizing mathematical expressions with
more complex structures, the performance of these methods
is unsatisfactory (Zhang et al. 2020).

In recent years, tree decoders become more popular than LaTeX string decoders in the field of handwritten mathematical
expression recognition (HMER) as they can capture the hierarchical tree structure of mathematical expressions. However previous tree decoders converted the tree structure labels
into a fixed and ordered sequence, which could not make full
use of the diversified expression of tree labels. In this study,
we propose a novel tree decoder (TDv2) to fully utilize the
tree structure labels. Compared with previous tree decoders,
this new model does not require a fixed priority for different
branches of a node during training and inference, which can
effectively improve the model generalization capability. The
input and output of the model make full use of the tree structure label, so that there is no need to find the parent node in
the decoding process, which simplifies the decoding process
and adds a priori information to help predict the node. We verified the effectiveness of each part of the model through comprehensive ablation experiments and attention visualization
analysis. On the authoritative CROHME 14/16/19 datasets,
our method achieves the state-of-the-art results.

Besides, tree-structured decoder (TD) (Zhang et al. 2020)
describes mathematical expressions with a tree structure label and uses different modules to separately predict the node
category and the spatial relationship between nodes. This
separate modeling of spatial relationships can effectively improve the generalization of the model to complex structures.
But unfortunately, in the process of training, they converted
the tree structure label into a fixed and ordered sequence,
which could not make full use of the diversified expression
brought by the tree structure label. On the other hand, in the
decoding process of this model, a complex attention memory module is needed to find the parent node of the current
node, which makes the decoding process more complicated
and inefficient.
In this article, we propose a novel tree decoder (TDv2)
that can fully utilize the tree structure tags of mathematical expressions to obtain more generalization and higher
accuracy. The overall architecture of TDv2 is based on the
encoder-decoder model, which is shown in Figure 1. The
encoder uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract high-dimensional features of offline mathematical expression pictures. The decoder includes a node classification
module and a branch prediction module to predict the symbol category of the current node and branches of the current
node separately. After getting the node information, we put
it into the stack table to build a tree of mathematical expression. In the inference stage, the stack table is also responsible for automatically popping the parent node and the spatial
relationship between the current node and the parent node as
the input of the decoder. For HMER, we also propose two
novel and effective improvements: adding “thinking” labels
and pixel-level auxiliary classification loss. We add a “thinking” label to let the attention mechanism observe first, and
make better preparations for finding child nodes, so that the
attention mechanism can focus on the child nodes more accurately. In addition, in order to better optimize the encoder
to obtain a stronger ability of extracting features, we directly

Introduction
Handwritten mathematical expression recognition (HMER)
has attracted more and more attention in academia and industry due to its huge application value. Different from text
line recognition (Shi, Bai, and Yao 2016; Cheng et al. 2017;
Li et al. 2019), handwritten mathematical expressions usually have complex structures, which means that HMER not
only needs to accurately recognize each handwritten symbol
in various forms, but also needs to analyze the corresponding relationship between the symbols. This complex spatial
structure not only makes the process more complicated, but
also puts forward higher requirements on the generalization
of HMER algorithms.
Many recent handwritten mathematical expression recognition works use end-to-end algorithms, which can perform symbol recognition and structural analysis in a single pipeline. These works are mainly based on the encoderdecoder framework to convert pictures or a series of trajectory points into LaTeX strings (Deng et al. 2017; Zhang
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2694

