The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Two Compacted Models for Efficient Model-Based Diagnosis
Huisi Zhou,1,2 Dantong Ouyang,1,2∗ Xiangfu Zhao,3 Liming Zhang 1,2*
2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130010, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130010, China
3
School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, China
zhouhsi@163.com,ouyd@jlu.edu.cn,xiangfuzhao@gmail.com,limingzhang@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract

fact, multiple observations with respect to the diagnosis system help promote the efficiency of the diagnosis process as
they may offer more diagnostic system information when
deriving diagnoses (Ignatiev et al. 2019). Furthermore, obtaining multiple observations is feasible and inexpensive in
real-world systems. Many diagnoses that take into account
this information have been presented in recent years.
The DiagCombine (DC) algorithm (Lamraoui and Nakajima 2014) aims at computing all covering sets of every set
of diagnoses with respect to each observaion. DC* (Lamraoui and Nakajima 2016) improves the runtime of the DC
algorithm by reducing the number of redundant diagnoses.
However, both DC and DC* fail to guarantee returning a
minimal diagnosis. Several algorithms propose a conflictdirected approach, which collects conflicts for all observations and merges them to derive diagnoses. The implicit Hitting Set Dualization (HSD) algorithm (Ignatiev et al. 2019)
focuses on computing implicit hitting sets with minimal correction set (MCS) (Marques-Silva et al. 2013; Previti et al.
2018) and maximum satisfiability (MaxSAT) (Narodytska
and Bacchus 2014; Cai and Lei 2020) algorithms between
diagnoses and conflicts, and outperforms DC and DC* when
injecting a single stuck-at fault. Although HSD outperforms
DC and DC* in most instances, it also exhibits poor performance when injecting more faults. Its improvement, namely,
the Improved implicit Hitting Set Dualization (IHSD) algorithm (Zhou et al. 2021), first uses the notion of gate dominance when deducing a diagnosis with multiple observations. The One-SAT algorithm (Kalech, Stern, and Lazebnik 2021) compiles all the observations into a Satisfiability
(SAT) formula (Gu et al. 1999) and derives the health assignment of all components using a SAT solver. This approach
will generate a very large number of clauses when given a
large number of observations.
This paper explores the MBD problem with multiple observations. The first contribution of this paper involves
the presentation of a novel compacted diagnosis model with
multiple observations. A set of observations consists of a
series of system inputs and the corresponding system
outputs. Taking the first system inputs w.r.t the first observation as a basis, we analyze the difference between the
other system inputs and the basis. Correspondingly, we
propose a selection strategy and the Compacted Model with
Multiple Observations (CMMO) encodes constraints for se-

Model-based diagnosis (MBD) with multiple observations
is complicated and difficult to manage over. In this paper,
we propose two new diagnosis models, namely, the Compacted Model with Multiple Observations (CMMO) and the
Dominated-based Compacted Model with Multiple Observations (D-CMMO), to solve the problem in which a considerable amount of time is needed when multiple observations are given and more than one fault is injected. Three ideas
are presented in this paper. First, we propose to encode MBD with each observation as a subsystem and share as many
system variables as possible to compress the size of encoded clauses. Second, we utilize the notion of gate dominance in
the CMMO approach to compute Top-Level Diagnosis with
Compacted Model (CM-TLD) to reduce the solution space.
Finally, we explore the performance of our model using three
fault models. Experimental results on the ISCAS-85 benchmarks show that CMMO and D-CMMO perform better than
the state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Model-based diagnosis (MBD) is an important approach to
analyze complex systems and explain why a system fails,
and this problem has been researched for many years in the
artificial intelligence (AI) field (Reiter 1987; de Kleer and
Williams 1987; Keren, Kalech, and Rokach 2011; Nica et al.
2013). In general, MBD algorithms either use an abductive
model in which all behaviors for each component in the system are known and defined (Friedrich, Gottlob, and Nejdl
1990), or a consistent model in which all behaviors for each
component in the system are undefined (Reiter 1987; Feldman et al. 2020; Console, Dupré, and Torasso 1991). These
algorithms are widely used in various areas including qualitative models (Struss and Price 2004), debugging of web services (Ardissono et al. 2005), discrete event systems (Pencolé and Cordier 2005), debugging of relational specifications (Torlak, Chang, and Jackson 2008), hybrid systems (Narasimhan and Biswas 2007), and spreadsheet debugging (Jannach and Schmitz 2016), among many others.
In most cases, MBD algorithms compute diagnoses using a given system model and one or more observations. In
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3885

