The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Entropy Eestimation via Normalizing Flow
Ziqiao Ao, Jinglai Li
School of Mathematics, University of Birmingham
{zxa029, j.li.10}@bham.ac.uk

Abstract

admits an analytical expression for a limited family of distributions and needs to be evaluated numerically in general.
When the distribution of interest is analytically available, in
principle its entropy can be estimated by numerical integration schemes such as the Monte Carlo method. However, in
many real-world applications, the distribution of interest is
not analytically available, and one has to estimate the entropy
from the i.i.d. realizations drawn from the target distribution,
which makes exact computation of the entropy difficult or
even impossible.
Entropy estimation has attracted considerable attention
from various communities in the last a few decades, and a
large number of methods have been developed to directly
evaluate entropy from realizations. In this work we only consider non-parametric approaches which do not assume any
parametric model of the target distribution, and those methods can be broadly classified into two categories. The first
line of methods, known as the plug-in estimators, are to estimate the unknown probability density, and then compute
the integral in Eq. (1) using numerical integration or Monte
Carlo (see (Beirlant et al. 1997) for a detailed description).
Some examples of density estimation approaches that have
been studied for plug-in methods are kernel density estimator (Joe 1989; Hall and Morton 1993), histogram estimator
(Györfi and Van der Meulen 1987; Hall and Morton 1993) and
field-theoretic approach (Chen, Tareen, and Kinney 2018). A
major limitation of this type of methods is that they rely on
an effective density estimation, which is a difficult problem
in its own right, especially when the dimensionality of the
problem is high. A different strategy is to directly estimate
the entropy from the independent samples of the random
variable. Methods following this line include sample-spacing
(Miller 2003) and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) (Kozachenko
and Leonenko 1987; Kraskov, Stögbauer, and Grassberger
2004) based estimators. The latter is particularly appealing
among the existing estimation methods for its theoretical and
computational advantages and has been widely used in practical problems. More recent variants and extensions of the
k-NN methods include (Gao, Ver Steeg, and Galstyan 2015;
Berrett et al. 2019).
Entropy estimation becomes increasingly more difficult
as the dimensionality grows, and such difficulty is mainly
due to the estimation bias, which decays very slowly with
respect to sample size for high-dimensional problems. For

Entropy estimation is an important problem in information theory and statistical science. Many popular entropy estimators
suffer from fast growing estimation bias with respect to dimensionality, rendering them unsuitable for high-dimensional
problems. In this work we propose a transform-based method
for high-dimensional entropy estimation, which consists of
the following two main ingredients. First by modifying the
k-NN based entropy estimator, we propose a new estimator
which enjoys small estimation bias for samples that are close
to a uniform distribution. Second we design a normalizing
flow based mapping that pushes samples toward a uniform
distribution, and the relation between the entropy of the original samples and the transformed ones is also derived. As a
result the entropy of a given set of samples is estimated by
first transforming them toward a uniform distribution and then
applying the proposed estimator to the transformed samples.
Numerical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
method for high-dimensional entropy estimation problems.

Introduction
Entropy is one of the most fundamental concepts in information theory, and has also found vast applications in other
disciplines such as physics, statistics and machine learning.
For example, in the data science contexts, various applications rely critically on the estimation of entropy, including
goodness-of-fit testing (Vasicek 1976; Goria et al. 2005), sensitivity analysis (Azzi, Sudret, and Wiart 2020), parameter
estimation (Ranneby 1984; Wolsztynski, Thierry, and Pronzato 2005), and Bayesian experimental design (Sebastiani
and Wynn 2000; Ao and Li 2020).
As a concept of the average surprisal in a variable’s possible outcomes, entropy provides a natural answer to measuring
the uncertainty of probability distribution of interest. In this
work we focus on the continuous version of entropy that takes
the form,
Z
H(X) = − log[px (x)]px (x)dx,
(1)
where px (x) is probability density function of a random variable X. Despite the rather simple definition, entropy only
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9990

