The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Relational Graph Representation Learning with
Bayesian Gaussian Process Network
Guanzheng Chen1,2 , Jinyuan Fang1,2 , Zaiqiao Meng3 , Qiang Zhang4,5 , Shangsong Liang1,2,6, *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
3
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom
4
Hangzhou Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, China
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
6
Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
{guanzzh.chen, fangjy6}@gmail.com, zaiqiao.meng@glasgow.ac.uk, qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn,
liangshangsong@gmail.com
2

Abstract

mendation (Qian et al. 2013), and relation extraction (Zhou
et al. 2005; Qu et al. 2020).
Recent researches on KGs have been focusing on learning
representations for entities and relations that encode semantic and structural information inherent in KGs. Particularly,
multi-relational graph neural networks (Schlichtkrull et al.
2018; Vashishth et al. 2020b; Nathani et al. 2019), which
iteratively aggregate messages from neighboring entities,
have achieved impressive performance on multi-relational
learning tasks. However, these methods learn a deterministic embedding function, which makes them less effective to
handle the imperfect and noisy KGs. For instance, the labeled entities in KGs are usually scarce due to the expensiveness and difficulty of human annotation, and missing or
wrong edges are also common in KGs (Ji et al. 2021). Learning with these imperfect and noisy KGs may lead to the
poor performance of deterministic embedding methods in
entity classification task, due to the rigidness of deterministic methods and lacking sufficient supervision signals (Wang
et al. 2020).
To address these challenges, we propose a novel multirelational Graph Gaussian Process Network (GGPN) for
learning KG representations. GGPN aims to simultaneously
learn a family of embedding functions, i.e., a stochastic embedding function (Ross et al. 1996), instead of learning a
deterministic function. The learned stochastic function of
GGPN offers more flexibility to handle the imperfections
or noises in KGs, effectively improving the performance.
Specifically, we model the stochastic embedding function
with Gaussian Process (GP), which defines a distribution
over functions in a continuous domain (Rasmussen 2003).
The resulting representations are obtained through aggregating the stochastic function values, i.e., messages, from
neighboring entities associated with different relations.
Despite using GP for representation learning is promising,
there are two additional problems incurred by GP remain to
be solved: (1) Existing kernel functions, e.g., RBF (Bergman
1970), which heavily affect the performance of GPs, are incapable of taking diverse relations between each pair of entities into account and difficult to adapt to the training data. (2)

Learning effective representations of entities and relations
for knowledge graphs (KGs) is critical to the success of
many multi-relational learning tasks. Existing methods based
on graph neural networks learn a deterministic embedding
function, which lacks sufficient flexibility to explore better
choices when dealing with the imperfect and noisy KGs such
as the scarce labeled nodes and noisy graph structure. To
this end, we propose a novel multi-relational graph Gaussian
Process network (GGPN), which aims to improve the flexibility of deterministic methods by simultaneously learning a
family of embedding functions, i.e., a stochastic embedding
function. Specifically, a Bayesian Gaussian Process (GP) is
proposed to model the distribution of this stochastic function
and the resulting representations are obtained by aggregating
stochastic function values, i.e., messages, from neighboring
entities. The two problems incurred when leveraging GP in
GGPN are the proper choice of kernel function and the cubic computational complexity. To address the first problem,
we further propose a novel kernel function that can explicitly
take the diverse relations between each pair of entities into account and be adaptively learned in a data-driven way. We address the second problem by reformulating GP as a Bayesian
linear model, resulting in a linear computational complexity.
With these two solutions, our GGPN can be efficiently trained
in an end-to-end manner. We evaluate our GGPN in link prediction and entity classification tasks, and the experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of our method. Our code
is available at https://github.com/sysu-gzchen/GGPN.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs), as high-profile multi-relational
graphs, are composed of entities as nodes and relations as
the types of edges to store plenty of factual knowledge. Analyzing KGs has become one of the most important topics in
machine learning community, with a wide spectrum of applications such as question answering (Liang, Luo, and Meng
2021; Luo, Liang, and Meng 2019), personalized recom* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5530

