The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Coordinate Descent on the Orthogonal Group for Recurrent Neural Network
Training
Estelle Massart1, 2 , Vinayak Abrol3
1

Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2
National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, UK
3
Infosys Centre for AI, IIIT Delhi, India
massart@maths.ox.ac.uk, abrol@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract

A recently proposed remedy against exploding and vanishing gradients in RNNs imposes the recurrent weight matrix W to be orthogonal/unitary, see, e.g., (Arjovsky, Shah,
and Bengio 2016). However, for large models, enforcing this
constraint comes with substantial computational costs, that
prohibit the use of large architectures. Several solutions have
been proposed to alleviate these costs, typically relying on
some parametrization of the orthogonal group, see below.
Unfortunately, most of these works are focused on algorithmic contributions and contain no convergence results.
As the orthogonal group admits a Riemannian manifold
structure, the problem can be studied through the lens of Riemannian optimization. For example, stochastic Riemannian
gradient descent has been applied to orthogonal RNN training in (Wisdom et al. 2016). This algorithm scales poorly
with architecture size; its cost per iteration evolves cubically with the number of recurrent states. We propose here
a stochastic extension of the Riemannian coordinate descent
algorithm proposed in (Shalit and Chechik 2014). For each
mini-batch, instead of updating the full matrix W , we rotate
a pair of columns of W only; this is equivalent to restricting
the update of the matrix W to one coordinate of the tangent
space to the orthogonal group per iteration, for a suitably
chosen basis. As pointed out in (Shalit and Chechik 2014),
this rotation can be efficiently implemented as a multiplication of the current iterate by a Givens matrix, at a cost that
evolves linearly with d. Moreover, as we only require a subset of the partial derivatives at each iterations, the cost of the
backpropagation routine could be theoretically reduced from
a quadratic to a linear function of d. Our work is thus a major step towards the training of high-dimensional orthogonal
recurrent neural networks. Moreover, the theory of Riemannian optimization allows us to derive a convergence analysis
of our proposed algorithm.

We address the poor scalability of learning algorithms for orthogonal recurrent neural networks via the use of stochastic
coordinate descent on the orthogonal group, leading to a cost
per iteration that increases linearly with the number of recurrent states. This contrasts with the cubic dependency of typical feasible algorithms such as stochastic Riemannian gradient descent, which prohibits the use of big network architectures. Coordinate descent rotates successively two columns
of the recurrent matrix. When the coordinate (i.e., indices of
rotated columns) is selected uniformly at random at each iteration, we prove convergence of the algorithm under standard assumptions on the loss function, stepsize and minibatch
noise. In addition, we numerically show that the Riemannian
gradient has an approximately sparse structure. Leveraging
this observation, we propose a variant of our proposed algorithm that relies on the Gauss-Southwell coordinate selection
rule. Experiments on a benchmark recurrent neural network
training problem show that the proposed approach is a very
promising step towards the training of orthogonal recurrent
neural networks with big architectures.

1

Introduction

Exploding or vanishing gradients are key issues affecting
the training of deep neural networks (DNNs), and are particularly problematic when training recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Bengio, Simard, and Frasconi 1994; Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013), an architecture that endows the network with some memory and has been proposed
for modeling sequential data (see, e.g., (Giles, Kuhn, and
Williams 1994)). In recurrent neural networks, the signal
propagation is described by the following pair of equations

h(t + 1) = φ(Win x(t + 1) + W h(t)),
(1)
y(t + 1) = Wout h(t + 1) + bout ,
for t = 0, 1, . . . , with input x(t) ∈ Rdin , hidden state
h(t) ∈ Rd , and output y(t) ∈ Rdout . The mapping φ is
a pointwise nonlinearity, and W ∈ Rd×d , Win ∈ Rd×din ,
Wout ∈ Rdout ×d and bout ∈ Rdout are model parameters.
The repeated multiplication of the hidden state by the recurrent matrix W makes these architectures particularly sensitive to exploding or vanishing gradients.

Related Works
Orthogonal/Unitary RNNs. Unitary RNNs have been
initially proposed in (Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016) to
avoid exploding or vanishing gradients. Various algorithms
have then been developed to train orthogonal RNNs. Typically, these works propose parametrizations of the orthogonal/unitary group that lead to computationally cheap operations, see (Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016; Wisdom et al.
2016; Jing et al. 2017; Hyland and Rätsch 2017; Mhammedi

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7744

