The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Mode Tensor Space Clustering Based on Low-Tensor-Rank Representation
Yicong He1 , George K. Atia1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida
{yicong.he, george.atia}@ucf.edu

Abstract

Subspace clustering has received strong interest in recent
years due to its wide applicability in diverse domains, including computer vision (Zhang, Jiang, and Davis 2013;
Wang et al. 2018a), image processing (Hong et al. 2006;
Zhang et al. 2016), and bioinformatics (Zheng et al. 2019;
Peignier, Rigotti, and Beslon 2015). The theoretical underpinning of subspace clustering is that high-dimensional data
points lie in a union of low-dimensional subspaces (Vidal
2011), which has led to numerous successful clustering algorithms in the last decades (Parsons, Haque, and Liu 2004;
Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Gao et al. 2015). Spectral clustering, in which points are clustered by partitioning a similarity
graph derived from the data (Von Luxburg 2007), is the basis
for some of the most popular and modern clustering methods, such as sparse spectral clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and

Vidal 2013), low rank representation (LRR) (Liu et al. 2010)
and least squares regression (LSR) (Lu et al. 2012).
In traditional subspace clustering, the data is assumed
to lie close to linear (vector) subspaces. To cluster multidimensional data, a common approach is to first map it to
vectors (vectorization), then apply subspace clustering to
cluster the points into groups that belong to the same subspace (e.g., see (Vidal 2011) for a survey.) A drawback of
this approach, however, is that it does not fully exploit multiway correlations intrinsic to such data (Piao et al. 2016; Fu
et al. 2016). For example, in video sequences, frames could
have strong correlations in the temporal domain, and vectorization often falls short of capturing the spatial and temporal
correlations among the adjacent pixels.
Recently, (Ashraphijuo and Wang 2020) presented a theoretical study of the problem of clustering tensors drawn
from a union of low-rank tensor spaces. This work brought
to the fore the utility of employing multi-dimensional data
structures when performing clustering, since the number of
data points and the sampling rate requirements to guarantee
correct clustering based on tensor analysis were shown to
be significantly lower than with matrix analysis applied to
unfoldings of the tensor data. However, (Ashraphijuo and
Wang 2020) did not develop actual algorithms for tensor
space clustering, which is the primary focus of our work.
In this paper, we develop a novel low-tensor-rank representation (LTRR) and a multi-mode tensor space clustering
(MMTSC) algorithm to cluster data lying in a union of tensor spaces with or without missing entries. By leveraging a
tensor circular unfolding scheme (Yu et al. 2018, 2019), the
tensor can be unfolded into several matrices along different modes and the corresponding representation coefficient
matrices are obtained. In sharp contrast to SSC and LRR
which impose a sparse and low rank constraint on the representation coefficient matrices, we impose a low-tensor-rank
constraint on the transformed coefficient tensors to capture
the self-expressiveness property of the tensor data. Then, a
multi-mode clustering algorithm is proposed, which simultaneously captures the low-tensor-rank property for each coefficient tensor and the consistency of clustering across the
different modes. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a novel low-tensor-rank representation for
unfolding matrices of high-dimensional data lying in a

Traditional subspace clustering aims to cluster data points lying in a union of vector subspaces. The vectorization of multidimensional data to perform clustering disregards much of
the structure intrinsic to such data. To capture said structure, in this work we perform clustering in a high-order tensor space rather than a vector space. We develop a novel
low-tensor-rank representation (LTRR) for unfolded matrices of tensor data lying in a low-rank tensor space. The
representation coefficient matrix of an unfolding matrix is
tensorized to a 3-order tensor, and a low-tensor-rank constraint is imposed on the resulting coefficient tensor to exploit
the self-expressiveness property. Then, inspired by the multiview clustering framework, we develop a multi-mode tensor
space clustering algorithm (MMTSC) that can deal with tensor space clustering with or without missing entries. The tensor is unfolded along each mode, and the coefficient matrices are obtained for each unfolded matrix. The low-tensorrank constraint is imposed on a tensor constructed from transformed coefficient tensors for each mode, thereby simultaneously capturing the low rank property of the data within each
tensor space and maintaining cluster consistency across different modes. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed MMTSC algorithm can in many cases outperform existing clustering algorithms.

Introduction

6893

