The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MLink: Linking Black-Box Models for Collaborative Multi-Model Inference
Mu Yuan, Lan Zhang* , Xiang-Yang Li
University of Science and Technology of China
ym0813@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhanglan@ustc.edu.cn, xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

blum et al. 2020; Bai et al. 2020) techniques attempt to eliminate parameters and connections not related to the inference
accuracy; Inference reusing (Guo et al. 2018; Ning, Guan,
and Shen 2019) approaches aim to avoid the same or similar
computations; Source filtering (Li et al. 2020) methods try to
transmit only necessary input data to backend ML models.
Adaptive configuration (Jiang et al. 2018) and multi-model
scheduling (Yuan et al. 2020a) were proposed to make inference workloads adaptive to the dynamics of input content.
We summarize them as answers to an interesting question:
How to obtain as accurate inference results as possible without the exact execution of ML models?
From this perspective, multi-task learning and model compression generates a lighter model for the same inference
task(s) by pruning the original model(s). Inference reusing
and source filtering techniques reuse previous inference results as the predicted results through analyzing the correlation between inputs. Based on the observation that, for some
input data, the accuracy of expensive and cheap models is
similar, adaptive configuration analyzes the input dynamics and predicts the inference results of expensive models
by executing cheap ones. Adaptive multi-model scheduling
predicts unnecessary inference results as empty using the executed models’ outputs as the hint information.
We address this problem from a novel perspective: linking black-box models. We were motivated by the insight that
even ML models that are different in input modalities, learning tasks, architectures, etc., can share knowledge with each
other, since ML models are prone to “overlearning” (Song
and Shmatikov 2020) and outputs of different models have
semantic correlations (Tan et al. 2018). If we can effectively
bridge the knowledge among ML models, we can directly
predict inference results of remaining models based on executed models’ outputs. If the cost of this prediction is low, it
is promising to improve the resulting accuracy of inference
results from all models under a limited cost budget, compared to the original workflow where results of unexecuted
models cannot be obtained at all. To realize this vision, the
following two main challenges need to be solved:
(1) How to build knowledge-level links among blackbox and highly different ML models? In practice, deployed ML models could have different architectures and
input modalities, and they could be developed by different
programming languages and ML frameworks. The hetero-

The cost efficiency of model inference is critical to realworld machine learning (ML) applications, especially for
delay-sensitive tasks and resource-limited devices. A typical dilemma is: in order to provide complex intelligent services (e.g. smart city), we need inference results of multiple ML models, but the cost budget (e.g. GPU memory) is
not enough to run all of them. In this work, we study underlying relationships among black-box ML models and propose a novel learning task: model linking. Model linking aims
to bridge the knowledge of different black-box models by
learning mappings (dubbed model links) between their output spaces. Based on model links, we developed a scheduling
algorithm, named MLink. Through collaborative multi-model
inference enabled by model links, MLink can improve the accuracy of obtained inference results under the cost budget. We
evaluated MLink on a multi-modal dataset with seven different ML models and two real-world video analytics systems
with six ML models and 3,264 hours of video. Experimental
results show that our proposed model links can be effectively
built among various black-box models. Under the budget of
GPU memory, MLink can save 66.7% inference computations while preserving 94% inference accuracy, which outperforms multi-task learning, deep reinforcement learning-based
scheduler and frame filtering baselines.

Introduction
Multi-model inference workloads are increasingly prevalent,
e.g., smart speaker assistants (Bentley et al. 2018), smart
cities (Duan et al. 2018), drone-based video monitoring (Dilshad et al. 2020), multi-modal autonomous driving (Feng
et al. 2020), etc. Besides the accuracy of the trained models, costs in the inference phase can become the bottleneck
to the quality of services, especially for delay-sensitive tasks
and resource-limited devices.
Towards cost-efficient inference, existing work explored
various perspectives to achieve the resource-performance
trade-offs. Multi-task learning and zipping (He, Zhou, and
Thiele 2018; Sanh, Wolf, and Ruder 2019; Crawshaw 2020;
Zhang and Yang 2021) can reduce the computing overheads
by sharing neurons among different tasks; Model compression (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Liu et al. 2018; Gold* Lan Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9475

