The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Search and Learn: Improving Semantic Coverage for Data-to-Text Generation
Shailza Jolly1, 2 , Zi Xuan Zhang3 , Andreas Dengel1, 2 , Lili Mou3
1

TU Kaiserslautern, Germany
2
DFKI GmbH, Germany
3
Dept. Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta, Canada
shailza.jolly@dfki.de, zixuan7@ualberta.ca, andreas.dengel@dfki.de, doublepower.mou@gmail.com

Abstract

Chen et al. (2020b) apply few-shot learning to data-totext generation by fine-tuning pre-trained language models (LMs) with a copy mechanism. Pretrained LMs learn
generic knowledge of natural language from massive unlabeled corpora, and thus are able to generate plausible text
with fewer samples than traditional neural networks. However, we observe that fine-tuned LMs fail to fully learn the
correspondence between input and output in the few-shot
setting. They suffer from the problem of low semantic coverage, that is, important information slots are often missing
in the generated text.

Data-to-text generation systems aim to generate text descriptions based on input data (often represented in the tabular
form). A typical system uses huge training samples for learning the correspondence between tables and texts. However,
large training sets are expensive to obtain, limiting the applicability of these approaches in real-world scenarios. In this
work, we focus on few-shot data-to-text generation. We observe that, while fine-tuned pretrained language models may
generate plausible sentences, they suffer from the low semantic coverage problem in the few-shot setting. In other words,
important input slots tend to be missing in the generated text.
To this end, we propose a search-and-learning approach that
leverages pretrained language models but inserts the missing slots to improve the semantic coverage. We further finetune our system based on the search results to smooth out
the search noise, yielding better-quality text and improving
inference efficiency to a large extent. Experiments show that
our model achieves high performance on E2E and WikiBio
datasets. Especially, we cover 98.35% of input slots on E2E,
largely alleviating the low coverage problem.

In our work, we propose a search-and-learning (S&L) approach to address the low coverage problem for few-shot
data-to-text generation. We first fine-tune the pre-trained T5
language model (Raffel et al. 2020), similar to previous work
of Chen et al. (2020b). To address the low coverage problem,
we iteratively insert a missing slot into the generated sentence. We try all possible positions for the insertion, and pick
the most appropriate candidate sentence based on T5 probability. This can be thought of as greedy search that finds
a sentence containing all slots. Inspired by Li et al. (2020),
we then treat the search results as pseudo-groundtruth and
further fine-tune our T5 language model.

Introduction
Data-to-text generation is a task that converts structured data
into human-readable text descriptions, illustrated in Figure 1. Data-to-text generation has gained much attention in
the field of natural language processing, with applications to
restaurant descriptions (Novikova, Dušek, and Rieser 2017),
biographies (Lebret, Grangier, and Auli 2016), and weather
forecasts (Liang, Jordan, and Klein 2009).
Traditional approaches to text generation (NLG) use
handcrafted rules with statistics (Langkilde and Knight
1998; Stent, Prasad, and Walker 2004; Rieser and Lemon
2009), usually lacking flexibility and output diversity.
Recently, data-to-text generation is generally accomplished by modern neural networks, such as sequence-tosequence recurrent neural networks (Lebret, Grangier, and
Auli 2016; Liu et al. 2018). These models use massive parallel training data, for example, 42K table–text training pairs
in the E2E dataset (Novikova, Dušek, and Rieser 2017). This
data-hungry nature of neural models makes data-to-text generation an expensive and time-consuming affair and restricts
its real-world applications.

In this way, our model achieves high semantic coverage
of the input slots. Also, our model is efficient for generating
sentences and does not increase the inference complexity;
it also yields more fluent sentences compared with searchbased text generation (Liu et al. 2020).
In summary, our main contributions include: 1) We address the low semantic coverage problem in few-shot datato-text generation. 2) To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to propose search-and-learning approaches for
data-to-text generation, where we incorporate traditional
template-based methods as search actions to insert missing slots. 3) We conducted extensive experiments on E2E
and WikiBio datasets; our model outperforms previous fewshot models in various metrics, largely closing the gap between few-shot and fully supervised learning. Especially, we
achieve 98.35% coverage on the E2E dataset1 .

1
Our code and output are available at
https://github.com/shailzajolly/FSDT

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10858

