The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Trusted Multi-View Deep Learning with Opinion Aggregation
Wei Liu1 , Xiaodong Yue1,2 * , Yufei Chen3 , Thierry Denoeux4,5
1

School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
2
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
3
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
4
Université de technologie de Compiègne, CNRS UMR 7253 Heudiasyc, Compiègne, France
5
Shanghai University, UTSEUS, Shanghai, China
ldachuan@outlook.com, yswantfly@shu.edu.cn, yufeichen@tongji.edu.cn, thierry.denoeux@utc.fr
Abstract

In real-world applications, data is usually represented with
different views, including multiple modalities or various
types of features, which leads a growing interest in multiview learning. With the development of the deep learning,
most of the existing multi-view learning methods tend to integrate multi-view information with deep neural networks
to achieve state-of-the-art performance in various application domains (Wang et al. 2015a; Andrew et al. 2013; Wang
et al. 2018; Tao et al. 2019; Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2019;
Bachman, Hjelm, and Buchwalter 2019; Sun, Liu, and Mao
2019; Zhang et al. 2019, 2020; Sun, Dong, and Liu 2020).
However, due to the property differences and inconsistency
of multiple data sources, the results learned from multi-view
deep learning method may be uncertain and unreliable, because the traditional convolutional neural networks focus on
the accuracy of the classifications but ignore the credibility of the results, which makes a great limitation in various
kinds of applications, especially safety-critical applications
(e.g., medical diagnosis or autonomous driving).

To address this limitation, an uncertainty-aware trusted
Multi-view Classification (TMC) method (Han et al. 2021)
was proposed recently. TMC focuses on combining different
views at an evidence level in terms of the Dempster’s rule of
combination to produce a reliable classification result. However, it does not guarantee the decrease of the overall uncertainty when integrating the uncertain information extracted
from multi-view data and does not consider the “consistency” in multi-view learning for avoiding the conflict across
information captured from different views. Moreover, the
fusion with Dempster’s rule will produce counter-intuitive
results (Zadeh 1984). Therefore, this has motivated us to revisit the multi-view learning from the perspective of opinion
aggregation and thereby develop a trusted multi-view deep
learning method.
Opinion aggregation aims at aggregating multiple opinions within a group in support of group decision making,
which is the same as the fusion process for multi-view learning. However, the opinions from multiple views about the
same domain are always unreliable because of the various
sensor qualities or environmental factors, which adds more
uncertainty to the decision-making process. A good opinion
aggregation process should consist of two necessary parts:
1) a trusted aggregation strategy, which can reduce the overall uncertainty after aggregation, 2) maximization of consistency across views for avoiding conflict between multiple opinions. Therefore, from the perspective of a good
opinion aggregation structure, we devise a trusted multiview deep learning method. Within this method, we adopt
the evidence theory to represent opinions as beliefs about
the truth of propositions under degrees of uncertainty. In
this opinion representation, the beliefs mean the evidences
support for those class probabilities and uncertainty means
the vacuity of evidence, which allows explicit expression of
level of trust for the results learned from different views.
Then, guided by the mapping between opinions and Dirichlet PDFs, we integrate the opinions in terms of the evidence
accumulation, which can increase the evidences support for
class probabilities and decrease the vacuity of evidence and
thereby increase the reliability of multi-view deep learning
results. In summary, our contributions of this paper are:

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(1) We construct a trusted multi-view deep learning method
through simulating opinion aggregation mechanism to
achieve trusted learning results. The proposed method

Multi-view deep learning is performed based on the deep fusion of data from multiple sources, i.e. data with multiple
views. However, due to the property differences and inconsistency of data sources, the deep learning results based on the
fusion of multi-view data may be uncertain and unreliable. It
is required to reduce the uncertainty in data fusion and implement the trusted multi-view deep learning. Aiming at the
problem, we revisit the multi-view learning from the perspective of opinion aggregation and thereby devise a trusted multiview deep learning method. Within this method, we adopt
evidence theory to formulate the uncertainty of opinions as
learning results from different data sources and measure the
uncertainty of opinion aggregation as multi-view learning results through evidence accumulation. We prove that accumulating the evidences from multiple data views will decrease
the uncertainty in multi-view deep learning and facilitate to
achieve the trusted learning results. Experiments on various
kinds of multi-view datasets verify the reliability and robustness of the proposed multi-view deep learning method.

Introduction

7585

