The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Fine-Grained Reasoning for Fake News Detection
Yiqiao Jin1 * , Xiting Wang2† , Ruichao Yang3 , Yizhou Sun1 , Wei Wang1 , Hao Liao4 , Xing Xie2
1

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Microsoft Research Asia,
3
Hong Kong Baptist University, 4 Shenzhen University
ahren2040@g.ucla.edu, {xitwan, xing.xie}@microsoft.com,
{yzsun, weiwang}@cs.ucla.edu, csrcyang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, haoliao@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

Breaking: Barrels Removed From Clinton Property
Contained Parts From 3 Missing Women

The detection of fake news often requires sophisticated reasoning skills, such as logically combining information by
considering word-level subtle clues. In this paper, we move
towards fine-grained reasoning for fake news detection by
better reflecting the logical processes of human thinking and
enabling the modeling of subtle clues. In particular, we propose a fine-grained reasoning framework by following the
human’s information-processing model, introduce a mutualreinforcement-based method for incorporating human knowledge about which evidence is more important, and design a
prior-aware bi-channel kernel graph network to model subtle differences between pieces of evidence. Extensive experiments show that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods and demonstrate the explainability of our approach.

Three women who all went missing in the mid-1970s have turned up, at least parts of them, in
a steel industrial 55-gallon drum buried on the Clinton estate in Chappaqua, New York. ...

Evidence group 1: imply TRUE news
Liam

Disappeared from Arkansas. Found on their
property. Nothing to do with them?

Evidence is in the barrels and 2 people own
that property are Hillary and Mr. Clinton.
Alice Arrest them. No excuses. Damn u.

Evidence group 3: imply FAKE news
Mia

The link is at the end of the article, I have
seen this one before and they were dead
before Clinton bought the property!

Evidence group 2: imply TRUE news
I knew it. The Clintons persecuted
my family ... nobody believed me.
Alice Now they will!

I knew Hillary was hiding those
Noah bodies somewhere. Go to hell!

Evidence group 4: imply FAKE news
I guess the site is based on satire

Claimed to be satire. To give the
fist-shakers a reason to hate.

Figure 1: A motivating example of fine-grained reasoning
for fake news detection.
The major part of the model (e.g. the overall workflow) remains obscure to humans. This prevents humans to better
understand and trust the model, or steer the model for performance refinement.
Accuracy. When humans reason about the authenticity of
a news article, they have the ability to perform fine-grained
analysis for identifying subtle (e.g., word-level) clues, and
can connect different types of clues (e.g., textual and social)
to draw conclusions. An example is shown in Fig. 1. Although the four groups of evidence are semantically dissimilar, humans can logically connect them in terms of subtle
clues such as the word “property”, which leads to a much
more confident conclusion about the article. For example,
reasoning in terms of “property” reveals that the accusation
of finding bodies in Clintons’ property (evidence group 1)
might be false, since the women were dead before the Clintons bought the property (evidence group 3). Reasoning with
respect to “hate” suggests that users in groups 1 and 2 might
post false messages because they hate the Clintons. The
overlap between users in groups 1 and 2 further strengthens this suggestion. Existing methods lack such capability
of fine-grained reasoning: they either do not model the interactions between different types of evidence or model them
at a coarse-grained (e.g., sentence or post) level.
We aim to move towards using deep reasoning for fake
news detection. The goal is to improve accuracy and explainability by 1) better reflecting the logical processes of
human thinking and 2) enabling fine-grained modeling of
subtle clues. In particular, we study three research questions:

Introduction
The emergence of social media has transformed the way
users exchange information online. People are no longer
mere reviewers of information, but content creators and message spreaders. Consequently, it has become much easier for
fake news to spread on the Internet. Since fake news can obscure the truth, undermine people’s belief, and cause serious social impact (Brewer, Young, and Morreale 2013), detecting fake news has become increasingly important for a
healthy and clean network environment (Shu et al. 2017).
Recently, neural models have been proposed to detect fake
news in a data-driven manner (Pan et al. 2018; Dun et al.
2021). These works have shown the promise in leveraging
big data for fake news detection. However, works that approach the task from the perspective of reasoning are still
lacking. According to the literature on psychology, reasoning is the capability of consciously applying logic for truth
seeking (Honderich 2005), and is typically considered as
a distinguishing capacity of humans (Mercier and Sperber
2017). We observe that such ability is essential to improve
the explainability and accuracy for fake news detection:
Explainability. Most existing works on fake news detection either do not provide explanations or enable explainability for a small part of the model (e.g., the attention layer).
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Xiting Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5746

