The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TVT: Three-Way Vision Transformer through Multi-Modal Hypersphere
Learning for Zero-Shot Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Jialin Tian1 , Xing Xu1 * , Fumin Shen1 , Yang Yang1 , and Heng Tao Shen1,2
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
tian.garin@gmail.com; xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn; fumin.shen@gmail.com; dlyyang@gmail.com; shenhengtao@hotmail.com
Abstract

data of unseen classes. Consequently, there has been some
work (Shen et al. 2018; Dey et al. 2019) focused on studying
the SBIR problem in the zero-shot setting, which assumes
that the training class set and the test class set are disjoint.
So zero-shot SBIR (ZS-SBIR) is a more challenging problem for the inherent modal gap as well as the semantic gap
brought by the zero-shot setting.
So far, most existing ZS-SBIR methods largely rely on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), i.e., they either finetune the pre-trained CNNs to extract features and then build
projection models to learn a shared embedding space (Dutta
and Akata 2019; Hwang et al. 2020), or train the whole
model in an end-to-end manner (Liu et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2021). In spite of the excellent representational power of
CNNs, these methods are also limited in modeling the global
structural information due to the inherent local nature of
convolution operations. However, global structural information is essential for the ZS-SBIR task since the only information that the image and sketch together contain is the
global structural information of the object. Vision Transformer (ViT) has demonstrated that it is a advanced alternative to the CNN framework, with the global structural information modeling capability and exceptional transferability. In particular, ViT pre-trained in a self-supervised manner (e.g., DINO (Caron et al. 2021)) surprisingly shows a
segmentation property. The suffixes of DINO variants indicate the model size and input patch size, where DINOS/8 (DINO-B/16) means the “Small” (“Base”) variant with
8×8 (16×16) patch size (as shown in Fig. 1). We can see
that the DINO model explicitly learns the object boundaries
of images and sketches (Fig. 1(a)), ignoring occlusions and
backgrounds. The effect of the segmentation property is also
reflected in the retrieval tasks (Fig. 1(b)): DINO-S/8 outperforms ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016) by a margin in both intraand inter-modal retrieval tasks on unseen data of Sketchy
(Yelamarthi et al. 2018).
Motivated by the above observations, we take the first
step in this paper towards utilizing the global structure modeling capability of ViT for the ZS-SBIR task. Specifically,
we propose a novel approach named Three-Way Vision
Transformer (TVT), which integrates two modality-specific
ViTs and a fusion ViT into a three-way pipeline by a tokenbased strategy. As the general framework of our proposed
TVT model shown in Fig. 2, the modality-specific ViTs,

In this paper, we study the zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval (ZS-SBIR) task, which retrieves natural images related
to sketch queries from unseen categories. In the literature,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the defacto standard and they are either trained end-to-end or used
to extract pre-trained features for images and sketches. However, CNNs are limited in modeling the global structural information of objects due to the intrinsic locality of convolution operations. To this end, we propose a Transformerbased approach called Three-Way Vision Transformer (TVT)
to leverage the ability of Vision Transformer (ViT) to model
global contexts due to the global self-attention mechanism.
Going beyond simply applying ViT to this task, we propose a
token-based strategy of adding fusion and distillation tokens
and making them complementary to each other. Specifically,
we integrate three ViTs, which are pre-trained on data of each
modality, into a three-way pipeline through the processes of
distillation and multi-modal hypersphere learning. The distillation process is proposed to supervise fusion ViT (ViT with
an extra fusion token) with soft targets from modality-specific
ViTs, which prevent fusion ViT from catastrophic forgetting. Furthermore, our method learns a multi-modal hypersphere by performing inter- and intra-modal alignment without loss of uniformity, which aims to bridge the modal gap between modalities of sketch and image and avoid the collapse
in dimensions. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets, i.e., Sketchy, TU-Berlin, and QuickDraw, demonstrate the superiority of our TVT method over the state-ofthe-art ZS-SBIR methods.

Introduction
Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) (Eitz et al. 2010;
Saavedra, Barrios, and Orand 2015) is a practical problem
that the sketch is used as a query to retrieve relevant images
from the gallery. The conventional SBIR scenario assumes
that training and testing data come from the distributions of
the same categories. Many methods (Sangkloy et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2017a) have achieved satisfying performance in
this scenario with the help of a large number of annotated
samples. However, annotating samples is labor-intensive and
time-consuming, as well as these methods perform poorly on
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2370

