The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Weakly-Supervised Salient Object Detection Using Point Supervison
Shuyong Gao1 , Wei Zhang1* , Yan Wang1 , Qianyu Guo1
Chenglong Zhang1 , Yangji He1 , Wenqiang Zhang1,2*
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
{sygao18,weizh,yanwang19,qyguo20,clzhang20,yjhe20,wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art saliency detection models rely heavily on large datasets of accurate pixel-wise annotations,
but manually labeling pixels is time-consuming and laborintensive. There are some weakly supervised methods developed for alleviating the problem, such as image label, bounding box label, and scribble label, while point label still has
not been explored in this field. In this paper, we propose a
novel weakly-supervised salient object detection method using point supervision. To infer the saliency map, we first design an adaptive masked flood filling algorithm to generate
pseudo labels. Then we develop a transformer-based pointsupervised saliency detection model to produce the first round
of saliency maps. However, due to the sparseness of the label, the weakly supervised model tends to degenerate into
a general foreground detection model. To address this issue, we propose a Non-Salient Suppression (NSS) method
to optimize the erroneous saliency maps generated in the
first round and leverage them for the second round of training. Moreover, we build a new point-supervised dataset (PDUTS) by relabeling the DUTS dataset. In P-DUTS, there is
only one labeled point for each salient object. Comprehensive
experiments on five largest benchmark datasets demonstrate
our method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods
trained with the stronger supervision and even surpass several
fully supervised state-of-the-art models. The code is available
at: https://github.com/shuyonggao/PSOD.

Figure 1: Top left: original image. Bottom left: fully supervised annotation. Top right: scribble annoation. Bottom
right: point annotation.

Recently, sparse labeling methods have attracted increasing attention, which aims to achieve a trade-off between time
consumption and performance. Some methods attempt to
use image-level labels to detect salient objects (Li, Xie, and
Lin 2018; Wang et al. 2017; Piao et al. 2021). And some
approaches train the network using noisy labels which are
often generated from other SOD methods (Liu et al. 2021a).
Scribble annotation (Zhang et al. 2020) is proposed by lower
labeling time consumption. Besides, as compared to previous methods, it can provide local ground truth labels. (Zhang
et al. 2020) claims that they can finish annotating an image in 1∼2 seconds, but we find it difficult to achieve this
for untrained annotators. We attempt to propose a point supervised saliency detection method to achieve an acceptable
performance using a less time-consuming method compared
to scribble annotation. As far as we know, this is the first
attempt to accomplish salient object detection using point
supervision (Fig. 1).
In this paper, we propose a framework that uses point supervision to train the salient object model. We build a new
weakly supervised saliency detection annotation dataset by
relabeling DUTS (Wang et al. 2017) dataset using point supervision. We choose to use point annotation to label the

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD), aiming at detecting the
most attractive regions of the images or videos to imitate human attention mechanism (Wang et al. 2021), has
currently caught increasing attention in image processing,
which can be further used in various computer vision fields,
such as object recognition (Flores et al. 2019), image caption (Zhou et al. 2020), person re-identification (He and
Liu 2020). Fully supervised salient object detection models have achieved superior performance relying on effectively designed modules (Wei et al. 2020; Wei, Wang, and
Huang 2020). However, these methods heavily rely on large
datasets of precise pixel-wise annotations which is a tedious
and inefficient procedure.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

670

