The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Smoothing Advantage Learning
Yaozhong Gan1,2 , Zhe Zhang1,2 , Xiaoyang Tan1,2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{yzgancn, zhangzhe, x.tan}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

0.25

Advantage learning (AL) aims to improve the robustness
of value-based reinforcement learning against estimation errors with action-gap-based regularization. Unfortunately, the
method tends to be unstable in the case of function approximation. In this paper, we propose a simple variant of AL,
named smoothing advantage learning (SAL), to alleviate this
problem. The key to our method is to replace the original
Bellman Optimal operator in AL with a smooth one so as
to obtain more reliable estimation of the temporal difference
target. We give a detailed account of the resulting action gap
and the performance bound for approximate SAL. Further
theoretical analysis reveals that the proposed value smoothing technique not only helps to stabilize the training procedure of AL by controlling the trade-off between convergence
rate and the upper bound of the approximation errors, but is
beneficial to increase the action gap between the optimal and
sub-optimal action value as well.

DQN
AL
SAL

Action Gap

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0

1

2

3

Training steps (Million)

4

5

Figure 1: An illustration of trajectories of action gaps between the optimal and sub-optimal action at each training
step in Asterix of MinAtar (Young and Tian 2019). It shows
that compared to the baseline DQN method, the AL could
suffer from the problem of over-enlarging the action gaps at
the early stage of the training procedure, while such behavior is well controlled by the proposed SAL method.

Introduction
Learning an optimal policy in a given environment is a challenging task in high-dimensional discrete or continuous state
spaces. A common approach is through approximate methods, such as using deep neural networks (Mnih et al. 2015).
However, an inevitable phenomenon is that this could introduce approximation/estimation errors - actually, several
studies suggest that this leads to sub-optimal solutions due
to incorrect reinforcement (Thrun and Schwartz 1993; van
Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016; Lan et al. 2020).
Advantage learning operator (AL) (Bellemare et al. 2016)
is a recently proposed method to alleviate the negative effect
of the approximation and estimation errors. It is a simple
modification to the standard Bellman operator, by adding an
extra term that encourages the learning algorithm to enlarge
the action gap between the optimal and sub-optimal action
value at each state. Theoretically, it can be shown that the AL
operator is an optimality-preserving operator, and increasing
the action gap not only helps to mitigate the undesirable effects of errors on the induced greedy policies, but may be
able to achieve a fast convergence rate as well (Farahmand
2011).

Due to these advantages, the AL method has drawn increasing attention recently and several variants appear in
literatures. For example, generalized value iteration (G-VI)
(Kozuno, Uchibe, and Doya 2017) is proposed to alleviate the overestimation of AL, while Munchausen value iteration (M-VI) (Vieillard, Pietquin, and Geist 2020) adds a
scaled log-policy to the immediate reward under the entropy
regularization framework. Both methods impose extra constraints in the policy space, such as entropy regularization
and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, and technically, both
can be seen as a soft Q operator plus a soft advantage term.
However, one problem less studied in literature about the
AL method is that it could suffer from the problem of overenlarging the action gaps at the early stage of the training
procedure. From Figure 1, one can see that the AL method
faces this problem. Although the action gaps are rectified at
a later stage, this has a very negative impact on the performance of the algorithm. We call that this issue is an incorrect action gaps phenomenon. Naively using the AL operator tends to be both aggressive and risky. Thus, the difficulty
of learning may be increased. Recall that the AL method
includes two terms, i.e., the temporal-difference (TD) tar-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6657

