The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Dimensional Prediction of Guild Health in Online Games: A
Stability-Aware Multi-Task Learning Approach
Chuang Zhao1 , Hongke Zhao1 * , Runze Wu2 * ,
Qilin Deng2 , Yu Ding2 , Jianrong Tao2 , Changjie Fan2
1

College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University,
2
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Games,
{zhaochuang, hongke}@tju.edu.cn, {wurunze1, dengqilin, dingyu01, hztaojianrong, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com,
Abstract
Guild is the most important long-term virtual community
and emotional bond in massively multiplayer online roleplaying games (MMORPGs). It matters a lot to the player
retention and game ecology how the guilds are going, e.g.,
healthy or not. The main challenge now is to characterize and predict the guild health in a quantitative, dynamic,
and multi-dimensional manner based on complicated multimedia data streams. To this end, we propose a novel framework, namely Stability-Aware Multi-task Learning Approach
(SAMLA) to address these challenges. Specifically, different
media-specific modules are designed to extract information
from multiple media types of tabular data, time series characteristics, and heterogeneous graphs. To capture the dynamics
of guild health, we introduce a representation encoder to provide a time-series view of multi-media data that is used for
task prediction. Inspired by well-received theories on organization management, we delicately define five specific and
quantitative dimensions of guild health and make parallel predictions based on a multi-task approach. Besides, we devise a
novel auxiliary task, i.e., the guild stability, to boost the performance of the guild health prediction task. Extensive experiments on a real-world large-scale MMORPG dataset verify that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods in the task of organizational health characterization
and prediction. Moreover, our work has been practically deployed in online MMORPG, and case studies clearly illustrate
the significant value.

Wealth

Power

Commu

Guild
Health
Report

(a) One guild in a famous (b) Dimensions of guild health.
MMORPGs Justice Online.

Figure 1: Guild health. Guild health can be measured from
multiple dimensions.

Considering the guild is a specific organization in
MMORPGs, we refer to the existing literature on organization and its health. Traditional research on organizations in the field of management mostly relies on survey
interviews and classical statistical models (Meggetto et al.
2020). The interpretability and low-cost characteristics of
these methods make them popular with many researchers
and have achieved rich academic results. However, these research methods are mainly based on simple static research
scenarios, which are inconsistent with the complicated realtime game scenarios we are discussing. Another research
paradigm is to characterize the activities and cohesion of the
organization from the perspective of social network analysis, and to explore the different network structure attributes
of the organization in different life cycle stages (Lee et al.
2013). Note that this method can effectively use the organizational structure information and perform large-scale calculations (Wu and Pan 2018). However, due to the difficulty
of obtaining member portraits and the ambiguity of relationship types in traditional company research, most of these
methods do not consider node-level attributes and treat the
connections between members as homogeneous.
In general, the previous researches mainly suffer from
three challenges. Firstly, the organizational structure of
guilds is complicated, coupling as well as heterogeneous (Rodrı́guez et al. 2019). Enriched with different elements for building a virtual world, MMORPGs can track
a variety of data of a guild, including the static characteristics of guilds, the portraits of guild members, the hetero-

Introduction
Massively multiplayer online role-playing games
(MMORPGs) have become a phenomenon of growing
cultural, social, and economic importance, routinely attracting millions of players (Liao et al. 2020). Guild, often
called tribe or clan in MMORPGs, is a smaller piece of
the community made up of users with shared goals (Pisan
2007). It allows players to interact more intimately with the
guild’s members, which is of great significance to character
leveling, player retention, game activity, etc (Poor 2015).
However, the guild health will deteriorate due to various
reasons, gradually becoming inactive or disbanding directly,
which harms both the player and the platform.
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4371

