The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Intra-Inter Subject Self-Supervised Learning for Multivariate Cardiac Signals
Xiang Lan1 , Dianwen Ng3 , Shenda Hong4, 5∗ , Mengling Feng1, 2∗
1

Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Institute of Medical Technology, Health Science Center of Peking University, Beijing, China
{ephlanx, ephfm}@nus.edu.sg, dianwen001@e.ntu.edu.sg, hongshenda@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Learning information-rich and generalizable representations
effectively from unlabeled multivariate cardiac signals to
identify abnormal heart rhythms (cardiac arrhythmias) is
valuable in real-world clinical settings but often challenging due to its complex temporal dynamics. Cardiac arrhythmias can vary significantly in temporal patterns even for the
same patient (i.e., intra subject difference). Meanwhile, the
same type of cardiac arrhythmia can show different temporal patterns among different patients due to different cardiac
structures (i.e., inter subject difference). In this paper, we
address the challenges by proposing an Intra-Inter Subject
Self-Supervised Learning (ISL) model that is customized for
multivariate cardiac signals. Our proposed ISL model integrates medical knowledge into self-supervision to effectively
learn from intra-inter subject differences. In intra subject selfsupervision, ISL model first extracts heartbeat-level features
from each subject using a channel-wise attentional CNNRNN encoder. Then a stationarity test module is employed
to capture the temporal dependencies between heartbeats. In
inter subject self-supervision, we design a set of data augmentations according to the clinical characteristics of cardiac
signals and perform contrastive learning among subjects to
learn distinctive representations for various types of patients.
Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets were conducted. In a semi-supervised transfer learning scenario, our
pre-trained ISL model leads about 10% improvement over supervised training when only 1% labeled data is available, suggesting strong generalizability and robustness of the model.

Atrial Fibrillation

Atrial Fibrillation

Sinus Tachycardia

Sinus Tachycardia

Premature Ventricular Contraction Premature Ventricular Contraction

Subject A
Intra subject difference

Subject B
Inter subject difference

Figure 1: Example of the complex temporal dynamics of
cardiac arrhythmias. The three different cardiac arrhythmias
vary considerably in temporal patterns even if they all come
from subject A (i.e., intra subject difference). Also, because of different cardiac structures, the temporal features
of Premature Ventricular Contraction between subject A and
subject B are different (i.e., inter subject difference). (Best
viewed in color.)
can improve treatment outcomes (Artis, Mark, and Moody
1991). Deep learning has been applied to improve the timeliness and accuracy of diagnosis of 12-lead ECG (Hong et al.
2020, 2019; Zhu et al. 2021). However, training deep learning models in a supervised manner often requires a large
volume of high-quality labels to achieve strong generalization performance. Despite the daily collection of thousands
of ECG data by medical institutions, these data are mostly
unlabeled. Moreover, it requires intensive labeling on the 12lead ECG before being able to train a decent model. The
work is taxing and requires huge efforts from domain experts, which is costly and not feasible in the real-world clinical setting.
Self-supervised learning is a rising field and provides a
promising solution to process unlabeled ECG data, whose
main idea is to leverage data’s innate co-occurrence relationships as the self-supervision to mine useful representations
(Liu et al. 2021). Nevertheless, due to the complex temporal
dynamics, learning information-rich and generalizable representations from unlabeled multivariate cardiac signals to
identify cardiac arrhythmias remains to be a challenge. As

Introduction
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the primary causes
of death globally. It has been reported with an estimation
of 17.9 million deaths in 2019, representing 32% of the entire global deaths (WorldHealthOrganization 2019). In clinical practice, 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG) is widely
adopted to screen overall heart conditions (Kligfield et al.
2007). Abnormal heart rhythms or heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias) present in ECG may indicate anomaly cardiac
functions that could result in severe CVD (Golany and
Radinsky 2019). Therefore, early and accurate diagnosis of
ECG plays an important role in preventing severe CVD and
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4532

