The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MetaNODE: Prototype Optimization as a Neural ODE for Few-Shot Learning
Baoquan Zhang, Xutao Li∗ , Shanshan Feng, Yunming Ye∗ , Rui Ye
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
zhangbaoquan@stu.hit.edu.cn, {lixutao, victor fengss, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn, yerui hitsz@163.com

Abstract
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) is a challenging task, i.e., how
to recognize novel classes with few examples? Pre-training
based methods effectively tackle the problem by pre-training
a feature extractor and then predicting novel classes via a cosine nearest neighbor classifier with mean-based prototypes.
Nevertheless, due to the data scarcity, the mean-based prototypes are usually biased. In this paper, we attempt to diminish the prototype bias by regarding it as a prototype optimization problem. To this end, we propose a novel metalearning based prototype optimization framework to rectify
prototypes, i.e., introducing a meta-optimizer to optimize prototypes. Although the existing meta-optimizers can also be
adapted to our framework, they all overlook a crucial gradient bias issue, i.e., the mean-based gradient estimation is also
biased on sparse data. To address the issue, we regard the
gradient and its flow as meta-knowledge and then propose
a novel Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE)-based
meta-optimizer to polish prototypes, called MetaNODE. In
this meta-optimizer, we first view the mean-based prototypes
as initial prototypes, and then model the process of prototype optimization as continuous-time dynamics specified by
a Neural ODE. A gradient flow inference network is carefully
designed to learn to estimate the continuous gradient flow for
prototype dynamics. Finally, the optimal prototypes can be
obtained by solving the Neural ODE. Extensive experiments
on miniImagenet, tieredImagenet, and CUB-200-2011 show
the effectiveness of our method.

1

One-step rectification function

Meta-optimizer

(a) Prior Works

(b) Our Method

Figure 1: Pre-training based method estimates prototypes in
an average manner, which suffers from a prototype bias issue. Prior works diminish the bias in a one-step manner (a).
Our method addresses it in a meta-optimization manner (b).
Here, orange and black points denote training and test samples, respectively. Orange square, star, and triangle denotes
the mean-based, rectified, and real prototypes, respectively.
employ the meta-knowledge to perform class prediction for
novel classes with scarce examples (Li et al. 2019a).
Previous studies primarily address the FSL problem using the idea of meta-learning, i.e., constructing a large set of
few-shot tasks on base classes to learn task agnostic metaknowledge (Flennerhag et al. 2020). Recently, Chen et al.
regard feature representation as meta-knowledge, and propose a simple pre-training method (Chen et al. 2020), which
delivers more promising performance. In the method, they
first pre-train a feature extractor on all base classes, and then
perform novel class prediction via mean-based prototypes.
However, this method suffers from a prototype bias issue,
i.e., the discrepancy between calculated mean and real prototypes. As illustrated in Figure 1, the mean-based prototype
(orange square) is usually far away from real prototype (triangle). This kind of prototype bias is caused by the fact that
scarce labeled samples cannot provide a reliable mean estimation for the prototypes (Liu, Song, and Qin 2020). To
address the drawback, some prior works attempt to learn a
one-step prototype rectification function from a large set of
few-shot tasks (Liu, Song, and Qin 2020; Xue and Wang
2020; Zhang et al. 2021a), which is shown in Figure 1(a).
However, characterizing the prototype bias with a one-step
rectification function is too coarse to obtain accurate prototypes (as we will see in Table 3 of the Section 4.4).
In this paper, we propose a novel meta-learning based prototype optimization framework to rectify the prototype bias.

Introduction

With abundant annotated data, deep learning techniques
have shown very promising performance for many applications, e.g., image classification (He et al. 2016). However, preparing enough annotated samples is very timeconsuming, laborious, or even impractical in some scenarios, e.g., cold-start recommendation (Zheng et al. 2021) and
medical diagnose (Prabhu et al. 2019). Few-shot learning
(FSL), which aims to address the issue by mimicking the
flexible adaptation ability of human to novel tasks from very
few examples, has been proposed and received considerable attentions. Its main rationale is to learn meta-knowledge
from base classes with sufficient labeled samples and then
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9014

