The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DISTREAL: Distributed Resource-Aware Learning in Heterogeneous Systems
Martin Rapp1 , Ramin Khalili2 , Kilian Pfeiffer1 , Jörg Henkel1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
2
Huawei Research Center, Munich, Germany
martin.rapp@kit.edu, ramin.khalili@huawei.com, kilian.pfeiffer@kit.edu, henkel@kit.edu

Abstract

in terms of computation, energy, time, etc. (You et al. 2018),
and it is rather unrealistic to assume that all devices in an FL
system can perform all types of training computations all the
time, especially if the training is distributed on edge devices,
e.g., as suggested for 6G systems.1 This is as the computational capabilities of devices participating in an FL system
may be heterogeneous, e.g., different hardware, different
generations (Bonawitz et al. 2019). More importantly, the
resources available on a device for training could change
over time. This could for instance be due to shared resource
contention (Dhar et al. 2019), where CPU time, cache memory, energy, etc. are shared between the learning and parallel
tasks. We illustrate this with the following two examples.
1) Edge computing has been employed in ML-based realtime video analytics, where each edge device processes images from several camera modules (Ananthanarayanan et al.
2017). Currently, edge devices mostly perform inference,
but there is a clear trend towards additionally performing
distributed learning via FL (Zhou et al. 2019). The learning
task shares computational resources with the inference tasks.
The inference workload depends on the activity in the video
images and changes over time, as processing is skipped
for subsequent similar images to save resources (Ananthanarayanan et al. 2017). These changes happen fast, i.e., in the
order of seconds (Zhang et al. 2017), while FL round times
may be minutes (Bonawitz et al. 2019). 2) Google GBoard
(Yang et al. 2018) trains a next-word-prediction model using FL on end users’ mobile phones. To avoid slowing down
user applications, and thereby degrading the user experience, training is performed only when the device is charging
and idle, and aborted when these conditions change. This introduces a bias towards certain devices and users, degrading
the model accuracy (Yang et al. 2018). This can be resolved
by allowing training also when the device is in use, but only
using free resources. Smartphone workloads change within
seconds (Tu et al. 2014), which is faster than the GBoard
round time of several minutes. In both examples, the learning task is subject to fast-changing resource availability.
While several works study the problem of heterogeneity
across devices (Li et al. 2020a; Imteaj et al. 2020), time-

We study the problem of distributed training of neural
networks (NNs) on devices with heterogeneous, limited,
and time-varying availability of computational resources.
We present an adaptive, resource-aware, on-device learning
mechanism, DISTREAL, which is able to fully and efficiently
utilize the available resources on devices in a distributed manner, increasing the convergence speed. This is achieved with
a dropout mechanism that dynamically adjusts the computational complexity of training an NN by randomly dropping
filters of convolutional layers of the model. Our main contribution is the introduction of a design space exploration (DSE)
technique, which finds Pareto-optimal per-layer dropout vectors with respect to resource requirements and convergence
speed of the training. Applying this technique, each device
is able to dynamically select the dropout vector that fits
its available resource without requiring any assistance from
the server. We implement our solution in a federated learning (FL) system, where the availability of computational resources varies both between devices and over time, and show
through extensive evaluation that we are able to significantly
increase the convergence speed over the state of the art without compromising on the final accuracy.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved impressive results in a number
of diverse domains, such as image classification (Howard
et al. 2017; Tan and Le 2019), board and video games (Silver et al. 2016; Mnih et al. 2016), and is widely applied to distributed systems, such as mobile and sensor networks (Zhang, Patras, and Haddadi 2019), as we consider in
this paper. Centralized deep learning techniques, where the
training is performed in a single location (e.g., a data center), is often costly, as data would need to be collected and
sent all over the network to that centralized entity (Shi et al.
2020), and might not be feasible/authorized if the training
uses users’ private data. FL (McMahan et al. 2017) emerged
as an alternative to such techniques, performing distributed
learning on each device with the locally available data.
FL has proven effective in large-scale systems (Bonawitz
et al. 2019; Liu, Wang, and Liu 2019; Chen et al. 2020b).
However, training of a deep NN model is resource-hungry

1
EU’s Horizon Europe (European Commission 2021a,b) calls
for proposals, as well as 5GIA (5G Infrastructure Association) and
SRIA (Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda) reports (Bernardos and Uusitalo 2021; NetWorld 2020) detail such a vision.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8062

