The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Identification of Linear Latent Variable Model with Arbitrary Distribution
1

2

Zhengming Chen * , Feng Xie * , Jie Qiao
1

1,4 *

1,5

3

, Zhifeng Hao , Kun Zhang , Ruichu Cai

1,4†

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
5
College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong, China
chenzhengming1103@gmail.com, xiefeng009@gmail.com, qiaojie.chn@gmail.com
zfhao@gdut.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu, cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn

Abstract

However, these variables of interest are usually unobserved,
and we can only make use of measured variables generated
by them, e.g., the response level from questionnaires for role
conflict factor.
To discover the causal relationship among the latent variables, the linear latent variable model is introduced. In the
linear latent variable model, researchers often use a twophase framework to address this issue (Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 2000). It first finds the pure measurement
model of the causal relations between the measured variables and their corresponding latent variables, and then infers the causal relationships between latent variables (structural model) by analyzing the measured variables. In the
literature of measurement model, Silva et al. (2006) have
shown that the pure measurement model can be fully identifiable under the purity assumption (each latent have at
least three pure measured variables), and proposed a BPC
algorithm to estimate it. Later, Kummerfeld et al. (2014)
proposed a more efficient method, called FOFC, to estimate the pure measurement model. In the field of the structural model, there exist work such as (Silva et al. 2006),
which proposed a MIMBuild algorithm to estimate the
causal structure of latent variables given a pure measurement model. However, it can only output structures up to
the Markov equivalence class for latent variables. Shimizu,
Hoyer, and Hyvärinen (2009) showed that the causal relationships among latent factors are identifiable when the data
are non-Gaussian. Following the non-Gaussian assumption,
Cai et al. (2019) recently designed the so-called Triad constraints and proposed a more efficient method to infer the
latent structure, and Xie et al. (2020) further proposed a
generalized independent noise condition to address the case
where there are multiple latent variables behind measured
variables. Recently, Zeng et al. (2021) proposed the MDLiNA to estimate the underlying causal structure among latent factors for multi-domain data.
In many real-world scenarios, however, the full nonGaussianity assumption (all noise terms are non-Gaussian)
may be violated. For example, none of the existing methods is able to uniquely identify the causal direction between

An important problem across multiple disciplines is to infer and understand meaningful latent variables. One strategy
commonly used is to model the measured variables in terms
of the latent variables under suitable assumptions on the connectivity from the latents to the measured (known as measurement model). Furthermore, it might be even more interesting to discover the causal relations among the latent variables (known as structural model). Recently, some methods
have been proposed to estimate the structural model by assuming that the noise terms in the measured and latent variables are non-Gaussian. However, they are not suitable when
some of the noise terms become Gaussian. To bridge this gap,
we investigate the problem of identification of the structural
model with arbitrary noise distributions. We provide necessary and sufficient condition under which the structural model
is identifiable: it is identifiable iff for each pair of adjacent latent variables Lx , Ly , (1) at least one of Lx and Ly has nonGaussian noise, or (2) at least one of them has a non-Gaussian
ancestor and is not d-separated from the non-Gaussian component of this ancestor by the common causes of Lx and Ly .
This identifiability result relaxes the non-Gaussianity requirements to only a (hopefully small) subset of variables, and
accordingly elegantly extends the application scope of the
structural model. Based on the above identifiability result, we
further propose a practical algorithm to learn the structural
model. We verify the correctness of the identifiability result
and the effectiveness of the proposed method through empirical studies.

Introduction
Discovering causal relations among latent variables is important in many domains, such as social science, climate science, and psychology. For example, to design a proper psychotherapy program, we need to understand the causal relations among role conflict and depersonalization, emotional
exhaustion, and personal accomplishment (Byrne 2016).
*

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6350

