The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Best-Buddy GANs for Highly Detailed Image Super-resolution
Wenbo Li1∗ , Kun Zhou2∗ , Lu Qi1 , Liying Lu1 , Jiangbo Lu2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Smartmore Technology
{wenboli,luqi,lylu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk {kun.zhou,jiangbo}@smartmore.com

Abstract

estimation of RCAN (Zhang et al. 2018b) achieves the highest PSNR, yet lacking high-frequency texture.
To enhance the perceptual quality of recovered images,
several methods (Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016; Ledig
et al. 2017; Mechrez et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b; Zhang
et al. 2019; Soh et al. 2019) use adversarial learning and perceptual loss (Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei 2016). It is noted
that the issue of excessive smoothing caused by the one-toone MSE/MAE loss is still not fully addressed. Besides, the
training of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) could be unstable and result in unpleasant
visual artifacts (see the recovered tree of ESRGAN (Wang
et al. 2018b) in Figure 1). Thus in this paper, we aim to address these issues from two aspects.
It is well-known that SISR is essentially an ill-posed problem since a single low-resolution (LR) patch may correspond to multiple high-resolution (HR) solutions - it is difficult to decide the best. The commonly used one-to-one
MSE/MAE loss tends to enforce a rigid mapping between
the given LR-HR pair and will penalize the model when the
HR estimates do not exactly match the ground truth (GT),
even when they are valid solutions. As a result, the strictly
constrained HR space makes it difficult to train the network.
Relaxing the one-to-one constraint, we propose a novel bestbuddy loss, an improved one-to-many MAE loss, to allow
finding and using HR supervision signals flexibly by exploiting the ubiquitous self-similarity existing in natural images,
making the model easy to optimize. Put it differently, an
estimated HR patch is allowed to be supervised by different but close-to-ground-truth patches sourced from multiple
scales of the corresponding GT image. Additionally, a backprojection constraint is introduced to ensure the validity of
the estimated HR signal.
As aforementioned, undesirable artifacts may be produced in images for existing GAN-based methods (Ledig
et al. 2017; Mechrez et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b; Zhang
et al. 2019; Soh et al. 2019). We propose a region-aware adversarial learning strategy to address it. Our network treats
smooth and well-textured areas differently, and only performs the adversarial training on the latter. This separation
encourages the network to focus more on regions with rich
details while avoiding generating unnecessary texture on flat
regions (e.g., sky and building). With this improvement, our
proposed best-buddy GANs (termed as Beby-GAN) is able to

We consider the single image super-resolution (SISR) problem, where a high-resolution (HR) image is generated based
on a low-resolution (LR) input. Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) become popular to hallucinate details. Most methods along this line rely on a predefined singleLR-single-HR mapping, which is not flexible enough for the
ill-posed SISR task. Also, GAN-generated fake details may
often undermine the realism of the whole image. We address
these issues by proposing best-buddy GANs (Beby-GAN) for
rich-detail SISR. Relaxing the rigid one-to-one constraint, we
allow the estimated patches to dynamically seek trustworthy
surrogates of supervision during training, which is beneficial to producing more reasonable details. Besides, we propose a region-aware adversarial learning strategy that directs
our model to focus on generating details for textured areas
adaptively. Extensive experiments justify the effectiveness of
our method. An ultra-high-resolution 4K dataset is also constructed to facilitate future super-resolution research.

Introduction
The increasing demand for high-quality displays has promoted the rapid development of single image superresolution (SISR). SISR has been successfully applied to a
wide range of tasks, such as medical diagnostic imaging, security imaging and satellite imaging.
A great number of methods were proposed based on insightful image priors and optimization techniques, such as
self-similarity (Protter et al. 2008; Glasner, Bagon, and Irani
2009; Yang, Huang, and Yang 2010) and sparsity (Martin
et al. 2001; Yang et al. 2008, 2010; Zeyde, Elad, and Protter
2010; Peleg and Elad 2014). In recent years, deep-learningbased methods (Dong et al. 2014; Kim, Kwon Lee, and
Mu Lee 2016a; Shi et al. 2016; Tai, Yang, and Liu 2017;
Tai et al. 2017; Lim et al. 2017; Haris, Shakhnarovich, and
Ukita 2018; Zhang et al. 2018c,b) further advance SISR.
Most of them rely on an immutable one-to-one supervision to pursue high PSNR but possibly generate blurry results. For example, the solution of commonly adopted oneto-one MSE/MAE metric approximates mean or median of
data (Sønderby et al. 2016). As shown in Figure 1, the HR
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1412

