The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Visual Definition Modeling:
Challenging Vision & Language Models to Define Words and Objects
Bianca Scarlini* 1 , Tommaso Pasini* 2 , Roberto Navigli1
1

Sapienza NLP Group, Sapienza University of Rome
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen
scarlini@di.uniroma1.it, tommaso.pasini@di.ku.dk, navigli@diag.uniroma1.it
2

Abstract
Architectures that model language and vision together have
received much attention in recent years. Nonetheless, most
tasks in this field focus on end-to-end applications without
providing insights on whether it is the underlying semantics of
visual objects or words that is captured. In this paper we draw
on the established Definition Modeling paradigm and enhance
it by grounding, for the first time, textual definitions to visual representations. We name this new task Visual Definition
Modeling and put forward D EMETER and D IONYSUS, two
benchmarks where, given an image as context, models have
to generate a textual definition for a target being either i) a
word that describes the image, or ii) an object patch therein. To
measure the difficulty of our tasks we finetuned six different
baselines and analyzed their performances, which show that a
text-only encoder-decoder model is more effective than models pretrained for handling inputs of both modalities concurrently. This demonstrates the complexity of our benchmarks
and encourages more research on text generation conditioned
on multimodal inputs. The datasets for both benchmarks are
available at https://github.com/SapienzaNLP/visual-definitionmodeling as well as the code to reproduce our models.

(a) A long walk usually for
exercise or pleasure.

(b) An aircraft that has a fixed
wing and is powered by propellers or jets.

Figure 1: An excerpt from the D EMETER (left) and D IONYSUS (right) datasets.

Introduction
Two of the most important building blocks of human cognition and Artificial Intelligence are text and image understanding, which are widely known, respectively, as Natural Language Processing and Image Processing. Recently,
these two worlds have joined forces and modality-specific
models are losing ground to more hybrid architectures that
were developed to leverage both textual and visual data (Su
et al. 2019; Tan and Bansal 2019). In fact, these models
showed that the key to achieving more comprehensive reasoning skills lies in exploiting both sources of information
at the same time. However, most multimodal tasks aim at
investigating the high-level understanding1 capabilities of
a model, such as Visual Semantic Role Labeling (Yatskar,
* The authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In line with Bender and Koller (2020), in this paper we do
not refer to the human process of “understanding”, but rather to
the ability of a machine to draw conclusions based on data, albeit
multimodal.

11267

Zettlemoyer, and Farhadi 2016) and Image Captioning (Lin
et al. 2014). Indeed, while being apt at showing what kind of
patterns models can capture, these tasks do not provide any
fine-grained information about how models “perceive” image
and text components (objects and words). In fact, the semantic understanding of these aspects is often overlooked, i.e.,
objects are just classified with coarse-grained classes (Zhang
et al. 2013) and words have been investigated by categorizing them according to a predefined discrete sense inventory
(Gella, Lapata, and Keller 2016; Gella, Elliott, and Keller
2019). Therefore, while we may have a picture reflecting the
extent to which multimodal architectures perform, we still do
not know how these approaches cope with a more in-depth
understanding of words and objects in context.
In this paper, with the goal of shedding some light on
these aspects, we draw inspiration from the recent Definition Modeling task (Noraset et al. 2017), where a word in
context has to be associated with a textual definition of the
concept it represents, and shift it to a multimodal perspective. Hence, we propose the new task of Visual Definition
Modeling (VDM), where a model is required to generate a
definition for i) a given word representative of the concept
depicted in an input image (Figure 1a), or ii) a visual object

