The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Meta Propagation Networks for Graph Few-shot Semi-supervised Learning
Kaize Ding1 , Jianling Wang2 , James Caverlee2 , and Huan Liu1
1

Arizona State University
Texas A&M University
kaize.ding@asu.edu, jlwang@tamu.edu, caverlee@tamu.edu, huan.liu@asu.edu
2

Abstract

features from its local neighborhoods. Along with this idea,
different designs of GNN architectures have been proposed,
including graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016),
graph attention networks (GAT) (Veličković et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019) and many others (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Xu et al. 2019; Klicpera, Bojchevski, and
Günnemann 2019; Wu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020). Despite their promising results, existing GNNs developed for
semi-supervised node classification predominantly assume
that the provided gold-labeled nodes are relatively abundant.
This assumption is often impractical as data labeling requires
intensive domain knowledge, especially when considering
the heterogeneity of graph-structured data (Yao et al. 2020;
Ding et al. 2020). When only few labeled nodes per class
are available, how to improve the expressive power of Graph
ML models for tackling the few-shot semi-supervised node
classification problem remains understudied and meanwhile
requires urgent research efforts.

Inspired by the extensive success of deep learning, graph
neural networks (GNNs) have been proposed to learn expressive node representations and demonstrated promising
performance in various graph learning tasks. However, existing endeavors predominately focus on the conventional semisupervised setting where relatively abundant gold-labeled
nodes are provided. While it is often impractical due to the
fact that data labeling is unbearably laborious and requires
intensive domain knowledge, especially when considering the
heterogeneity of graph-structured data. Under the few-shot
semi-supervised setting, the performance of most of the existing GNNs is inevitably undermined by the overfitting and
oversmoothing issues, largely owing to the shortage of labeled data. In this paper, we propose a decoupled network
architecture equipped with a novel meta-learning algorithm to
solve this problem. In essence, our framework Meta-PN infers
high-quality pseudo labels on unlabeled nodes via a metalearned label propagation strategy, which effectively augments
the scarce labeled data while enabling large receptive fields
during training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
approach offers easy and substantial performance gains compared to existing techniques on various benchmark datasets.
The implementation and extended manuscript of this work are
publicly available at https://github.com/kaize0409/Meta-PN.

1

However, it is a non-trivial and challenging task mainly
because of two reasons: (i) oversmoothing and overfitting.
In general, most of the existing GNNs are designed with
shallow architecture with restricted receptive fields, thereby
restricting the efficient propagation of label information (Li,
Han, and Wu 2018). In order to propagate the label signals
more broadly, larger receptive fields of GNNs, i.e., the number of layers, are particularly desirable (Klicpera, Bojchevski,
and Günnemann 2019). Due to the entanglement of representation transformation and propagation in each layer, GNNs
will face the oversmoothing issue when increasing the model
depth (Liu, Gao, and Ji 2020), which in turn renders the
learned node representations inseparable. In the meantime,
when training with few labeled nodes, an over-parametric
deep GNN model tends to overfit and goes timber easily;
(ii) no auxiliary knowledge. Though previous works proposed for graph few-shot learning (Ding et al. 2020) or crossnetwork transfer learning (Yao et al. 2020) also focus on
related low-resource scenarios, their key enabler lies in transferring knowledge from either label-rich node classes or other
similar networks. Nonetheless, such auxiliary knowledge is
commonly not accessible, making those methods practically
infeasible to be applied to few-shot semi-supervised learning. As suggested by previous research, pseudo-labeling (Li,
Han, and Wu 2018; Sun, Lin, and Zhu 2020; Ding et al.

Introduction

Graphs serve as a common language for modeling a plethora
of structured and relational systems, ranging from social
networks (Zafarani, Abbasi, and Liu 2014) to citation networks (Namata et al. 2012), to molecular graphs (Klicpera,
Groß, and Günnemann 2019). To ingest the rich information
encoded in graph-structured data, it is of paramount importance to learn expressive node representations by modeling
the information from both node attributes and graph topology.
Among numerous endeavors in the graph machine learning
(Graph ML) community, graph neural networks (GNNs) have
received significant attention due to their effectiveness and
scalability (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017).
In general, most of the prevailing GNNs adopt the messagepassing scheme to learn the representation of a node by iteratively transforming, and propagating/aggregating node
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6524

