The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Mixture of Domain-Specific Experts via Disentangled Factors for
Autonomous Driving
Inhan Kim, Joonyeong Lee, Daijin Kim
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{kiminhan, joonyeonglee, dkim}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

illa et al. 2019). Based on recent efforts in this field, multitask learning (Li et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018; Kim et al.
2020), which leverage representation of closely related tasks
through a joint optimization strategy, is considered a good
solution for increasing generalization ability under unseen
conditions. Furthermore, representation learning (Xing et al.
2021), which automatically separates the related or unrelated hidden variables through a learning process in multiple
source environments, can be another solution by distinguishing true causes in observed training demonstration patterns
based on the supervision. The disentanglement with explicit
consideration of the given knowledge makes the model focus on essential information in the driving situation.

Since human drivers only consider the driving-related factors
that affect vehicle control depending on the situation, they can
drive safely even in diverse driving environments. To mimic
this behavior, we propose an autonomous driving framework based on the two-stage representation learning that initially splits the latent features as domain-specific features and
domain-general features. Subsequently, the dynamic-object
features, which contain information of dynamic objects, are
disentangled from latent features using mutual information
estimator. In this study, the problem in behavior cloning is
divided into several domain-specific subspaces, with experts
becoming specialized on each domain-specific policy. The
proposed mixture of domain-specific experts (MoDE) model
predicts the final control values through the cooperation of
experts using a gating function. The domain-specific features
are used to calculate the importance weight of the domainspecific experts, and the disentangled domain-general and
dynamic-object features are applied in estimating the control
values. To validate the proposed MoDE model, we conducted
several experiments and achieved a higher success rate on the
CARLA benchmarks under several conditions and tasks than
state-of-the-art approaches.

Our work is concerned with the following observations in
an attempt to improve the generalization performance. First,
the same static components such as lanes and curbs, the
types and locations of which are regulated by law, may contain some helpful hints for driving because their existence
ensures safety and efficiency by informing drivers about semantic information on the road. Human drivers perceive this
information easily; however, the learning-based autonomous
driving models need to specify this information explicitly.
We adopt a concept from a previous study, latent unified
state representation (LUSR) (Xing et al. 2021), to exploit the
road components restricted by regulations. It disentangles
domain-specific features and domain-general features from
the original latent space. The domain-general latent factors
contain information in common to all domains and can be
used to predict the control values, regardless of the domainspecific variations. Second, dynamic objects appear in various shapes and colors at arbitrary positions and relatively
small compared to static objects. We disentangle dynamicobject features from latent space using a learning strategy,
which maximizes and minimizes mutual information between target latent spaces (Belghazi et al. 2018b; Sanchez,
Serrurier, and Ortner 2020). We maximize the mutual information between the dynamic-object representation and observation while minimizing mutual information between the
dynamic-object features and the others (Sanchez, Serrurier,
and Ortner 2020). Third, we can estimate the distribution of
action spaces under unseen conditions by combining distribution from the observed driving conditions. Let us assume
that we drive for the first time on a rainy evening. Humans
can drive based on the experience of clear evenings and rainy

Introduction
In the field of autonomous driving, behavior cloning is
receiving interest as a promising approach to imitate the
demonstrations of human drivers by mapping from camera input to control output. Starting with a basic end-to-end
model (Bojarski et al. 2016) that explores the lane-keeping
task (Virgo 2017), several successive deep networks (Codevilla et al. 2018; Sauer, Savinov, and Geiger 2018; Chen,
Yuan, and Tomizuka 2019) have been developed to solve
the task of driving in complex urban scenarios. Although
methods leveraging deep networks can manipulate the egovehicle safely under training environments, they predict unexpected control values, particularly under unseen conditions, such as different weather and towns compared to the
weather and towns present in the training data. In addition,
there is still a well-known limitation that threatens the ability of generalization caused by the lack of policy experience (Chen et al. 2020) and the causal confusion (CodevCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1148

