The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Tractable Abstract Argumentation via Backdoor-Treewidth
Wolfgang Dvořák, Markus Hecher, Matthias König,
André Schidler, Stefan Szeider, Stefan Woltran
TU Wien, Institute of Logic and Computation
{dvorak, hecher, mkoenig, woltran}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, {aschidler, sz}@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

B

Argumentation frameworks (AFs) are a core formalism in the
field of formal argumentation. As most standard computational tasks regarding AFs are hard for the first or second
level of the Polynomial Hierarchy, a variety of algorithmic
approaches to achieve manageable runtimes have been considered in the past. Among them, the backdoor-approach and
the treewidth-approach turned out to yield fixed-parameter
tractable fragments. However, many applications yield high
parameter values for these methods, often rendering them infeasible in practice. We introduce the backdoor-treewidth approach for abstract argumentation, combining the best of both
worlds with a guaranteed parameter value that does not exceed the minimum of the backdoor- and treewidth-parameter.
In particular, we formally define backdoor-treewidth and establish fixed-parameter tractability for standard reasoning
tasks of abstract argumentation. Moreover, we provide systems to find and exploit backdoors of small width, and conduct systematic experiments evaluating the new parameter.

x

y

z

Figure 1: Illustration of the backdoor-treewidth approach

2012) and backdoor-distance (Dvořák, Ordyniak, and Szeider 2012). These concepts support efficient (i.e., polynomial
time) reasoning, provided the respective parameter is small.
In this paper, we combine these two approaches to achieve
a smaller parameter while still maintaining polynomial runtime in the size of the framework.
To illustrate the usefulness of this concept consider the
following example scenario, where two parties argue about
a general agreement, where diverging opinions on several
subtopics have to be resolved. The discussions about the
subtopics might be located in easy fragments of AFs (e.g.,
symmetric or acyclic frameworks). Then there is a metadiscussion that goes along the lines “if we agree on argument a in subtopic x, we shall have in turn argument b in
subtopic y accepted”, etc. One can expect that the metadiscussion, while not being in an easy fragment itself, exhibits certain structural features. A high-level illustration of
this concept is given in Figure 1, where we have subtopics
x, y, z and the meta-discussion B. Here, B indicates the
backdoor functioning of this part, i.e. removing B yields
an AF composed of easy fragments. In order to employ
the backdoor-treewidth approach, we have to use the torso
graph of B, where any pair of nodes a, b ∈ B adjacent to
same component (x, y, or z) needs to be connected; it is this
graph for which we require small treewidth.
Our main contributions can be summarised as follows.
• We define the concept of backdoor-treewidth (Ganian,
Ramanujan, and Szeider 2017b) for AFs. Specifically, we
present two backdoor-types that allow us to exploit small
treewidth, and two backdoor-types that do not.
• Moreover, we argue that given such a backdoor of
small treewidth, the reasoning tasks on AFs are fixedparameter tractable (FPT) parameterized by the backdoor’s treewidth in complete and stable semantics, ex-

Introduction
Argumentation is used to resolve conflicts in potentially inconsistent or incomplete knowledge. Argumentation
frameworks (AFs), introduced in his influential paper by
Dung (1995), turned out to be a versatile system for reasoning tasks in an intuitive setting. In AFs we view arguments
just as abstract entities, represented by nodes in a directed
graph, independent from their internal structure. Conflicts
are modelled in form of attacks between these arguments,
constituting the edges of said graph representation. The semantics are defined via so called extensions—sets of arguments that can be jointly accepted.
Evaluating AFs w.r.t. these semantics is a central task in
argumentation (Cerutti et al. 2018). However, many common reasoning and counting problems regarding extensions
turned out to be computationally hard by classical notions (Dvořák and Dunne 2017; Fichte, Hecher, and Meier
2019; Baroni, Dunne, and Giacomin 2010). For this reason, various approaches utilizing structural parameters have
been introduced (Dunne 2007) and shown to be fruitful for
AFs, in particular treewidth (Dvořák, Pichler, and Woltran
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5608

