The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Adversarial Markov Decision Processes with Delayed Feedback
Tal Lancewicki* 1 , Aviv Rosenberg* 1 , Yishay Mansour1,2
1

Tel Aviv University, Israel
Google Research, Israel
lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il, avivros007@gmail.com, mansour.yishay@gmail.com
2

Abstract

while the transition function remains stationary over time
(but unknown to the agent). We present the adversarial MDP
with delayed feedback model in which the agent observes
feedback for episode k only in the end of episode k + dk ,
where the delays dk are unknown and not restricted in any
way. This model generalizes standard adversarial MDPs
(where dk = 0 ∀k), and encompasses great challenges
that do not arise in standard RL models, e.g., exploration
without feedback and latency in policy updates. Adversarial
models are extremely important in practice, as they allow
dependencies between costs, unlike stochastic models that
assume i.i.d samples. This is especially important in the
presence of delays (that are also adversarial in our model),
since it allows dependencies between costs and delays.
We develop novel policy optimization (PO) algorithms
that perform their updates whenever feedback is available
and ignore feedback with large delay, and prove √
that they
obtain high-probability regret bounds of order K + D
under full-information feedback and (K + D)2/3 under
bandit feedback, where K is the number of episodes and
D is the sum of delays. Unlike simple reductions that can
only handle fixed delay d, our algorithms are robust to
any kind of variable delays and do not require any prior
knowledge. Furthermore, we show that a naive adaptation
of existing algorithms suffers from sub-optimal dependence
in the number of actions, and present a novel technique
that forces exploration in order to achieve tight bounds. To
complement our√results, we present nearly matching lower
bounds of order K + D. See detailed bounds in Table 1.

Reinforcement learning typically assumes that agents observe
feedback for their actions immediately, but in many realworld applications (like recommendation systems) feedback
is observed in delay. This paper studies online learning in
episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs) with unknown
transitions, adversarially changing costs and unrestricted
delayed feedback. That is, the costs and trajectory of episode
k are revealed to the learner only in the end of episode
k + dk , where the delays dk are neither identical nor
bounded, and are chosen by an oblivious adversary. We
present novel algorithms based on policy optimization
that
√
achieve near-optimal high-probability regret of K + D
under full-information
where K is the number of
Pfeedback,
k
episodes and D =
the total delay. Under bandit
k d is
√
feedback, we prove similar K + D regret assuming the
costs are stochastic, and (K + D)2/3 regret in the general
case. We are the first to consider regret minimization in the
important setting of MDPs with delayed feedback.

1

Introduction

Delayed feedback is a fundamental challenge in sequential
decision making arising in almost all practical applications.
For example, recommendation systems learn the utility of a
recommendation by detecting occurrence of certain events
(e.g., user conversions), which may happen with a variable
delay after the recommendation was issued. Other examples
include display advertising, autonomous vehicles, video
streaming (Changuel, Sayadi, and Kieffer 2012), delays in
communication between learning agents (Chen et al. 2020)
and system delays in robotics (Mahmood et al. 2018).
Although handling feedback delays is crucial for applying
reinforcement learning (RL) in practice, it was only barely
studied from a theoretical perspective, as most of the RL
literature focuses on the MDP model in which the agent
observes feedback regarding her immediate reward and
transition to the next state right after performing an action.
This paper makes a substantial step towards closing the
major gap on delayed feedback in the RL literature. We
consider the challenging adversarial episodic MDP setting
where cost functions change arbitrarily between episodes

1.1

Related Work

Delays in RL. Although delay is a common challenge
RL algorithms need to face in practice (Schuitema et al.
2010; Liu, Wang, and Liu 2014; Changuel, Sayadi, and
Kieffer 2012; Mahmood et al. 2018), the theoretical
literature on the subject is very limited. Previous work
only studied delayed state observability (Katsikopoulos and
Engelbrecht 2003) where the state is observable in delay
and the agent picks actions without full knowledge of
its current state. This setting is much related to partially
observable MDPs (POMDPs) and motivated by scenarios
like robotics system delays. Unfortunately, even planning
is computationally hard (exponential in the delay d) for
delayed state observability (Walsh et al. 2009).

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7281

