The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Operator-Potential Heuristics for Symbolic Search
Daniel Fišer1,2 , Álvaro Torralba3 , Jörg Hoffmann1
1

2

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Republic
3
Aalborg University, Denmark
danfis@danfis.cz, alto@cs.aau.dk, hoffmann@cs.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

search (Speck, Geißer, and Mattmüller 2020), when they do
not fulfill property (2). The main reason is that reducing the
amount of expanded states may be detrimental if the underlying BDD representation is less efficient. Due to all this,
symbolic bidirectional blind search (without heuristics) is
considered the dominant symbolic search approach, and the
use of heuristic search in this context has lost traction.
Here we challenge this trend by showing that potential
heuristics (Pommerening et al. 2015) yield fresh synergy between heuristic and symbolic search. Such heuristics assign
a numeric value (a potential) to each fact of the planning
task, in a way so that the sum of the potentials of the facts
true in a state is an admissible estimate of the state’s goal
distance. As we show, potential heuristics are particularly
well suited for combination with symbolic search.
Our key observation is that potentials can be computed for
each operator rather than for each fact. Such operator potentials combine synergically with symbolic search as they have
property (1): Under certain conditions, the operator potential
of an operator o is equal to the difference in heuristic values
h(s0 ) − h(s) for any state transition s → s0 induced by the
operator o. This allows for an efficient encoding of potential
heuristics in symbolic search without having to compute the
heuristic value of each explored state (Jensen, Veloso, and
Bryant 2008). The main difficulty in doing so is that these
operator potentials are real (floating-point) numbers, which
can lead to rounding and precision issues. Naively rounding
these values may lead to a path-dependent and inconsistent
heuristic. We show that this can be dealt with by rounding
operator potentials within the mixed-integer linear program
(MIP) that derives the potential heuristics.
Our empirical analysis shows that potential heuristics also
fulfill property (2). That is, they not only reduce the number of explored states, but also lead to improvements on
the number of BDD nodes on average. This makes potential heuristics very helpful in symbolic search across a large
number of benchmark domains. Overall, symbolic forward
search with potential heuristics soundly outperforms symbolic bidirectional blind search, thus establishing a new state
of the art in optimal symbolic planning.

Symbolic search, using Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) to
represent sets of states, is a competitive approach to optimal
planning. Yet heuristic search in this context remains challenging. The many advances on admissible planning heuristics are not directly applicable, as they evaluate one state at
a time. Indeed, progress using heuristic functions in symbolic search has been limited and even very informed heuristics have been shown to be detrimental. Here we show how
this connection can be made stronger for LP-based potential heuristics. Our key observation is that, for this family
of heuristic functions, the change of heuristic value induced
by each operator can be precomputed. This facilitates their
smooth integration into symbolic search. Our experiments
show that this can pay off significantly: we establish a new
state of the art in optimal symbolic planning.

1

Introduction

A∗ search with admissible heuristics and symbolic search
are currently the two main contenders for the state of the
art in cost-optimal planning. In principle, these are two
orthogonal enhancements of a vanilla search algorithm—
admissible heuristics aim to reduce the number of explored states, and symbolic search uses Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) (Bryant 1986) to efficiently represent and
manipulate sets of states, greatly speeding up exhaustive
search. A natural idea is to combine the two, and indeed that
idea has been presented decades ago in the BDDA∗ algorithm (Edelkamp and Reffel 1998; Edelkamp 2002).
Yet that combination has not been an unqualified success. For a heuristic to be effective in symbolic search,
two properties are required: (1) it must be possible to efficiently evaluate sets of states represented as BDDs, without
evaluating the heuristic on each represented state individually; and (2) it must induce a good partitioning, so that sets
of states with the same g- and h-value can be efficiently
represented as BDDs. Property (1) is fulfilled by some of
the strongest heuristics for explicit-state search (e.g., symbolic PDBs (Kissmann and Edelkamp 2011; Franco et al.
2017; Torralba, López, and Borrajo 2018)) so they can be
used in BDDA∗ . However, it has been shown that even
very informative heuristics can be detrimental in symbolic

2

Preliminaries

We consider the finite domain representation (FDR) of planning tasks (Bäckström and Nebel 1995). An FDR planning

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9750

