The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Empirical Study of GPT-3 for Few-Shot Knowledge-Based VQA
Zhengyuan Yang, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaowei Hu,
Yumao Lu, Zicheng Liu, Lijuan Wang
Microsoft Corporation
{zhengyang, zhe.gan, jianfw, xiaowei.hu, yumaolu, zliu, lijuanw}@microsoft.com

(a) Previous: separate knowledge retrieval and reasoning

Abstract

●

Knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) involves
answering questions that require external knowledge not
present in the image. Existing methods first retrieve knowledge from external resources, then reason over the selected
knowledge, the input image, and question for answer prediction. However, this two-step approach could lead to mismatches that potentially limit the VQA performance. For example, the retrieved knowledge might be noisy and irrelevant
to the question, and the re-embedded knowledge features dur- Image-to-Text
ing reasoning might deviate from their original meanings in
the knowledge base (KB). To address this challenge, we propose PICa, a simple yet effective method that Prompts GPT3 via the use of Image Captions, for knowledge-based VQA.
Inspired by GPT-3’s power in knowledge retrieval and quesCaption: A large
sandwich on a plate
tion answering, instead of using structured KBs as in previous
with pickles.
What is the largest
work, we treat GPT-3 as an implicit and unstructured KBQ:
usthat
restaurant chain
that sells this item?
can jointly acquire and process relevant knowledge. A:
Specifsubway
ically, we first convert the image into captions (or tags) that
GPT-3 can understand, then adapt GPT-3 to solve the VQA
task in a few-shot manner by just providing a few in-context
VQA examples. We further boost performance by carefully
investigating: (i) what text formats best describe the image
content, and (ii) how in-context examples can be better selected and used. PICa unlocks the first use of GPT-3 for multimodal tasks. By using only 16 examples, PICa surpasses
the supervised state of the art by an absolute +8.6 points on
the OK-VQA dataset. We also benchmark PICa on VQAv2,
where PICa also shows a decent few-shot performance.

●
Step 1: external knowledge retrieval

Question: What is the warmest
outdoor temperature this kind
of weather can happen?

Supervised training
Knowledge

Question

Explicit external
knowledge
Supervised training

Image

Image.

Step 2: knowledge-image-question reasoning

(b) PICa : joint knowledge retrieval and reasoning
by prompting GPT-3
Image textual descriptions
Caption: People are standing … as it snows.
Tag list: Umbrella, covered, …, snow, wheel

Image-to-Text
●

Frozen
Textual
N-shot VQA
Question
descriptions GPT-3
examples
Prompting GPT-3 with textual descriptions for VQA

●

Implicit knowledge
in GPT-3
Few-shot w/o
parameter update

Figure 1: Comparison between previous methods and PICa.
(a) Previous methods adopt a two-step approach, which first
retrieves the external knowledge, then reasons over the selected knowledge, the input image, and question for answer
prediction. (b) Alternatively, PICa directly prompts GPT-3
to jointly acquire and reason over the relevant knowledge.
We convert images into textual descriptions that GPT-3 can
understand, and adapt GPT-3 to solve the task by providing
only a few in-context VQA examples during inference time.

However, this two-step approach could be sub-optimal.
For example, the image-question feature used for knowledge
retrieval in the first step may not match their representations
in the second reasoning step, which leads to noisy or even irrelevant retrieved knowledge. The re-embedded textual feature of the retrieved knowledge might also deviate from its
original meaning in the knowledge source. Such mismatches
potentially limit the VQA performance. Furthermore, learning a good joint knowledge-image-question representation
requires sufficient training data, thus making it difficult to
transfer to new types of questions. In this study, we explore an alternative approach inspired by the intriguing properties of recent language models. Specifically, large-scale
language models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020) have
shown powerful abilities in NLP tasks, such as knowledge
retrieval (Wang, Liu, and Song 2020) and question answering (Brown et al. 2020). More impressively, they are also

Introduction
The problem of knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) (Marino et al. 2019) extends the standard VQA
task (Antol et al. 2015) by asking questions that require
outside knowledge beyond the image content to answer. To
obtain such knowledge, existing methods (Zhu et al. 2020;
Garderes et al. 2020; Marino et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021) first
retrieve external knowledge from multiple resources, such as
Wikipedia articles and ConceptNet concepts (Speer, Chin,
and Havasi 2017). Based on this, joint reasoning over the retrieved knowledge and the image-question pair is performed
to predict the answer, as shown in Figure 1(a).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3081

