The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Use of Unrealistic Predictions in Hundreds of Papers Evaluating Graph
Representations
Li-Chung Lin1 , Cheng-Hung Liu1 , Chih-Ming Chen2 , Kai-Chin Hsu3 ,
I-Feng Wu4 , Ming-Feng Tsai2 , Chih-Jen Lin1
1
National Taiwan University
National Chengchi University
3
University of Southern California
4
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services
r08922141@ntu.edu.tw, ericliu8168@gmail.com, 104761501@nccu.edu.tw, kaichinh@usc.edu,
ifengwu1518@gmail.com, mftsai@nccu.edu.tw, cjlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw
2

Abstract

to be associated with the instance. Because information on
the number of labels is usually not available in practice, this
setting violates the machine learning principle that groundtruth information should not be used in the prediction stage.
Unfortunately, after surveying numerous papers, we find that
this inappropriate setting is so ubiquitous that many started
thinking it is a standard and valid one.
While the research community should move to use appropriate settings, some detailed investigation is needed first.
In this work, we aim to do so by answering the following
research questions.
• Knowing this unrealistic setting has been commonly
used, how serious is the situation and why does it occur?
To confirm the seriousness of the situation, we identify
a long list of papers that have used the unrealistic predictions. Our analysis then indicates that with unrealistic information, the performance is likely over-estimated.
Further, while the setting clearly cheats, it roughly works
for some node classification problems that are close to a
multi-class one with many single-labeled instances.
• What are suitable settings without using unknown information? Are there practical difficulties for researchers to
apply them?
After explaining that multi-label algorithms and/or tools
may not be readily available, we suggest pragmatic solutions for future studies. Experimental comparisons with
the unrealistic setting show that we can effectively optimize some commonly used metrics such as Macro-F1.
• Because of the use of unrealistic predictions, past comparisons on methods to generate embedding vectors may
need to be re-examined. Can we give comparisons under
appropriate multi-label predictions?
By using suitable prediction settings, our results give new
insights into comparing influential methods on representation learning.
This paper is organized as follows. Sections 2-3 address
the first research question, while Sections 4 and 5 address
the second and the third research questions, respectively. Finally, Section 6 concludes this work. Programs and supplementary materials are available at https://www.csie.ntu.edu.
tw/∼cjlin/papers/multilabel-embedding/

Prediction using the ground truth sounds like an oxymoron
in machine learning. However, such an unrealistic setting
was used in hundreds, if not thousands of papers in the area
of finding graph representations. To evaluate the multi-label
problem of node classification by using the obtained representations, many works assume that the number of labels of
each test instance is known in the prediction stage. In practice such ground truth information is rarely available, but we
point out that such an inappropriate setting is now ubiquitous in this research area. We detailedly investigate why the
situation occurs. Our analysis indicates that with unrealistic
information, the performance is likely over-estimated. To see
why suitable predictions were not used, we identify difficulties in applying some multi-label techniques. For the use in
future studies, we propose simple and effective settings without using practically unknown information. Finally, we take
this chance to compare major graph representation learning
methods on multi-label node classification.

1

Introduction

Recently unsupervised representation learning over graphs
has been an important research area. One of the primary
goals is to find embedding vectors as feature representations
of graph nodes. Many effective techniques (e.g., Perozzi,
Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang et al. 2015; Grover and
Leskovec 2016) have been developed and widely applied.
This research area is very active as can be seen from the tens
of thousands of related papers.
The obtained embedding vectors can be used in many
downstream tasks, an important one being node classification. Because each node may be associated with multiple
labels, this application falls into the category of multi-label
problems in machine learning. In this study, we point out
that in many (if not most) papers using node classification
to evaluate the quality of embedding vectors, an unrealistic
setting was adopted for prediction and evaluation. Specifically, in the prediction stage, the number of labels of each
test instance is assumed to be known. Then according to decision values, this number of top-ranked labels is considered
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7479

