The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deciding Unsolvability in Temporal Planning under Action Non-Self-Overlapping
Stefan Panjkovic, Andrea Micheli, Alessandro Cimatti
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
{spanjkovic, amicheli, cimatti}@fbk.eu

Abstract

Yet, being able to determine unsolvability has important
applications. For example, when doing plan optimization, a
method is to progressively tighten the problem constraints,
trying to solve them in order to obtain more optimized plans.
Clearly, when the constraints are tightened too much, the
problem becomes unsolvable, and existing planners might
diverge on this input. Another application is “oversubscription” planning (Smith 2004), where it might be impossible to satisfy all the goals. Detecting unsolvability is also
important for domain validation (Khatib, Muscettola, and
Havelund 2001).
The problem of detecting unsolvability of planning instances has been studied in the context of classical planning
(i.e., where actions are instantaneous and no temporal constraints are present), and several techniques have been presented (e.g., (Suda 2014; Hoffmann, Kissmann, and Torralba
2014; Muise and Lipovetzky 2016)), but it only recently received theoretical attention in the realm of temporal planning. In this paper, we address unsolvability in TP from a
practical point of view. In general, the complexity of TP depends on the domain of time. If time is interpreted as a discrete quantity, TP is EXPSPACE-complete (Rintanen 2007).
Instead, if time is interpreted as a dense quantity, TP is undecidable (Gigante et al. 2020). In this paper, we concentrate on a very expressive and practically relevant subclass
of TP, characterized by the assumption of action non-selfoverlapping (ANSO), that is PSPACE-complete in both the
dense and discrete cases (Gigante et al. 2020). We study
sound and complete decision procedures for ANSO TP: if
the problem is solvable then a plan is eventually found, and
if the problem is unsolvable the algorithm terminates stating that no solution exists. We stress that current planning
techniques are semi-decision procedures for TP, and thus
they are incapable of guaranteeing termination even under
the ANSO assumption.
We propose two novel terminating approaches: the first
approach is a reduction to model-checking, which encodes
the problem in a symbolic timed transition system (Cimatti
et al. 2019) and uses the NU X MV (Cavada et al. 2014)
model-checker; the second approach is a dedicated ForwardChaining Temporal Planner called TAMER -CTP, which
combines a heuristic-search schema inspired by (Valentini,
Micheli, and Cimatti 2020) with a symbolic representation
of time using Difference Bound Matrices (DBM).

The field of Temporal Planning (TP) is receiving increasing
interest for its many real-world applications. Most of the literature focuses on the TP problem of finding a plan, with algorithms that are not guaranteed to terminate when the problem admits no solution. In this paper, we present sound and
complete decision procedures that address the dual problem
of proving that no plan exists, which has important applications in oversubscription, model validation and optimization. We focus on the expressive and practically relevant semantics of action non-self-overlapping, recently proved to be
PSPACE-complete. For this subclass, we propose two approaches: a reduction of the planning problem to modelchecking of Timed Transition Systems, and a heuristic-search
algorithm where temporal constraints are represented by Difference Bound Matrices. We implemented the approaches,
and carried out an experimental evaluation against other stateof-the-art TP tools. On benchmarks that admit no plans, both
approaches dramatically outperform the other planners, while
the heuristic-search algorithm remains competitive on solvable benchmarks.

Introduction
AI Planning is the problem of synthesizing a course of actions that leads to a certain goal. It is a well-studied field
of Artificial Intelligence, with a wide variety of real-world
applications in logistics, autonomy, robotics, and industrial
automation. Temporal Planning (TP) is concerned with temporal aspects, such as deadlines, synchronization between
actions and the precise timing of events. Several temporal
planners are able to find plans efficiently in a variety of domains. However, none of them is guaranteed to detect that
the input problem is unsolvable, i.e. does not admit a solution plan. In fact, some temporal planning techniques (e.g.
decision-epoch) are incomplete also in the case when a plan
exists (Cushing et al. 2007), other temporal planning techniques based on heuristic search (e.g. (Coles et al. 2010;
Simmons and Younes 2011)) explore a search space that is
in general not finite and thus, in cases where the heuristic is
unable to eventually prune all branches, the search algorithm
diverges. Techniques based on reduction to satisfiability (e.g
(Shin and Davis 2005; Rintanen 2007)) are oriented to find
plans and are unable to detect that no plan exists.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9886

