The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Diagnostics-Guided Explanation Generation
Pepa Atanasova∗ , Jakob Grue Simonsen, Christina Lioma, Isabelle Augenstein
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
{pepa, simonsen, c.lioma, augenstein}@di.ku.dk

Question: What is Bernardo's last name?
Answer Option: Smith
S1: ...
S15: It amuses
[MASK](4)
4 me.
S16: Show me around, and then I shall decide.
S17: Of course, Señor Flynn.
S18: And stop calling
[MASK](4) me señor.
S19: Not even Los Mundos is so polite.
S20: Call me Bernardo.
[M
Target
Explanation
A
Prediction
Prediction

Abstract
Explanations shed light on a machine learning model’s rationales and can aid in identifying deficiencies in its reasoning
process. Explanation generation models are typically trained
in a supervised way given human explanations. When such
annotations are not available, explanations are often selected
as those portions of the input that maximise a downstream
task’s performance, which corresponds to optimising an explanation’s Faithfulness to a given model. Faithfulness is one
of several so-called diagnostic properties, which prior work
has identified as useful for gauging the quality of an explanation without requiring annotations. Other diagnostic properties are Data Consistency, which measures how similar explanations are for similar input instances, and Confidence Indication, which shows whether the explanation reflects the confidence of the model. In this work, we show how to directly optimise for these diagnostic properties when training a model
to generate sentence-level explanations, which markedly improves explanation quality, agreement with human rationales,
and downstream task performance on three complex reasoning tasks.

1

S
K]
(2)
2

1

Model

S1 S15 S16 S17 S18 S19 S20
0.1 0.3 0.2 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.9

2

3

1
False
p=0.9

4

Prediction is preserved
Can predict
Explanation is
when removing
confidence from
similar for
[MASK](4)
(masking)
2 non-selected
[MASK](4)
explanation. similar(masked)
explanation sentences.
Indicates
input.
Faithful!
Confidence!
Consistent!

Figure 1: Example instance from MultiRC with predicted
target and explanation (Step 1), where sentences with confidence ≥ 0.5 are selected as explanations (S17, S18, S20).
Steps 2-4 illustrate the use of Faithfulness, Data Consistency, and Confidence Indication diagnostic properties as
additional learning signals. ‘[MASK](2)’ is used in Step
2 for sentences (in red) that are not explanations, and
‘[MASK](4)’–for random words in Step 4.

Introduction

Explanations are an important complement to the predictions of a ML model. They unveil the decisions of a model
that lead to a particular prediction, which increases user trust
in the automated system and can help find its vulnerabilities.
Moreover, “The right . . . to obtain an explanation of the decision reached” is enshrined in the European law (Regulation 2016).
In NLP, research on explanation generation has spurred
the release of datasets (Zaidan, Eisner, and Piatko 2008;
Thorne et al. 2018; Khashabi et al. 2018) containing human
rationales for the correct predictions of downstream tasks
in the form of word- or sentence-level selections of the input
text. Such datasets are particularly beneficial for knowledgeintensive tasks (Petroni et al. 2020) with long sentence-level
explanations, e.g., question answering and fact-checking,
where identifying the required information is an important
prerequisite for a correct prediction. They can be used to supervise and evaluate whether a model employs the correct

rationales for its predictions (DeYoung et al. 2020a; Thorne
et al. 2018; Augenstein 2021). The goal of this paper is to
improve the sentence-level explanations generated for such
complex reasoning tasks.
When human explanation annotations are not present, a
common approach (Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016; Yu
et al. 2019) is to train models that select regions from the
input maximising proximity to original task performance
which corresponds to the Faithfulness property. Atanasova
et al. (2020a) propose Faithfulness and other diagnostic
properties to evaluate different characteristics of explanations. These include Data Consistency, which measures the
similarity of the explanations between similar instances, and
Confidence Indication, which evaluates whether the expla-

∗

Contact Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10445

