The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deterministic and Discriminative Imitation (D2-Imitation):
Revisiting Adversarial Imitation for Sample Efficiency
Mingfei Sun1, 2 , Sam Devlin2 , Katja Hofmann2 , Shimon Whiteson1
1

University of Oxford
Microsoft Research
{mingfei.sun, shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk, {sam.devlin, katja.hofmann}@microsoft.com
2

Demonstrations

Abstract

Positive buffer 𝓑"

Sample efficiency is crucial for imitation learning methods
to be applicable in real-world applications. Many studies improve sample efficiency by extending adversarial imitation to
be off-policy regardless of the fact that these off-policy extensions could either change the original objective or involve
complicated optimization. We revisit the foundation of adversarial imitation and propose an off-policy sample efficient
approach that requires no adversarial training or min-max optimization. Our formulation capitalizes on two key insights:
(1) the similarity between the Bellman equation and the stationary state-action distribution equation allows us to derive a
novel temporal difference (TD) learning approach; and (2) the
use of a deterministic policy simplifies the TD learning. Combined, these insights yield a practical algorithm, Deterministic and Discriminative Imitation (D2-Imitation), which operates by first partitioning samples into two replay buffers and
then learning a deterministic policy via off-policy reinforcement learning. Our empirical results show that D2-Imitation
is effective in achieving good sample efficiency, outperforming several off-policy extension approaches of adversarial imitation on many control tasks.

𝓓𝝍

(𝑠 & , 𝑎& )

Env

discriminator

𝑠 " , 𝑎" , 𝑟 " ∼ ℬ "
TD learning
# 𝜽 (𝒔, 𝒂)
𝒂 = 𝝁𝜽 𝒔
𝒅
distribution
deterministic policy $ $
𝑠 , 𝑎 , 0 ∼ ℬ%
proxy
Nil buffer 𝓑𝟎

Figure 1: Overview of the D2-Imitation learning1 .
collecting interactions is often slow (e.g., physical robotics)
or expensive (e.g., autonomous driving).
Some methods improve sample efficiency by relaxing
the on-policy requirement in adversarial imitation, e.g., using off-policy samples to train the discriminator and policy (Kostrikov et al. 2018; Sasaki, Yohira, and Kawaguchi
2018). Doing so, however, changes the original divergence minimization objective, hence providing no guarantee that the learned policy recovers the expert distribution (Kostrikov, Nachum, and Tompson 2019; Sun et al.
2021). Furthermore, the non-stationary rewards generated
by the discriminator make actor-critic algorithms converge
slowly (or even diverge) (Sutton and Barto 2018) and could
demand significantly more samples to learn a good policy (Schulman et al. 2015; Fujimoto, van Hoof, and Meger
2018). Other methods translate the on-policy distribution
matching problem into an off-policy optimization, which
also circumvents the need to learn rewards (Kostrikov,
Nachum, and Tompson 2019; Sun et al. 2021). This type
of approach involves a non-convex min-max optimization
procedure that requires well-tuned regularization (Gulrajani
et al. 2017), limiting its practical application.
In this paper, we revisit the foundation of adversarial imitation and propose an off-policy learning approach, Deterministic and Discriminative Imitation (D2-Imitation), that
involves no adversarial training or non-convex min-max optimization. D2-Imitation capitalizes on two key insights: (1)
the similarity between the Bellman equation and the stationarity equation of the state-action distribution from the

Introduction
We consider a specific imitation learning task: given a limited number of expert demonstrations, learn an optimal policy in a simulator without any access to the expert policy
or reinforcement signals of any kind. One of the important approaches for this problem setting, a.k.a Apprenticeship Learning (Abbeel and Ng 2004), is adversarial imitation, which learns a policy by minimizing the divergence
between the stationary state-action distribution induced by
the policy and the expert distribution given in the demonstrations (Ho and Ermon 2016; Kostrikov et al. 2018; Ke
et al. 2019; Ghasemipour, Zemel, and Gu 2020). As the two
distributions are given in the form of empirical samples, adversarial imitation has to roll out the policy to collect onpolicy samples and then estimates the empirical divergence
by training a discriminator (Ho and Ermon 2016). Those onpolicy samples are then discarded immediately after each
policy update. The resulting sample inefficiency is a crucial
limitation, ruling out many real-world applications, where
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8378

Code repository: https://github.com/mingfeisun/d2-imitation.

