The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SASA: Semantics-Augmented Set Abstraction for Point-Based 3D Object
Detection
Chen Chen1 , Zhe Chen1 , Jing Zhang1 , Dacheng Tao2,1
1

The University of Sydney, Australia
2
JD Explore Academy, China
cche9000@uni.sydney.edu.au, {zhe.chen1, jing.zhang1}@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract

Ours

82

Although point-based networks are demonstrated to be accurate for 3D point cloud modeling, they are still falling behind their voxel-based competitors in 3D detection. We observe that the prevailing set abstraction design for downsampling points may maintain too much unimportant background information that can affect feature learning for detecting objects. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel set abstraction method named Semantics-Augmented Set Abstraction (SASA). Technically, we first add a binary segmentation
module as the side output to help identify foreground points.
Based on the estimated point-wise foreground scores, we
then propose a semantics-guided point sampling algorithm to
help retain more important foreground points during downsampling. In practice, SASA shows to be effective in identifying valuable points related to foreground objects and improving feature learning for point-based 3D detection. Additionally, it is an easy-to-plug-in module and able to boost various point-based detectors, including single-stage and twostage ones. Extensive experiments on the popular KITTI and
nuScenes datasets validate the superiority of SASA, lifting
point-based detection models to reach comparable performance to state-of-the-art voxel-based methods. Code is available at https://github.com/blakechen97/SASA.

3D Moderate AP

CIA-SSD

PV-RCNN
SA-SSD

80

3DSSD

STD
Part-A^2

HotSpotNet
Associate-3Ddet

78

Fast PointRCNN

TANet

76

PointRCNN

PointPillars
74

Voxel-based
PV-based
Point-based

SECOND
20

40

60

Inference Time (ms)

80

100

Figure 1: Our method reaches top performance (moderate
AP: 82.16%) among both voxel-based and point-based detectors with a high inference speed for the car detection on
the KITTI benchmark (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012).

Qi et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020) that directly perform feature
learning on 3D points. Benefiting from transformation-free
point cloud processing and flexible receptive fields (Shi et al.
2020a), point-based methods have the potential of achieving compelling performance (Yang et al. 2020). However,
compared with voxel-based detectors that show vast development, point-based 3D detection stagnates in recent years
and fails to achieve top performance on related datasets.
By investigating popular point-based methods, we find
that an important problem is that the widely-used set abstraction (SA) is inefficient to describe scenes in the context
of detection, especially with the problematic sampling strategy. In particular, the SA layer first selects a subset of input
points as key points and then encodes context representations from nearby points for each sampled key point. However, when selecting key points, existing sampling strategies,
which tend to choose distant points to better cover the entire
scene, could make abstracted point sets involve excessive irrelevant background points like points on the ground, since
the majority of the 3D space belongs to background especially in outdoor scenarios (Chen, Zhang, and Tao 2019).
These irrelevant points usually deliver trivial information for
detecting objects and, at the same time, plenty of beneficial foreground points could be inappropriately discarded.

Introduction
3D object detection has attracted increasing interest from
research communities as it plays an important role in various real-world scenarios, including autonomous driving and
robotic systems (Shi et al. 2020a; Yang et al. 2020). This
task aims to identify and localize objects from 3D scenes.
To properly detect objects from 3D space, LiDAR sensors
are widely applied to capture 3D point clouds that represent
the surrounding environments. Comparing to RGB images,
point clouds could provide rich and accurate 3D structure information, which is vital for precise localization in 3D space.
To exploit the representational power of deep learning
(Zhang and Tao 2020), researchers have designed different neural networks to extract 3D features, including voxelbased ones (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Yan, Mao, and Li 2018;
Deng et al. 2020) that discretize sparse points into regular
voxel grids and point-based ones (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

221

