The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semantic Parsing in Task-Oriented Dialog
with Recursive Insertion-Based Encoder
Elman Mansimov and Yi Zhang
AWS AI Labs
{mansimov, yizhngn}@amazon.com

Abstract
We introduce Recursive INsertion-based Encoder (RINE), a
novel approach for semantic parsing in task-oriented dialog.
Our model consists of an encoder network that incrementally
builds the semantic parse tree by predicting the non-terminal
label and its positions in the linearized tree. At the generation time, the model constructs the semantic parse tree by
recursively inserting the predicted non-terminal labels at the
predicted positions until termination. RINE achieves stateof-the-art exact match accuracy on low- and high-resource
versions of the conversational semantic parsing benchmark
TOP, outperforming strong sequence-to-sequence models and
transition-based parsers. We also show that our model design
is applicable to nested named entity recognition task, where
it performs on par with state-of-the-art approach designed for
that task. Finally, we demonstrate that our approach is 2−3.5×
faster than the sequence-to-sequence model at inference time.

Introduction
Task-oriented dialog systems are playing an increasingly important role in modern business and social lives of people
by facilitating information access and automation of routine
tasks through natural language conversations. At the core of
such dialog systems, a natural language understanding component interprets user input utterances into a meaning representation. While the traditional intent-slot based approach can
go a long way, such flat meaning representation falls short of
capturing the nuances of natural languages, where phenomena such as conjunction, negation, co-reference, quantification and modification call for a hierarchically structured representation, as illustrated by recent work (Gupta et al. 2018;
Bonial et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2020; Andreas et al. 2020).
Commonly adopted tree- or directed acyclic graph-based
structures resemble traditional frameworks for syntactic or
semantic parsing of natural language sentences.
The hierarchical representation of Gupta et al. (2018) motivated the extension of neural shift-reduce parsers (Dyer et al.
2016; Einolghozati et al. 2019), neural span-based parsers
(Stern, Andreas, and Klein 2017; Pasupat et al. 2019) and
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014; Vaswani et al. 2017; Rongali et al. 2020) models for
handing compositional queries in task-oriented dialog. Due
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11067

to the state-of-the-art performance of these models, there has
been limited work designing structured prediction models
that have a stronger inductive bias for semantic parsing of
task-oriented dialog utterances.
In this paper, we propose the Recursive Insertion-based
Encoder) (RINE; pronounced ”Ryan”), that incrementally
builds the semantic parse tree by inserting the non-terminal
intent/slot labels into the utterance. The model is trained as
a discriminative model that predicts labels with their corresponding positions in the input. At generation time, the model
constructs the semantic parse tree by recursively inserting the
predicted label at the predicting position until the termination.
Unlike seq2seq models (Rongali et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020;
Aghajanyan et al. 2020; Babu et al. 2021), our approach does
not contain a separate decoder which generates the linearized
semantic parse tree.
We extensively evaluate our proposed approach on lowresource and high-resource versions of the popular conversational semantic parsing dataset TOP (Gupta et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2020). We compare our model against a state-of-the-art
transition-based parser RNNG (Gupta et al. 2018; Einolghozati et al. 2019) and seq2seq models (Rongali et al. 2020;
Zhu et al. 2020; Aghajanyan et al. 2020; Babu et al. 2021)
adapted to this task. We show that our approach achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on both low-resource and
high-resource settings TOP. In particular, RINE achieves up
to an 13% absolute improvement in exact match in the
low-resource setting. We also demonstrate that our approach
is 2 − 3.5× faster than strong sequence-to-sequence model
at inference time.
While we focus on semantic parsing in task-oriented dialog, we demonstrate that our model design is applicable to
other structured prediction tasks, such as nested named entity recognition (nested NER). We empirically show that our
model with no specific tuning performs on par with state-ofthe-art machine reading comprehension approach for nested
NER (Li et al. 2020) that was explicitly designed for that
task.

Proposed Approach
First, we introduce the problem of semantic parsing in taskoriented dialog and give a general description of our approach
in Section . Then in Section , we give a detailed description
of the forward pass and loss calculation in our model. Finally

