The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Detecting Misclassification Errors in Neural Networks
with a Gaussian Process Model
Xin Qiu 1 , Risto Miikkulainen 1, 2
1

Cognizant AI Labs
The University of Texas at Austin
qiuxin.nju@gmail.com, risto@cognizant.com
2

Abstract

Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Amodei et al. 2016). In a practical setting, it
is beneficial to have a detector that can raise a red flag whenever the predictions are likely to be wrong. A human observer can then evaluate such predictions, making the classification system safer.
Such a detector can be constructed by first developing
quantitative metrics for measuring the reliability of predictions under different circumstances, and then setting a
warning threshold based on users’ preferred precision-recall
tradeoff. Existing such methods can be categorized into
three types based on their focus: error detection, which
aims to detect the natural misclassifications made by the
classifier (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Jiang et al. 2018;
Corbière et al. 2019); out-of-distribution (OOD) detection,
which identifies samples that are from different distributions
compared to training data (Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018; Lee
et al. 2018a; Devries and Taylor 2018); and adversarial sample detection, which filters out samples from adversarial attacks (Lee et al. 2018b; Wang et al. 2019; Aigrain and Detyniecki 2019).
Among these categories, error detection, also called misclassification detection (Jiang et al. 2018) or failure prediction (Corbière et al. 2019), is the most challenging (Aigrain
and Detyniecki 2019) and most underexplored. For instance,
Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017) defined a baseline error detection score using the maximum class probability after the
softmax layer. Although this baseline is a good starting
point, it is ineffective in some cases, indicating that there is
room for improvement (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017). Jiang
et al. (2018) proposed Trust Score, which measures the similarity between the original classifier and a modified nearestneighbor classifier. The main limitation of this method is
scalability: the Trust Score may provide no or negative improvement over the baseline for high-dimensional data. ConfidNet (Corbière et al. 2019) builds a separate NN model to
learn the true class probablity, i.e. softmax probability for
the ground-truth class. However, ConfidNet itself is a standard NN, so its detection scores may be unreliable or misleading: A random input may generate a random detection
score, and ConfidNet does not indicate uncertainty of these
detection scores. Moreover, none of these methods can differentiate natural classifier errors from risks caused by OOD
or adversarial samples; if a detector could do that, it would

As neural network classifiers are deployed in real-world applications, it is crucial that their failures can be detected reliably. One practical solution is to assign confidence scores
to each prediction, then use these scores to filter out possible
misclassifications. However, existing confidence metrics are
not yet sufficiently reliable for this role. This paper presents
a new framework that produces a quantitative metric for detecting misclassification errors. This framework, RED, builds
an error detector on top of the base classifier and estimates
uncertainty of the detection scores using Gaussian Processes.
Experimental comparisons with other error detection methods on 125 UCI datasets demonstrate that this approach is
effective. Further implementations on two probabilistic base
classifiers and two large deep learning architecture in vision
tasks further confirm that the method is robust and scalable.
Third, an empirical analysis of RED with out-of-distribution
and adversarial samples shows that the method can be used
not only to detect errors but also to understand where they
come from. RED can thereby be used to improve trustworthiness of neural network classifiers more broadly in the future.

1

Introduction

Classifiers based on Neural Networks (NNs) are widely deployed in many real-world applications (LeCun, Bengio,
and Hinton 2015; Anjos et al. 2015; Alghoul et al. 2018;
Shahid, Rappon, and Berta 2019). Although good prediction accuracies are achieved, it is usually not clear whether
a particular prediction can be trusted, which is a severe issue especially in safety-critical domains such as healthcare
(Selişteanu et al. 2018; Gupta et al. 2007; Shahid, Rappon,
and Berta 2019), finance (Dixon, Klabjan, and Bang 2017),
and automated driving (Janai et al. 2017; Hecker, Dai, and
Van Gool 2018).
One way to estimate trustworthiness of a classifier prediction is to use its inherent confidence-related score, e.g., the
maximum class probability (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017),
entropy of the softmax outputs (Williams and Renals 1997),
or difference between the highest and second highest activation outputs (Monteith and Martinez 2010). However, these
scores are unreliable and may even be misleading: Predictions often have high-confidence but are nevertheless incorrect (Provost, Fawcett, and Kohavi 1998; Guo et al. 2017;
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8017

