The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Knowledge Distillation via Constrained Variational Inference
Ardavan Saeedi,1 Yuria Utsumi,2 Li Sun,3 Kayhan Batmanghelich,3 Li-wei H. Lehman2
1
Hyperfine*
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
University of Pittsburgh
av.saeedi@gmail.com, yutsumi@mit.edu, lis118@pitt.edu, kayhan@pitt.edu, lilehman@mit.edu
2

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a framework for distilling the
knowledge of a discriminative model into a probabilistic
graphical model. Probabilistic graphical models such as topic
models or autoregressive hidden Markov models (AR-HMM)
have been widely used for building density models of observed data. Two factors that have helped their widespread
adoption are their simplicity and the possibility of bypassing
custom inference for them by using probabilistic programming languages.
In these models, posterior of the latent variables (e.g. topic
proportions in a topic model) or a function of it is often used
as low-dimensional feature representation for a downstream
task such as predicting labels associated with each data point
(Halpern et al. 2012; Lehman et al. 2015b). However, as
shown by Halpern et al. (2012) and Hughes et al. (2018), this
two-stage process of extracting features and then training a
discriminative model, performs subpar compared to purely
discriminative approaches. Semi-supervised variants of these
models, where labels and observations are modeled jointly,
have been developed but their performance is not significantly
different from the two-stage approaches (Hughes et al. 2018).
Our goal is to enhance the feature representation of these
graphical models so they incorporate the knowledge of their
discriminative counterparts while being reasonable density
models for the data. Optimizing for matching the observed
data can be achieved by maximizing the variational lower
bound of the marginal likelihood. To incorporate the knowledge of a powerful discriminative model (i.e. our teacher
model), we add a knowledge distillation constraint to the
variational inference optimization objective. This constraint
ensures that we have the best generative model for the data
while having feature space which is close to that of a discriminative model.
Given the distinct nature of the feature space between the
teacher and student models in our framework, we propose to
use the similarity-preserving knowledge distillation scheme
introduced by Tung and Mori (2019) as our constraint. This
scheme, instead of the common approach of matching the
smoothed class scores of the teacher and student models,
matches the pairwise similarity matrix in the student model
with that matrix in the teacher model. A pairwise similarity
matrix consists of pairwise distances between the feature
representations of inputs to a model. As mentioned by Tung
and Mori (2019), this scheme is inspired by the observation

Knowledge distillation has been used to capture the knowledge of a teacher model and distill it into a student model with
some desirable characteristics such as being smaller, more
efficient, or more generalizable. In this paper, we propose a
framework for distilling the knowledge of a powerful discriminative model such as a neural network into commonly used
graphical models known to be more interpretable (e.g., topic
models, autoregressive Hidden Markov Models). Posterior of
latent variables in these graphical models (e.g., topic proportions in topic models) is often used as feature representation
for predictive tasks. However, these posterior-derived features
are known to have poor predictive performance compared
to the features learned via purely discriminative approaches.
Our framework constrains variational inference for posterior
variables in graphical models with a similarity preserving constraint. This constraint distills the knowledge of the discriminative model into the graphical model by ensuring that input
pairs with (dis)similar representation in the teacher model
also have (dis)similar representation in the student model. By
adding this constraint to the variational inference scheme, we
guide the graphical model to be a reasonable density model for
the data while having predictive features which are as close
as possible to those of a discriminative model. To make our
framework applicable to a wide range of graphical models, we
build upon the Automatic Differentiation Variational Inference
(ADVI), a black-box inference framework for graphical models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on two
real-world tasks of disease subtyping and disease trajectory
modeling.

1

Introduction

Distilling knowledge of a teacher model in a student model
was originally motivated by compressing larger neural networks into smaller ones (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015).
However, later it has been applied to a diverse set of areas
such as adversarial defense (Papernot et al. 2016) or privileged learning (Lopez-Paz et al. 2015). The distinguishing
factor among these applications is the desirable characteristic
of the student model (e.g. higher inference speed, smaller
size). In all these applications, the student model mimics
the performance of the teacher model while maintaining the
desirable characteristic.
* Work is not related to the research done at Hyperfine.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8132

