The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reliability Exploration with Self-Ensemble Learning for Domain Adaptive Person
Re-Identification
Zongyi Li, Yuxuan Shi* , Hefei Ling, Jiazhong Chen, Qian Wang, Fengfan Zhou
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{zongyili, shiyx, lhefei, jzchen, yqwq1996, fengfanzhou}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) based on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer the pre-trained model
from one labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Existing methods tackle this problem by using clustering methods to generate pseudo labels. However, pseudo labels produced by these techniques may be unstable and noisy,
substantially deteriorating models’ performance. In this paper, we propose a Reliability Exploration with Self-ensemble
Learning (RESL) framework for domain adaptive person ReID. First, to increase the feature diversity, multiple branches
are presented to extract features from different data augmentations. Taking the temporally average model as a mean
teacher model, online label refining is conducted by using its
dynamic ensemble predictions from different branches as soft
labels. Second, to combat the adverse effects of unreliable
samples in clusters, sample reliability is estimated by evaluating the consistency of different clusters’ results, followed
by selecting reliable instances for training and re-weighting
sample contribution within Re-ID losses. A contrastive loss
is also utilized with cluster-level memory features which are
updated by the mean feature. The experiments demonstrate
that our method can significantly surpass the state-of-the-art
performance on the unsupervised domain adaptive person ReID.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed reliability estimation
method, which utilizes the overlapping sample in different cluster results. Different color circles represent different
clusters produced by different branch features. A reliable instance is supposed to have more overlapping cluster neighbors, and those of a unreliable sample are scatted in different
clusters.

grouped into two categories. The first category is distribution
aligning method (Bak, Carr, and Lalonde 2018; Deng et al.
2018; Wei et al. 2018; Zhong et al. 2018a; Li et al. 2019).
This kind of method align the image distributions between
source and target datasets or apply Generative Adversarial
Network to transfer the style of an image from the source
domain to the target domain, remaining the identity label of
the image for training. However, these methods achieve unsatisfying performance because they do not make full use
of the information in the target domain data. Most existing
methods(Ding et al. 2020; Ge, Chen, and Li 2020; Zhai et al.
2020b; Zheng et al. 2021a) are based on the second category, named clustering-based methods. This kind of method
utilizes the pre-trained model from source domain to generate pseudo labels on the target domain by clustering the
extracted features. The pseudo label generation step and the
training step are performed alternatively until the model converges. Although these methods can achieve acceptable performance with pseudo labels, they also face the noisy problem due to the domain gap.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to retrieve a given person from different cameras. With the development of deep
learning and increasing computing power, person Re-ID has
achieved great success (Zheng et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2019b;
Shi et al. 2020a,b,c). However, most existing methods based
on supervised learning require a large amount of labeled
data which is time-consuming. And if a pre-trained model
is transferred from one scenario to another, the model performance will drop drastically due to different data distribution. Therefore, the unsupervised domain adaption (UDA)
for person Re-ID needs to be introduced for transferring a
trained model from a labeled source domain to another unlabeled dataset.
Recently, most existing methods focusing on unsupervised domain adaption for person Re-ID can be broadly
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1527

