The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Graph Clustering via Dual Correlation Reduction
Yue Liu,1 * Wenxuan Tu,1 * Sihang Zhou,2 Xinwang Liu,1†
Linxuan Song,1 Xihong Yang,1 En Zhu1
2

1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{yueliu, twx, xinwangliu, yangxihong, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn, sihangjoe@gmail.com, slxnatavidad@163.com

Abstract
Deep graph clustering, which aims to reveal the underlying
graph structure and divide the nodes into different groups,
has attracted intensive attention in recent years. However, we
observe that, in the process of node encoding, existing methods suffer from representation collapse which tends to map
all data into the same representation. Consequently, the discriminative capability of the node representation is limited,
leading to unsatisfied clustering performance. To address this
issue, we propose a novel self-supervised deep graph clustering method termed Dual Correlation Reduction Network
(DCRN) by reducing information correlation in a dual manner. Specifically, in our method, we first design a siamese
network to encode samples. Then by forcing the cross-view
sample correlation matrix and cross-view feature correlation
matrix to approximate two identity matrices, respectively, we
reduce the information correlation in the dual-level, thus improving the discriminative capability of the resulting features.
Moreover, in order to alleviate representation collapse caused
by over-smoothing in GCN, we introduce a propagation regularization term to enable the network to gain long-distance
information with the shallow network structure. Extensive
experimental results on six benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed DCRN against the existing state-of-the-art methods. The code of DCRN is available at https://github.com/yueliu1999/DCRN and a collection (papers, codes and, datasets) of deep graph clustering
is shared at https://github.com/yueliu1999/Awesome-DeepGraph-Clustering on Github.

(a) GAE

(b) MVGRL

(c) OURS

Figure 1: The heat maps of node similarity matrices in the
latent space of GAE (Kipf and Welling 2016b), MVGRL
(Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020), and our proposed method
on the ACM dataset.
Pan et al. 2019; Tao et al. 2019; Park et al. 2019; Bo et al.
2020; Tu et al. 2020).
Though good performance has been achieved, we found
that the existing GCN-based clustering algorithms usually
suffer from the representation collapse problem and tend to
map nodes from different categories into the similar representation in the process of sample encoding. As a result,
the node representation is indiscriminative and the clustering performance is limited. We illustrate this phenomenon
on ACM dataset in Fig. 1. In this figure, we first extract
the node embedding learned from three representative algorithms, i.e., the Graph Auto-Encoder (GAE) (Kipf and
Welling 2016b), Multi-View Graph Representation Learning
(MVGRL) (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020), and our proposed algorithm (OURS), and then construct the elementwise similarity matrices by calculating the cosine similarity,
respectively. Finally, we visualize the similarity matrices of
the three compared algorithms in Fig. 1. Among the compared algorithms, GAE is a classic graph convolutional network, MVGRL is a contrastive strategy enhanced algorithm,
which can to some extent alleviate the representation collapse problem by introducing a positive and negative sample
pair recognition mechanism. From sub-figure (a) and (b), we
observe that, in the latent space learned by both the classic
algorithm and the contrastive learning enhanced algorithm,
the intrinsic three dimensional cluster space is not well revealed. It indicates that representation collapse is still an
open problem which is restricting the performance of GCNbased clustering algorithms.
To solve this problem, we propose a novel self-supervised
deep graph clustering method termed Dual Correlation Reduction Network (DCRN) to avoid representation collapse

Introduction
Deep graph clustering is a fundamental yet challenging task
whose target is to train a neural network for learning representations to divide nodes into different groups without
human annotations. Thanks to the powerful graph information exploitation capability, graph convolutional networks
(GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016a) have recently achieved
promising performance in many graph clustering applications like social networks and recommendation systems.
Consequently, it has attracted considerable attention in this
field and many algorithms are proposed (Wang et al. 2019;
* First author with equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7603

