The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Zero-Shot Phrase Grounding via Reasoning on
External Knowledge and Spatial Relations
Zhan Shi* † ,1 Yilin Shen,2 Hongxia Jin,2 Xiaodan Zhu1
1

Ingenuity Labs Research Institute & ECE, Queen’s University
2
Samsung Research America
{z.shi, xiaodan.zhu}@queensu.ca, {yilin.shen, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Problem: Either walking stick or stick is seen instances in training

Abstract
Phrase grounding is a multi-modal problem that localizes a
particular noun phrase in an image referred to by a text query.
In the challenging zero-shot phrase grounding setting, the existing state-of-the-art grounding models have limited capacity in handling the unseen phrases. Humans, however, can
ground novel types of objects in images with little effort,
significantly benefiting from reasoning with commonsense.
In this paper, we design a novel phrase grounding architecture that builds multi-modal knowledge graphs using external knowledge and then performs graph reasoning and spatial
relation reasoning to localize the referred nouns phrases. We
perform extensive experiments on different zero-shot grounding splits sub-sampled from the Flickr30K Entity and Visual
Genome dataset, demonstrating that the proposed framework
is orthogonal to backbone image encoders and outperforms
the baselines by 2∼3% in accuracy, resulting in a significant
improvement under the standard evaluation metrics.

Ground the object
in query

Query: A walking stick
Motivation: stick could be detected with external knowledge and reasoning
People can be localized by
explicit object detector
people hold stick
is a commonsense
people hold something
is seen in training

Stick could be near the
detected box of People

Figure 1: An example of zero-shot phrase grounding and
motivation of our solution
There are two settings in the challenging zero-shot phrase
grounding proposed by (Sadhu, Chen, and Nevatia 2019):
(a) novel noun phrases, i.e., the noun phrases in the test set
are not shown in the training set. (b) novel object categories,
i.e., the visual examples of queried object categories in the
test set are not shown in the training set, in which setting (b)
is more strict than setting (a). To tackle the zero-shot problem, two-stage models can only ground a fixed set of object
categories on which the explicit detector was trained, and
the single-stage models lack object priors because they do
not use explicit detectors. However, humans can effortlessly
ground novel types of objects in natural language queries
through reasoning based on knowledge (Minsky 2007). Inspired by this, we explore and propose a novel architecture by leveraging dense candidate proposals in single-stage
models and relating the locations of the target proposal
to objects detected by the explicit detector in a two-stage
model, thus leveraging the best of both worlds. As illustrated in Figure 1, although neither walking stick nor stick
is seen during training, we can ground them by resorting to
commonsense knowledge “people-hold-stick” and learning
to relate the target proposal to explicitly detected object box
of “people”.
To introduce external knowledge into our model, we propose to jointly learn from commonsense knowledge (Fellbaum 2012; Liu and Singh 2004) and scene graph knowledge (Krishna et al. 2017). We build multi-modal knowledge
graphs based on text entities parsed from queries (entity

Introduction
Localizing objects in an image referenced by noun phrases
in a query (Chen, Kovvuri, and Nevatia 2017; Plummer et al.
2015; Yu et al. 2018), a fundamental problem known as
phrase grounding or referring expressions, has drawn extensive attention in both the natural language processing and
computer vision community. A good phrase grounding system can benefit many other downstream tasks such as visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al.
2017), image retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015; Hu et al. 2016),
and image captioning (Lu et al. 2018; Dai, Fidler, and Lin
2018). There have been two major lines of models for
phrase grounding: (1) The two-stage phrase grounding models (Wang et al. 2018; Plummer et al. 2015, 2018; Chen et al.
2017a) first obtain candidate proposals from an explicit object detector and then perform matching according to their
similarities to the query. (2) Single-stage phrase grounding
models (Sadhu, Chen, and Nevatia 2019; Yang et al. 2019)
directly generate dense candidate proposals on sliced image
regions with various resolutions and perform matching with
the query.
* Work done while interning at Samsung Research America
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2253

