The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Unsupervised Hashing with Latent Semantic Components
Qinghong Lin1 * , Xiaojun Chen1† , Qin Zhang1 , Shaotian Cai1 ,
Wenzhe Zhao2 , Hongfa Wang2
1

Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent Data Platform
linqinghong@email.szu.edu.cn, {xjchen, qinzhang}@szu.edu.cn, cai.st@foxmail.com,
{carsonzhao, hongfawang}@tencent.com
Abstract
Deep unsupervised hashing has been appreciated in the
regime of image retrieval. However, most prior arts failed
to detect the semantic components and their relationships
behind the images, which makes them lack discriminative
power. To make up the defect, we propose a novel Deep Semantic Components Hashing (DSCH), which involves a
common sense that an image normally contains a bunch of
semantic components with homology and co-occurrence relationships. Based on this prior, DSCH regards the semantic components as latent variables under the ExpectationMaximization framework and designs a two-step iterative algorithm with the objective of maximum likelihood of training data. Firstly, DSCH constructs a semantic component
structure by uncovering the fine-grained semantics components of images with a Gaussian Mixture Modal (GMM),
where an image is represented as a mixture of multiple components, and the semantics co-occurrence are exploited. Besides, coarse-grained semantics components, are discovered
by considering the homology relationships between finegrained components, and the hierarchy organization is then
constructed. Secondly, DSCH makes the images close to their
semantic component centers at both fine-grained and coarsegrained levels, and also makes the images share similar semantic components close to each other. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed hierarchical semantic components indeed facilitate the
hashing model to achieve superior performance.

Figure 1: An illustration of semantic component structure,
where a picture is normally composed of multiples interrelated semantic components. e.g, dog and grass are associated by an image, we call this relations as co-occurrence.
Besides, these semantic components are hierarchically organized from fine to coarse scale, e.g, dog belongs to
animal, this relationship known as homology.
methods (Liu et al. 2012) (Shen et al. 2015) (Yuan et al.
2020) use label information to train hashing models, which
achieve reliable performances. However, obtaining adequate
labeled data is normally expensive and impractical, which
hinders the application of these methods. In this scenario,
an increasing number of researchers turn their attention to
unsupervised hashing methods (Liu et al. 2011) (Liu et al.
2014) (Shen et al. 2018) (Lin et al. 2021). With the lack of labels, the key to unsupervised hashing methods is the manual
design of semantic similarity and how they guide the learning of hashing models. However, existed methods (Yang
et al. 2018) (Song et al. 2018) (Deng et al. 2019) mainly
develop the similarity information derived from the entire
image, which fails to recognize the semantic composition
of each image. Generally, a real-world picture is composed
of different types of objects, which makes it contain rich
semantic connotations. We call a type of object with specific semantic meaning as a semantic component. For instance, a picture of walking a dog can be comprised of
the following components: people, dog and grasses, in
which dog are usually correlated with people as human
pets. We call this phenomenon semantic co-occurrence.
Besides the detection of the semantic components of im-

Introduction
With the explosive growth of social data such as images,
how to conduct rapid similarity searches has become one of
the basic requirements of large-scale information retrieval.
Hashing (Wang et al. 2015) (Liu and Zhang 2016) has become a widely studied solution to this problem. The goal of
hashing is to convert high-dimensional feature and similarity information into compact binary codes, which can greatly
speed up computation with efficient xor operations and save
storage space.
Hashing techniques can be generally divided into supervised and unsupervised categories. Supervised hashing
* This work is done when Qinghong Lin is an intern at Tencent.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7488

