The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Inconsistent Planning: When in Doubt, Toss a Coin!
Yuriy Dementiev1 , Fedor Fomin2 , Artur Ignatiev1
1

Saint-Petersburg State University, Russia
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
yuru.dementiev@gmail.com, fedor.fomin@uib.no, artur.ignatev23924@gmail.com
2

Abstract

The mathematical idea of present bias goes back to
1937 when (Samuelson 1937) introduced the discountedutility model. It has developed into the hyperbolic discounting model, one of the cornerstones of behavioral economics (Laibson 1994; McClure et al. 2004). A simple
mathematical model of present bias was suggested in (Akerlof 1991). In Akerlof’s model, the salience factor causes
the agent to put more weight on immediate events than on
the future. Thus the cost of an action that will be perceived
in the future is assumed to be β times smaller than its actual
cost, for some present-bias parameter β < 1. It appears that
even a tiny salience factor could yield high extra costs for
the agent.
Kleinberg and Oren (Kleinberg and Oren 2014, 2018) introduced an elegant graph-theoretic model encapsulating the
salience factor and scenarios of Akerlof. The approach is
based on analyzing how an agent traverses from a source s
to a target t in a directed edge-weighted graph G. Before
defining this model formally, we provide an illustrating example. The example, up to small modifications, is borrowed
from (Kleinberg and Oren 2014) and originally due to Akerlof (Akerlof 1991).

One of the most widespread human behavioral biases is the
present bias—the tendency to overestimate current costs by
a bias factor. Kleinberg and Oren (2014) introduced an elegant graph-theoretical model of inconsistent planning capturing the behavior of a present-biased agent accomplishing a set
of actions. The essential measure of the system introduced by
Kleinberg and Oren is the cost of irrationality—the ratio of
the total cost of the actions performed by the present-biased
agent to the optimal cost. This measure is vital for a task designer to estimate the aftermaths of human behavior related
to time-inconsistent planning, including procrastination and
abandonment.
As we prove in this paper, the cost of irrationality is highly
susceptible to the agent’s choices when faced with a few possible actions of equal estimated costs. To address this issue,
we propose a modification of Kleinberg-Oren’s model of inconsistent planning. In our model, when an agent selects from
several options of minimum prescribed cost, he uses a randomized procedure. We explore the algorithmic complexity
of computing and estimating the cost of irrationality in the
new model.

1

Example. One of the authors of this paper, we call him Bob,
is planning to write reviews for AAAI. He estimates the cost
(say, estimated time) of this task as c. While the definite
deadline is on Friday, Bob’s initial plan is to write reviews
on Monday. However, on Monday, Bob realizes that he also
needs to check Google Scholar to find out who cited his paper. He estimates the cost of the other task as x. Now Bob
meets the dilemma. He can either (a) write reviews today or
(b) check Google Scholar today and write reviews tomorrow. While estimating the costs, Bob uses the present-bias
parameter β. Thus he estimates the cost of (b) as x + βc. It
appears that x+βc < c, therefore Bob decides to pursue (b).
On Tuesday, the story repeats by procrastinating with Instagram, and on Wednesday with Facebook, see Fig. 1. At the
end, Bob sends the reviews on Friday, spending on this job
totally 4x + c instead of c.

Introduction

Time-inconsistent behavior is the term in behavioral economics and psychology describing the behavior of an agent
optimizing a course of future actions but changing his optimal plans in the short run without new circumstances
(Thaler 2016). For example, why do we buy a year swim
membership and not go to the swimming pool after that?
Why do we procrastinate when it comes to paying off credit
card debt? Why do we want to eat healthier but have little
incentive to do so? As Socrates in Plato’s Protagoras asks, if
one judges a certain behavior to be the best course of action,
why would one do anything else?
A standard assumption in behavioral economics used to
explain the gap between long-term intention and short-term
decision-making is the notion of present bias. According to
(O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999), when considering trade-offs
between two future moments, present-biased preferences
give stronger relative weight to the earlier moment as it gets
closer.

Kleinberg-Oren’s Model. An instance of the timeinconsistent planning model is a 5-tuple M = (G, w, s, t, β)
where:
• G = (V (G), E(G)) is a directed acyclic n-vertex graph
called a task graph. V (G) is a set of elements called ver-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9724

