The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NaturalInversion: Data-Free Image Synthesis Improving Real-World Consistency
Yujin Kim1,2 , Dogyun Park1,2 , Dohee Kim2 , Suhyun Kim2 *
1

Korea University, Republic of Korea
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{lakeeye1220, koparkrea, kimdohe1070, dr.suhyun.kim}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

tune the compressed networks, limiting their use in privacysensitive or data-limited scenarios.
To overcome these scenarios, several approaches have
synthesized the data from a pre-trained network without
original datasets or images prior (Mahendran and Vedaldi
2015). Recently, Yin et al. (2020) has proposed a novel
method to optimize the raw input space x̂ to synthesize images, using a regularizer that follows the statistics in the
batch-normalization(BN) layers of a pre-trained classifier.
However, we argue that optimizing the high-dimensional
raw input space is challenging for two reasons: 1) limited
image prior since the statistics in BN layer are averaged,
ignoring the specific information for individual images, 2)
optimization without non-linearity. These problems lead to
sub-optimized images which are heavily inconsistent with
original data distribution: low fidelity and low diversity of
synthesized images. Therefore, these images cause performance degradation in applications compared to performance
trained with original dataset.
Therefore, for the richer image prior, we focus on features of pre-trained CNNs, since they encode the low to high
level image prior on multi-scale feature maps (Islam, Jia,
and Bruce 2020). The sparsity in feature maps eliminates
the irrelevant variability of the input data while preserving
the important information (Xu et al. 2021). Furthermore,
feature maps of each layer encourage to capture multi-scale
characteristics of the target class and real data distribution.
Thus, utilizing the feature maps of the pre-trained classifier
for generation strengthens the real data characteristics on the
synthesized images (Shocher et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021).
Inspired by the above methods, we propose the subgenerator: Feature Transfer Pyramid (FTP) that uses multiscale feature maps from the pre-trained network to generated images. Thus, FTP enhances the characteristics of real
data by sequentially combining the multi-scale feature maps
from a pre-trained classifier. By adding the final combined
multi-scale feature maps to synthesized image, it strengthens the original data characteristics on the synthesized images, making images more consistent to original data distribution. Secondly, we use the CNN-based generator to bring
a non-linearity in optimization, which makes generator possess higher ability to represent the complex characteristics.
We further propose the one-to-one approach, which utilizes
a generator for one batch of images during the current batch

We introduce NaturalInversion, a novel model inversionbased method to synthesize images that agrees well with the
original data distribution without using real data. In NaturalInversion, we propose: (1) a Feature Transfer Pyramid which
uses enhanced image prior of the original data by combining
the multi-scale feature maps extracted from the pre-trained
classifier, (2) a one-to-one approach generative model where
only one batch of images are synthesized by one generator to
bring the non-linearity to optimization and to ease the overall
optimizing process, (3) learnable Adaptive Channel Scaling
parameters which are end-to-end trained to scale the output
image channel to utilize the original image prior further. With
our NaturalInversion, we synthesize images from classifiers
trained on CIFAR-10/100 and show that our images are more
consistent with original data distribution than prior works by
visualization and additional analysis. Furthermore, our synthesized images outperform prior works on various applications such as knowledge distillation and pruning, demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved a great
success in various computer vision tasks such as image
classification, image generation, etc (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Goodfellow et al. 2014). The emergence of large
datasets (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009; Deng et al. 2009)
has led to a progressive improvement in various applications
(Zhai et al. 2021; Chu et al. 2020). The CNNs learn meaningful feature spaces with rich information from low-level
features to high-level semantic content (Zeiler and Fergus
2014). Hence, several works have been proposed to transfer knowledge from pre-trained networks into a lightweight
model to inference in various conditions. Specially, Knowledge Distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) transfers
the knowledge from the pre-trained teacher network to student networks. Network pruning (Liu et al. 2017) reduces
redundant neural connections of a pre-trained network and
fine-tunes the remaining weights to recover the accuracy.
However, these methods require original data to train or fine* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1201

