The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Better Parameter-Free Stochastic Optimization with ODE Updates for
Coin-Betting
Keyi Chen1 , John Langford2 , Francesco Orabona1
1

Boston University, Boston, MA
Microsoft Research, New York, NY
keyichen@bu.edu, jcl@microsoft.com, francesco@orabona.com
2

Abstract

proportional to the square root of the number of iterations and
proportional to the distance between the initial point and the
optimal one x? . Unfortunately, we do not know in advance
the distance from the initial point to the optimal solution nor
we can expect to reliably estimate it—again, consider the
function F (x) = |x − 10|. This lack of information about
kx1 − x? k2 is the primary difficulty of choosing the learning
rate in the stochastic setting.
From a practical point of view, this failure of the theory to
provide a way to automatically set the learning rates means
that most of the time the best way to achieve the best convergence rate is to treat the learning rate as a hyperparameter and
exhaustively search for the best one. However, the computational cost of this search can be huge, basically multiplying
the entire learning process by the number of different learning
rates we have to try.
However, a new class of parameter-free algorithms has
been recently proposed (e.g. McMahan and Orabona 2014;
Orabona 2014; Cutkosky and Boahen 2016; Orabona and Pal
2016; Cutkosky and Boahen 2017; Orabona and Tommasi
2017; Foster, Rakhlin, and Sridharan 2018; Cutkosky and
Orabona 2018; Kotłowski 2020; Kempka, Kotłowski, and
Warmuth 2019; Cutkosky and Sarlos 2019; Jun and Orabona
2019; Mhammedi and Koolen 2020; Orabona and Pál 2021).
These algorithms do not have a learning rate parameter at all,
while achieving essentially the same theoretical convergence
rate you would have obtained tuning the learning rate in
(1). The simplest parameter-free algorithm (Orabona and Pal
2016) has an update rule of
!
Pt
t
X
− i=1 g i
xt+1 =
1−
hg i , xi i ,
(2)
L(1 + t)
i=1

Parameter-free stochastic gradient descent (PFSGD) algorithms do not require setting learning rates while achieving optimal theoretical performance. In practical applications, however, there remains an empirical gap between tuned stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) and PFSGD. In this paper, we close
the empirical gap with a new parameter-free algorithm based
on continuous-time Coin-Betting on truncated models. The
new update is derived through the solution of an Ordinary
Differential Equation (ODE) and solved in a closed form. We
show empirically that this new parameter-free algorithm outperforms algorithms with the “best default” learning rates
and almost matches the performance of finely tuned baselines
without anything to tune.

1

Introduction

Most machine learning algorithms require solving an optimization problem, minx∈Rd F (x). To solve this problem,
first-order stochastic optimization algorithms are the de-facto
choice for machine learning due to their speed across large
datasets and simplicity. These Stochastic (sub)Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithms start from an initial solution x1 , iteratively update a vector xt moving in the negative direction
of a stochastic (sub)gradient g t such that E[g t ] ∈ ∂F (xt ):
xt+1 = xt − ηt g t , where ηt > 0 is the learning rate or step
size. Learning rates are the big caveat of SGD.
How do we set the learning rate? Intuitively, the learning
rates must become arbitrarily small to converge to the minimum of the function. This is clear considering minimizing
the function F (x) = |x − 10| with SGD. In addition, the
step size must be large enough that not too many updates are
required to move from the initial to the optimal solution.
We can formalize the above intuitions with the standard
convergence rate of SGD with constant step size η after T
iterations with stochastic subgradients g t bounded by 1 in
L2 norm (Zinkevich 2003):
"
!#
T
1X
kx1 − x? k2 ηT
E F
xt
− F (x? ) ≤
+
. (1)
T t=1
2η
2

where L is the Lipschitz constant of F . These algorithms basically promise to trade-off a bit of accuracy for the removal
of tuning the learning rate. However, empirically they still
have a big gap with tuned optimization algorithms.
Contributions. In this paper, we greatly reduce this gap
with a new class of parameter-free stochastic optimization algorithms that performs better than SGD, AdaGrad, and Adam
with the “best default” parameter, see Figure 1. We achieve it
by designing a parameter-free algorithm that is more aware of
the geometry of the loss functions by avoiding overshooting
their minima. In particular, we modify the optimization algorithm based on coin-betting in (2) to make an infinite number

From the above, we have that the optimal worst-case step size
−x? k2
is η = kx1√
implying the optimal step size is inversely
T
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6239

