The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Iterative Calculus of Voting Under Plurality
Fabricio Vasselai
University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, MI, USA
vasselai@umich.edu

Abstract

agent maximizes its expected reward via weighting candidates’ cardinal utility differences by the probability that voting for a candidate would be pivotal to determine the election result (see Palfrey 1988; Myerson and Weber 1993).
Here we formally derive the Iterative Calculus of Voting
(ICV), a voting model that joins main aspects of IV and CV.
Agents re-evaluate their choices over multiple iterations, like
in IV, but each time doing a simultaneous expected reward
optimization, like in CV. This is naturally akin to growing
applications based on simulating CV in discrete-time (e.g.
Clough 2007; Tsang and Larson 2016; Fairstein et al. 2019).
ICV encompasses those and aims at offering a rigorously
formalized and more general framework. Additionally, ICV
deals with how to transition CV assumptions to an iterated
setting, it is defined for both small and large electorates and
it jointly addresses limitations of both CV and IV.
More specifically, ICV can be described as follows. In
each iteration, agents learn only candidates’ latest vote
shares and use those to estimate the probability that currently
voting for each candidate would alter the election outcome.
Agents use those pivotal probabilities to weight the utility differences they see between candidates and then update
their choices. Therefore, similarly to IV and CV, agents are
unaware of each other’s preferences or individual choices.
However, like in IV and differently from most CV, agents
are even unaware of the distribution of preferences. Also,
like in CV but differently from most IV, agents update simultaneously in electorates that can be reasonably small or
arbitrarily large. Finally, ICV agents require low information
and are boundedly rational in the strategic sense.1
After deriving several generalizations and novel pivotal
probability calculations - exact and heuristics - convergence
properties of ICV under plurality are studied in two ways.
In non-atomic ICV games of standard characteristics and
pivotal probabilities, we prove that convergence always results, as well as the bounds on convergence rates. Also, we
show that similarly to CV, under weak assumptions ICV usually converges to only two candidates receiving positive vote
counts, which is known as Duvergerian equilibria (Palfrey
1988; Meir 2018). In atomic ICV games, while the exis-

We formalize a voting model for plurality elections that combines Iterative Voting and Calculus of Voting. Each iteration,
autonomous agents simultaneously maximize the utility they
expect from candidates. Agents are aware of neither other individuals’ preferences or choices, nor of the distribution of
preferences. They know only of candidates’ latest vote shares
and with that calculate expected rewards from each candidate,
considering the probability that voting for each would alter
the election. We define the general form of those pivotal probabilities, then derive efficient exact and approximated calculations. Lastly, we prove formally the model converges with
asymptotically large electorates and show via simulations that
it nearly always converges even with very few agents.

Introduction
In many multi-agent systems, agents with diverse preferences have to settle on a single choice or course of action - a
challenge often solved by voting. Yet, it is known from the
Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem that if there are more than
two alternatives and no one can dictate the result, intelligent
agents’ best response may differ from their sincere preference (Gibbard 1973; Satterthwaite 1975).
While, traditionally, the Computational Social Choice
literature has treated such a misrepresentation of preferences as a ‘manipulation’ to be prevented or diminished
(see Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1989; Conitzer, Sandholdm,
and Lang 2007), in the last decade a new view has emerged.
Desmedt and Elkind (2010) deemed such a strategic voting
“an unavoidable attribute of an electoral system with rational
voters” (p.347). Crucially, Meir et. al.’s (2010) Iterative Voting (IV) allowed agents with ordinal preferences to sequentially and deterministically re-evaluate their choices over iterations, after learning the most current election score.
Conversely, analytical Game-Theory has embraced strategic voting for decades, but with works focusing on the exact opposite. They usually investigate solution concepts of
non-atomic games where players know the distribution of
voter types and decide their optimal vote simultaneously in
a single one-shot iteration (for a review, see Meir 2018). In
its most renowned approach, the ‘Calculus of Voting’ (CV)
model inaugurated by Riker and Ordeshook (1968), each

1

Like in CV, they must be computationally sophisticated
enough to estimate their probabilities of being pivotal. As will be
discussed, conceptually principled heuristics can be developed.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5208

