The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimal Sampling Gaps for Adaptive Submodular Maximization
Shaojie Tang,1 Jing Yuan, 2
1

Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas
shaojie.tang@utdallas.edu, csyuanjing@gmail.com

Abstract

t a group of items to maximize a submodular function
on various types of independence systems, including matroid [Nemhauser, Wolsey, and Fisher 1978; Calinescu et al.
2007] and knapsack [Sviridenko 2004], has been extensively studied in the literature. Most of existing studies focus
on the non-adaptive setting, where each item has a deterministic state and all items must be selected at once. However, the classic notation of submodularity can not capture
the interactive nature of many applications, including active
learning and experimental design, where one must adaptively select a group of items based on the stochastic observations collected from past selections. Recently, [Golovin and
Krause 2011] introduce the notation of adaptive submodularity, which extends the classic notation of submodularity
from sets to policies. In the problem of adaptive submodular maximization, each item has a particular state which
is unknown initially. One must pick an item before observing its realized state. An adaptive policy can be represented using a decision tree which specifies which item to pick
next based on the realizations observed so far. [Golovin and
Krause 2011] develop a simple adaptive greedy algorithm
that achieves a 1 − 1/e approximation for the problem of
cardinality constrained adaptive submodular maximization.
Their algorithm starts with an empty set, and in each iteration, it selects an item with the largest marginal utility on
top of the current observation. This algorithm requires n × k
value oracle queries, where n is the size of the ground set
and k is the cardinality constraint. Note that k could be as
large as n, making the standard greedy algorithm infeasible
in practise when n is large. One natural idea to reduce the
computational cost of any machine learning algorithms is to
run them on a reduced ground set that is sampled from the
full set. However, one major concern here is that the output
restricted to the sampled data set might be much worse than
that of the optimal solution when using the full data set. This
raises the sampling gap question:
What is the maximum ratio between the expected utility
of the optimal solution (over independence systems) when
using the full data set and that when using the sampled data
set?
If this sampling gap is small then we can focus on finding
a good solution based on the sampled data set while enjoying its benefits of reduced computational cost. In this work,
we consider a simple sampling method that selects each item

Running machine learning algorithms on large and rapidly
growing volumes of data is often computationally expensive,
one common trick to reduce the size of a data set, and thus reduce the computational cost of machine learning algorithms, is probability sampling. It creates a sampled data set by
including each data point from the original data set with a
known probability. Although the benefit of running machine
learning algorithms on the reduced data set is obvious, one
major concern is that the performance of the solution obtained from samples might be much worse than that of the
optimal solution when using the full data set. In this paper,
we examine the performance loss caused by probability sampling in the context of adaptive submodular maximization.
We consider a simple probability sampling method which selects each data point with probability at least r ∈ [0, 1]. If we
set r = 1, our problem reduces to finding a solution based
on the original full data set. We define sampling gap as the
largest ratio between the optimal solution obtained from the
full data set and the optimal solution obtained from the samples, over independence systems. Our main contribution is to
show that if the sampling probability of each data point is at
least r and the utility function is policywise submodular, then
the sampling gap is both upper bounded and lower bounded
by 1/r. We show that the property of policywise submodular can be found in a wide range of real-world applications,
including pool-based active learning and adaptive viral marketing.

Introduction
Many machine learning methods are highly benefitted when
they are fed with the right volume of data. One common approach to reduce the volume of a large data set is probability
sampling, which generates a sampled data set by including
each data point with a known probability. However, one major concern of running an algorithm on a sampled data set is
that the performance of the sampling-based solution might
be much worse than that of the optimal solution when using
the full data set. In this paper, we examine the performance
loss caused by probability sampling in the context of adaptive submodular maximization over independence systems.
Due to the wide applicability of submodular functions, submodular maximization, whose objective is to selecCopyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8450

