The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Can Vision Transformers Learn without Natural Images?
Kodai Nakashima1,2 * , Hirokatsu Kataoka1 * , Asato Matsumoto1,2 ,
Kenji Iwata1 , Nakamasa Inoue3 and Yutaka Satoh1,2
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan
2
University of Tsukuba, Japan
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
{nakashima.kodai, hirokatsu.kataoka, matsumoto-a, kenji.iwata, yu.satou}@aist.go.jp, inoue@c.titech.ac.jp
Abstract
Is it possible to complete Vision Transformer (ViT) pretraining without natural images and human-annotated labels?
This question has become increasingly relevant in recent
months because while current ViT pre-training tends to rely
heavily on a large number of natural images and humanannotated labels, the recent use of natural images has resulted in problems related to privacy violation, inadequate
fairness protection, and the need for labor-intensive annotations. In this paper, we experimentally verify that the results of formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) framework are comparable with, and can even partially outperform, sophisticated self-supervised learning (SSL) methods
like SimCLRv2 and MoCov2 without using any natural images in the pre-training phase. We also consider ways to reorganize FractalDB generation based on our tentative conclusion that there is room for configuration improvements in
the iterated function system (IFS) parameter settings of such
databases. Moreover, we show that while ViTs pre-trained
without natural images produce visualizations that are somewhat different from ImageNet pre-trained ViTs, they can still
interpret natural image datasets to a large extent. Finally, in
experiments using the CIFAR-10 dataset, we show that our
model achieved a performance rate of 97.8, which is comparable to the rate of 97.4 achieved with SimCLRv2 and 98.0
achieved with ImageNet.

1

(a) Val. accuracy transition during fine-tuning on CIFAR-10.

(b) Attention maps in fractal images. The brighter areas are
those receiving more attention.

Figure 1: The impact of FDSL ViT pre-training on a FractalDB. These results show that (a) the pre-trained model facilitates fine-tuning accuracy improvements to a level that
is much closer to an ImageNet pre-trained ViT, and (b) the
FractalDB pre-trained ViT recognizes fractal images while
identifying complex contours. We believe that this property
contributes to the pre-training effect even though fractal images do not have background areas.

Introduction

In contemporary visual recognition, transformer architectures (Vaswani et al. 2017) are gradually replacing the usage
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which has long
been dominated in the field of computer vision (CV).
Transformer architectures, which are based on selfattention mechanisms, were initially employed in natural
language processing (NLP) tasks such as machine translation and semantic analysis. Recently, however, we have
witnessed the development of epoch-making methods that
use transformer modules such as Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al.
2019) and Generative pre-trained Transformers (GPT)-{1,
2, 3} (Radford et al. 2018a,b; Brown and et al. 2020). The
trend is now gradually shifting from NLP to CV tasks, where

one of the most active topics is the use of Vision Transformers (ViTs) for image classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021),
primarily because ViTs can effectively process and recognize an image based on Transformers with minimum modifications. Additionally, even though the reimplementation
process is reasonably straightforward, it has been shown that
ViTs often perform at least as well as state-of-the-art transfer learning. However, it is also true that ViT tends to require
a large amount of data in the pre-training phase. For example, Dosovitskiy et al. (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) reported

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1990

