The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

VALUE N ET: A New Dataset for Human Value Driven Dialogue System
Liang Qiu1 , Yizhou Zhao1 , Jinchao Li2 , Pan Lu1 , Baolin Peng2 ,
Jianfeng Gao2 , Song-Chun Zhu1
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond
liangqiu@ucla.edu

Abstract

Scenario: applying to a far-away university
against my dad's wishes.

Building a socially intelligent agent involves many challenges, one of which is to teach the agent to speak guided
by its value like a human. However, value-driven chatbots are
still understudied in the area of dialogue systems. Most existing datasets focus on commonsense reasoning or social norm
modeling. In this work, we present a new large-scale human
value dataset called VALUE N ET, which contains human attitudes on 21,374 text scenarios. The dataset is organized in
ten dimensions that conform to the basic human value theory
in intercultural research. We further develop a Transformerbased value regression model on VALUE N ET to learn the utility distribution. Comprehensive empirical results show that
the learned value model could benefit a wide range of dialogue tasks. For example, by teaching a generative agent with
reinforcement learning and the rewards from the value model,
our method attains state-of-the-art performance on the personalized dialog generation dataset: P ERSONA -C HAT. With
values as additional features, existing emotion recognition
models enable capturing rich human emotions in the context, which further improves the empathetic response generation performance in the E MPATHETIC D IALOGUES dataset.
To the best of our knowledge, VALUE N ET is the first largescale text dataset for human value modeling, and we are the
first one trying to incorporate a value model into emotionally intelligent dialogue systems. The dataset is available at
https://liang-qiu.github.io/ValueNet/.

Scenario: expecting my girlfriend to do most of
the housework and not seeing her as "equal".

freedom

Self-direction
independent

daring
variation

responsible

pleasure

intelligent

successful

Achievement

ambitious

Power

loyal

self-discipline
politeness

healthy

obedient

family

Security

recognition
wealthy

when someone
needs medical
help.

Conformity

Hedonism
influential

Scenario: letting

Benevolence people know

love
helpful

excitement
enjoy
self-indulgent

Universalism
harmony

wisdom

privacy

Stimulation

equality

unity

curious

safety

humble

respect

devout

Traditition
moderate

belonging
authority

Scenario: having a phone call in the bus.

Figure 1: The presented VALUE N ET dataset with curated
social scenarios organized by Schwartz values (Schwartz
2012).
read from the dialogue that Jerry prefers a healthy and selfdisciplined lifestyle and steer its recommendation to healthier options in the future.
The development of socially intelligent chatbots has been
one of the longest-running goals in artificial intelligence.
Early dialogue systems such as Eliza (Weizenbaum 1966),
Parry (Colby, Weber, and Hilf 1971), and more recent SimSimi1 , Panda Ichiro (Okuda and Shoda 2018), Replika (Fedorenko, Smetanin, and Rodichev 2018), XiaoIce (Zhou
et al. 2020), were designed to mimic human behavior and
incorporate emotional quotients (EQ) to some extent. There
are also datasets and benchmarks for studying related problems, such as emotion recognition (McKeown et al. 2010;
Hsu et al. 2018; Poria et al. 2019; Ghosal et al. 2020), personalized dialogue generation (Zhang et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2020), and empathetic dialogue generation (Rashkin et al.
2019). Even though value plays a fundamental and critical
role in human EQ, there is a lack of explicit modeling of
values in the dialogue domain, based on social domain theory. We have seen recent efforts about crowdsourcing social commonsense knowledge base or benchmarks (Forbes
et al. 2020; Sap et al. 2019; Lourie, Bras, and Choi 2021;

Introduction
Value refers to desirable goals in human life. They guide
the selection or evaluation of actions, policies, people, and
events. A person’s value priority or hierarchy profoundly affects his or her attitudes, beliefs, and traits, making it one
core component of personality (Schwartz 2012). In dialogue
systems, modeling human values is a critical step towards
building socially intelligent chatbots (Qiu et al. 2021b). By
considering values, we can estimate user behavior and cognitive patterns from their utterances and generate responses
that conform to the robot’s persona configuration. For example, the robot is set to be aware of human values, and it
invites Jerry to drink beers, but Jerry replies, “You know that
is tempting but is not good for our fitness”. The bot could
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11183

https://simsimi.com/

