The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stochastic Planner-Actor-Critic for Unsupervised Deformable Image Registration
Ziwei Luo1 * , Jing Hu1 * , Xin Wang2† , Shu Hu3 ,
Bin Kong2 , Youbing Yin2 , Qi Song2 , Xi Wu1† , Siwei Lyu3
1

Chengdu University of Information Technology, China
2
Keya Medical, Seattle, USA
3
University at Buffalo, SUNY, USA
algo lzw@yahoo.com, jing hu09@163.com, xi.wu@cuit.edu.cn, xinw@keyamedna.com
Abstract

feomorphic metric mapping (LDDMM) (Beg et al. 2005),
derived from the group structure of the manifold of diffeomorphisms, is one of the most popular methods to tackle
large deformations in DIR. However, achieving an optimal
solution of the diffeomorphic image registration is computationally intensive and time-consuming, attempts at speeding up diffeomorphic image registration have thus been proposed to improve numerical approximation schemes (Wang
and Zhang 2020).
Most existing DL-based solutions (Balakrishnan et al.
2019; Dalca et al. 2019; Mok and Chung 2020) are enforced to make a straightforward prediction, which is incapable to handle complicated deformations (Zhao et al.
2019). The step-wise image registration methods, such as
R2N2 (Sandkühler et al. 2019) and RCN (Zhao et al. 2019),
have shown the potential in DIR, in which the final deformation field (probably with large displacements) can be considered as a composition of the progressively predicted deformation field. But both of them are complex and computationally costly, and cannot deal with long step-wise registration. Inspired by the way that a human expert aligns two
images by applying a sequence of local or global deformations, some RL-based image registration methods have been
introduced in the past (Liao et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2017;
Miao and Liao 2019; Sun et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2021; Luo
et al. 2020). However, most of them merely focus on global
rigid transformation since it only includes rotation and translation and can be easily represented by a low-dimensional
discrete parametric model. Compared to rigid registration,
DIR has huge, continuous state and action spaces, especially in 3D, which makes RL training extremely difficult.
Krebs et al. (Krebs et al. 2017) proposed an RL-based approach for DIR, but their method uses supervised learning
with ground truth deformation field, which is infeasible for
most DIR tasks. And they incorporate the traditional statistical deformation model to reduce and discretize the action
space, which leads to inferior performance in complex deformation registration.
In this paper, we propose a new RL architecture for unsupervised DIR problems, known as the Stochastic PlannerActor-Critic (SPAC), to handle high dimensional continuous state and action spaces. As shown in Figure 1, the
SPAC framework is formed with three core deep neural networks: the planner, the actor, and the critic. We introduce

Large deformations of organs, caused by diverse shapes and
nonlinear shape changes, pose a significant challenge for
medical image registration. Traditional registration methods
need to iteratively optimize an objective function via a specific deformation model along with meticulous parameter
tuning, but which have limited capabilities in registering
images with large deformations. While deep learning-based
methods can learn the complex mapping from input images to
their respective deformation field, it is regression-based and
is prone to be stuck at local minima, particularly when large
deformations are involved. To this end, we present Stochastic
Planner-Actor-Critic (SPAC), a novel reinforcement learningbased framework that performs step-wise registration. The
key notion is warping a moving image successively by each
time step to finally align to a fixed image. Considering that
it is challenging to handle high dimensional continuous action and state spaces in the conventional reinforcement learning (RL) framework, we introduce a new concept ‘Plan’ to
the standard Actor-Critic model, which is of low dimension
and can facilitate the actor to generate a tractable high dimensional action. The entire framework is based on unsupervised
training and operates in an end-to-end manner. We evaluate
our method on several 2D and 3D medical image datasets,
some of which contain large deformations. Our empirical results highlight that our work achieves consistent, significant
gains and outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Deformable image registration (DIR) is an important task in
medical imaging and has been actively studied for decades.
DIR consists of establishing a spatial anatomical non-linear
dense correspondence between a pair of fixed and moving
images. The central task of DIR is the estimation of the
ill-posed free-form transformation field that consists of a
combination of global and local displacements (Eppenhof
et al. 2019). Moreover, an accurate DIR on large deformation is needed due to soft organs (e.g., the brain, liver, and
stomach) may undergo large deformations caused by patient re-positioning, surgical manipulation, or other physiological differences (Holden 2007). Large deformation dif* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1917

