The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deeply Tensor Compressed Transformers for End-to-End Object Detection
Peining Zhen, Ziyang Gao, Tianshu Hou, Yuan Cheng, and Hai-Bao Chen∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{zhenpn, gaoziyang, houtianshu, cyuan328, haibaochen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

2017), or key points (Zhou, Wang, and Krähenbühl 2019;
Law and Deng 2018). However, the design and generation of
the above prior knowledge make the corresponding network
structures more complex. Currently, another branch of object detection methods beyond anchor-based ones has drawn
wide attention (Carion et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020; Dai et al.
2021). These methods are inspired by the widely used transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) and streamline the
detection pipeline.
The detection transformer (DETR) (Carion et al. 2020),
which achieves competitive results against strong baselines,
is the first attempt to simplify the detection pipeline based
on transformers. However, the vanilla DETR models suffer from large model size and high computational cost since
most of their network structures are linear layers. Such high
demands for computing resources seriously hinder them to
be stored and deployed on mobile devices with limited hardware resources and a tight power budget. It thereby remains
a great challenge to develop compact DETR models while
maintaining the simplicity of their detection pipeline. Although the works (Zhu et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021; Dai
et al. 2021) make efforts to improve the training efficiency
of DETR models, they do not focus on reducing the model
size. For resources-constrained AI applications, such as selfdriving cars and AR glasses, model compression is particularly necessary.
It is intuitive to develop model compression methods
for reducing the complexity of neural networks. One of
the major compression methods is quantization-aware training (QAT), which aims to reduce the bitwidth of network weights and activations during training based on pretrained models (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Jacob et al.
2018). Nevertheless, these QAT methods are tedious and
time-consuming, which hinder the immediate application
of quantization techniques.f Downstream toolchains (e.g.,
ONNX or TensorFlow-Lite) are required to accomplish the
model size reduction after QAT. Another main compression method is network pruning (He, Zhang, and Sun 2017;
Zhuang et al. 2018), which focuses on removing the redundant network structure. However, the pruning metric is
difficult to decide and the retraining procedure is complicated. In this work, we propose to compress the DETR models through low-rank tensor decomposition. The neural network weights can be represented as a combination of mul-

DEtection TRansformer (DETR) is a recently proposed
method that streamlines the detection pipeline and achieves
competitive results against two-stage detectors such as FasterRCNN. The DETR models get rid of complex anchor generation and post-processing procedures thereby making the
detection pipeline more intuitive. However, the numerous redundant parameters in transformers make the DETR models computation and storage intensive, which seriously hinder them to be deployed on the resources-constrained devices. In this paper, to obtain a compact end-to-end detection
framework, we propose to deeply compress the transformers with low-rank tensor decomposition. The basic idea of
the tensor-based compression is to represent the large-scale
weight matrix in one network layer with a chain of low-order
matrices. Furthermore, we propose a gated multi-head attention (GMHA) module to mitigate the accuracy drop of the
tensor-compressed DETR models. In GMHA, each attention
head has an independent gate to determine the passed attention value. The redundant attention information can be suppressed by adopting the normalized gates. Lastly, to obtain
fully compressed DETR models, a low-bitwidth quantization
technique is introduced for further reducing the model storage size. Based on the proposed methods, we can achieve significant parameter and model size reduction while maintaining high detection performance. We conduct extensive experiments on the COCO dataset to validate the effectiveness of
our tensor-compressed (tensorized) DETR models. The experimental results show that we can attain 3.7× full model
compression with 482× feed forward network (FFN) parameter reduction and only 0.6 points accuracy drop.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great success in object detection area with the rapid development of deep learning and
neural networks (Ren et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2017; Carion et al. 2020). Numerous detectors have been proposed
to continually push forward the state-of-the-art. Nowadays,
anchor-based and anchor-free detectors are the dominant
methods for efficient target object detection. These methods make bounding box (bbox) predictions depending on
proposals (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018), anchors (Lin et al.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4716

