The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bounding Quality in Diverse Planning
Michael Katz1 , Shirin Sohrabi1 , Octavian Udrea2
1

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
2
Dataminr, New York, NY, USA
michael.katz1@ibm.com, ssohrab@us.ibm.com, oudrea@dataminr.com

Most diverse planners developed over the last decade are
focused on addressing a particular diversity metric. For example, while the diverse planner DLAMA focuses on finding a set of plans by considering a landmark-based diversity measure (Bryce 2014), other diverse planners such as
LPG -d, DIV , DFAA / DFAM , and A∗AA / A∗AM focus on finding
a set of plans with a particular minimum action distance
(Nguyen et al. 2012; Coman and Muñoz-Avila 2011; Vadlamudi and Kambhampati 2016). Goldman and Kuter (2015)
propose a diversity metric based on information retrieval literature. Roberts, Howe, and Ray (2014) suggest another diversity metric, introducing several planners, such as itA∗
and MQA, which, in addition to the diversity metrics, consider plan quality. While all these planners implement the
chosen diversity metric and switching to another metric is
not trivial, the planners DFAA/DFAM and A∗AA/A∗AM work
in two phases: find a set of plans and choose a proper subset
of the found set. That is, plan subset selection is independent of the diversity metric. In 2020, Katz and Sohrabi have
proposed a set of planners FI-diverse that separate the phase
of finding candidate plans from choosing a diverse subset of
these plans (Katz and Sohrabi 2020). Further, they provide
a tool for selecting a subset of plans for a variety of metrics
and computational problems (Katz and Sohrabi 2019).

Abstract
Diverse planning is an important problem in automated planning with many real world applications. Recently, diverse
planning has seen renewed interest, with work that defines
a taxonomy of computational problems with respect to both
plan quality and solution diversity. However, despite the recent advances in diverse planning, the variety of approaches
and the number of available planners are still quite limited,
even nonexistent for several computational problems. In this
work, we aim to extend the portfolio of planners for various
computational problems in diverse planning. To that end, we
introduce a novel approach to finding solutions for three computational problems within diverse planning and present planners for these three problems. For one of these problems, our
approach is the first one that is able to provide solutions to
the problem. For another, we show that top-k and top quality planners can provide, albeit naive, solutions to the problem and we extend these planners to improve the diversity
of the solution. Finally, for the third problem, we show that
some existing diverse planners already provide solutions to
that problem. We suggest another approach and empirically
show it to compare favorably with these existing planners.

Introduction
Diverse planning is an important problem in AI Planning
with many practical applications that require generating
multiple plans rather than one. Example applications include
automated machine learning (Mohr, Wever, and Hüllermeier
2018; Katz et al. 2020), risk management (Sohrabi et al.
2018), automated analysis of streaming data (Riabov et al.
2015), and malware detection (Boddy et al. 2005). Diverse
planning is also important in the context of re-planning and
plan monitoring (Fox et al. 2006), under-specified user preferences (Myers and Lee 1999; Nguyen et al. 2012), as well
as plan recognition and its related applications (Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016). In all these applications, the importance of generating multiple diverse plans is on par with being able to control solution quality, in part due to the way
many of these applications are modelled. As a prominent example, in domains that exploit a variant of soft goals compilation (Keyder and Geffner 2009), plans of low quality (high
cost) may choose to discard many otherwise reachable soft
goals (e.g., (Katz et al. 2020)).

The work by Katz and Sohrabi has also introduced a taxonomy of computational problems and classified existing
planners according to the problems they tackle. Most existing planners, according to that taxonomy, solve Satisficing
Diverse Planning (sat-k), where any sufficiently large set of
plans, k, is a solution, and the aim is to improve solution diversity. The planners LPG-d (Nguyen et al. 2012) and bFI
(Katz and Sohrabi 2020) tackle Bounded Diversity Diverse
Planning (bD-k), where a set of plans, k, is a solution only if
its diversity is above a certain specified bound b. Top-k planners (Katz et al. 2018b; Speck, Mattmüller, and Nebel 2020)
and top-quality planners (Katz, Sohrabi, and Udrea 2020),
while usually are not considered diverse planners, according to the aforementioned taxonomy, return, albeit naive,
solutions to the Bounded Quality Diverse Planning (bQ-k)
problem, where plan set quality is required to be above a
specified bound. The planners DFAA/DFAM and A∗AA/A∗AM
(Vadlamudi and Kambhampati 2016) tackle Bounded Quality and Diversity Diverse Planning (bQbD-k), where both the
quality and the diversity of plan sets is bounded.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9805

