The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AFDetV2: Rethinking the Necessity of the Second Stage for
Object Detection from Point Clouds
Yihan Hu* , Zhuangzhuang Ding* , Runzhou Ge*
Wenxin Shao, Li Huang, Kun Li, Qiang Liu
Horizon Robotics
{yihan.hu96, dinghouzx, runzhouge, proliu}@gmail.com

Abstract

single-stage (Ge et al. 2020; Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Yan,
Mao, and Li 2018; He et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021; Lang
et al. 2019; Bewley et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2020a) and two-stage (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Yang et al.
2019; Qi et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2020c; Li, Wang, and Wang
2021; Shi et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2021a; Yin, Zhou, and
Krahenbuhl 2021a; Sun et al. 2021), in terms of the model
structure. The two-stage methods usually show better accuracy (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Shi et al. 2021; Deng et al.
2021a) in the classification confidence and the box regression, than the single-stage methods. In these methods, the
first stage provides proposals of the bounding boxes, based
on which the second stage pools feature and runs through a
smaller network to classify it and refine the box regression.
The features utilized by the second stage can be extracted
from the feature maps (voxel-based) produced by the backbone (Deng et al. 2021a; Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl 2021a),
or from the raw point cloud (point-based) which need to go
through another round of feature encoding (Yang et al. 2019;
Shi, Wang, and Li 2019).
Why is the second stage needed? One argument is that
the point features may recover the loss of positioning information, due to voxelization, striding operations, or lack of
receptive field. Another argument is that the category classification and the box regression are usually realized in two
separate branches, so the confidence map from the classification branch may not align well with the localization accuracy. These arguments are somewhat supported by the evidence that the second stage does boost detection accuracy.
But we wonder whether the above arguments mean the
necessity of a second stage. For example, is the raw point
necessary for a precise positioning? Some recent two-stage
methods (Deng et al. 2021a; Yin, Zhou, and Krahenbuhl
2021a) suggest that voxel-based features could achieve the
same positioning accuracy without using the point-based
features (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019). What the second stage
provides is to refine the classification score and enhance box
regression with additional computational blocks. However,
after a careful examination, we have found that the first stage
is already capable of producing accurate box localization,
when designed properly (Sec. 3.1). The actual contribution
from the second stage lies in the enhancement of the classification scores. In another word, the second stage may not
refine the positions of the boxes; instead, it rescores the clas-

There have been two streams in the 3D detection from point
clouds: single-stage methods and two-stage methods. While
the former is more computationally efficient, the latter usually provides better detection accuracy. By carefully examining the two-stage approaches, we have found that if appropriately designed, the first stage can produce accurate box regression. In this scenario, the second stage mainly rescores
the boxes such that the boxes with better localization get selected. From this observation, we have devised a single-stage
anchor-free network that can fulfill these requirements. This
network, named AFDetV2, extends the previous work by incorporating a self-calibrated convolution block in the backbone, a keypoint auxiliary supervision, and an IoU prediction
branch in the multi-task head. We take a simple product of the
predicted IoU score with the classification heatmap to form
the final classification confidence. The enhanced backbone
strengthens the box localization capability, and the rescoring approach effectively joins the object presence confidence
and the box regression accuracy. As a result, the detection
accuracy is drastically boosted in the single-stage. To evaluate our approach, we have conducted extensive experiments
on the Waymo Open Dataset and the nuScenes Dataset. We
have observed that our AFDetV2 achieves the state-of-theart results on these two datasets, superior to all the prior arts,
including both the single-stage and the two-stage 3D detectors. AFDetV2 won the 1st place in the Real-Time 3D Detection of the Waymo Open Dataset Challenge 2021. In addition, a variant of our model AFDetV2-Base was entitled the
“Most Efficient Model” by the Challenge Sponsor, showing
a superior computational efficiency. To demonstrate the generality of this single-stage method, we have also applied it to
the first stage of the two-stage networks. Without exception,
the results show that with the strengthened backbone and the
rescoring approach, the second stage refinement is no longer
needed.

1

Introduction

Object detection from point clouds has become a practical
solution to robotics vision, especially in autonomous driving
applications. Like the detection methods on 2D images, the
3D detection methods can also be divided into two groups:
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

969

