The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Worst-Case Voting When the Stakes Are High
Anson Kahng1 , Gregory Kehne2
1

University of Toronto
Harvard University
anson@cs.toronto.edu, gkehne@g.harvard.edu
2

Abstract

Indeed,
the canonical instance which demonstrates a
√
Ω( m) lower bound on distortion for randomized social
choice
√ functions (Boutilier et al. 2015) allots at most a
1/ m proportion of the total utility to any alternative. In
practice—for example, in political contests—we often expect that there are alternatives which confer much larger social welfare than the average alternative.
To address these concerns we instead study the additive
distortion of randomized social choice functions, which may
be viewed as their worst-case expected regret (Caragiannis
et al. 2017). The additive distortion of a social choice function is the difference between the maximum social welfare
attainable and the expected social welfare that f delivers, in
the worst case over all implicit utilities. Different profiles in
the implicit utilitarian model can have vastly different maximum attainable social welfare, and we posit that, in evaluating social choice functions, additive distortion appropriately prioritizes the instances in which the most utility can
be gained or lost. More concretely, consider a fixed profile
of ordinal votes. Multiplicative distortion hedges against bad
performance in the case of consistent utilities which assign
low total welfare for all candidates, which harms its performance for consistent utilities that yield high-welfare candidates. Additive distortion, on the other hand, prioritizes good
performance for this latter case.
In its introduction to the social choice setting, distortion
was compared to the distortion of metric embeddings (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006); this additive distortion is
similarly analogous (Liestman and Shermer 1993).
Although we advocate for additive distortion primarily
on the above grounds, another advantage is that it remains
a meaningful worst-case metric under weaker assumptions
about voters’ utilities. Past work on distortion in the (nonmetric) implicit utilitarian model has made the assumption
that all voters’ utilities are unit-sum (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006; Caragiannis and Procaccia 2011; Boutilier
et al. 2015; Caragiannis et al. 2017; Benadè et al. 2021). This
is not a coincidence: with potentially apathetic voters whose
utilities are instead unit-capped, one can show that choosing
an alternative uniformly at random (incurring distortion m)
is optimal, and that the distortion of any deterministic rule is
infinite. However, the assumption that all participating voters’ total utility is equal is unreasonable in many settings,
and we instead uniformly cap the sum of voters’ utilities at

We study the additive distortion of social choice functions in
the implicit utilitarian model, and argue that it is a more appropriate metric than multiplicative distortion when an alternative that confers significant social welfare may exist (i.e.,
when the stakes are high). We define a randomized analog of
positional scoring rules, and present a rule which is asymptotically optimal within this class as the number of alternatives increases. We then show that the instance-optimal social
choice function can be efficiently computed. Next, we take a
beyond-worst-case view, bounding the additive distortion of
prominent voting rules as a function of the best welfare attainable in an instance. Lastly, we evaluate the additive distortion
of a range of rules on real-world election data.

1

Introduction

Distortion is a widely-used metric that captures the worstcase loss in efficiency of a social choice function (SCF) (Anshelevich et al. 2021b). It is defined in the implicit utilitarian
model where voters have cardinal utilities for alternatives
but only report ordinal information, e.g., (partial) rankings,
to the social choice function, which then outputs a distribution over winning alternatives.
Distortion evaluates SCFs according to their worst-case
performance over all implicit utilities and corresponding induced rankings, where performance is measured in terms of
(utilitarian) social welfare, i.e. the sum of all agents’ utilities. Specifically, the distortion of a rule is the maximum
ratio between the social welfare of the optimal alternative
and the expected social welfare given by the rule.
While utilitarian social welfare is a defensible basis on
which to evaluate social choice functions (Boutilier et al.
2015), distortion is not always the best tool for the job. In
particular, we might prefer a social choice function which
delivers poor multiplicative guarantees on instances where
no alternative confers significant social welfare, so long as
it performs well on instances
where the potential gains are
√
large. For example, a 1/ m-approximation is a much more
tolerable loss when the maximum attainable social welfare
is O(log n) (as for a symmetric profile with n alternatives)
than when it is fully Ω(n).
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5100

