The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Top-Down Deep Clustering with Multi-Generator GANs
Daniel P. M. de Mello 1 , Renato M. Assunção 2, 1 , Fabricio Murai 1
1

Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
2
Esri Inc.
dani-dmello@hotmail.com, rassuncao@esri.com, murai@dcc.ufmg.br

Abstract

is subject to all sorts of low-level noisy disturbances irrelevant for determining the similarity and suffer from a lack of
translation or rotation invariance. This motivates the need for
some dimensionality reduction technique, by which the fundamental relationships between objects projected onto the
resulting embedding space become more consistent with geometrical distances.
In recent years deep clustering techniques have spearheaded the dimensionality reduction approach to clustering by employing highly non-linear latent representations
learned by deep learning models (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012). Considering the unsupervised nature of
cluster analysis, the models that naturally arise as candidates
for deep clustering are unsupervised deep generative models, since these must learn highly abstract representations of
the data as a requirement for realistic and diverse generated
samples. One of such models are the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), whose extremely realistic results in image generation, semantic interpolation and interpretability in the latent space, are evidence
of their capacity of learning a powerful latent representation
that captures the essential components of the data distribution. Nonetheless, very few works have proposed GAN architectures designed for clustering. Some of these works are
(Mukherjee et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2016), where the authors
showed that, by manipulating the generator’s architecture in
a specific way, it is possible to control the class of the training data to which a generated sample belongs, even when
classes labels are not available during the training.
Some recent works employed a GAN architecture with
multiple generators (Ghosh et al. 2018; Hoang et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018) to achieve greater diversity in image generation, as well as an alternative way of stabilizing the training. In these works, the authors have observed that each generator tends to specialize in generating examples belonging
to a specific class of the dataset. This suggests the organic
emergence of clusters in the generators’ representation of the
data and it is one of the main motivations of our work. The
rationale is that clustering would be possible by employing a
classifier in charge of distinguishing between the generators,
and this classifier could later be applied to the real dataset in
order to classify real examples without the use of labels. Additionally, the problem of setting the number of generators
to be used for representing the classes of the training set is

Deep clustering (DC) leverages the representation power of
deep architectures to learn embedding spaces that are optimal for cluster analysis. This approach filters out low-level
information irrelevant for clustering and has proven remarkably successful for high dimensional data spaces. Some DC
methods employ Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs),
motivated by the powerful latent representations these models are able to learn implicitly. In this work, we propose HCMGAN, a new technique based on GANs with multiple generators (MGANs), which have not been explored for clustering. Our method is inspired by the observation that each generator of a MGAN tends to generate data that correlates with a
sub-region of the real data distribution. We use this clustered
generation to train a classifier for inferring from which generator a given image came from, thus providing a semantically
meaningful clustering for the real distribution. Additionally,
we design our method so that it is performed in a top-down
hierarchical clustering tree, thus proposing the first hierarchical DC method, to the best of our knowledge. We conduct
several experiments to evaluate the proposed method against
recent DC methods, obtaining competitive results. Last, we
perform an exploratory analysis of the hierarchical clustering
tree that highlights how accurately it organizes the data in a
hierarchy of semantically coherent patterns.

Introduction
Cluster analysis is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning, with a wide range of applications, especially in computer vision (Shi and Malik 2000; Achanta and
Susstrunk 2017; Joulin, Bach, and Ponce 2010; Liu et al.
2018). Its goal is to assign similar points of the data space
to the same cluster, while ensuring that dissimilar points
are placed in different clusters. One of the main challenges
in this approach is to quantify the similarity between objects. For low-dimensional data spaces, similarity might be
straightforwardly defined as the minimization of some geometric distance (e.g. euclidean distance, squared euclidean
distance, Manhattan distance). On the other hand, choosing
the distance metric becomes unfeasible for high dimensional
data distributions. Images are a clear example of this problem, since any distance metric based on raw pixel spaces
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7770

