The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SCIR-Net: Structured Color Image Representation Based 3D Object Detection
Network from Point Clouds
Qingdong He1,2∗ , Hao Zeng1 , Yi Zeng1 , Yijun Liu1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,Chengdu,China
2
Aibaba Group,Hangzhou, China
heqingdong@alu.uestc.edu.cn, haozeng@std.uestc.edu.cn, zengyii@std.uestc.edu.cn, yijunliu@std.uestc.edu.cn

3D object detection from point clouds data has become an
indispensable part in autonomous driving. Previous works
for processing point clouds lie in either projection or voxelization. However, projection-based methods suffer from information loss while voxelization-based methods bring huge
computation. In this paper, we propose to encode point clouds into structured color image representation (SCIR) and utilize 2D CNN to fulfill the 3D detection task. Specifically, we
use the structured color image encoding module to convert
the irregular 3D point clouds into a squared 2D tensor image,
where each point corresponds to a spatial point in the 3D space. Furthermore, in order to fit for the Euclidean structure,
we apply feature normalization to parameterize the 2D tensor image onto a regular dense color image. Then, we conduct repeated multi-scale fusion with different levels so as
to augment the initial features and learn scale-aware feature
representations for box prediction. Extensive experiments on
KITTI benchmark, Waymo Open Dataset and more challenging nuScenes dataset show that our proposed method yields
decent results and demonstrate the effectiveness of such representations for point clouds.

Projection

Bird view

2D CNN

3D CNN

3D bounding box

Voxelization

2D CNN

3D bounding box

Front view
(a) Projection-based method

3D bounding box

RGB image

Abstract

(b) Voxel-based method

Structured
color image

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of different representations for point
clouds. (a) Projection-based method: project point clouds to
bird view or front view and combine RGB image to generate
3D box by 2D CNN, (b) Voxelization-based method: divide
point clouds into equally spaced 3D voxels but use 3D CNN
to generate 3D box, (c) our method: encode point clouds
into structured color image and adopt 2D CNN to generate
3D box.

Introduction
The ability of perception and understanding in 3D environment is vital in autonomous driving (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012) and virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR) scenarios (Park, Lepetit, and Woo 2008). In the domain of 3D
sensing, 3D object detection is crucial and indispensable. In
the last decades, with the advanced 3D sensing technology,
the point clouds from LiDAR scanner have become a mainstream due to the rich spatial information and geometric features. However, the sparsity, irregularity and non-Euclidean
structure of point clouds make it a tricky problem to apply the conventional deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to 3D object detection.
Current methods for processing point clouds can be divided into three streams, i.e., projection-based approaches, voxelization-based approaches and PointNet-based approaches. Projection-based approaches (Simon et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2017; Yang, Liang, and Urtasun 2018; Ku et al.

2018; Liang et al. 2018; Yang, Luo, and Urtasun 2018; Premebida et al. 2014) project point clouds into front view or
birds eye view and employ 2D CNN to directly predict 3D
bounding box. However, projection alone will lose the spatial information greatly and cannot represent geometry information of point clouds inevitably, so this type of method
often combines semantic information from RGB images to
compensate for the information loss, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
Compared to projection-based approaches, voxelizationbased approaches (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Yan, Mao, and Li
2018; Lang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020a) divide 3D point
clouds into regular spaced voxels and apply 3D CNN (Li
2017; He et al. 2020a) to generate feature maps for 3D de-

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4486

