The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Strange Role of Information Asymmetry in Auctions — Does More Accurate
Value Estimation Benefit a Bidder?
Haifeng Xu1 and Ruggiero Cavallo2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
2
Yahoo Research
1
hx4ad@virginia.edu and 2 cavallo@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract

turns out to be highly non-trivial once an agent’s payoff
has externalities, and specifically, is affected by other selfinterested agents’ actions in a strategic setup. This raises the
following basic and intriguing question:

We study the second-price auction in which bidders have
asymmetric information regarding the item’s value. Each bidder’s value for the item depends on a private component and a
public component. While each bidder observes their own private component, they hold different and asymmetric information about the public component. We characterize the equilibrium of this auction game and study how the asymmetric bidder information affects their equilibrium bidding strategies.
We also discover multiple surprisingly counter-intuitive equilibrium phenomena. For instance, a bidder may be better off
if she is less informed regarding the public component. Conversely, a bidder may sometimes be worse off if she obtains
more accurate estimation about the auctioned item. Our results suggest that efforts devoted by bidders to improve their
value estimations, as widely seen in today’s online advertising auctions, may not always be to their benefit.

In real-world strategic settings with uncertainty, does
more accurate estimation always benefit the agent?
In this paper, we investigate the above question in the
fundamental sealed-bid second price auction (a.k.a., Vickrey auction) which is widely used in the online advertising
industry (Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz 2007).1 Specifically, we consider a second-price auction with n + 1 bidders 0, 1, · · · , n. The valuation of the auctioned item for
each bidder i is the sum of a private component Vi and a
public component C that is common to all bidders. While
Vi ’s and C are all drawn from publicly known distributions,
bidders have asymmetric information about the public component C; that is, (only) bidder 0 can observe the realized
C. As a motivating example, consider an ad auction among
insurance companies who all bid for an Internet user searching the keyword of “insurance”. The common component C
here captures the total profit any insurance company could
earn from this particular user, which depends on the user’s
attributes and typically does not differ much across insurance companies. The private component Vi describes the
specific operational cost of insurance company i. Bidder 0
could be a performance-driven advertiser who delegates her
bidding to professional marketing agencies which indeed
have much more accurate information about Internet users.
This work aims at understanding how the special bidder
0’s extra information may affect the equilibrium as well as
agents’ utilities by comparing two different situations: (1)
the asymmetric world as we described above; and (2) the
symmetric world in which bidder 0 also cannot observe C.
Summary of results. As a necessary step, we first characterize the equilibrium of the above game under information
asymmetry. Specifically, when there are only two bidders, 0
and 1, we provide an explicit characterization of the equilibrium under mild assumptions. As an application of this
characterization, we prove that there exists a critical value t

Introduction
Thanks to convenient access to information and the significant advances of machine learning techniques, we can now
make unprecedentedly accurate predictions about various
uncertain quantities. Naturally, these predictions have also
changed how our decisions are made. One prominent examples, among many others, is the significant effort devoted by
both Internet companies and online advertisers to predicting
an Internet user’s interest in their ads. Such predicted level
of interest, typically characterized by the click through rate
(Richardson, Dominowska, and Ragno 2007), will then affect the advertiser’s value, and thus the bid, for the user’s
impression. More generally, when we make many other purchases (e.g., a house, used car or an artwork), we tend to
collect as much data as possible in order to reduce our uncertainty about the item’s value estimation.
An important question, however, is whether such more accurate estimations always benefit us. At a first glance, this
answer might seem obvious — how could knowing more
ever be harmful? Certainly, if an agent’s payoff, with possible uncertainty, only depends on its own decision and is not
affected by any other agent’s actions (i.e., there are no externalities), then more accurate estimations always improve
the agent’s decision (Blackwell 1953). However, the answer

1

More precisely, second-price auctions are used when there is
only a single ad slot for sale, e.g., for display ads (Korula, Mirrokni,
and Nazerzadeh 2015).

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5236

