The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Truth-Tracking via Approval Voting: Size Matters
Tahar Allouche,1 Jérôme Lang, 1 Florian Yger 1
1

LAMSADE, CNRS, PSL, Université Paris-Dauphine
tahar.allouche@dauphine.eu, lang@lamsade.dauphine.fr, florian.yger@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Abstract

While some classical anonymous rules have been shown
to be optimal under some assumptions, the aggregation rule
may, when possible, assign different weights to the voters
according to their expertise. Whilst this is doable if we have
additional information about voter expertise or when we
keep a record of their answers to different questions, estimating the individual expertise gets complicated when we have
no prior information about voters and when the sole information we have are votes on a single issue. This leads to the
single-question wisdom of the crowd problem for which the
seminal work (Prelec, Seung, and McCoy 2017) proposes a
novel solution, namely selecting the alternative which is surprisingly popular. Although it proved to be an efficient way
to get around the problem of estimating the voters’ reliabilities, its major drawback is that it requires the elicitation of
further information: each voter has to report her answer and
her beliefs about the answers of the remaining voters.
Now we suggest that there is an alternative approach that
does not require this surplus of information and that simply
relies on the truthfulness of voters. (Shah, Zhou, and Peres
2015) have defined a proper mechanism to incentivize the
participants to select an alternative if and only if they believe it can be the winning one. An intuitive idea might be to
consider that smaller ballots, i.e. answers that contain less
alternatives, are more reliable: a voter who knows the true
answer (or, more generally, who believes to know it) will
probably select only one alternative and a voter who selects
all alternatives has probably no idea whatsoever of the correct answer. For instance, if voters hear a speech and are
asked to detect the language in which it is spoken, we may
give more weight to a voter approving Arabic and Hebrew
than to one approving Arabic, Hebrew, Persian and Turkish.
Based on this intuition, more weight must be assigned to
smaller ballots. Rules that work this way, which we call sizedecreasing approval rules, are part of the family of size approval rules (Alcalde-Unzu and Vorsatz 2009). Our goal is
to motivate the use of such rules from an epistemic social
choice point of view. To this purpose, we will study a family
of noise models which are approval voting variants of the
Mallows model, and prove that in many cases the optimal
rule is size-decreasing.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we discuss related work. In Section 3 we define the framework and
the family of noise models we consider. Section 4 charac-

Epistemic social choice aims at unveiling a hidden ground
truth given votes, which are interpreted as noisy signals about
it. We consider here a simple setting where votes consist
of approval ballots: each voter approves a set of alternatives which they believe can possibly be the ground truth.
Based on the intuitive idea that more reliable votes contain
fewer alternatives, we define several noise models that are approval voting variants of the Mallows model. The likelihoodmaximizing alternative is then characterized as the winner of
a weighted approval rule, where the weight of a ballot decreases with its cardinality. We have conducted an experiment
on three image annotation datasets; they conclude that rules
based on our noise model outperform standard approval voting; the best performance is obtained by a variant of the Condorcet noise model.

1

Introduction

Epistemic social choice deals with the problem of unveiling a hidden ground truth state from a set of some possible
states, given the reports of some voters. Votes are seen as
noisy reports on the ground truth. The distribution of these
reports is modelled by a noise model, sometimes tuned by
some parameter reflecting the competence (expertise, reliability) of these voters.
The space of frameworks for epistemic social choice
varies along two dimensions: the nature of the ground truth
and the format of the reports (ballots expressed by voters).
Depending on the framework chosen, the ground truth may
be a single alternative, a set of alternative or a ranking over
alternatives. We assume the simplest form of ground truth: it
is a single alternative (the unique correct answer). Still depending on the framework, ballots may also contain a single
alternative, a set of alternatives, or a ranking over alternatives. We assume that they are subsets of alternatives, that is,
approval ballots. Requiring voters to give only one answer
(that is, a single alternative) is often too constraining because
voters may be uncertain and believe that several alternatives
may possibly be the ground truth. This is the path followed
by (Procaccia and Shah 2015; Shah, Zhou, and Peres 2015;
Caragiannis and Micha 2017).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4768

