The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Construct Effective Geometry Aware Feature Pyramid Network
for Multi-Scale Object Detection
Jinpeng Dong, Yuhao Huang, Songyi Zhang, Shitao Chen, Nanning Zheng*
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi‘an Jiaotong University
{djp1235a, hyh950623, zhangsongyi, chenshitao}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, nnzheng@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Heuristic-guide
mapping

Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) has been widely adopted
to exploit multi-scale features for scale variation in object
detection. However, intrinsic defects in most of the current
methods with FPN make it difficult to adapt to the feature
of different geometric objects. To address this issue, we introduce geometric prior into FPN to obtain more discriminative features. In this paper, we propose the Geometry-aware
Feature Pyramid Network (GaFPN), which mainly consists of
the novel Geometry-aware Mapping Module and Geometryaware Predictor Head. The Geometry-aware Mapping Module is proposed to make full use of all pyramid features to
obtain better proposal features by the weight-generation subnetwork. The weights generation subnetwork generates fusion weight for each layer proposal features by using the geometric information of the proposal. The Geometry-aware Predictor Head introduces geometric prior into predictor head
by the embedding generation network to strengthen feature
representation for classification and regression. Our GaFPN
can be easily extended to other two-stage object detectors
with feature pyramid and applied to instance segmentation
task. The proposed GaFPN significantly improves detection
performance compared to baseline detectors with ResNet-50FPN: +1.9, +2.0, +1.7, +1.3, +0.8 points Average Precision
(AP) on Faster-RCNN, Cascade R-CNN, Dynamic R-CNN,
SABL, and AugFPN respectively on MS COCO dataset.

w:h
aspect
ratio

Geometric
prior missing

cls
1:1
1:3
3:1
Region
Proposals

1:3

Feature
Pyramid

3:1
Feature of
Proposal

reg

cls
1:1
Align
Feature

reg

Figure 1: Defects in feature pyramid network.

Despite the performance of multi-scale object detection
substantially improved by FPN, its potential has not been
fully explored, as shown in Fig. 1. We summarize two potential promotions as follows:
1) Geometry-guided proposal mapping mechanism.
Object proposals are assigned to a certain level of feature
map by heuristic rules, such as the area of proposals. Although the areas of object proposals are similar, the aspect
ratio of them may be significantly different. For example,
a 1000×10 object and a 10×1000 object are assigned to the
same feature map. The problem leads to a major flaw that the
optimal feature may be hard to obtain based on heuristicguided. Meanwhile, recent studies (Liu et al. 2018; Guo
et al. 2020) report that selecting only single-layer feature
may generate sub-optimal results, since this way ignores the
valid information of unselected features from other layers.
The geometry-guided proposal mapping mechanism by employing multi-layer features from the feature pyramid may
alleviate these problems.
2) Geometric feature embedding. The geometric information of proposals is key prior knowledge for classification
and location refinement. On the one hand, the extra geometric prior feature may facilitate the classification learning of
two semantically similar proposals to distinguish them easily. On the other hand, the regression value may be dynamically changed according to the extra geometric prior feature.
However, after feature mapping, each object proposal is extracted 7×7 features by RoI Align (He et al. 2017) layer.
Then the extracted features are fed into the detector head

Introduction
As one of the most important computer vision tasks, object
detection serves as a fundamental task for several high level
applications such as panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al.
2020) and instance segmentation (He et al. 2017). Following the advance of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
and benchmarks, the performance of CNN-based object detectors has been greatly improved. Among these detectors,
Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) (Lin et al. 2017a) is a classic and effective method for multi-scale object detection. It
first constructs a feature pyramid and then selects one single
level feature for each proposal by heuristic-guided mapping
mechanism. Finally, the features of each proposal fed into
the predictor head by the RoI Align layer (He et al. 2017).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

534

