The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Interpretable Clustering via Multi-Polytope Machines
Connor Lawless1 * , Jayant Kalagnanam2 , Lam M. Nguyen2 , Dzung Phan2 , Chandra Reddy2
1

Cornell Univeristy, Operations Research and Information Engineering, Ithaca, NY 14850
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
cal379@cornell.edu, jayant@us.ibm.com, LamNguyen.MTLD@ibm.com, phandu@us.ibm.com, creddy@ibm.com
2

Abstract

learning tool, to construct clusters (Ghattas, Michel, and
Boyer 2017; Moshkovitz et al. 2020; Frost, Moshkovitz, and
Rashtchian 2020; Bertsimas and Dunn 2017; Fraiman, Ghattas, and Svarc 2013; Basak and Krishnapuram 2005; Jin
and Chang 2001; De Raedt and Blockeel 1997; Yasami and
Mozaffari 2010). While these approaches have intuitive appeal, as decision trees are a well studied model class that are
easy to understand, they focus primarily on clusters that can
be defined by axis-parallel partitions of the feature space. In
contrast, interpretable supervised learning has a much wider
range of tools available to practitioners including sparse linear models (Tibshirani 1996; Ustun, Traca, and Rudin 2013;
Bertsimas and Van Parys 2020), rule sets (Dash, Günlük,
and Wei 2018; Wang and Rudin 2015; Wang et al. 2017;
Lawless and Gunluk 2021), or score cards (Ustun and Rudin
2017) amongst others. In this paper we introduce a novel
method for interpretable clustering that provides cluster explanations by constructing polytopes around each cluster.
Our framework allows for constraints on the hyperplanes
that construct each polytope allowing for a wider range of
cluster explanations including axis parallel partitions (similar to decision trees), partitions defined by sparse integer
hyperplanes (similar to sparse/integer models), and general
linear models (similar to SVMs). Figure 1 shows an example of a polytope cluster explanation under the three different constraints. Overall our approach provides practitioners
more flexibility to explain clusters inline with the business
requirements of their application.

Clustering is a popular unsupervised learning tool often used
to discover groups within a larger population such as customer segments, or patient subtypes. However, despite its use
as a tool for subgroup discovery and description - few stateof-the-art algorithms provide any rationale or description behind the clusters found. We propose a novel approach for interpretable clustering that both clusters data points and constructs polytopes around the discovered clusters to explain
them. Our framework allows for additional constraints on the
polytopes - including ensuring that the hyperplanes constructing the polytope are axis-parallel or sparse with integer coefficients. We formulate the problem of constructing clusters via
polytopes as a Mixed-Integer Non-Linear Program (MINLP).
To solve our formulation we propose a two phase approach
where we first initialize clusters and polytopes using alternating minimization, and then use coordinate descent to boost
clustering performance. We benchmark our approach on a
suite of synthetic and real world clustering problems, where
our algorithm outperforms state of the art interpretable and
non-interpretable clustering algorithms.

1

Introduction

Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning problem that
aims to partition unlabelled data into groups. In practice, it is
often used as a tool for discovering sub-populations within a
dataset such as customer segments, disease heterogeneity, or
movie genres. In these applications the group assignment itself is often of secondary importance to the interpretation of
the groups found. However, traditional clustering algorithms
simply output a set of cluster assignments and provide no
explanation or interpretation for the discovered groups. This
fundamental misalignment between algorithms and applications force practitioners to work backwards from cluster assignments to fit post-hoc explanations to the output of traditional clustering algorithms. Motivated by these shortcomings, the field of interpretable clustering aims to jointly cluster points and provide an explanation of the groups themselves.
Recent work on interpretable clustering has focused on
leveraging decision trees, a popular interpretable supervised

1.1

Related Work

Existing interpretable clustering methods can be grouped
into two general approaches: post-hoc explanations and integrated interpretation and clustering. Post-hoc approaches
take the output of any clustering algorithm and attempt to
fit an explanation to it. A common heuristic approach is to
simply use an interpretable supervised learning algorithm
to predict the cluster labels (Jain, Murty, and Flynn 1999;
De Koninck, De Weerdt et al. 2017; Kauffmann et al. 2019).
Recent work has also looked at designing specialized decision tree algorithms to explain the output of a clustering algorithm using a new splitting criterion (Moshkovitz
et al. 2020; Frost, Moshkovitz, and Rashtchian 2020). Another post-hoc approach is to find a representative summary
point, or prototype, for each cluster. Common choices in-

* Work done while an intern at IBM Research.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7309

