The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Polygon-to-Polygon Distance Loss for Rotated Object Detection
Yang Yang, Jifeng Chen, Xiaopin Zhong* , Yuanlong Deng
Lab. of Machine Vision and Inspection, College of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
1910294008@email.szu.edu.cn, chenjifeng2020@email.szu.edu.cn
xzhong@szu.edu.cn, dengyl@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
There are two key issues that limit further improvements in
the performance of existing rotational detectors: 1) Periodic
sudden change of the parameters in the rotating bounding box
(RBBox) definition causes a numerical discontinuity in the
loss (such as smoothL1 loss). 2) There is a gap of optimization asynchrony between the loss in the RBBox regression
and evaluation metrics. In this paper, we define a new distance formulation between two convex polygons describing
the overlapping degree and non-overlapping degree. Based
on this smooth distance, we propose a loss called Polygonto-Polygon distance loss (P2P Loss). The distance is derived
from the area sum of triangles specified by the vertexes of
one polygon and the edges of the other. Therefore, the P2P
Loss is continuous, differentiable, and inherently free from
any RBBox definition. Our P2P Loss is not only consistent
with the detection metrics but also able to measure how far, as
well as how similar, a RBBox is from another one even when
they are completely non-overlapping. These features allow
the RetinaNet using the P2P Loss to achieve 79.15% mAP on
the DOTA dataset, which is quite competitive compared with
many state-of-the-art rotated object detectors.

(a) RetinaNet(smoothL1 )

(b) RetinaNet(P2P Loss)

Figure 1: Visualization comparison of smoothL1 and P2P
Loss under the same model. The red box indicates the detrimental effect of boundary discontinuity and gap between loss
and metrics on the detector.

sudden change of the parameters in the rotating bounding
box (RBBox) definition causes a numerical discontinuity in
the loss. Second, there is a gap of optimization asynchrony
between the loss in the RBBox regression and evaluation metrics. We propose a Polygon-to-Polygon distance loss, which
can solve the above problems without any cost to obtain
better performance of the rotated object detector.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

Introduction
Object detection is a hot topic in computer vision, and horizontal object detectors have achieved promising results in
both academic research and industrial applications. However, they are still inadequate because there are oriented and
densely packed objects in many cases, such as object detection in aerial images and text recognition in natural scene
images. To address this problem, researchers usually incorporate angular parameters in the regression branch as a way to
develop rotated object detectors. They reported large improvements in public datasets, such as aerial image datasets DOTA
(Xia et al. 2018), DIOR (Li et al. 2020b), HRSC2016 (Liu
et al. 2017), scene text datasets ICDAR2015 (Karatzas et al.
2015), ICDAR2017 (Gomez et al. 2017) and face dataset
FDDB (Jain and Learned-Miller 2010).
Compared to conventional horizontal object detectors,
there emerge at least two issues when including angular parameters. They can be summarized as follows. First, periodic

• We define a Polygon-to-Polygon distance that can be used
to describe the spatial distance and morphological similarity of two convex polygons.
• We proposed a novel Polygon-to-Polygon distance loss
(P2P Loss) with differentiable, numerically continuous
properties. P2P Loss is free from the impact of periodic
sudden change of the RBBox parameters. It is accordingly
effective for any bounding box definition. When using our
P2P Loss, in other words, a model with different box
definitions yields almost the same performance.
• We executed extensive experiments on the commonlyused DOTA and HRSC2016 dataset to demonstrate the
performance of P2P Loss and compared it with other key
detectors. RetinaNet with P2P Loss can achieve 79.155%
mAP on the DOTA dataset, which is preferable over the
state-of-the-art rotation detectors.

* indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3072

