The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Globally Optimal Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Linearly-Solvable
Markov Decision Processes
Guillermo Infante, Anders Jonsson, Vicenç Gómez
Dept. Information and Communication Technologies, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona (Spain)
{guillermo.infante,anders.jonsson,vicen.gomez}@upf.edu

Abstract

mal control as probabilistic inference (Kappen, Gómez, and
Opper 2012; Dvijotham and Todorov 2013; Kappen 2013).
LMDPs are also strongly related to maximum-entropy reinforcement learning, which is known to have favorable
properties and is quickly becoming the state-of-the-art for
reinforcement learning (Ziebart 2010; Mnih et al. 2016;
Haarnoja et al. 2018b; Levine 2018; Vieillard, Pietquin, and
Geist 2020; Bas-Serrano et al. 2021).
One of the computational advantages of LMDPs is compositionality, which allows for zero-shot learning of new
skills by linearly combining previously learned base skills
which only differ in their cost or reward at boundary
states (Todorov 2009; da Silva, Durand, and Popović 2009).
In this paper we propose a novel approach to hierarchical
reinforcement learning in LMDPs that takes advantage of
the compositionality of LMDPs. Our approach assumes that
the state space is partitioned into subsets, and the subtasks
consist in moving between these partitions. The subtasks are
parameterized on the current value estimates of boundary
states. Instead of solving the subtasks each time the value
estimates change, we take advantage of compositionality to
express the solution to an arbitrary subtask as a linear combination of a set of base LMDPs. The result is a form of
value function decomposition which allows us to express an
estimate of the optimal value of an arbitrary state as a combination of multiple value functions with smaller domains.
Concretely, our work makes the following contributions:

We present a novel approach to hierarchical reinforcement
learning for linearly-solvable Markov decision processes.
Our approach assumes that the state space is partitioned, and
defines subtasks for moving between the partitions. We represent value functions on several levels of abstraction, and
use the compositionality of subtasks to estimate the optimal
values of the states in each partition. The policy is implicitly
defined on these optimal value estimates, rather than being
decomposed among the subtasks. As a consequence, our approach can learn the globally optimal policy, and does not suffer from non-stationarities induced by high-level decisions. If
several partitions have equivalent dynamics, the subtasks of
those partitions can be shared. We show that our approach is
significantly more sample efficient than that of a flat learner
and similar hierarchical approaches when the set of boundary
states is smaller than the entire state space.

Introduction
A major challenge in reinforcement learning is to design
agents that are able to learn efficiently and to adapt their
existing knowledge to solve new tasks.
One way to reduce the complexity of learning is hierarchical reinforcement learning (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999;
Dietterich 2000; Barto and Mahadevan 2003). By decomposing a task into subtasks, each of which can be solved
independently, a solution to the original task can then be
composed of the solutions to the subtasks. If each subtask is
easier to solve than the original task, this may significantly
reduce the learning effort of an agent that is learning to perform the task.
We consider Linearly-solvable Markov decision processes (LMDPs), a class of control problems whose Bellman
optimality equations are linear in the (exponentiated) value
function (Kappen 2005; Todorov 2006). Because of this, solution methods for LMDPs are more efficient than those for
general Markov decision processes (MDPs). Though not as
expressive as MDPs, LMDPs can nevertheless model a wide
range of decision problems, and there exist methods for approximating MDPs with LMDPs (Todorov 2006).
LMDPs frequently appear under the names of pathintegral or Kullback-Leibler control in the context of opti-

• We define a novel scheme based on compositionality for
solving subtasks, defining local rewards that constitute a
convenient basis for composite rewards.
• The subtask decomposition is at the level of the value
function, not of the actual policy. Hence our approach
does not suffer from non-stationarity in the online setting, unlike approaches that select among subtasks whose
associated policies are being learned.
• Even though the subtasks have local reward functions,
under mild assumptions our approach converges to the
globally optimal value function.
• We analyze experimentally our proposed learning algorithm and show in two classical domains that it is more
sample efficient compared to a flat learner and similar hierarchical approaches when the set of boundary states is
smaller than the entire state space.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6970

