The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Prune and Tune Ensembles: Low-Cost Ensemble Learning With Sparse
Independent Subnetworks
Tim Whitaker, Darrell Whitley
Department of Computer Science
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80525
timothy.whitaker@colostate.edu, whitley@cs.colostate.edu
Abstract

as ensemble performance increases with the number of well
trained and diverse models it contains (Bonab and Can 2016;
Oshiro, Perez, and Baranauskas 2012).
We introduce an improved low-cost method for dynamically constructing an ensemble of size M . Rather than training several independent networks from scratch, we instead
start by training only a single large parent network. We
then clone the trained network M times and randomly prune
the weights of each clone to create M significantly smaller
child networks, each with a unique connective topology.
Each child is then fine tuned for a small number of training
epochs. We explore several methods to maximize diversity
among the generated child networks, including anti-random
pruning (Malaiya 1995; Wu et al. 2008) and one-cycle tuning (Smith and Topin 2018).
We call the resulting ensemble a Prune and Tune Ensemble (PAT Ensemble). Our approach is highly flexible and
offers several unique benefits over other low-cost ensemble methods. Since ensemble members are created independently of the parent’s training phase, any network architecture, pre-trained or not, can be used as a parent without
modification. This allows for very large ensembles as child
networks can be dynamically generated with little additional computation. Using pruning methods to create sparse
children significantly reduces memory usage and computational cost with no discernible loss in accuracy (Blalock
et al. 2020). Our examination of the loss landscapes of child
networks show that the combination of anti-random pruning and one-cycle tuning ensures that children converge to
unique local optima despite inheriting their parameters from
the same network.
We compare Prune and Tune Ensembles to popular lowcost ensemble learning algorithms using several deep neural network architectures on benchmark computer vision
datasets. We conduct hyperparameter ablation studies with
child sparsity, pruning structures, tuning schedules, and ensemble sizes up to 128 members. We demonstrate that Prune
and Tune Ensembles are both highly efficient and highly robust in low training budget (16 epochs) and high training
budget (200 epochs) environments. With the experiments introduced in this paper, Prune and Tune Ensembles prove to
be more accurate and more diverse than current state-of-theart low-cost ensemble algorithms, while using significantly
fewer parameters.

Ensemble Learning is an effective method for improving generalization in machine learning. However, as state-of-the-art
neural networks grow larger, the computational cost associated with training several independent networks becomes expensive. We introduce a fast, low-cost method for creating diverse ensembles of neural networks without needing to train
multiple models from scratch. We do this by first training
a single parent network. We then create child networks by
cloning the parent and dramatically pruning the parameters
of each child to create an ensemble of members with unique
and diverse topologies. We then briefly train each child network for a small number of epochs, which now converge
significantly faster when compared to training from scratch.
We explore various ways to maximize diversity in the child
networks, including the use of anti-random pruning and onecycle tuning. This diversity enables “Prune and Tune” ensembles to achieve results that are competitive with traditional
ensembles at a fraction of the training cost. We benchmark
our approach against state of the art low-cost ensemble methods and display marked improvement in both accuracy and
uncertainty estimation on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.

Introduction
Ensemble learning has long been an active area of research
in machine learning (Hansen and Salamon 1990; Krogh and
Vedelsby 1994). Combining the predictions of several models is a simple way to improve generalization on unseen data
and ensembles of neural networks have been used to win
many high profile machine learning competitions (Wolfinger and Tan 2017). However, as datasets and neural networks
grow larger and more complex, traditional ensemble methods become prohibitively expensive to implement.
Several approaches have been introduced to reduce the
large computational costs associated with building ensembles of neural networks. Methods such as pseudo-ensembles,
temporal ensembles, and evolutionary ensembles either
share network structure or training information among ensemble members in order to reduce the need to train several independent networks from scratch. While these methods are effective at reducing computational cost, they can
often be limited in potential ensemble size, member diversity and convergence efficiency. This is a critical problem
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8638

