The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Biomedical Information Retrieval with Neural Retrievers
Man Luo,1 Arindam Mitra,2 Tejas Gokhale,1 Chitta Baral1
1

Arizona State University
2
Microsoft
mluo26@asu.edu, arindam.mitra2@gmail.com, tgokhale@asu.edu, chitta@asu.edu

Abstract
Information retrieval (IR) is essential in search engines and
dialogue systems as well as natural language processing tasks
such as open-domain question answering. IR serve an important function in the biomedical domain, where content and
sources of scientific knowledge may evolve rapidly. Although
neural retrievers have surpassed traditional IR approaches such
as TF-IDF and BM25 in standard open-domain question answering tasks, they are still found lacking in the biomedical
domain. In this paper, we seek to improve information retrieval
(IR) using neural retrievers (NR) in the biomedical domain,
and achieve this goal using a three-pronged approach. First,
to tackle the relative lack of data in the biomedical domain,
we propose a template-based question generation method that
can be leveraged to train neural retriever models. Second, we
develop two novel pre-training tasks that are closely aligned to
the downstream task of information retrieval. Third, we introduce the “Poly-DPR” model which encodes each context into
multiple context vectors. Extensive experiments and analysis
on the BioASQ challenge suggest that our proposed method
leads to large gains over existing neural approaches and beats
BM25 in the small-corpus setting. We show that BM25 and
our method can complement each other, and a simple hybrid
model leads to further gains in the large corpus setting.

1

Introduction

Information retrieval (IR) is widely used in commercial
search engines and is an active area of research for natural language processing tasks such as open-domain question
answering (ODQA). IR has also become important in the
biomedical domain due to the explosion of information available in electronic form (Shortliffe et al. 2014). Biomedical
IR has traditionally relied upon term-matching algorithms
(such as TF-IDF and BM25 (Robertson and Zaragoza 2009)),
which search for documents that contain terms mentioned in
the query. For instance, the first example in Table 1 shows that
BM25 retrieves a sentence that contains the word “Soluvia”
from the question. However, term-matching suffers from failure modes, especially for terms which have different meanings in different contexts (example 2), or when crucial semantics from the question are not considered during retrieval
(for instance, in the third example when the term “how large”
is not reflected in the answer retrieved by BM25).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11038

Since these failure modes can have a direct impact on
downstream NLP tasks such as open-domain question answering (ODQA), there has been interest in developing neural
retrievers (NR) (Karpukhin et al. 2020). NRs which represent
query and context as vectors and utilize similarity scores for
retrieval, have led to state-of-the-art performance on ODQA
benchmarks such as Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al.
2019) and TriviaQA (Joshi et al. 2017). Unfortunately, these
improvements on standard NLP datasets are not observed in
the biomedical domain with neural retrievers.
Recent work provides useful insights to understand a few
shortcomings of NRs. Thakur et al. (2021) find NRs to be
lacking at exact word matching, which affects performance
in datasets such as BioASQ (Tsatsaronis et al. 2015) where
exact matches are highly correlated with the correct answer.
Lewis, Stenetorp, and Riedel (2021) find that in the Natural
Questions dataset, answers for 63.6% of the test data overlap
with the training data and DPR performs much worse on the
non-overlapped set than the test-train overlapped set. In this
work, we found this overlap to be only 2% in the BioASQ
dataset, which could be a potential reason for lower performance of NR methods. We also discovered that NRs produce
better representations for short contexts that for long contexts
– when the long context is broken down into multiple shorter
contexts, performance of NR models improves significantly.
In this paper, we seek to address these issues and improve
the performance of neural retrieval beyond traditional methods for biomedical IR. While existing systems have made
advances by improving neural re-ranking of retrieved candidates (Almeida and Matos 2020; Pappas, Stavropoulos, and
Androutsopoulos 2020), our focus is solely on the retrieval
step, and therefore we compare our neural retriever with
other retrieval methods. Our method makes contributions to
three aspects of the retrieval pipeline – question generation,
pre-training, and model architecture.
Our first contribution is the “Poly-DPR” model architecture for neural retrieval. Poly-DPR builds upon two recent
developments: Poly-Encoder (Humeau et al. 2020) and Dense
Passage Retriever (Karpukhin et al. 2020). In DPR, a question and a candidate context are encoded by two models
separately into a contextual vector for each, and a score for
each context can be computed using vector similarity. On the
other hand, Poly-Encoder represents the query by K vectors
and produces context-specific vectors for each query. Instead,

