The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Interventional Multi-Instance Learning
with Deconfounded Instance-Level Prediction
Tiancheng Lin1,2 , Hongteng Xu3,4,5 , Canqian Yang1,2 and Yi Xu1,2*
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Digital Media Processing and Transmission, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods 5 JD Explore Academy
{ltc19940819, charles.young, xuyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn

When applying multi-instance learning (MIL) to make predictions for bags of instances, the prediction accuracy of an
instance often depends on not only the instance itself but also
its context in the corresponding bag. From the viewpoint of
causal inference, such bag contextual prior works as a confounder and may result in model robustness and interpretability issues. Focusing on this problem, we propose a novel
interventional multi-instance learning (IMIL) framework to
achieve deconfounded instance-level prediction. Unlike traditional likelihood-based strategies, we design an ExpectationMaximization (EM) algorithm based on causal intervention,
providing a robust instance selection in the training phase and
suppressing the bias caused by the bag contextual prior. Experiments on pathological image analysis demonstrate that
our IMIL method substantially reduces false positives and
outperforms state-of-the-art MIL methods.

# of pixels

Negative

Bag B

Positive

Negative

0.9

Positive

Score

Bag A

Abstract

0.8
0.7
0.6

Intensity of pixels

(a)

0.5

P

A

N

(b)

Figure 1: Qualitative and quantitative evidence for bag contextual prior. (a) The patches in two bags and their histograms of pixel intensities. (b) Average scores of positive/all/negative (P/A/N) instances over positive bags and
their confidence intervals.

instance-shared information corresponding to bags but irrelevant to their instances, which may be inherited by models like deep neural networks (DNNs) and lead to questionable instance-level prediction. Figure 1(a) illustrates the
bag contextual prior in WSI classification. In each bag, its
patches (instances) with different labels (positive/negative)
often have similar attributes on color and texture. For different bags, on the contrary, their patches with the same labels
can be very different in vision. As a result, the “similarity”
within each bag and the “difference” across different bags,
which harm instance-level prediction, could be wrongly exploited by MIL models. As shown in Figure 1(b), the models
predict similar scores for the instances in the same bag. From
the viewpoint of causal inference, the above bag contextual
prior is a confounder that causes the spurious correlation between instances and labels, making the prediction depend on
both the key instance and its useless context. Therefore, a robust and interpretable MIL model should build an efficient
mechanism to suppress the bias caused by the bag contextual prior, predicting the classification scores via revealing
the actual causality between instances and labels.
To achieve deconfounded instance-level prediction, we
propose a novel interventional multi-instance learning
(IMIL), in which a structural causal model (SCM) (Pearl,
Glymour, and Jewell 2016) analyzes the causalities among
the bag contextual prior, instances, and labels. As depicted
in Figure 2, our IMIL is an Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithmic framework with two novel strategies for con-

Introduction
In many real-world scenarios, fine-grained labels of data,
e.g., pixel-wise annotations of high-resolution images, are
often unavailable due to the limitations of human resources,
time, and budgets. To mitigate the requirement for highquality labels, multi-instance learning (MIL) treats multiple
instances as a bag and learns an instance-level predictive
model from a set of labeled bags (Dietterich, Lathrop, and
Lozano-Pérez 1997). Such a paradigm has been widely used
in many applications, e.g., image classification (Wu et al.
2015a), object detection (Wan et al. 2019), semantic segmentation (Xu et al. 2019), etc. Among them, whole slide
pathological image (WSI) classification is a representative
example. Each WSI is a bag with a pathological label, and
the patches of the WSI are unlabeled instances in the bag.
The MIL framework learns an instance-level classifier to indicate the patches corresponding to the lesions.
Although many MIL methods have been proposed and
achieved encouraging performance in extensive applications (Hou et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2019; Chikontwe et al.
2020), they often suffer from an issue called “bag contextual prior”. In particular, the bag contextual prior is a kind of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
Corresponding author.

1601

