The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sequence-to-Action: Grammatical Error Correction
with Action Guided Sequence Generation
Jiquan Li1 , Junliang Guo1 , Yongxin Zhu1 , Xin Sheng1 , Deqiang Jiang2 , Bo Ren2 , Linli Xu1
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Tencent YouTu Lab
{lijiquan, guojunll, zyx2016, xins}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dqiangjiang, timren}@tencent.com, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

with sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) architectures have become the preferred solution for the GEC task, where the
original sentences with various kinds of grammatical errors
are taken as the source input while the correct sentences are
taken as the target supervision. Specifically, the Transformer
model (Vaswani et al. 2017; Bryant et al. 2019) has been a
predominant choice for NMT-based methods.
However, there are some issues with the seq2seq methods
for the GEC task. In general, as a result of generating target
sentences from scratch, the repetition and omission of words
frequently occur in the seq2seq generation process as studied by previous works (Tu et al. 2016). More importantly,
there is no guarantee that the generated sentences can keep
all the original correct words while maintaining the semantic structures. Experiments show that such problems occur
more frequently when the original sentences are too long
or contain low-frequency/out-of-vocabulary words. Consequentially, the seq2seq models may suffer from these potential risks in practice which conflict with the second primary
goal of the GEC task. Recently, sequence tagging methods
(Malmi et al. 2019; Awasthi et al. 2019; Omelianchuk et al.
2020; Stahlberg and Kumar 2020) consider GEC as a text
editing task by detecting and applying edits to the original
sentences, therefore bypassing the above mentioned problems of seq2seq models. Nevertheless, the edits are usually
constrained by human designed or automatically generated
lexical rules (Omelianchuk et al. 2020; Stahlberg and Kumar 2020) and vocabularies (Awasthi et al. 2019; Malmi
et al. 2019), which limits the generality and transferability
of these methods. Moreover, when it comes to corrections
which need longer insertions, most of these sequence tagging methods rely on iterative corrections, which can reduce
the fluency.
To tackle these problems, in this paper, we propose a
Sequence-to-Action (S2A) model which is able to automatically edit the erroneous tokens in the original sentences
without relying on human knowledge, while keeping as
many correct tokens as possible. Specifically, we simply
introduce three atomic actions named SKIP, COPY and
GENerate to guide the model when generating the corrected
outputs. By integrating the erroneous source sentence and
the golden target sentence, we construct a tailored input format for our model, and for each token, the model learns to
skip it if the current input token is an erroneous one, or copy

The task of Grammatical Error Correction (GEC) has received remarkable attention with wide applications in Natural Language Processing (NLP) in recent years. While one
of the key principles of GEC is to keep the correct parts
unchanged and avoid over-correction, previous sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) models generate results from scratch,
which are not guaranteed to follow the original sentence
structure and may suffer from the over-correction problem. In
the meantime, the recently proposed sequence tagging models can overcome the over-correction problem by only generating edit operations, but are conditioned on human designed
language-specific tagging labels. In this paper, we combine
the pros and alleviate the cons of both models by proposing
a novel Sequence-to-Action (S2A) module. The S2A module
jointly takes the source and target sentences as input, and is
able to automatically generate a token-level action sequence
before predicting each token, where each action is generated
from three choices named SKIP, COPY and GENerate. Then
the actions are fused with the basic seq2seq framework to provide final predictions. We conduct experiments on the benchmark datasets of both English and Chinese GEC tasks. Our
model consistently outperforms the seq2seq baselines, while
being able to significantly alleviate the over-correction problem as well as holding better generality and diversity in the
generation results compared to the sequence tagging models.

Introduction
Grammatical Error Correction (GEC), which aims at automatically correcting various kinds of errors in the given
text, has received increasing attention in recent years, with
wide applications in natural language processing such as
post-processing the results of Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models (Mani et al. 2020), as well as providing language assistance to non-native speakers. In the task of GEC, the primary
goals are two-fold: 1) identifying as many errors as possible and successfully correcting them; 2) keeping the original
correct words unchanged without bringing in new errors.
Intuitively, GEC can be considered as a machine translation task by taking the incorrect text as the source language
and the corrected text as the target language. In recent years,
NMT-based approaches (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015)
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10974

