The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning by Competition of Self-Interested Reinforcement Learning Agents
Stephen Chung
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
minghaychung@umass.edu

Abstract

the feedforward value has to be retained until the error signal
arrives.
Alternatively, REINFORCE (Williams 1992), a special
case of AR−λP when λ = 0 (Barto and Anandan 1985),
could be applied to all units as a more biologically plausible way of training a network. It is shown that the learning rule gives an unbiased estimate of the gradient of return (Williams 1992). Another interpretation of this relates
to viewing each unit as a reinforcement learning (RL) agent,
with each agent trying to maximize the same reward from
the environment. We can thus view an ANN as a team of
agents playing a cooperative game, a scenario where all
agents receive the same reward. Such a team of agents is
also known as coagent network (Thomas 2011). However,
coagent networks can only feasibly solve simple tasks due
to the high variance associated with this training method and
thus the low speed of learning. The high variance stems from
the lack of structural credit assignment, i.e. a single reward
signal is used to evaluate the collective action of all agents.
To address the lack of structural credit assignment in a
team of agents trained by REINFORCE, we consider delivering a different reward signal to each hidden unit instead of
the same global reward. Here hidden units refer to the units
that output to other units in the network instead of to the
environment. As such, each hidden unit is associated with
a vector of weights by which the unit’s actions influence
other units in the network, and we call this vector the outgoing weight. We propose to replace the global reward signal to each hidden unit with the change in the L2 norm of
its outgoing weight, such that each hidden unit in the network is trying to maximize the norm of its outgoing weight.
We call this new learning method Weight Maximization. This
is based on the intuition that the norm of a unit’s outgoing
weight roughly reflects the contribution of the unit in the network. This change of reward signals turns the original cooperative game into a competitive game since units no longer
receive the same reward.
We prove that Weight Maximization is approximately following the gradient of return in expectation, showing that every hidden unit maximizing the norm of its outgoing weight
also approximately maximizes the network’s rewards. This
illustrates an example of cooperative behavior automatically
arising from a population of self-interested agents in a competitive game and offers an alternative perspective of train-

An artificial neural network can be trained by uniformly
broadcasting a reward signal to units that implement a REINFORCE learning rule. Though this presents a biologically
plausible alternative to backpropagation in training a network, the high variance associated with it renders it impractical to train deep networks. The high variance arises from the
inefficient structural credit assignment since a single reward
signal is used to evaluate the collective action of all units.
To facilitate structural credit assignment, we propose replacing the reward signal to hidden units with the change in the
L2 norm of the unit’s outgoing weight. As such, each hidden unit in the network is trying to maximize the norm of
its outgoing weight instead of the global reward, and thus we
call this learning method Weight Maximization. We prove that
Weight Maximization is approximately following the gradient of rewards in expectation. In contrast to backpropagation,
Weight Maximization can be used to train both continuousvalued and discrete-valued units. Moreover, Weight Maximization solves several major issues of backpropagation relating to biological plausibility. Our experiments show that
a network trained with Weight Maximization can learn significantly faster than REINFORCE and slightly slower than
backpropagation. Weight Maximization illustrates an example of cooperative behavior automatically arising from a population of self-interested agents in a competitive game without any central coordination.

Introduction
The error backpropagation algorithm (backprop) efficiently
computes the gradient of an objective function with respect
to parameters by iterating backward from the last layer of a
multi-layer artificial neural network (ANN). However, backprop is generally regarded as being biologically implausible
(Crick 1989; Mazzoni, Andersen, and Jordan 1991; O’Reilly
1996; Bengio et al. 2015; Hassabis et al. 2017; Lillicrap
et al. 2020). First, the learning rule given by backprop is
non-local, as it relies on information other than input and
output of a neuron-like unit computed in the feedforward
phase. Second, backprop requires synaptic symmetry in the
forward and backward paths, which has not been observed in
biological systems. Third, backprop requires precise coordination between the feedforward and feedback phase because
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6384

