The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DCAN: Improving Temporal Action Detection via Dual Context Aggregation
Guo Chen* , Yin-Dong Zheng* , Limin Wang, Tong Lu†
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{chenguo1177, ydzheng0331}@gmail.com, {lmwang, lutong}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal action detection aims to locate the boundaries of
action in the video. The current method based on boundary matching enumerates and calculates all possible boundary matchings to generate proposals. However, these methods neglect the long-range context aggregation in boundary prediction. At the same time, due to the similar semantics of adjacent matchings, local semantic aggregation of
densely-generated matchings cannot improve semantic richness and discrimination. In this paper, we propose the endto-end proposal generation method named Dual Context Aggregation Network (DCAN) to aggregate context on two levels, namely, boundary level and proposal level, for generating high-quality action proposals, thereby improving the performance of temporal action detection. Specifically, we design the Multi-Path Temporal Context Aggregation (MTCA)
to achieve smooth context aggregation on boundary level
and precise evaluation of boundaries. For matching evaluation, Coarse-to-Fine Matching (CFM) is designed to aggregate context on the proposal level and refine the matching map from coarse to fine. We conduct extensive experiments on ActivityNet v1.3 and THUMOS-14. DCAN obtains an average mAP of 35.39% on ActivityNet v1.3 and
reaches mAP 54.1% at IoU@0.5 on THUMOS-14, which
demonstrates DCAN can generate high-quality proposals and
achieve state-of-the-art performance. We release the code at
https://github.com/cg1177/DCAN.

Figure 1: Examples to illustrate the importance and difficulty of context aggregation on two levels. (a) The frame2
and frame5 with similar local context are difficult to be distinguished, which will generate many positive false proposals. (b) The temporal intervals of adjacent 3 × 3 matchings
on the matching map are highly overlapped, lacking semantic discrimination and richness, and it is not easy to obtain
effective semantic supplements by simple aggregation.

Indroduction
With the explosive growth of Internet videos, video content’s
understanding and analysis technology have attracted more
academia and industry attention. Temporal action detection
is to locate the boundaries of action instances and recognize
action categories in untrimmed videos. Video data is a stack
of image frames, and the semantic changes between frames
are more complicated to capture than the semantic changes
between image pixels. Therefore, compared with object detection, temporal action detection focuses more on processing and capturing the temporal information of the video.
Similar to object detection, the temporal action detection
methods can be divided into one-stage and two-stage meth-

ods. The one-stage methods simultaneously locate the action boundaries and classify the action. The two-stage methods first generate proposals, then refine the boundaries and
classify the action. In order to obtain high-quality detection results, the proposals should precisely cover action with
high recalls and reliable confidence scores. There are mainly
two types of proposal generation methods, “top-down” and
“bottom-up”. The “top-down” method (Gao et al. 2017;
Long et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2020; Chao et al. 2018; Lin,
Zhao, and Shou 2017) obtains the final proposals by refining the boundaries of anchors or sliding windows with predefined scales and calculating the confidence. The “bottomup” method (Zhao et al. 2017a; Lin et al. 2018, 2019; Bai
et al. 2020; Su et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2020) generates proposals by calculating the boundary confidence of each position
and matching start positions with end positions.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

248

