The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Decentralized Stochastic Gradient Descent Method for
Nonconvex Finite-Sum Optimization Problems
Wenkang Zhan1 , Gang Wu2 , Hongchang Gao1
1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, PA, USA
2
Adobe Research, CA, USA
wenkang.zhan@temple.edu, gawu@adobe.com, hongchang.gao@temple.edu

Abstract

high-order term of these complexities. (Yu, Jin, and Yang
2019) developed the decentralized stochastic gradient descent with momentum (DSGDM) method, which has the
same theoretical sample and communication complexities as
DSGD. Recently, (Xin, Khan, and Kar 2021; Zhang et al.
2021b) proposed a hybrid decentralized stochastic gradient
descent (HSGD) method, which achieves better sample and
communication complexities. However, these methods focus
on the stochastic setting, failing to disclose how the finitesum structure affects those complexities.
As for the finite-sum setting, based on the variance reduction method developed in (Fang et al. 2018), (Sun, Lu, and
Hong 2020) proposed the decentralized gradient estimation
and tracking (DGET) method, whose sample complexity is
O(Kn+Kn1/2 /((1−λ)p ϵ2 )) and communication complexity is O(1/((1 − λ)p ϵ2 )) where 1 − λ is the spectral gap and
p > 1. Afterwards, GT-SARAH (Xin, Khan, and Kar 2022)
refined the theoretical analysis and achieved improved sample and communication complexities (See Table 1). However, DGET/GT-SARAH needs to compute the full gradient periodically to achieve such sample and communication
complexities, which is prohibitive for large-scale data. As
such, their sample complexity is suboptimal. Specifically, it
is inferior to that of the existing centralized method (Li and
Richtárik 2021).
To address the aforementioned problems, we developed
a novel efficient decentralized stochastic gradient descent
method for the nonconvex finite-sum optimization problem.
Particularly, to improve the sample complexity, our method
employs a variance reduction technique to estimate the gradient on each worker and uses the gradient tracking strategy to communicate the gradient across different workers.
Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that our method enjoys the O(K 1/2 n1/2 /((1 − λ)ϵ2 )) sample complexity and
O(1/((1 − λ)ϵ2 )) communication complexity. It is worth
noting that our communication complexity is much better
than DGET and GT-SARAH (See Table 1). To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work achieving such favorable sample and communication complexities for the nonconvex finite-sum optimization problem. However, it is challenging to obtain this theoretical result. Specifically, the
variance-reduced gradient makes it difficult to bound the
consensus error under the gradient-tracking communication
setting. In this paper, we developed novel techniques to ad-

Decentralized stochastic gradient descent methods have attracted increasing interest in recent years. Numerous methods have been proposed for the nonconvex finite-sum optimization problem. However, existing methods have a large
sample complexity, slowing down the empirical convergence
speed. To address this issue, in this paper, we proposed a
novel decentralized stochastic gradient descent method for
the nonconvex finite-sum optimization problem, which enjoys a better sample and communication complexity than existing methods. To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first one achieving such favorable sample and communication complexities. Finally, we have conducted extensive
experiments and the experimental results have confirmed the
superior performance of our proposed method.

Introduction
With the emergence of large-scale distributed data, the decentralized training method has attracted increasing interest
in recent years in the machine learning community. In this
paper, we are interested in optimizing the following decentralized nonconvex finite-sum optimization problem:
min F (x) ≜

x∈Rd

K
n
1 X 1 X (k)
f (x) .
K
n i=1 i

(1)

k=1

Here, it is assumed that there are K workers in a decentralPn
(k)
ized training system. n1 i=1 fi (x) is the loss function on
d
the k-th worker where x ∈ R denotes the model parameter
and n is the number of samples on each worker. Essentially,
optimizing Eq. (1) is to learn the model parameter x via the
collaboration between K workers.
To optimize Eq. (1), a wide variety of decentralized training methods have been proposed under both stochastic and
finite-sum settings. For instance, under the stochastic setting, (Lian et al. 2017) developed the decentralized stochastic gradient descent (DSGD) method and provided the convergence analysis for nonconvex problems. In particular, to
achieve the ϵ-accuracy solution, the sample complexity of
DSGD is O(K/ϵ4 ) and the communication complexity is
also O(1/ϵ4 ). Here, the network topology only affects the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9006

