The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Enforcement Heuristics for Argumentation with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Dennis Craandijk1,2 and Floris Bex2,3
1
National Police-lab AI, Netherlands Police
Department Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University
3
Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology and Society, Tilburg University
{d.f.w.craandijk, f.j.bex}@uu.nl

2

Abstract

attacks between these arguments - and several acceptability
semantics that define which sets of arguments (extensions)
can be reasonably accepted. Recent work demonstrates the
use of a graph neural network (GNN) to learn to determine
which arguments are (part of) an extension (Kuhlmann and
Thimm 2019; Craandijk and Bex 2020; Malmqvist et al.
2020) - computational problems which are normally solved
with handcrafted symbolic methods (Charwat et al. 2015;
Gaggl et al. 2020). These approaches however, learn by supervision of an existing solver used to generate the training
data, rather than end-to-end.
In this work we employ a graph-based deep reinforcement
learning algorithm on the dynamic argumentation problem
of enforcement (Baumann and Brewka 2010): given sets of
arguments that we (do not) want to accept, how to modify
the argumentation framework in such a way that these arguments are (not) accepted, while minimizing the number of
changes (Baumann 2012). Here, it is possible to distinguish
between extension enforcement – modifying an argumentation framework in such a way that a given set of arguments
becomes an extension (Baumann and Brewka 2010) – and
status enforcement (Niskanen, Wallner, and Järvisalo 2016)
– modifying an argumentation framework in such a way that
the arguments in one set become accepted while at the same
time the arguments in another set are not accepted.
While there has been ample formal work on enforcement
and its complexity (Doutre and Mailly 2018; Wallner, Niskanen, and Järvisalo 2017), only a few automated solvers currently exist, which all translate the problem into a symbolic
formalism for which a dedicated solver exists. In contrast to
solvers for static argumentation (i.e. determining acceptability or extensions under various semantics), for which there
is a lively community (Gaggl et al. 2020), there is less work
on solvers for dynamic enforcement problems, with enforcement not being part of the ICCMA competitions1 . Existing
algorithms on extension and status enforcement have been
published by Coste-Marquis et al. (2015); Wallner, Niskanen, and Järvisalo (2017); Niskanen, Wallner, and Järvisalo
(2016); Niskanen, Wallner, and Järvisalo (2018); Niskanen
and Järvisalo (2020b) who only tackle some variants of status enforcement. Furthermore, we have found that existing
symbolic solvers demonstrate a quite significant drop in run-

In this paper, we present a learning-based approach to
the symbolic reasoning problem of dynamic argumentation,
where the knowledge about attacks between arguments is
incomplete or evolving. Specifically, we employ deep reinforcement learning to learn which attack relations between
arguments should be added or deleted in order to enforce the
acceptability of (a set of) arguments. We show that our Graph
Neural Network (GNN) architecture EGNN can learn a near
optimal enforcement heuristic for all common argumentfixed enforcement problems, including problems for which
no other (symbolic) solvers exist. We demonstrate that EGNN
outperforms other GNN baselines and on enforcement problems with high computational complexity performs better
than state-of-the-art symbolic solvers with respect to efficiency. Thus, we show our neuro-symbolic approach is able
to learn heuristics without the expert knowledge of a human
designer and offers a valid alternative to symbolic solvers. We
publish our code at https://github.com/DennisCraandijk/DLAbstract-Argumentation.

Introduction
Recent years have seen rapid developments in neurosymbolic computing, which aim to put together learning in
(deep) neural networks with reasoning and explainability
via symbolic representations (d’Avila Garcez et al. 2019).
A growing body of literature in this field combines deep
learning with reinforcement learning to automatically learn
heuristics for symbolic reasoning problems (such as game
playing (Silver et al. 2018) and combinatorial optimization (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021)). The appeal of this
deep reinforcement learning paradigm is that solvers can be
learned end-to-end without the tailoring and expert knowledge of a human designer.
One domain where learning based methods are a promising alternative for symbolic methods is computational argumentation. With applications in multi-agent systems,
decision-making tools, medical and legal reasoning, computational argumentation has become a major subfield of
AI (Atkinson et al. 2017). The foundation of much of the
theory of computational argumentation is based on the seminal work by Dung (1995), who introduced abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) - representing arguments and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5573

See argumentationcompetition.org and (Gaggl et al. 2020)

