The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Compact Bilinear Pooling via Kronecker Product
Tan Yu, Yunfeng Cai, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, Washington 98004, USA
No.10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing 100193, China
{tanyu01, caiyunfeng, liping11}@baidu.com
Abstract

effectiveness, when using a standard fully-connected layer
as a classifier, it contains d2 c parameters where c is the number of classes. Assuming d = 512 and c = 200, it will need
around 52 million parameters, making the classifier prone
to over-fitting. It is especially serious in the few-shot learning scenarios. The over-fitting caused by the huge number
of parameters will significantly affect the recognition accuracy of the classifier. On the efficiency side, the huge number
of parameters in the classifier makes the computation and
memory cost expensive. Particularly, in the image retrieval
scenario, the high-dimension features will take huge costs
when calculating the similarity between features.
A straightforward method for feature dimension reduc2
tion is linear projection. Given the bilinear feature b ∈ Rd ,
2
we can learn a projection matrix P ∈ RD×d (D  d2 )
for dimension reduction. Then the low-dimension feature is
b = Pb. However, since d2 is large, making
obtained by b
the projection Pb extremely slow (2d2 D floating-point operations). Meanwhile, P additionally brings huge number of
parameters (d2 D), making the over-fitting more serious.
To obtain a low-dimensional bilinear feature, compact bilinear pooling (CBP) (Gao et al. 2016) relies on Tensor
Sketch (TS) (Pham and Pagh 2013) and Random Maclaurin
(RM) (Kar and Karnick 2012). Both TS and RM are based
on random projections. Basically, the low-dimensional features from TS and RM statistically satisfy the property of bilinear features. Specifically, the inner-product between lowdimensional features from TS and RM is an unbiased estimation of the inner-product between two bilinear features.
Nevertheless, to achieve a small estimation error, the random
projection matrix should be large-scale, making the random
projection slow. Recently, RM is revisited by MLB (Kim
et al. 2017) which achieves excellent performance in crossmodal understanding and also revisited by HBP (Yu et al.
2018) which fuses features from different layers. However,
the inefficiency problem of RM is still unsolved.
In this work, we seek to address the inefficiency problem in compact bilinear pooling methods. Recall that the bilinear feature is obtained by unfolding the bilinear matrix
b = vec(XX> ), thus the linear projection Pb is equivalent
to computing Pvec(XX> ). Meanwhile, a well known vec
trick gives a property that vec(BYA> ) = (A ⊗ B)vec(Y).
To exploit the nice property of vec trick, we construct the
projection matrix by a Kronecker product of two matrices,

Bilinear pooling has achieved excellent performance in finegrained recognition tasks. Nevertheless, high-dimensional bilinear features suffer from over-fitting and inefficiency. To alleviate these issues, compact bilinear pooling (CBP) methods were developed to generate low-dimensional features.
Although the low-dimensional features from existing CBP
methods enable high efficiency in subsequent classification,
CBP methods themselves are inefficient. Thus, the inefficiency issue of the bilinear pooling is still unsolved. In
this work, we propose an efficient compact bilinear pooling
method to solve the inefficiency problem inherited in bilinear
pooling thoroughly. It decomposes the huge-scale projection
matrix into a two-level Kronecker product of several smallscale matrices. By exploiting the “vec trick” and the tensor
modal product, we can obtain the compact bilinear feature
through the decomposed projection matrices in a speedy manner. Systematic experiments on four public benchmarks using
two backbones demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness
of the proposed method in fine-grained recognition.

Introduction
Visual feature pooling is a vital part for image representation learning. Compared with widely-used sum-pooling
and max-pooling (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016), bilinear pooling (Tenenbaum and Freeman
2000) has achieved competitive performance in fine-grained
recognition (Lin, RoyChowdhury, and Maji 2015; Gao et al.
2016; Wang et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017a). Given an image,
through a series of convolution layers, a set of d-dimensional
local convolutional features X = [x1 , · · · , xN ] are generated. Each local feature represents a local region in the image. Bilinear pooling aggregates local convolutional features
into a bilinear matrix through M = XX> ∈ Rd×d . Then M
is unfolded into a vector b = vec(M), which is further fed
into a fully-connected layer for classification.
Straightforwardly, bilinear pooling encodes the correlation between every two channels, that is, the second-order
statistics. It possesses powerful representation capability to
describe the fine-grained details in the image. Nevertheless,
2
the bilinear feature b ∈ Rd is high-dimensional, which limits its effectiveness and efficiency. From the perspective of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3170

