The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Incomplete Argumentation Frameworks: Properties and Complexity
Gianvincenzo Alfano, Sergio Greco, Francesco Parisi, Irina Trubitsyna
Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics and System Engineering,
University of Calabria, Italy
{g.alfano, greco, fparisi, i.trubitsyna}@dimes.unical.it

e

Abstract
Dung’s Argumentation Framework (AF) has been extended
in several directions, including the possibility of representing unquantified uncertainty about the existence of arguments
and attacks. The framework resulting from such an extension
is called incomplete AF (iAF). In this paper, we first introduce
three new satisfaction problems named totality, determinism
and functionality, and investigate their computational complexity for both AF and iAF under several semantics.
We also investigate the complexity of credulous and skeptical acceptance in iAF under semi-stable semantics—a problem left open in the literature. We then show that any iAF
can be rewritten into an equivalent one where either only
(unattacked) arguments or only attacks are uncertain. Finally, we relate iAF to probabilistic argumentation framework, where uncertainty is quantified.

a

b

c

d

Figure 1: iAF ∆ of Example 1.
with recursive attacks and supports (Cohen et al. 2015; Gottifredi et al. 2018; Cayrol et al. 2018), Dialectical framework (Brewka and Woltran 2010; Brewka et al. 2013), AF
with preferences (Amgoud and Cayrol 1998; Modgil and
Prakken 2013) and constraints (Coste-Marquis, Devred, and
Marquis 2006; Arieli 2015; Alfano et al. 2021b), as well extensions for representing uncertain information. For the representation of uncertain information, two main extensions
have been proposed: incomplete AF (iAF), where arguments
and attacks may be uncertain (Baumeister et al. 2018, 2021),
and probabilistic AF (PrAF), where arguments and attacks
are associated with a probability (Dung and Thang 2010; Li,
Oren, and Norman 2011; Hunter 2012). In this paper we focus on iAF, but we will also study its connection with PrAF.

Introduction
Formal argumentation has emerged as one of the important
fields in Artificial Intelligence (Bench-Capon and Dunne
2007; Simari and Rahwan 2009; Atkinson et al. 2017). In
particular, Dung’s abstract Argumentation Framework (AF)
is a simple yet powerful formalism for modeling disputes
between two or more agents (Dung 1995). An AF consists
of a set of arguments and a binary attack relation over the
set of arguments that specifies the interactions between arguments: intuitively, if argument a attacks argument b, then
b is acceptable only if a is not. Hence, arguments are abstract
entities whose status is entirely determined by the attack relation. An AF can be seen as a directed graph, whose nodes
represent arguments and edges represent attacks.
Several argumentation semantics—e.g. grounded (gr),
complete (co), preferred (pr), stable (st) (Dung 1995), and
semi-stable (sst) (Caminada 2006)—have been defined for
AF, leading to the characterization of σ-extensions, that intuitively consist of the sets of arguments that can be collectively accepted under semantics σ ∈ {gr, co, st, pr, sst}.
Various proposals have been made to extend the Dung
framework with the aim of better modeling the knowledge to
be represented. The extensions include Bipolar AF (Nouioua
and Risch 2011; Nouioua 2013; Villata et al. 2012), AF

Example 1. Consider an iAF ∆ = h{a, b, c, d}, {e}, {(a, b),
(b, a), (a, c), (b, d), (c, d), (d, c), (d, a), (e, a), (e, b)}, ∅i
whose corresponding graph is shown in Figure 1, where
dashed nodes represent uncertain arguments (see Definition 1 for the formal definition). ∆ describes the following
scenario. A party planner invites Alice, Bob, Carl, David,
and Erik to join a party. Due to their old rivalry (i) Alice
replies that she will join the party if Bob, David and Erik
do not; (ii) Bob replies that he will join the party if Alice
and Erik do not; (iii) Carl replies that he will join the party
if Alice and David do not; (iv) David replies that he will
join the party if Bob and Carl do not; and (v) Erik replies
that he is not sure that can join the party. This situation
can be modeled by iAF ∆, where an argument x states that
“(the person whose names’ initial is) x joins the party”, and
argument e=“Erik joins the party” is uncertain.

The semantics of an iAF is given by considering all completions, i.e. AFs obtained by removing consistent subsets
of the uncertain elements, and for each completion its σextensions under a given semantics σ.
Example 2. Continuing with Example 1, the completions of
∆ are as follows:

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5451

