The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Recovering the Propensity Score from Biased Positive Unlabeled Data
Walter Gerych,1 Thomas Hartvigsen, 2 Luke Buiquicchio,1 Emmanuel Agu,1 Elke Rundensteiner 1
1

Worcester Polytechic Institute
2
MIT CSAIL
wgerych@wpi.edu, tomh@mit.edu, ljbuquicchio@wpi.edu, emmanuel@wpi.edu, rundenst@wpi.edu

Abstract

annotator with inherent and unobserved biases. The vast majority of recent methods for learning from PU data model
this labeling mechanism by assuming that all positive instances are equally likely to be labeled (Bekker and Davis
2020). This is overly simplistic and disregards all biases in
the labeling mechanism, which naturally lead to certain data
points being labeled. For instance, this assumption ignores
the fact that individuals with health insurance (who are more
likely to visit doctors) are more likely to be be diagnosed
than individuals without health insurance. The biased labeling mechanism can also be much more socially innocuous:
objects in the foreground of an image are more likely to be
labeled than objects in the background.
The key idea of our work is to recover the true complex
and biased labeling mechanism by identifying the likelihood
that a given positive instance is labeled. Recovering this labeling mechanism is essential for biased PU learning, as
success would allow us to train a classifier that distinguish
between the positive and negative classes given only biased
positive and unlabeled data (Bekker, Robberechts, and Davis
2019). Additionally, learning the biased labeling mechanism
allows us to recover the posterior of the positive class, which
we can integrate over to obtain the class prior. This is important, as knowing the class prior allows us to compute performance metrics for standard positive-negative classification
even when the test set includes only positive and unlabeled
instances (Bekker and Davis 2020). Lastly, knowing the labeling mechanism gives insight into why certain instances
were labeled while others were not, which can be important
for explainability tasks.
While one prior work has likewise attempted to learn this
labeling mechanism (Bekker, Robberechts, and Davis 2019),
known as the propensity score, it does not focus on identifiability. Thus, it is unclear when this method may return the
true propensity score and when the returned value may be
nearly arbitrarily incorrect. Our goal thus is to instead develop an approach that produces an identifiable propensity
score.
This is a challenging task. As we do not directly observe
the propensity score, it must be inferred indirectly from the
data. Further, identifying the true propensity score is impossible without additional assumptions; when left unconstrained, an infinite number of propensity score/posterior
class probability pairs can explain the observed PU data, as

Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning methods train a classifier
to distinguish between the positive and negative classes given
only positive and unlabeled data. While traditional PU methods require the labeled positive samples to be an unbiased
sample of the positive distribution, in practice the labeled
sample is often a biased draw from the true distribution. Prior
work shows that if we know the likelihood that each positive instance will be selected for labeling, referred to as the
propensity score, then the biased sample can be used for PU
learning. Unfortunately, no prior work has been proposed an
inference strategy for which the propensity score is identifiable. In this work, we propose two sets of assumptions under
which the propensity score can be uniquely determined: one
in which no assumption is made on the functional form of
the propensity score (requiring assumptions on the data distribution), and the second which loosens the data assumptions
while assuming a functional form for the propensity score.
We then propose inference strategies for each case. Our empirical study shows that our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art propensity estimation methods on
a rich variety of benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Typical binary classification assumes access to a dataset
of labeled positive and negative examples during training.
However, in practice fully-labeled training data are often
unavailable. Instead, we may have only a small set of labeled examples any many unlabeled examples. As the negative class is often highly diverse, it tends to be prohibitively
expensive, if not impossible, to obtain a sufficient labeled
sample of the negative class, causing only some positive instances to be labeled (Bekker and Davis 2020; Hammoudeh
and Lowd 2020). Such Positive Unlabeled (PU) data is characteristic of a wide variety of domains, such as healthcare (a
lack of diagnosis does not mean someone does not have the
disease) and images (most annotators are only asked to label objects that are in an image, not the infinite number of
objects that are not).
PU learning assumes that a typically-unknown and complex labeling mechanism decides which positive instances
are labeled. This mechanism is usually an imperfect human
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6694

