The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hybrid Curriculum Learning for Emotion Recognition in Conversation
Lin Yang* , Yi Shen* , Yue Mao, Longjun Cai
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
{yl176562, sy133447, maoyue.my, longjun.clj}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

then gradually increase the difficulty level of data until the
whole training dataset. As an easy-to-use plug-in, the CL
strategy has demonstrated its power in improving the overall performance of various models in a wide range of scenarios (Wang, Chen, and Zhu 2020). Inspired by the success
of CL in other NLP tasks (Zhou et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2018;
Su et al. 2021), in this paper, we make effort to leverage the
spirit of CL to improve the traditional ERC methods. Due
to the hierarchical structure of the ERC datasets, we need to
construct the curricula from two granularities: one curriculum sorts the conversations in the dataset from easy to hard,
and the other sorts the utterances in each conversation from
easy to hard.
The question arises how to measure the difficulty of conversations and utterances. Previous studies (Majumder et al.
2019; Shen et al. 2021a) have reported that most ERC methods mainly suffer from two issues: 1) “emotion shift” problem. It refers to that these methods cannot efficiently handle scenarios in which emotions of two consecutive utterances are different (Ghosal et al. 2021). 2) “confusing label” problem. Previous methods (Ghosal et al. 2019; Shen
et al. 2021b) usually fail to distinguish between similar emotions very well. This is due to the subtle semantic difference
between certain emotion labels such as happy and exciting.
These two phenomena provide us the key to quantify the difficulty of conversations and utterances in ERC.
In this paper, we tailor-design a hybrid curriculum learning (HCL) framework for the ERC task. HCL framework consists of two complementary curriculum strategies,
conversation-level curriculum (CC) and utterance-level curriculum (UC). In CC, we construct a difficulty measurer
based on “emotion shift” frequency within a conversation,
then the conversations with lower difficulty are presented to
the model before harder ones. This way, the model gradually
increases its ability to tackle the “emotion shift” problem.
While in UC, since ERC requires reasoning over multiple
utterances in the conversation, we cannot directly schedule
the utterances asynchronously in the “easy to hard” scheme.
As a result, we design an emotion-similarity based curriculum (ESC) to implement utterance-level curriculum learning. Specifically, inspired by the “confusing label” problem
mentioned above, we believe that in a conversation, those utterances with confusing labels are more difficult than others.
Therefore, we make the model focus on the utterances with

Emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) aims to detect
the emotion label for each utterance. Motivated by recent
studies which have proven that feeding training examples in
a meaningful order rather than considering them randomly
can boost the performance of models, we propose an ERCoriented hybrid curriculum learning framework. Our framework consists of two curricula: (1) conversation-level curriculum (CC); and (2) utterance-level curriculum (UC). In CC,
we construct a difficulty measurer based on “emotion shift”
frequency within a conversation, then the conversations are
scheduled in an “easy to hard” schema according to the difficulty score returned by the difficulty measurer. For UC, it is
implemented from an emotion-similarity perspective, which
progressively strengthens the model’s ability in identifying
the confusing emotions. With the proposed model-agnostic
hybrid curriculum learning strategy, we observe significant
performance boosts over a wide range of existing ERC models and we are able to achieve new state-of-the-art results on
four public ERC datasets.

Introduction
Emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) has attracted numerous interests from the NLP community in recent years
due to its potential applications in many areas, such as opinion mining in social media (Chatterjee et al. 2019), dialogue
generation (Huang et al. 2018) and fake news detection (Guo
et al. 2019). The objective of ERC is to detect emotions
expressed by the speakers in each utterance of the conversation. Previous works on ERC usually solve this problem
with two steps. At the first step, each utterance is encoded
separately into an utterance-level representation, which will
be used as the input for sequence-based models (Majumder
et al. 2019; Hazarika et al. 2018a; Jiao et al. 2019) or graphbased models (Ghosal et al. 2019; Ishiwatari et al. 2020) during the second step. Despite their success, previous works
still have a lot of room for improvement (Poria et al. 2019b).
Curriculum learning (CL) (Bengio et al. 2009) is a training strategy which imitates the meaningful learning order
in human curricula. The core idea of CL is to train the machine learning model with easier data subsets at first, and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11595

