The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Parameterized Approximation Algorithms for K-center Clustering and Variants
Sayan Bandyapadhyay1 , Zachary Friggstad2 , Ramin Mousavi2
1

Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada
Sayan.Bandyapadhyay@uib.no, zacharyf@ualberta.ca, mousavih@ualberta.ca
2

Abstract

a cluster is measured in terms of the deviation of the points
in the cluster from the center. Consequently, this deviation
is captured by the corresponding objective function, which
one needs to minimize. Arguably the most popular centerbased objectives are k-center, k-means, and k-median. All
of these problems ask to find k center points, where k > 0
is a given integer. The desired k clusters are formed by assigning each point to its closest center. For k-center, the deviation is defined as the maximum distance between a point
and its closest center, and for k-median, it is the sum of the
distances between points and their closest centers. k-means
is similar to k-median except here the deviation is the sum
of the square of the distances.

k-center is one of the most popular clustering models. While
it admits a simple 2-approximation in polynomial time in general metrics, the Euclidean version is NP-hard to approximate
within a factor of 1.93, even in the plane, if one insists the dependence on k in the running time be polynomial. Without
this restriction, a classic algorithm yields a 2O((k log k)/) dntime (1 + )-approximation for Euclidean k-center, where d
is the dimension.
We give a faster algorithm for small dimensions: roughly
O(d) 1−1/d
·k
·log k)
speaking an O∗ (2O((1/)
)-time (1 + )approximation. In
particular,
the
running
time is roughly
√
O(1)
k log k)
O∗ (2O((1/)
) in the plane. We complement our
algorithmic result with a matching hardness lower bound.
We also consider a well-studied generalization of k-center,
called Non-uniform k-center (NUkC), where we allow different radii clusters. NUkC is NP-hard to approximate
within any factor, even in the Euclidean case. We design a
2O(k log k) n2 time 3-approximation for NUkC in general metrics, and a 2O((k log k)/) dn time (1 + )-approximation for
Euclidean NUkC. The latter time bound matches the bound
for k-center.

In this article, we limit our discussions to the Euclidean
version of the above clustering problems where the data
points and centers belong to a real space of dimension
d ≥ 2 and the distance measure is the Euclidean distance.
All of these problems are NP-hard even in the plane, i.e.,
when d = 2 (Mahajan, Nimbhorkar, and Varadarajan 2012;
Megiddo and Supowit 1984; Feder and Greene 1988). For
both k-median and k-means, (1 + )-approximation algorithms (or approximation schemes) are known with running
d−1
time 2(f ()) nlogd+6 n (Kolliopoulos and Rao 2007) and
O(d)
nk(log n)(d/)
(Cohen-Addad 2018), respectively, for
some function f . Note that for constant dimension and in
particular, for d = 2, these algorithms run in polynomial
time. In contrast, it is widely known that such an approximation scheme does not exist for k-center (Mentzer 1988;
Feder and Greene 1988; Chen 2021). Indeed, it is NP-hard
to approximate k-center in the plane up to a factor of 1.82
(Mentzer 1988; Chen 2021). On the positive side, several
polynomial-time 2-approximations are known for k-center
(Gonzalez 1985; Feder and Greene 1988). On the hardness
side of k-median and k-means, it is known that polynomialtime approximation scheme is not possible for these problems (or are APX-hard) when the dimension is not necessarily a constant (Awasthi et al. 2015; Bhattacharya, Goyal, and
Jaiswal 2020).

Introduction
Given n data points in a metric space, a clustering of the
data is a partition into a number of groups (or clusters),
such that points in each group are more similar compared
to points across multiple groups. The notion of similarity is
captured by the distances between the points, which form a
metric. The task of partitioning the data as above is referred
to also as clustering, which has numerous applications in the
areas of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML)
and data mining. For example, during the training process
of an AI/ML model, the training samples are clustered into
similar groups to enhance the expressive power of learning
methods. With the goal of retrieving the natural clustering
of the points, the task of partitioning is modeled as an optimization problem where the goal is to find a clustering that
optimizes some objective function. For center-based objectives, each cluster is represented by a point, which is called
the center of the cluster. The similarity (or dissimilarity) of

From the above discussion, it is evident that all these
problems are intractable when the dimension is arbitrary.
To cope with this hardness, researchers have designed fixedparameter tractable (FPT) (1 + )-approximations. Fixedparameter tractability is a notion in parameterized complex-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3895

