The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reverse Differentiation via Predictive Coding
Tommaso Salvatori 1 , Yuhang Song 1, 2 * , Zhenghua Xu 3 , Thomas Lukasiewicz 1 , Rafal Bogacz 2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford, UK
3
State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment,
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
{tommaso.salvatori, yuhang.song, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk, rafal.bogacz@ndcn.ox.ac.uk,
zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

used for any task, the empirical successes listed above show
that more complex and task-oriented architectures perform
significantly better than their fully connected ones. Hence,
the last decades have seen the use of different layer structures, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997), transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017),
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and residual neural
networks (He et al. 2016). Albeit diverse architectures may
look completely different, their parameters are all trained using gradient-based methods, creating a need for a general
framework to efficiently compute gradients. Computational
graphs, which are decompositions of complex functions in
elementary ones, represent the ideal solution for this task, as
they generalize the concept of neural network. In fact, they
allow the use of reverse differentiation to efficiently compute
derivatives and hence update the parameters of the network.
In deep learning, this technique is used to quickly propagate
the output error through the network, and it is hence known
under the name of error backpropagation (BP) (Rumelhart,
Hinton, and Williams 1986). While being a milestone of the
field, this algorithm has often been considered biologically
implausible, as it does not follow the rules of biological networks in the brain to update the parameters and propagate
information (Crick 1989). Here, we use the term “biologically plausible” to refer to models that satisfy a list of minimal properties required by a possible neural implementation,
namely, local computations and local plasticity (change in a
connection weight depending only on the activity of the connected neurons) (Whittington and Bogacz 2017).
An influential model of information processing in the
brain, called predictive coding (PC) (Rao and Ballard 1999),
is used to describe learning in the brain, and has promising theoretical interpretations, such as the minimization of
free energy (Bogacz 2017; Friston 2003, 2005; Whittington and Bogacz 2019) and probabilistic models (Whittington and Bogacz 2017). Originally proposed to solve unsupervised learning tasks, PC has been found to be successful
also in supervised models (Whittington and Bogacz 2017),
and its standard implementation, called inference learning
(IL) (Whittington and Bogacz 2017), has also been shown
to be able to approximate asymptotically BP on MLPs,
and on any other complex model (Millidge, Tschantz, and
Buckley 2020). Furthermore, a recent work has proved that
PC can do exact BP on MLPs using a learning algorithm

Deep learning has redefined AI thanks to the rise of artificial
neural networks, which are inspired by neuronal networks
in the brain. Through the years, these interactions between
AI and neuroscience have brought immense benefits to both
fields, allowing neural networks to be used in a plethora of
applications. Neural networks use an efficient implementation of reverse differentiation, called backpropagation (BP).
This algorithm, however, is often criticized for its biological
implausibility (e.g., lack of local update rules for the parameters). Therefore, biologically plausible learning methods that
rely on predictive coding (PC), a framework for describing
information processing in the brain, are increasingly studied.
Recent works prove that these methods can approximate BP
up to a certain margin on multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), and
asymptotically on any other complex model, and that zerodivergence inference learning (Z-IL), a variant of PC, is able
to exactly implement BP on MLPs. However, the recent literature shows also that there is no biologically plausible method
yet that can exactly replicate the weight update of BP on complex models. To fill this gap, in this paper, we generalize (PC
and) Z-IL by directly defining it on computational graphs, and
show that it can perform exact reverse differentiation. What
results is the first PC (and so biologically plausible) algorithm
that is equivalent to BP in the way of updating parameters
on any neural network, providing a bridge between the interdisciplinary research of neuroscience and deep learning.
Furthermore, the above results in particular also immediately
provide a novel local and parallel implementation of BP.

Introduction
In recent years, neural networks have achieved amazing results in multiple fields, such as image recognition (He et al.
2016; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019),
and game playing (Silver et al. 2017, 2016). All the models designed to solve these problems share a common ancestor, multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), which are fully connected neural networks with a feedforward multilayer structure and a mapping function Rn → Rm . Although MLPs
are able to approximate any continuous function (Hornik,
Stinchcombe, and White 1989) and theoretically can be
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8150

