The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning from Label Proportions with Prototypical Contrastive Clustering
Laura Elena Cué La Rosa1 , Dário Augusto Borges Oliveira2
1

Electrical Engineering Department, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
2
Data Science in Earth Observation, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany
lauracue@aluno.puc-rio.br, dario.oliveira@tum.de

Abstract
T1

The use of priors to avoid manual labeling for training machine
learning methods has received much attention in the last few
years. One of the critical subthemes in this regard is Learning
from Label Proportions (LLP), where only the information
about class proportions is available for training the models.
While various LLP training settings verse in the literature,
most approaches focus on bag-level label proportions errors,
often leading to suboptimal solutions. This paper proposes a
new model that jointly uses prototypical contrastive learning
and bag-level cluster proportions to implement efficient LLP
classification. Our proposal explicitly relaxes the equipartition
constraint commonly used in prototypical contrastive learning
methods and incorporates the exact cluster proportions into
the optimal transport algorithm used for cluster assignments.
At inference time, we compute the clusters’ assignment, delivering instance-level classification. We experimented with our
method on two widely used image classification benchmarks
and report a new state-of-art LLP performance, achieving
results close to fully supervised methods.

35%

fθ
45%

T2

15%
fθ

5%

Figure 1: General overview of LLP-Co. Given an input bag
of images, we generate two augmented views of each image.
Then, we forward the full batch of image views into a network
that assigns them to various clusters constrained to their a
priori proportions. The colored arrows point to the images
that were assigned to each cluster.

As a weakly supervised classification subtheme, Learning
from Label Proportions (LLPs) has received much attention in the machine learning community in the last decade
(Quadrianto et al. 2009; Yu et al. 2013, 2014; Qi et al. 2016;
Dulac-Arnold et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020; Scott and Zhang
2020). Standard LLP approaches split training samples into
groups of bags where only label proportions are known and
target to learn individual sample class. Many different ways
for implementing that were proposed, including those based
on support vector machine (Yu et al. 2013), Bayesian models
(Hernández-González, Inza, and Lozano 2013), convolutional
neural networks (Ardehaly and Culotta 2017), generative
models (Liu et al. 2019) and clustering (Stolpe and Morik
2011). In (Yu et al. 2014), the authors presented the Empirical Proportion Risk Minimization (EPRM) algorithm to infer
when and why bag-level proportions help predict individual
labels. The study concluded that LLP performance strongly
depends on the bag size and label proportions and that a predictor with a reasonable bag proportion estimate warrants a
good instance-level prediction. EPRM and others LLP methods optimize the learning process by minimizing a bag-level
loss that typically uses the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
to measure how much the predicted proportion distribution
differs from the known distribution. Despite the recent advances observed in the field (Ardehaly and Culotta 2017; Liu
et al. 2019; Dulac-Arnold et al. 2019), learning instance-label
classifiers solely from bag-level label proportions with KL

Introduction
The performance of the firstly proposed deep learning methods was directly related to large amounts of annotated training samples (Russakovsky et al. 2015). However, annotating
such large datasets promptly became a bottleneck in supervised learning, as it is a time-consuming and labor-intensive
task. Additionally, various applied areas such as healthcare
or democratic elections struggle with labels, which are often
not available (Qi et al. 2016). In many scenarios, despite
the unavailability of instance-level annotations, approximate
group-level labels like class proportions are readily obtainable from other sources, like the census or even common
knowledge. In this sense, efficient learning from group-level
labels would have an important impact in many real-life
applications, such as demographic classification (Ardehaly
and Culotta 2017), presidential elections (Sun, Sheldon, and
O’Connor 2017; Qi et al. 2016), remote sensing (Ding, Li,
and Yu 2017), image analysis in medicine (Bortsova et al.
2018), activity recognition (Poyiadzi, Santos-Rodriguez, and
Twomey 2018), and others.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2153

