The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Equilibrium Finding in Normal-Form Games via Greedy Regret Minimization
Hugh Zhang1* , Adam Lerer2 , Noam Brown2
1

Harvard University
Facebook AI Research
hughzhang@fas.harvard.edu, alerer@fb.com, noambrown@fb.com
2

Abstract
We extend the classic regret minimization framework for
approximating equilibria in normal-form games by greedily
weighing iterates based on regrets observed at runtime. Theoretically, our method retains all previous convergence rate
guarantees. Empirically, experiments on large randomly generated games and normal-form subgames of the AI benchmark
Diplomacy show that greedy weights outperforms previous
methods whenever sampling is used, sometimes by several
orders of magnitude.

Introduction
Figure 1: Vanilla regret minimization methods always move
the rolling weighted average policy profile discovered so far
π̄ t−1 (with average regret represented by R̄t−1 ) a fixed step
towards the latest iteration of the procedure π t (with instantaneous regret represented by rt ) to the point represented by
π̄ t . In contrast, greedy weights will choose the point π̄∗t that
minimizes the distance to the set of equilibria we wish to
approach (represented by E), often resulting in accelerated
convergence.

Constructing algorithms that efficiently converge to equilibria is one of the central goals of computational game
theory. In recent years, regret minimization techniques for
approximating equilibria via self play have led to a number
of major successes in games like poker (Bowling et al.
2015; Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm 2018,
2019b), Avalon (Serrino et al. 2019), and Diplomacy (Gray
et al. 2021). Regret minimization is now the state-of-the-art
approach for computing equilibria in large games, especially
those with a large number of actions or in settings where
queries to the payoff matrix are too expensive to compute
an exact solution via linear programming.
Classical usage of regret minimization algorithms for learning equilibria in games has typically weighted each iteration
equally. In this paper, we demonstrate empirically faster convergence, while still guaranteeing the same worst-case regret
bound, by greedily weighing each new iteration to minimize
the regret minimizer’s potential function: a measure the current distance to the set of desired equilibria. Recent work
such as CFR+ (Tammelin 2014) and Linear CFR (Brown and
Sandholm 2019a) have also shown that faster performance is
achievable by weighing iterates non-uniformly. However, in
all previous algorithms, iterates were weighed according to
a fixed, pre-determined schedule. In contrast, we introduce
greedy weights, the first equilibrium-finding regret minimization algorithm where iterates are weighed dynamically
using information available at runtime. We benchmark greedy

weights against past techniques for computing minimax equilibria (in two-player zero-sum games), coarse-correlated equilibria, and correlated equilibria in large, randomly generated
normal-form games. Additionally, we conduct experiments in
subgames of Diplomacy, which has a long history as an important benchmark for AI research (Kraus and Lehmann 1988;
Kraus, Ephrati, and Lehmann 1994; Kraus and Lehmann
1995; Johansson and Håård 2005; Ferreira, Cardoso, and
Reis 2015) and has been a particularly active domain for
research in recent years (Paquette et al. 2019; Anthony et al.
2020; Gray et al. 2021). We find that greedy weights significantly improves the rate of convergence whenever sampling
is used, in some cases by several orders of magnitude. Finally, we find that equilibria discovered by greedy weights
in general-sum games typically have higher overall social
welfare than those found by prior methods.

Notation and Background

* Work done primarily while the author was at Facebook AI

In a normal-form (also called strategic-form) game, each of
P players simultaneously chooses their actions without observing the other players’ choices. Each player then receives

Research.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9484

