The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Split Moves for Monte-Carlo Tree Search
Jakub Kowalski1 , Maksymilian Mika1 , Wojciech Pawlik1 , Jakub Sutowicz1 , Marek Szykuła1 ,
Mark H. M. Winands2
1

University of Wrocław, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Maastricht University, Department of Data Science and Knowledge Engineering
jko@cs.uni.wroc.pl, mika.maksymilian@gmail.com, pawlik.wj@gmail.com,
jakubsutowicz@gmail.com, msz@cs.uni.wroc.pl, m.winands@maastrichtuniversity.nl
2

Abstract

2016), Regular Boardgames (RBG) (Kowalski et al. 2019),
and Ludii (Piette et al. 2020).
Recent advances in search and learning support the trend
of generalization, focusing on methods being as widely applicable as possible. Deep Q-networks were applied to play
classic Atari games and achieved above human-level performance on most of the 49 games from the test set (Mnih et al.
2015). More recently, A LPHA Z ERO, showed how to utilize
a single technique to play Go, Chess, and Shogi on a level
above all other compared AI agents (Silver et al. 2018).
In the trend of developing enhancements for MCTS
(Cazenave 2015; Baier and Winands 2018), we tackle the
problem of influencing the quality of the search by altering the structure of the game tree itself. In many games,
a player’s turn consists of a sequence of choices that can
be examined separately. A straightforward representation is
to encode these choices as distinct moves, obtaining a split
game tree, instead of using a single move in orthodox design.
The potential applications go beyond games, as the method
can be used for any kind of problem that is solvable via a
simulation-based approach and its representation of actions
can be decomposed. In this paper, we are interested in the
general technique of altering the game tree by introducing
split moves and its possible effects, rather than its application to a particular game combined with expert knowledge.
Hence, we focus on the GGP setting and MCTS, which is
the most well-known and widely applied general search algorithm working without expert knowledge.
We propose the semisplit algorithm, which is a generalization of MCTS that effectively works with arbitrary splitting.
For the purposes of experiments, we implement the concept
in the Regular Boardgames system (Kowalski et al. 2019) –
a universal GGP formalism for the class of finite deterministic games with perfect information. A few split strategies of
different granularity are developed, which split moves basing on the given general game description. The experiments
are conducted on a set of classic board games, comparing
agents using orthodox and split designs. We test a number of
variants of the algorithm, applying split moves selectively to
different phases of MCTS, and include action-based heuristics (MAST, RAVE (Gelly and Silver 2007)) to observe the
behavior also for enhanced MCTS. From the results, we
identify the most beneficial configurations and conclude that
split moves can greatly improve the player’s strength.

In many games, moves consist of several decisions made by
the player. These decisions can be viewed as separate moves,
which is already a common practice in multi-action games
for efficiency reasons. Such division of a player move into a
sequence of simpler / lower level moves is called splitting.
So far, split moves have been applied only in forementioned
straightforward cases, and furthermore, there was almost no
study revealing its impact on agents’ playing strength. Taking the knowledge-free perspective, we aim to answer how to
effectively use split moves within Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) and what is the practical impact of split design
on agents’ strength. This paper proposes a generalization of
MCTS that works with arbitrarily split moves. We design several variations of the algorithm and try to measure the impact of split moves separately on efficiency, quality of MCTS,
simulations, and action-based heuristics. The tests are carried
out on a set of board games and performed using the Regular Boardgames General Game Playing formalism, where
split strategies of different granularity can be automatically
derived based on an abstract description of the game. The results give an overview of the behavior of agents using split
design in different ways. We conclude that split design can be
greatly beneficial for single- as well as multi-action games.

Introduction
The benefits of simulation-based, knowledge-free, openloop algorithms such as Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
(Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006; Browne et al. 2012;
Świechowski et al. 2021) and Rolling Horizon Evolutionary Algorithm (Perez et al. 2013) are especially suited to
work within environments with many unknowns. In particular, they are widely used in General Game Playing (GGP)
(Genesereth, Love, and Pell 2005), a domain focusing on developing agents that can successfully play any game given
its formalized rules, which was established to promote work
in generalized, practically applicable algorithms (Finnsson
and Björnsson 2010; Goldwaser and Thielscher 2020). Initially based entirely on Stanford’s Game Description Language (GDL) (Love et al. 2006), GGP expands over time
as new game description formalisms are being developed
e.g., Toss (Kaiser and Stafiniak 2011), GVG-AI (Perez et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10247

