The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Anomaly Detection by Robust Density Estimation
Boyang Liu, Pang-Ning Tan, Jiayu Zhou
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
liuboya2, ptan, jiayuz@msu.edu

Abstract
Density estimation is a widely used method for unsupervised
anomaly detection. However, the presence of anomalies in
training data may severely impact the density estimation process, thereby hampering the use of more sophisticated density estimation methods such as those based on deep neural networks. In this work, we propose RobustRealNVP, a
robust deep density estimation framework for unsupervised
anomaly detection. Our approach differs from existing flowbased models from two perspectives. First, RobustRealNVP
discards data points with low estimated densities during optimization to prevent them from corrupting the density estimation process. Furthermore, it imposes Lipschitz regularization
to ensure smoothness in the estimated density function. We
demonstrate the robustness of our algorithm against anomalies in training data from both theoretical and empirical perspectives. The results show that our algorithm outperforms
state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection methods.

Figure 1: Effect of anomalies on density estimation for flowbased models. The upper left figure represents clean data
while the lower left figure represents data contaminated by
anomalies (red points). The right column shows the density
functions estimated by Real NVP. Observe that Real NVP
assigns large density values to the clustered anomalies.

Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) is the task of finding unusual observations, whose characteristics are considerably different
from the majority of the data. Applications of AD can be
found in diverse domains, including cybersecurity, finance,
and healthcare. While there have been extensive methods developed for AD, density-based methods such as kernel density estimation, local outlier factor (LOF), and their variants
have found success due to their simplicity, ease of use, and
ability to detect diverse types of anomalies under various settings (Breunig et al. 2000). However, despite their success,
current density-based methods are mostly designed to operate in the original feature space, which hampers their applicability to high-dimensional data, as density estimation has
high sample complexity and computational costs with increasing number of dimensions (Tsybakov 2008). Moreover,
if the data lies in some low-dimensional, nonlinear manifold,
performing density estimation and anomaly detection in the
original feature space may lead to inferior performance.
With the emergence of deep learning, deep generative
models have been widely used to perform density estimation in complex, high-dimensional datasets. For example,
flow-based models (Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2016;

Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2014) learn an invertible function to facilitate exact inference and sampling of data points
for density estimation. By carefully designing the network
structure, it can successfully learn the underlying data distribution. Unlike other deep generative models such as generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2013), flow-based
models explicitly learn the density function, which makes it
a powerful tool for inferring out-of-distribution data.
However, due to the high capacity of the DNNs, the density function estimated by the flow-based model can be corrupted by anomalies. To illustrate this, Figure 1 shows a toy
example in which the normal data lies in a two-moon manifold. When the training data is clean, the flow-based model
accurately captures the true density function, as shown in the
upper right figure. However, when training data is contaminated with anomalies, the flow-based model will attempt to
learn the density of the anomalies as well, as shown in the
lower right figure. Thus, a more robust approach is needed
to estimate the density function in order to enhance the performance of flow-based models in unsupervised AD tasks.
This paper presents a deep unsupervised AD method
called RobustRealNVP. Unlike Real NVP (Dinh, SohlDickstein, and Bengio 2016), which is a popular flow-based

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4101

