The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Machine Reading Comprehension
via Inter-sentence Dependency Graph
Liyan Xu1 , Xuchao Zhang2 , Bo Zong2 , Yanchi Liu2 , Wei Cheng2 ,
Jingchao Ni2 , Haifeng Chen2 , Liang Zhao1 , Jinho D. Choi1
1

Department of Computer Science, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
2
NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ, USA
1
{liyan.xu, liang.zhao, jinho.choi}@emory.edu
2
{xuczhang, bozong, yanchi, weicheng, jni, haifeng}@nec-labs.com

Abstract

1

購⼊

bought

We target the task of cross-lingual Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) in the direct zero-shot setting, by incorporating syntactic features from Universal Dependencies (UD),
and the key features we use are the syntactic relations within
each sentence. While previous work has demonstrated effective syntax-guided MRC models, we propose to adopt the
inter-sentence syntactic relations, in addition to the rudimentary intra-sentence relations, to further utilize the syntactic
dependencies in the multi-sentence input of the MRC task. In
our approach, we build the Inter-Sentence Dependency Graph
(ISDG) connecting dependency trees to form global syntactic relations across sentences. We then propose the ISDG encoder that encodes the global dependency graph, addressing
the inter-sentence relations via both one-hop and multi-hop
dependency paths explicitly. Experiments on three multilingual MRC datasets (XQuAD, MLQA, TyDiQA-GoldP) show
that our encoder that is only trained on English is able to
improve the zero-shot performance on all 14 test sets covering 8 languages, with up to 3.8 F1 / 5.2 EM improvement on-average, and 5.2 F1 / 11.2 EM on certain languages.
Further analysis shows the improvement can be attributed
to the attention on the cross-linguistically consistent syntactic path. Our code is available at https://github.com/lxucs/
multilingual-mrc-isdg.

He

house

2016

a

in

He bought a house in 2016

家

彼

は

を

2016

し, まし, た

に

彼は2016に家を購⼊しました

Figure 1: Syntactic dependency representation of parallel
sentences in English and Japanese. We mark the aligned
verbs and nouns of the same meaning by the same color.
Two languages have quite different sentence structure, while
the main components (verbs and nouns) have the same graph
structure under syntactic dependencies, reducing the crosslingual gap on the representation.
the cross-linguistically consistent syntax can serve as the anchor points across multiple languages. For example, Figure 1
shows the parallel sentences in English and Japanese that
vary quite a lot in sentence structure. By providing the extra clues of universal syntactic dependencies, the model can
benefit from a closer gap of cross-lingual representation with
the explicit alignment from the dependency graph structure.
Various past work has already shown syntactically informed models to be effective in machine translation (Chen
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019) and other monolingual
intra-sentence tasks such as Semantic Role Labeling (SRL)
(Strubell et al. 2018; Kasai et al. 2019). Recently, the utilization of additional syntactic clues seems to depreciate, as the
emerging pretrained language models such as BERT (Devlin
et al. 2019) already implicitly encode the linguistic notions
of syntax (Hewitt and Manning 2019). Nevertheless, the values of this work are twofold. First, existing methods focus on
the direct syntactic relations within each sentence, e.g. the
recent MRC model SG-Net (Zhang et al. 2020); while we
further explicitly address the multi-hop relations in a global
syntactic graph across sentences. Second, whether the syntactic features can provide useful auxiliary information for
multilingual MRC is still an open question that has not been
answered before, given the fact that the universal syntax is
just made available recently.
Our approach adopts the multilingual pretrained language
models as the backbone, and features the direct zero-shot

Introduction

Universal Dependencies (UD) (Nivre et al. 2016) is a unified
framework that aims to provide cross-linguistically consistent features including part-of-speech (POS) tags, morphological features and syntactic dependencies for over 90 languages. With the recent release of more than 100 treebanks
thanks to great annotation efforts , several toolkits have been
made available, such as Stanza (Qi et al. 2020) and UDPipe
(Straka 2018), which are built upon the UD framework and
provide state-of-the-art performance on predicting universal
syntactic features for multiple languages, offering new potentials for cross-lingual applications.
In this work, we target to incorporate UD features in
the task of zero-shot cross-lingual machine reading comprehension (MRC), exploiting the potentials brought by UD.
Specifically, our main motivation is that the raw text of each
language can exhibit its own unique linguistic traits, while
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11538

