The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Impact of Spurious Correlation for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Yifei Ming, Hang Yin, Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
{alvinming, hyin56, sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Modern neural networks can assign high confidence to inputs
drawn from outside the training distribution, posing threats
to models in real-world deployments. While much research
attention has been placed on designing new out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection methods, the precise definition of OOD is
often left in vagueness and falls short of the desired notion of
OOD in reality. In this paper, we present a new formalization
and model the data shifts by taking into account both the invariant and environmental (spurious) features. Under such formalization, we systematically investigate how spurious correlation
in the training set impacts OOD detection. Our results suggest
that the detection performance is severely worsened when the
correlation between spurious features and labels is increased
in the training set. We further show insights on detection methods that are more effective in reducing the impact of spurious
correlation, and provide theoretical analysis on why reliance
on environmental features leads to high OOD detection error.
Our work aims to facilitate better understandings of OOD
samples and their formalization, as well as the exploration of
methods that enhance OOD detection. Code is available at
https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/Spurious_OOD.

Introduction
Modern deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented
success in known contexts for which they are trained, yet
they do not necessarily know what they don’t know (Nguyen,
Yosinski, and Clune 2015). In particular, neural networks
have been shown to produce high posterior probability for
test inputs from out-of-distribution (OOD), which should not
be predicted by the model. This gives rise to the importance of
OOD detection, which aims to identify and handle unknown
OOD inputs so that the algorithm can take safety precautions.
Before we attempt any solution, an important yet often overlooked problem is: what do we mean by out-ofdistribution data? While the research community lacks a
consensus on the precise definition, a common evaluation
protocol views data with non-overlapping semantics as OOD
inputs (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017). For example, an image
of a cow can be viewed as an OOD w.r.t a model tasked to
classify cat vs. dog. However, such an evaluation scheme is
often oversimplified and may not capture the nuances and
complexity of the problem in reality.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10051

We begin with a motivating example where a neural network can rely on statistically informative yet spurious features in the data. Indeed, many prior works showed that
modern neural networks can spuriously rely on the biased
features (e.g., background or textures) instead of features of
the object to achieve high accuracy (Beery, Van Horn, and
Perona 2018; Geirhos et al. 2019; Sagawa et al. 2019). In
Figure 1, we illustrate a model that exploits the spurious correlation between the water background and label waterbird
for prediction. Consequently, a model that relies on spurious features can produce a high-confidence prediction for
an OOD input with the same background (i.e., water) but
a different semantic label (e.g., boat). This can manifest in
downstream OOD detection, yet unexplored in prior works.
In this paper, we systematically investigate how spurious
correlation in the training set impacts OOD detection. We
first provide a new formalization and explicitly model the
data shifts by taking into account both invariant features and
environmental features (Section ). Invariant features can be
viewed as essential cues directly related to semantic labels,
whereas environmental features are non-invariant and can be
spurious. Our formalization encapsulates two types of OOD
data: (1) spurious OOD—test samples that contain environmental (non-invariant) features but no invariant features; (2)
non-spurious OOD—inputs that contain neither the environmental nor invariant features, which is more in line with the
conventional notion of OOD. We provide an illustration of
both types of OOD in Figure 1.
Under the new formalization, we conduct extensive experiments and investigate the detection performance under
both spurious and non-spurious OOD inputs (Section ). Our
results suggest that spurious correlation in the training data
poses a significant challenge to OOD detection. For both
spurious and non-spurious OOD samples, the detection performance is severely worsened when the correlation between
spurious features and labels is increased in the training set.
Further, we comprehensively evaluate common OOD detection approaches, and show that feature-based methods have a
competitive edge in improving non-spurious OOD detection,
while detecting spurious OOD remains challenging (Section ).
To further understand this, we provide theoretical insights on
why reliance on non-invariant features leads to high OOD
detection error (Section ). We provably show the existence
of spurious OOD inputs with arbitrarily high confidence,

