The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adversarial Robustness in Multi-Task Learning: Promises and Illusions
Salah Ghamizi, Maxime Cordy, Mike Papadakis, and Yves Le Traon
University of Luxembourg
salah.ghamizi@uni.lu, maxime.cordy@uni.lu, michail.papadakis@uni.lu, yves.letraon@uni.lu

Abstract

new attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014a; Madry
et al. 2017), defense mechanisms (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and
Bengio 2016; He et al. 2017), detection mechanisms (Metzen
et al. 2017), or to improve transferability across different
networks (Tramèr et al. 2017; Inkawhich et al. 2019).
(Mao et al. 2020) pioneered the research on adversarial attacks against multi-task models. Their main result is
that, under specific conditions, making models learn additional auxiliary tasks leads to both an increase in clean performances and improves the robustness of models.
In this paper, we pursue the endeavor of Mao et al. and
study whether their conclusions hold in a larger spectrum
of settings. Surprisingly, our experimental study shows that
adding more tasks does not consistently increase robustness,
and may even have negative effects. We even reveal some
experimental parameters, such as the attack norm distance,
can annihilate the validity of the previous theoretical results.
Overall, this indicates that increasing the number of tasks
only gives a false sense of robustness.
In face of this disillusionment, we investigate the different factors that may explain the discrepancies between our
results and that of the previous study. We demonstrate that
the contribution of each task to the vulnerability of the model
can be qualified, and that what matters is not the number of
added tasks but the marginal vulnerability of these tasks.
Following this finding, we investigate remedies to reinstate
the addition of auxiliary tasks as an effective means of improving robustness. Firstly, following the recommendation
of previous research on increasing the clean performance of
multi-task models (Chen et al. 2018; Standley et al. 2020),
we show that adjusting the task weights to make vulnerable
tasks less dominant yields drastic robustness improvement
but does so only against non-adaptive adversarial attacks:
Auto-PGD (Croce and Hein 2020) and Weighted Gradient
Descent – a new adaptive attack that we propose to adapt
the produced perturbation to task weights – annihilate the
benefits of weight adjustment.
Secondly, we show that a careful selection of the tasks suffices to ensure that model robustness increases. Given a target
model, determining which combination of tasks is optimal
can be costly. We propose different methods to approximate
the gain in robustness and show that they strongly correlate
with the robustness of the target model.
To summarize, our contributions are:

Vulnerability to adversarial attacks is a well-known weakness
of Deep Neural networks. While most of the studies focus
on single-task neural networks with computer vision datasets,
very little research has considered complex multi-task models
that are common in real applications. In this paper, we evaluate
the design choices that impact the robustness of multi-task
deep learning networks. We provide evidence that blindly
adding auxiliary tasks, or weighing the tasks provides a false
sense of robustness. Thereby, we tone down the claim made
by previous research and study the different factors which may
affect robustness. In particular, we show that the choice of the
task to incorporate in the loss function are important factors
that can be leveraged to yield more robust models.
We provide the appendix, all our algorithms, models, and open
source-code at https://github.com/yamizi/taskaugment

Introduction
While most research on computer vision focuses on singletask learning, many real applications (especially in robotics
(Radwan, Valada, and Burgard 2018), autonomous vehicle
(Yu et al. 2020), privacy (Ghamizi et al. 2019) and medical
diagnosis (Xu and Yang 2011)) require learning to perform
different tasks from the same inputs. For instance, an autonomous vehicle processes multiple computer vision tasks
to navigate properly (Sax et al. 2018; Savva et al. 2019), such
as object segmentation and depth estimation.
To meet such requirements, one can build and train on a
specific model for each task. However, previous studies have
shown that multi-task learning, i.e. building models that learn
to perform multiple tasks simultaneously, yields better performance than learning the individual tasks separately (Zhang
and Yang 2017; Vandenhende et al. 2021). The intuition behind these results is that tasks that share similar objectives
benefit from the information learned by each other. However,
while the performance of multi-task learning approaches on
clean images has seen major improvements recently(Standley
et al. 2020), the security of these models, in particular their
vulnerability to adversarial attacks, has been barely studied.
The phenomena of adversarial attacks has first been introduced by (Biggio et al. 2013) and (Szegedy et al. 2013)
and has since gathered the interest of researchers to propose
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

697

