The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dynamic Spatial Propagation Network for Depth Completion
Yuankai Lin1 , Tao Cheng2 * , Qi Zhong3 , Wending Zhou4 and Hua Yang1
1

School of Mechanical Science and Enginering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
College of Urban Transportation and Logistics, Shenzhen Technology University, China
3
Division of Logistics and Transportation, Tsinghua University, China
4
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), China
{linyuankai,huayang}@hust.edu.cn, chengtao@sztu.edu.cn, zhongq20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 220019048@link.cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

7×7 CSPN Module

Image-guided depth completion aims to generate dense depth
maps with sparse depth measurements and corresponding
RGB images. Currently, spatial propagation networks (SPNs)
are the most popular affinity-based methods in depth completion, but they still suffer from the representation limitation of the fixed affinity and the over smoothing during
iterations. Our solution is to estimate independent affinity
matrices in each SPN iteration, but it is over-parameterized
and heavy calculation. This paper introduces an efficient
model that learns the affinity among neighboring pixels with
an attention-based, dynamic approach. Specifically, the Dynamic Spatial Propagation Network (DySPN) we proposed
makes use of a non-linear propagation model (NLPM). It decouples the neighborhood into parts regarding to different distances and recursively generates independent attention maps
to refine these parts into adaptive affinity matrices. Furthermore, we adopt a diffusion suppression (DS) operation so
that the model converges at an early stage to prevent oversmoothing of dense depth. Finally, in order to decrease the
computational cost required, we also introduce three variations that reduce the amount of neighbors and attentions
needed while still retaining similar accuracy. In practice, our
method requires less iteration to match the performance of
other SPNs and yields better results overall. DySPN outperforms other state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods on KITTI Depth
Completion (DC) evaluation by the time of submission and is
able to yield SoTA performance in NYU Depth v2 dataset as
well.

7×7 DySPN Module

Depth Map

Depth Map

t+1

t+1

Affinity Matrix

h×w

h×w

A3

Affinity Matrix
7×7×h×w

Refined Depth Map
Filter application

t
3


h×w

24×h×w
 2t

A0
A2
A1
16×h×w 8×h×w h×w
t
t
1
0

Adaptive Affinity Matrix

Refined Depth Map

Element-wise
multiplication

Attentions{  kt }

Broadcast tensors

Figure 1: Comparison between 7×7 CSPN and 7×7 DySPN.
Left: A fixed affinity matrix is assigned to CSPN, with its
weights distributed in the outermost part of the kernel. Right:
An adaptive affinity matrix adjusted by the attention mechanism is provided to our DySPN.

Since RGB images can reflect subtle changes of color
and texture, many existing works (Ma and Karaman 2018)
(Van Gansbeke et al. 2019) (Eldesokey, Felsberg, and Khan
2020) utilize synchronous RGB images as guidance to
complete sparse depth values, which are known as imageguided depth completion. These methods directly estimate
dense depths by RGB images and sparse depths and use
encoder-decoder architecture (Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and
Cipolla 2017) to generate more details of depth maps. Therefore, compared with the early methods (Hawe, Kleinsteuber,
and Diepold 2011) (Uhrig et al. 2017) (Ku, Harakeh, and
Waslander 2018) that only rely on sparse measurement, the
results of depth completion are significantly improved. In order to generate better depth image boundaries, many learnable edge-preserving strategies (Cheng, Wang, and Yang
2020) (Tang et al. 2021) are adopted, which can be easily
embedded into end-to-end deep convolutional neural networks. SPNs are based on the strategy of Anisotropic Diffusion (Weickert 1998), which are popular refinement techniques in depth estimation and depth completion. This strategy obtains the final dense depth maps by affinities of local (Cheng et al. 2020a) or non-local (Park et al. 2020)
neighbors and iteratively refines the depth prediction. However, most of the current SPNs are based on linear propagation models. The values of the affinity matrix would not
change during the propagation process, which greatly limits

Introduction
Dense depth estimation is essential for 3D vision tasks, e.g.,
3D object detection (Ma et al. 2020b) and tracking (Hu et al.
2019), 6D object pose estimation (Wang et al. 2019), simultaneously localization and mapping (SLAM) (Zhang and
Singh 2015), and structure-from-motion (SfM) (Zhu et al.
2018), which are widely used in autonomous driving and
robot perception. However, the output of depth sensors such
as LiDAR and ToF cameras is sparse, resulting in a large
number of empty data regions, which need further processing to fulfill or simply ignore these missing regions.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1638

