The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

RRL: Regional Rotate Layer in Convolutional Neural Networks
Zongbo Hao, Tao Zhang, Mingwang Chen, Zou Kaixu
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
No.4, Section 2, North Jianshe Road
Chengdu, China, 610054
zbhao@uestc.edu.cn, zhangtao897476472@126.com, chenmingwang815@163.com, 1241510971@qq.com

Abstract

Tamura, Horiguchi, and Murakami 2019; Mash, Borghetti,
and Pecarina 2016), or merging the rotation equivariant features (Gao et al. 2019; Wiersma, Eisemann, and Hildebrandt
2020). These methods either increase the workload of training or increase the number of model parameters. In this paper, by making the feature maps before and after convolution
rotation equivariant, the whole neural network is rotation invariant. With rotation angle θ ∈ {0, 90, 180, 270}◦ , the feature maps are completely the same. When the input image
is rotated with arbitrary angle, there is only small difference
between feature maps before and after rotation.
The main contributions of this paper are:
1) A Local Binary Pattern(LBP) operator based Regional
Rotation Layer (RRL) is proposed. RRL can be embedded
in CNNs, without the need for substantial changes to the
network to achieve rotation invariant.
2) Without learning new parameters, RRL makes the feature maps before and after convolution satisfy the rotation
equivariance, and thus makes the entire neural network rotation invariant. With rotation angles θ ∈ {0, 90, 180, 270}◦ ,
the feature maps are exactly the same. With arbitrary rotation angle, there is a small distinction between feature maps.
3) Evaluate RRL with LeNet-5, ResNet-18 and tinyyolov3, we get impressive results.

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) perform very well
in image classification and object detection in recent years,
but even the most advanced models have limited rotation invariance. Known solutions include the enhancement of training data and the increase of rotation invariance by globally
merging the rotation equivariant features. These methods either increase the workload of training or increase the number of model parameters. To address this problem, this paper proposes a module that can be inserted into the existing
networks, and directly incorporates the rotation invariance
into the feature extraction layers of the CNNs. This module
does not have learnable parameters and will not increase the
complexity of the model. At the same time, only by training the upright data, it can perform well on the rotated testing set. These advantages will be suitable for fields such as
biomedicine and astronomy where it is difficult to obtain upright samples or the target has no directionality. Evaluate our
module with LeNet-5, ResNet-18 and tiny-yolov3, we get impressive results.

Introduction
Deep learning and convolutional neural networks have made
great progress in many tasks such as image classification and
object detection. The inherent properties of convolution and
pooling layer alleviate the influence of local translation and
distortion. However, due to the lack of the ability to process large rotation of image, convolution neural networks are
limited in some visual tasks, including target boundary detection (Maninis et al. 2016; Dalal and Triggs 2005), multidirectional target detection (Cheng, Zhou, and Han 2016)
and image classification (Jaderberg et al. 2015; Laptev et al.
2016). In recent years, CNN based image classification and
object detection have been used in biomedical, industrial and
astronomical research. In these fields, objects can appear in
any direction, such as microscopic images, objects on conveyor belts or objects observed. So, the research on rotation
invariance of neural networks has been more and more important.
At present, most deep networks use data augmentation to
make the network recognize objects in different directions
(Ojala, Pietikäinen, and Harwood 1996; Quiroga et al. 2018;

Related Work
For deep learning based methods, the most direct way is
data augmentation (Van Dyk and Meng 2001), which simply changes the size and direction of the input images to
create more training data. TI-Pooling (Laptev et al. 2016)
uses the rotated image as input, and applies a pooling layer
before outputting features to unify the network’s results for
different rotation angles. Dieleman proposed a deep neural
network model that uses translational and rotational symmetry to classify galaxy morphology (Dieleman, Willett,
and Dambre 2015). They create multiple rotated and flipped
galaxy image samples, and then concatenate the feature
maps to the classifier. Polar Transformer Networks (PTN)
(Esteves et al. 2018) converts the input to polar coordinates.
PTN is composed of a polar coordinate prediction module,
a polar coordinate conversion module, and a classifier to
achieve translation invariance and equal changes in expansion/rotation groups. (Jiang and Mei 2019) also proposed a
Polar Coordinate Convolutional Neural Network (PCCNN)

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

826

