The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deconvolutional Density Network: Modeling
Free-Form Conditional Distributions
Bing Chen1, * , Mazharul Islam1, * , Jisuo Gao1 , Lin Wang1,2,†
1

Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Based Intelligent Computing,
University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, China
2
Quancheng Shandong Laboratory, Jinan 250100, China
{binvecxyz, mazharul.cse34, gaojisuo, wangplanet}@gmail.com
Abstract
Sample
Points

Conditional density estimation (CDE) is the task of estimating the probability of an event conditioned on some inputs.
A neural network (NN) can also be used to compute the output distribution for continuous-domain, which can be viewed
as an extension of regression task. Nevertheless, it is difficult to explicitly approximate a distribution without knowing
the information of its general form a priori. In order to fit an
arbitrary conditional distribution, discretizing the continuous
domain into bins is an effective strategy, as long as we have
sufficiently narrow bins and very large data. However, collecting enough data is often hard to reach and falls far short
of that ideal in many circumstances, especially in multivariate CDE for the curse of dimensionality. In this paper, we
demonstrate the benefits of modeling free-form conditional
distributions using a deconvolution-based neural net framework, coping with data deficiency problems in discretization.
It has the advantage of being flexible but also takes advantage of the hierarchical smoothness offered by the deconvolution layers. We compare our method to a number of other
density-estimation approaches and show that our Deconvolutional Density Network (DDN) outperforms the competing
methods on many univariate and multivariate tasks. The code
of DDN is available at https://github.com/NBICLAB/DDN

y (2)

-1.00

-0.68

-0.33

-0.05

0.33

0.58

1.00

x

y (1)

Estimated
Density

y (2)
y (1)

Figure 1: Example Conditional Density Estimation, estimating the conditional density on a 2-dimensional domain. This
dataset has 35,000 training samples in total, drawn from a
distribution constructed based on an animation, by taking
each normalized frame and time as conditional density function and condition, respectively. Each sample point consists
of a single input x and two outputs (y (1) , y (2) ). We wish to
estimate the conditional density over all possible values of
(y (1) , y (2) ), given different input/condition x. Given different value of input, the sub-figures at top and at bottom represent the scatter plot of training samples and the estimated
conditional densities, respectively. Notice that the density
can change markedly, depending on the input. The density
is estimated by DDN.

Introduction
In supervised discriminative learning, a conditional model
learns the conditional distribution function of the outputs
given the inputs, while ignoring the distribution of the inputs. If the outputs are random variables, a learned conditional model can map inputs to a discrete set of labels (e.g.
classifying handwritten digits), or to values in a continuous
domain (e.g. regressing temperature).
What if the expected conditional output is an explicit
whole distribution, but not just a value of a random variable? Both classification and regression can be posed as
summary statistics of distribution: the location of the maximum (mode) for classification, and the expectation of the
distribution for regression. However these do not tell the
whole story, and often the entire distribution is much preferred, especially when there are lots of uncertainties, and

the distributions are broad or multi-modal. For instance, we
can predict the distribution curve over a student’s all possible scores given his personality and previous scores, or to
estimate the distribution surface over all drop-off locations
given pickup location and the time of day (Dutordoir et al.
2018).
This is related to the Conditional Density Estimation
(CDE), a more general discriminative learning task, where
the goal is to return the distribution over a range of output
values. More precisely, given an input x, estimate p(y|x),
where y ∈ D and D stands for the domain of y. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of CDE.
We focus on explicit CDE for fast and direct access to
the likelihoods and the whole landscape of distribution. A
critical problem with learning an explicit CDE model is the

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: Lin Wang
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6183

