The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Joint Deep Multi-Graph Matching and 3D Geometry Learning
from Inhomogeneous 2D Image Collections
Zhenzhang Ye1 , Tarun Yenamandra1 , Florian Bernard1, 2 , Daniel Cremers1
1

Technical University of Munich
2
University of Bonn
zhenzhang.ye@tum.de, tarun.yenamandra@tum.de, f.bernard@gmail.com, cremers@tum.de

Abstract

structures that lead to similar feature descriptors. Instead,
we can use a graph matching formulation to establish correspondences between key points while taking into account
geometric relations between points. Yet, the sequential nature of first computing features and then bringing them
into correspondence may lead to sub-optimal results, since
both tasks are solved independently from each other – despite their mutual dependence. More recently, several deep
learning-based graph matching methods have been proposed
that learn task-specific optimal features while simultaneously solving graph matching in an end-to-end manner (Zanfir and Sminchisescu 2018; Wang, Yan, and Yang 2019a;
Wang et al. 2020b; Rolı́nek et al. 2020). While such deep
graph matching approaches lead to state-of-the-art results in
terms of the matching accuracy, they have profound disadvantages, particularly in the context of 2D key point matching in image collections. On the one hand, most existing
approaches only consider the matching of pairs of images,
rather than the entire collection. This has the negative sideeffect that so-obtained matchings are generally not cycleconsistent. To circumvent this, there are approaches that use
a post-processing procedure (Wang, Yan, and Yang 2019b)
to establish cycle consistency based on permutation synchronisation (Pachauri, Kondor, and Singh 2013; Bernard
et al. 2018). Yet, they do not directly obtain cycle-consistent
matchings but rather achieve it based on post-processing. On
the other hand, and perhaps more importantly, approaches
that use graph matching for 2D image key point matching
have the strong disadvantage that the underlying 3D structure of the objects whose 2D projections are depicted in the
images is not adequately considered. In particular, the spatial relations in the 2D image plane are highly dependent on
the 3D geometric structure of the object, as well as on the
camera parameters. Hence, learning graph features directly
based on the image appearance and/or 2D image coordinates
is sub-optimal, at best, since the neural network implicitly
needs to learn the difficult task of reasoning about the underlying 3D structure.
In this work we address these issues by proposing a deep
multi-graph matching approach that learns the 3D structure
of objects. The main contributions are as follows:
• For the first time we propose a solution for jointly considering multi-graph matching and inferring 3D geometry
from inhomogeneous 2D image collections, see Fig. 1.

Graph matching aims to establish correspondences between
vertices of graphs such that both the node and edge attributes
agree. Various learning-based methods were recently proposed for finding correspondences between image key points
based on deep graph matching formulations. While these approaches mainly focus on learning node and edge attributes,
they completely ignore the 3D geometry of the underlying 3D
objects depicted in the 2D images. We fill this gap by proposing a trainable framework that takes advantage of graph neural networks for learning a deformable 3D geometry model
from inhomogeneous image collections, i.e., a set of images
that depict different instances of objects from the same category. Experimentally, we demonstrate that our method outperforms recent learning-based approaches for graph matching considering both accuracy and cycle-consistency error,
while we in addition obtain the underlying 3D geometry of
the objects depicted in the 2D images.

Introduction
Graph matching is a widely studied problem in computer
vision, graphics and machine learning due to its universal
nature and the broad range of applications. Intuitively, the
objective of graph matching is to establish correspondences
between the nodes of two given weighted graphs, so that the
weights of corresponding edges agree as well as possible.
Diverse visual tasks fit into the graph matching framework.
In this work we focus in particular on the task of matching
2D key points defined in images, which has a high relevance
for 3D reconstruction, tracking, deformation model learning, and many more. In this case, a graph is constructed for
each image by using the key points as graph nodes, and by
connecting neighbouring key points with edges, according
to some suitable neighbourhood criterion. The edges contain
information about geometric relations, such as the Euclidean
distance between nodes in the simplest case.
Image key point matching was traditionally addressed
based on finding nearest neighbours between feature descriptors such as SIFT (Lowe 2004), SURF (Bay et al.
2008). A downside to this approach is that the geometric relation between the key points are completely ignored,
which is in particular problematic if there are repetitive
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3125

