The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reinforcement Learning Based Dynamic Model Combination
for Time Series Forecasting
Yuwei Fu, Di Wu, Benoit Boulet
McGill University
yuwei.fu@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract

ML-based methods (Fawaz et al. 2019). Statistical methods such as Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average
(ARIMA) models (Zhang 2003; Pai and Lin 2005) and
Exponential Smoothing State Space (ETS) models (Hyndman et al. 2008; Durbin and Koopman 2012) provide basic benchmarks for predicting individual time series. Prevalent ML-based methods mostly apply deep neural networks
(DNNs) to learn complex patterns from raw data across different related time series (Rangapuram et al. 2018; Oreshkin
et al. 2019).
Among these methods, ensemble learning has been
proved to be an effective strategy for improving prediction
accuracy (Taylor, McSharry, and Buizza 2009; Makridakis,
Spiliotis, and Assimakopoulos 2018). In the ensemble learning, a strong learner is learned by combining results from
multiple weak learners (Dietterich et al. 2002). Models with
different capacities usually fit well in different data regimes,
hence a combined model sometimes is with the potential to
achieve superior performance (Zhou 2021). However, it is
still an open question that how should the weights for base
models in the ensemble be determined. Sub-optimal weights
may prevent the final model from reaching its full potential (Weigel, Liniger, and Appenzeller 2008). In this work,
we focus on the model combination problem for time series
forecasting with ensemble learning.
Determining the weights for a set of base models is indeed challenging for several reasons. First, many real-life
time series have complex dynamics and non-stationary data
distribution. For example, the generation process of renewable energy is usually intermittent that is difficult to predict (Gowrisankaran, Reynolds, and Samano 2016). Second,
many existing time series forecasting models would overfit
to some specific data distributions and fail to generalize well
on other data regimes (Binkowski, Marti, and Donnat 2018).
An ideal model combination method should be able to learn
effective representations from time series data and adapt fast
to the changing distribution by selecting the most appropriate models, as illustrated in Fig 1.
In some early works, researchers used hand-engineered
task-specific rules to select models (Collopy and Armstrong
1992), which require lots of domain knowledge and fail
to generalize to different tasks. Later, some researchers
proposed to use meta-learning (Vilalta and Drissi 2002;
Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman 2018) to solve the time

Time series data appears in many real-world fields such as energy, transportation, communication systems. Accurate modelling and forecasting of time series data can be of significant importance to improve the efficiency of these systems. Extensive research efforts have been taken for time series problems. Different types of approaches, including both
statistical-based methods and machine learning-based methods, have been investigated. Among these methods, ensemble
learning has shown to be effective and robust. However, it is
still an open question that how we should determine weights
for base models in the ensemble. Sub-optimal weights may
prevent the final model from reaching its full potential. To
deal with this challenge, we propose a reinforcement learning
(RL) based model combination (RLMC) framework for determining model weights in an ensemble for time series forecasting tasks. By formulating model selection as a sequential
decision-making problem, RLMC learns a deterministic policy to output dynamic model weights for non-stationary time
series data. RLMC further leverages deep learning to learn
hidden features from raw time series data to adapt fast to the
changing data distribution. Extensive experiments on multiple real-world datasets have been implemented to showcase
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Time series forecasting is crucial for many real-world applications, such as energy prediction (Miller et al. 2020),
weather forecasting (Liang et al. 2018) and inventory control (Seeger, Salinas, and Flunkert 2016). In recent years,
significant progress has been made in time series forecasting with machine learning (ML) methods (Lim and Zohren
2021). A notable challenge for applying time series forecasting in real world is the non-stationary problem (Tanaka
2017). For example, in the demand forecasting domain, the
erratic and intermittent data breaks some core assumptions
of many ML models, such as stationarity, or i.i.d. distribution. Moreover, due to the complex and changing dynamics,
there is no single forecasting model that is universal to all
types of problems (Wolpert 1996).
Existing time series forecasting methods can be mainly
divided into two categories, namely, statistical methods and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6639

