The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Powering Finetuning in Few-Shot Learning: Domain-Agnostic Bias Reduction
with Selected Sampling
Ran Tao, Han Zhang, Yutong Zheng, Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University
taoran1@cmu.edu, Hanz3, yutongzh, marioss@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Distribution
Calibration

In recent works, utilizing a deep network trained on metatraining set serves as a strong baseline in few-shot learning. In this paper, we move forward to refine novel-class
features by finetuning a trained deep network. Finetuning is
designed to focus on reducing biases in novel-class feature
distributions, which we define as two aspects: class-agnostic
and class-specific biases. Class-agnostic bias is defined as the
distribution shifting introduced by domain difference, which
we propose Distribution Calibration Module(DCM) to reduce. DCM owes good property of eliminating domain difference and fast feature adaptation during optimization. Classspecific bias is defined as the biased estimation using a few
samples in novel classes, which we propose Selected Sampling(SS) to reduce. Without inferring the actual class distribution, SS is designed by running sampling using proposal
distributions around support-set samples. By powering finetuning with DCM and SS, we achieve state-of-the-art results
on Meta-Dataset with consistent performance boosts over ten
datasets from different domains. We believe our simple yet
effective method demonstrates its possibility to be applied on
practical few-shot applications.

(a) Reducing Class-agnostic Bias by Distribution Calibration Module(DCM). For novel classes from different domains, the feature distribution could be skewed and our proposed DCM is to eliminate the domain difference in feature
distribution.

(b) Reducing Class-specific Bias by Selected Sampling. As
shown in the left, a few samples leads to a biased mean estimation. In the right, by selectively sampling more features,
the bias in estimation is largely reduced. The mean estimation is rectified towards the area with higher sample density.

Introduction
In recent works (Chen et al. 2019; Tian et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020; Dhillon et al. 2019), the importance of utilizing a
good feature embedding in few-shot learning is well studied
and addressed. A feature embedding is pre-trained as a classification task using meta-training set(base classes). Finetuning on the meta-test set(novel classes) (Tian et al. 2020;
Yang, Liu, and Xu 2021; Dhillon et al. 2019) is shown to surpass most meta-learning methods. However, only finetuning
a classifier on the meta-test set leaves the feature embedding unchanged. A pre-trained feature extractor is sufficient
to have well-defined feature distributions on base classes,
while this is not true for novel classes. Novel classes may
come from a variety of domains different from base classes.
Globally, initial feature distributions of novel classes could
be affected mainly by the domain difference. Locally, features are not trained to cluster tightly within a class and
separate well between classes, which intensifies the biased
estimation of only a few samples. Those biases in novel-

Figure 1: Illustration on Biases in Feature Distribution.
class feature distributions address the importance of refining
novel-class features.
In our work, we refine novel-class features by finetuning
the feature extractor on the meta-test set using only a few
samples. We focus on reducing biases in novel-class feature distributions by defining them into two aspects: classagnostic and class-specific biases. Class-agnostic bias refers
to the feature distribution shifting caused by domain differences between novel and base classes. The unrefined features from novel classes could cluster in some primary direction due to the domain difference, which leads to the skewed
feature distribution as shown in Fig. 1a. In other words, the
feature distribution of novel classes is shifted by the domain
difference when directly using the pre-trained feature extractor. Class-specific bias refers to the biased estimation using

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8467

