The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Weighted Model Counting in FO2 with Cardinality Constraints and Counting
Quantifiers: A Closed Form Formula
Sagar Malhotra1,2 and Luciano Serafini1
1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
2
University of Trento, Italy
smalhotra@fbk.eu, serafini@fbk.eu

Abstract

which admit polynomial-time WFOMC w.r.t the domain
cardinality are called domain-liftable (den Broeck 2011).
In the past decade, multiple extensions of FO2 (the fragment of FOL with two variables) have been proven to
be domain-liftable(Kazemi et al. 2016; Kuusisto and Lutz
2018; Kuzelka 2021).
In this paper, instead of relying on an algorithmic approach to WFOMC, as in (den Broeck et al. 2011), our objective is to find a closed-form for WFOMC in FO2 that
can be easily extended to larger classes of first-order formulas. To this aim, we introduce the novel notion of lifted
interpretation. Lifted interpretations allow us to reconstruct
the closed-form formula for First-Order Model Counting
(FOMC) in the universally quantified fragment of FO2 as
proposed in (Beame et al. 2015) and to extend it to larger
classes of FO formulas.
We see the following key benefits of the presented formulation:

Weighted First-Order Model Counting (WFOMC) computes
the weighted sum of the models of a first-order logic theory on a given finite domain. First-Order Logic theories
that admit polynomial-time WFOMC w.r.t domain cardinality are called domain liftable. We introduce the concept of
lifted interpretations as a tool for formulating closed-forms
for WFOMC. Using lifted interpretations, we reconstruct
the closed-form formula for polynomial-time FOMC in the
universally quantified fragment of FO2 , earlier proposed by
Beame et al. We then expand this closed-form to incorporate
cardinality constraints, existential quantifiers and counting
quantifiers (a.k.a. C2 ) without losing domain-liftability. Finally, we show that the obtained closed-form motivates a natural definition of a family of weight functions strictly larger
than symmetric weight functions.

Introduction
First-Order Logic (FOL) allows specifying structural knowledge with formulas containing variables ranging over all
the domain elements. Probabilistic inference in domains described in FOL requires grounding (aka instantiation) of
all the individual variables with all the occurrences of the
domain elements. This grounding leads to an exponential
blow-up of the complexity of the model description and
hence the probabilistic inference.
Lifted inference (Poole 2003; de Salvo Braz, Amir, and
Roth 2005) aims at resolving this problem by exploiting
symmetries inherent to the FOL structures. In recent years,
Weighted First-Order Model Counting has emerged as a useful formulation for probabilistic inference in statistical relational learning frameworks (Getoor and Taskar 2007; Raedt
et al. 2016). Formally, WFOMC (Gogate and Domingos
2011) refers to the task of calculating the weighted sum of
the models of a formula Φ over a domain of a given finite
size
X
WFOMC (Φ, w, n) =
w(ω)

1. The formula is easily extended to FO2 with existential
quantifiers, cardinality constraints and counting quantifiers, without losing domain-liftability. A cardinality constraint on an interpretation is a constraint on the number
of elements for which a certain predicate holds. Counting quantifiers admit expressions of the form ∃≥m xΦ(x)
expressing that there exist at least m elements that satisfy
Φ(x). Previous works have relied on Lagrange interpolation and Discrete Fourier Transform (Kuzelka 2021) for
evaluating cardinality constraints. In this work, we deal
with cardinality constraints in a completely combinatorial fashion.
2. We provide a complete and uniform treatment of
WFOMC in the two-variable fragment. Multiple extensions of FO2 have been proven to be domain liftable
(Kuzelka 2021; Kuusisto and Lutz 2018; den Broeck,
Meert, and Darwiche 2014). Most of these works rely
extensively on a variety of logic-based algorithmic techniques. In this paper, we provide a uniform and selfcontained combinatorial treatment for all these extensions.

ω|=Φ

where n is the cardinality of the domain and w is a
weight function that associates a real number to each interpretation ω. FOL theories Φ and weight functions w

3. The formula computes WFOMC for a class of weight
functions strictly larger than symmetric weight functions. This extended class of weight functions allows
modelling the recently introduced count distributions

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5817

