The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Uncertainty-Aware Learning Against Label Noise on Imbalanced Datasets
Yingsong Huang1 * , Bing Bai1 * , Shengwei Zhao1 , Kun Bai1 , Fei Wang2
2

1
Tencent Security Big Data Lab, Tencent Inc., China
Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
{hudsonhuang,icebai,swzhao,kunbai}@tencent.com
few2001@med.cornell.edu

Abstract

search engines (Fergus et al. 2010), or machine generation (Kuznetsova et al. 2020) are available. However, these
methods inevitably introduce mistakes or label noise, which
in turn deteriorates the performance of DNNs (Frénay and
Verleysen 2013). Another common problem in real-life applications is that some classes have a higher volume of examples in the training set than other classes, which we refer to as the class imbalance problem (Buda, Maki, and
Mazurowski 2018). Japkowicz and Stephen (2002) had well
studied that the class imbalance problem can significantly
affect training machine-learning models. When encountering class imbalance, existing label noise learning methods
face new challenges, and how to deal with label noise on
imbalanced datasets is essential in practice.
The effectiveness of recent works on noise-robust learning is often attributed to the memorization effect (Arpit et al.
2017; Li, Soltanolkotabi, and Oymak 2020), which states
that DNNs learn patterns of correctly-labeled data first and
then eventually memorize incorrectly-labeled data. On these
grounds, based on the given noisy labels and the model’s
output probabilities, existing methods usually treat samples
with small loss values in the early stage of model training as clean ones and then perform loss correction (Reed
et al. 2015; Konstantinov and Lampert 2019) or label correction (Arazo et al. 2019; Tanaka et al. 2018).
However, despite their immense success, these methods
still face the following issues, especially in class imbalance
situations. Firstly, on imbalanced datasets, the loss distributions among classes show a significant discrepancy. As
pointed out by Kang et al. (2020), the norms of the classifier
layer’s weights correlate with the cardinality of the classes.
Thus, the predicted probability of majority classes may naturally get more significant than that of minority classes, resulting in the inter-class loss distribution difference. Existing
methods that do not consider this difference may easily confuse samples in minority classes and samples with corrupted
labels as their loss values all tend to be relatively large, thus
getting bad performance for minority classes.
Secondly, models may be uncertain with their predictions,
even if they give high output probabilities (Gal 2016; Gal
and Ghahramani 2016). Specifically, the wide range of possibilities in model structures and parameters leads to epistemic uncertainty, while the uncertainty caused by noisy
data is referred to as aleatoric uncertainty (Kendall and Gal

Learning against label noise is a vital topic to guarantee a reliable performance for deep neural networks. Recent research
usually refers to dynamic noise modeling with model output
probabilities and loss values, and then separates clean and
noisy samples. These methods have gained notable success.
However, unlike cherry-picked data, existing approaches often cannot perform well when facing imbalanced datasets, a
common scenario in the real world. We thoroughly investigate this phenomenon and point out two major issues that hinder the performance, i.e., inter-class loss distribution discrepancy and misleading predictions due to uncertainty. The first
issue is that existing methods often perform class-agnostic
noise modeling. However, loss distributions show a significant discrepancy among classes under class imbalance, and
class-agnostic noise modeling can easily get confused with
noisy samples and samples in minority classes. The second
issue refers to that models may output misleading predictions
due to epistemic uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty, thus
existing methods that rely solely on the output probabilities
may fail to distinguish confident samples. Inspired by our observations, we propose an Uncertainty-aware Label Correction framework (ULC) to handle label noise on imbalanced
datasets. First, we perform epistemic uncertainty-aware classspecific noise modeling to identify trustworthy clean samples and refine/discard highly confident true/corrupted labels.
Then, we introduce aleatoric uncertainty in the subsequent
learning process to prevent noise accumulation in the label
noise modeling process. We conduct experiments on several
synthetic and real-world datasets. The results demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method, especially on imbalanced datasets.

Introduction
Widely accessible curated datasets, such as ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009), is one of the crucial factors that deep neural networks (DNNs) flourished. These datasets are usually artificially balanced among classes and carefully annotated by humans. Nevertheless, high-quality human annotation is often expensive and time-consuming. To obtain
large-scale annotated data with limited budgets, practical
solutions, such as crowd-sourcing (Welinder et al. 2010),
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6960

