The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards To-a-T Spatio-Temporal Focus for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Lipeng Ke1 , Kuan-Chuan Peng2 , Siwei Lyu1
1

University at Buffalo, State University of New York
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
lipengke@buffalo.edu, kpeng@merl.com, siweilyu@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have been widely
used to model the high-order dynamic dependencies for
skeleton-based action recognition. Most existing approaches
do not explicitly embed the high-order spatio-temporal
importance to joints’ spatial connection topology and intensity, and they do not have direct objectives on their attention module to jointly learn when and where to focus
on in the action sequence. To address these problems,
we propose the To-a-T Spatio-Temporal Focus (STF), a
skeleton-based action recognition framework that utilizes the
spatio-temporal gradient to focus on relevant spatio-temporal
features. We first propose the STF modules with learnable gradient-enforced and instance-dependent adjacency
matrices to model the high-order spatio-temporal dynamics.
Second, we propose three loss terms defined on the gradientbased spatio-temporal focus to explicitly guide the classifier
when and where to look at, distinguish confusing classes,
and optimize the stacked STF modules. STF outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on the NTU RGB+D 60, NTU
RGB+D 120, and Kinetics Skeleton 400 datasets in all 15
settings over different views, subjects, setups, and input
modalities, and STF also shows better accuracy on scarce data
and dataset shifting settings.

Figure 1: Spatio-temporal focus: (a) is the layout of joints
with their ID numbers, (b) Spatio-temporal focus volume
stacks spatial focus along temporal dimension (c) Adjacency matrix models the joints connection topology and
connection intensity, the top two rows either model static
connection topology or static connection intensity; the
bottom row models the dynamic connection topology and
dynamic connection intensity; ours further guides the learnable dynamic adjacency matrix with spatio-temporal focus.
(d) Spatio-temproal focus indicates when (temporal) and
where (spatial) to emphasize. The top two rows model the
spatial and temporal focus separately, the bottom row (ours)
models the spatio-temporal focus jointly.

Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, action recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Varol, Laptev, and
Schmid 2017; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Si et al. 2018;
Lei et al. 2019; Si et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020a) has a
wide range of applications in human-computer interaction
(Liu, Liu, and Chen 2017), video surveillance (Ji et al.
2012), and sports analysis (Herath et al. 2017). Existing
action recognition methods can be categorized into videobased (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) and skeleton-based
(Si et al. 2018) which take the video and skeleton sequences
as inputs, respectively. In recent years, with the improvement in hardware (e.g., MS Kinect) and skeleton extraction algorithms such as (Cao et al. 2017), the skeleton-based
action recognition methods have received more attention for
their low dimensional representation and robustness to the
background changes (Johansson 1973).

Since the action sequence is a time series of human
joint locations, we can represent it as a three-dimensional
tensor, with the joints layout being the spatial dimension
and joints movement in time series as the temporal dimension. To model the temporal information, earlier deep
neural network based action recognition methods (e.g., (Liu
et al. 2017)) model the temporal movement of joints across
frames directly using recurrent neural network with long
short-term memory. However, these methods do not explicitly consider the spatial dependencies among different joints
(Figure 1(d), middle-row). Subsequently, many methods (Si
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020a; Peng et al. 2020; Lei et al.
2019; Li et al. 2019b) model the skeleton topology as graphs
and use graph convolutional networks (GCNs) to model the
spatial connections (topology and intensity) among joints
(Figure 1(c), top row). The static topological connections

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1131

