The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MAGIC: Multimodal relAtional Graph adversarIal inferenCe for Diverse and
Unpaired Text-Based Image Captioning
Wenqiao Zhang 1 * , Haochen Shi 2 * , Jiannan Guo 1 * , Shengyu Zhang 1 Qingpeng Cai 3 ,
Juncheng Li 1† , Sihui Luo 4 , Yueting Zhuang 1†
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 National University of Singapore, 4 Ningbo University
{wenqiaozhang, jiannan, sy zhang junchengli, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, haochen.shi@umontreal.ca,
qingpeng@comp.nus.edu.sg, luosihui@nbu.edu.cn
Relational Graphs

Abstract

Graph Encoding

Inference

𝟏𝟏.

Text-based image captioning (TextCap) requires simultaneous comprehension of visual content and reading the text of
images to generate a natural language description. Although
a task can teach machines to understand the complex human
environment further given that text is omnipresent in our daily
surroundings, it poses additional challenges in normal captioning. A text-based image intuitively contains abundant and
complex multimodal relational content, that is, image details
can be described diversely from multiview rather than a single
caption. Certainly, we can introduce additional paired training data to show the diversity of images’ descriptions, this
process is labor-intensive and time-consuming for TextCap
pair annotations with extra texts. Based on the insight mentioned above, we investigate how to generate diverse captions
that focus on different image parts using an unpaired training paradigm. We propose the Multimodal relAtional Graph
adversarIal inferenCe (MAGIC) framework for diverse and
unpaired TextCap. This framework can adaptively construct
multiple multimodal relational graphs of images and model
complex relationships among graphs to represent descriptive
diversity. Moreover, a cascaded generative adversarial network is developed from modeled graphs to infer the unpaired
caption generation in image–sentence feature alignment and
linguistic coherence levels. We validate the effectiveness of
MAGIC in generating diverse captions from different relational information items of an image. Experimental results
show that MAGIC can generate very promising outcomes
without using any image–caption training pairs.

𝟐𝟐.

Image Domain

𝟑𝟑.
Sentence Domain

1. The price of $17.88 that is above a lady.
2. A Walmart sign that says Rollback $17.88 is above a shelf of weight loss products.
3. The hydroxycut has 33% bonus on sale for $17.88 instead of $19.88.

Figure 1: An example of how the diverse and unpaired captions generated. Orange, green and blue represent the objects, texts and multimodal relationships, respectively.
jointly, and write a succinct caption. Such task is very practical that encourage machine to generate fine-grained captions
(e.g., read the price of commodities in Fig.1), which is helpful to visually disabled people to understand surroundings
more accurately, but put forward new difficulties to existing
captioning models meanwhile.
Intuitively, human-made images with text contain more
semantic entities (e.g., objects, attributes, and texts) and
complex relations (e.g., correlation and constraint) than natural images (Hou et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020b,a; Li
et al. 2022). Common single captioning models experience
difficulty in representing a holistic image understanding.
These models also hinder the diversity of image descriptions, which is crucial for blind people concerning different aspects of an image (e.g., price comparison, discount,
brand and position of commodities in Fig.1). In fact, we
humans tend to focus on different aspects of image content by our preferences, personality and sentiment, this applies to the annotators with no exception (Yang, Zhang,
and Cai 2020b). Definitely, we could a sk annotators for
more paired data (e.g., multiview of an image - diverse descriptions), thereby force captioning model to generate varied captions from multiple views of an image. However, in
the Textcap task as well as many vision-language applications, such large-scale annotations are not readily available,
and are both time-consuming and labor-intensive to acquire.
In these scenarios, unsupervised/unpaired methods (Lample et al. 2017; Gu et al. 2019; Caron et al. 2020) that can

Introduction
Visual captioning aims to help visually impaired people to
quickly understand the image content. Existing methods focus on describing visual objects that have achieved impressive or even super-human performance (Yu et al. 2019; Cornia et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a; Ding et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021a,b). However, most prominent captioning methods fail to “read” the associated texts in the visual scene.
Therefore, text-based image captioning (TextCap) (Sidorov
et al. 2020) is proposed in this study to caption models, recognize visual content, read text, understand both modalities
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3335

