The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Centroid Representation Network for Domain Adaptive Person Re-ID
Yuhang Wu1 * † , Tengteng Huang2† , Haotian Yao2 , Chi Zhang2 , Yuanjie Shao1 , Chuchu Han1 ,
Changxin Gao1 , Nong Sang1‡
1
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Megvii Technology
{wuyuhang, shaoyuanjie, hcc, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, tengtenghuang@foxmail.com,
{yaohaotian, zhangchi}@megvii.com

(a)Uni-centroid representation (b)Multi-centroid representation
cluster
cluster

Abstract
Recently, many approaches tackle the Unsupervised Domain Adaptive person re-identification (UDA re-ID) problem through pseudo-label-based contrastive learning. During
training, a uni-centroid representation is obtained by simply averaging all the instance features from a cluster with
the same pseudo label. However, a cluster may contain images with different identities (label noises) due to the imperfect clustering results, which makes the uni-centroid representation inappropriate. In this paper, we present a novel
Multi-Centroid Memory (MCM) to adaptively capture different identity information within the cluster. MCM can effectively alleviate the issue of label noises by selecting proper
positive/negative centroids for the query image. Moreover,
we further propose two strategies to improve the contrastive
learning process. First, we present a Domain-Specific Contrastive Learning (DSCL) mechanism to fully explore intradomain information by comparing samples only from the
same domain. Second, we propose Second-Order Nearest Interpolation (SONI) to obtain abundant and informative negative samples. We integrate MCM, DSCL, and SONI into
a unified framework named Multi-Centroid Representation
Network (MCRN). Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of MCRN over state-of-the-art approaches on
multiple UDA re-ID tasks and fully unsupervised re-ID tasks.

query

query

centroid instance (GT label=0) instance (GT label=1)

Figure 1: Comparison of traditional uni-centroid representation and our multi-centroid representation when the cluster
is mixed with different identities. (a) The uni-centroid representation incorporates multiple identity information which
is inappropriate. (b) Our multi-centroid representation provides multiple discriminative centroids, making it possible
to select a suitable centroid as the positive sample that captures the same identity information with the query.

(i.e.,average feature or learnable weight of the cluster), under the supervision of the pseudo labels.
However, due to the imperfect results of the clustering
algorithm, the pseudo labels always contain noises which
are harmful to performance on the target domain. For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), instances belonging to two
identities are incorrectly merged into a cluster and assigned
the same pseudo label. In this case, traditional uni-centroid
representation inevitably incorporates information from different identities, which would mislead the feature learning
when the uni-centroid representation is used as the query’s
positive sample.
To alleviate the impact of label noises, we propose a
Multi-Centroid Memory (MCM) to provide multiple centroids for each cluster. As Figure 1(b) shows, each centroid
captures identity information within a local region of the
cluster. This suggests that for each input query, we can select its reliable positive and negative samples from the centroids in the positive cluster and other negative clusters, respectively. However, for a specific query, its positive cen-

Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive person re-identification
(UDA re-ID) is receiving increasing attention with the growing demand for practical video surveillance. The objective of
UDA re-ID is to transfer knowledge learned from source domain with rich annotations to unlabeled target domain. Previous works usually tackle this problem by clustering (Ge,
Chen, and Li 2020; Ge et al. 2020; Zhai et al. 2020a; Zheng
et al. 2021a,b), which follow a two-step loop paradigm:
(1) generating the pseudo labels of training samples from
the target domain through clustering, (2) optimizing the
model on the target domain with uni-centroid representation
* This work was done when Yuhang Wu was an intern at Megvii
Technology.
†
Equal contribution.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2750

