The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Federated Nearest Neighbor Classification with a Colony of Fruit-Flies
Parikshit Ram1 , Kaushik Sinha2
1

IBM Research AI
Wichita State University
p.ram@gatech.edu, kaushik.sinha@wichita.edu
2

Abstract

a small set of Kenyon Cells (KC) which represent a “tag”
for the odor. This tag generation process can be viewed as a
natural hashing scheme (Dasgupta, Stevens, and Navlakha
2017), termed FlyHash, which generates a high dimensional but very sparse representation (2000 dimensions with
95% sparsity). This tag/hash creates a response in a specific
mushroom body output neuron (MBON) – the MBON-α0 3
– corresponding to the perceived novelty of the odor. Dasgupta et al. (2018) “interpret the KC→MBON-α0 3 synapses
as a Bloom Filter” that creates a “memory” of all the odors
encountered by the fruit-fly, and reprogram this Fly Bloom
Filter (FBF) as a novelty detection mechanism that performs
better than other locality sensitive Bloom Filter-based novelty
detectors for neural activity and vision datasets.
We build upon the reprogramming of the KC→MBONα0 3 synapses as the FBF to create a supervised classification scheme. We show that this classifier mimics a nearestneighbor classifier (NNC). This scheme possesses several
unique desirable properties that allows for nearest-neighbor
classification in the federated learning (FL) setup with a low
communication overhead. In FL setup the complete training data is distributed across multiple parties and none of
the original data (training or testing) is to be exchanged between the parties. This is possible because of the unique
high-dimensional sparse structure of the FlyHash. We
consider this an exercise of leveraging “naturally occurring” algorithms to solve common learning problems (which
these natural algorithms were not designed for), resulting in
schemes with unique capabilities. Nearest neighbor classification (NNC) is a fundamental nonparametric supervised
learning scheme, with various theoretical guarantees and
strong empirical capabilities (especially with an appropriate
similarity function). FL has gained a lot of well-deserved
interest in the recent years as, on one hand, models become
more data hungry, requiring data to be pooled from various
sources, while on the other hand, ample focus is put on data
privacy and security, restricting the transfer of data. However,
the very nature of NNC makes it unsuitable for FL – for any
test point at a single party, obtaining the nearest neighbors
would naively either require data from all parties to be collected at the party with the test point, or require the test point
to be sent to all parties to obtain the per-party neighbors; both
these options violate the desiderata of FL.
We leverage the ability of the FBF to summarize a data

The mathematical formalization of a neurological mechanism
in the fruit-fly olfactory circuit as a locality sensitive hash
(FlyHash) and bloom filter (FBF) has been recently proposed and “reprogrammed” for various learning tasks such as
similarity search, outlier detection and text embeddings. We
propose a novel reprogramming of this hash and bloom filter
to emulate the canonical nearest neighbor classifier (NNC) in
the challenging Federated Learning (FL) setup where training
and test data are spread across parties and no data can leave
their respective parties. Specifically, we utilize FlyHash and
FBF to create the FlyNN classifier, and theoretically establish
conditions where FlyNN matches NNC. We show how FlyNN
is trained exactly in a FL setup with low communication overhead to produce FlyNNFL, and how it can be differentially
private. Empirically, we demonstrate that (i) FlyNN matches
NNC accuracy across 70 OpenML datasets, (ii) FlyNNFL
training is highly scalable with low communication overhead,
providing up to 8× speedup with 16 parties.

Introduction
Biological systems (such a neural networks (Kavukcuoglu
et al. 2010; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), convolutions (Lecun and Bengio 1995), dropout (Hinton et al.
2012), attention mechanisms (Larochelle and Hinton 2010;
Mnih et al. 2014)) have served as inspiration to modern deep
learning systems, demonstrating amazing empirical performance in areas of computer vision, natural language programming and reinforcement learning. Such learning systems are
not biologically viable anymore, but the biological inspirations were critical. This has motivated a lot of research into
identifying other biological systems that can inspire development of new and powerful learning mechanisms or provide
novel critical insights into the workings of intelligent systems. Such neurobiological mechanisms have been identified
in the olfactory circuit of the brain in a common fruit-fly, and
have been re-used for common learning problems such as
similarity search (Dasgupta, Stevens, and Navlakha 2017;
Ryali et al. 2020), outlier detection (Dasgupta et al. 2018),
and more recently for word embeddings (Liang et al. 2021)
and centralized classification (Sinha and Ram 2021). More
precisely, in the fruit-fly olfactory circuit, an odor activates
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8036

