The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Scaled ReLU Matters for Training Vision Transformers
Pichao Wang* , Xue Wang* , Hao Luo, Jingkai Zhou, Zhipeng Zhou, Fan Wang, Hao Li, Rong Jin
Alibaba Group
{pichao.wang,xue.w}@alibaba-inc.com
{michuan.lh,zhoujingkai.zjk,yuer.zzp,fan.w,lihao.lh,jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

ViT models and propose that early convolutions help transformers see better. Recent works (Graham et al. 2021; Guo
et al. 2021; Yuan et al. 2021c) also introduce the conv-stem
to improve the robustness of training vision transformer, but
they lack the deep analysis why such conv-stem works.
In this paper, we theoretically and empirically verify
that scaled ReLU in the conv-stem matters for the robust
ViTs training. Specifically, scaled ReLU not only improves
the training stabilization, but also increases the diversity
of patch tokens, thus boosting the final recognition performances by a large margin. In addition, extensive experiments are conducted to further unveil the effects of convstem and the following interesting observations are made:
firstly, after adding conv-stem to the ViTs, the SAM optimizer (Foret et al. 2020) is no longer powerful as reported
in (Chen, Hsieh, and Gong 2021); secondly, with conv-stem,
the supervised ViTs (Touvron et al. 2020) are better than its
corresponding self-supervised trained models (Caron et al.
2021) plus supervised finetuning on Imagenet-1k; thirdly,
using conv-stem the better trained ViTs improve the performance of downstream tasks. All of these observations reflect
that previous ViTs are far from being well trained and ViTs
may become a better substitute for CNNs.

Vision transformers (ViTs) have been an alternative design
paradigm to convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, the training of ViTs is much harder than CNNs, as it
is sensitive to the training parameters, such as learning rate,
optimizer and warmup epoch. The reasons for training difficulty are empirically analysed in the paper Early Convolutions Help Transformers See Better, and the authors conjecture that the issue lies with the patchify-stem of ViT models.
In this paper, we further investigate this problem and extend
the above conclusion: only early convolutions do not help for
stable training, but the scaled ReLU operation in the convolutional stem (conv-stem) matters. We verify, both theoretically
and empirically, that scaled ReLU in conv-stem not only improves training stabilization, but also increases the diversity
of patch tokens, thus boosting peak performance with a large
margin via adding few parameters and flops. In addition, extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate that previous ViTs are far from being well trained, further showing that
ViTs have great potential to be a better substitute of CNNs.

Introduction
Visual recognition has been dominated by convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) (He et al. 2016; Howard et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Tan and Le 2019; Li et al. 2021a;
Zhou et al. 2021c) for years, which effectively impose spatial locality and translation equivalence. Recently the prevailing vision transformers (ViTs) are regarded as an alternative design paradigm, which target to replace the inductive
bias towards local processing inherent in CNNs with global
self-attention (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021b; Fan et al. 2021).
Despite the appealing potential of ViTs for complete datadriven training, the lack of convolution-like inductive bias
also challenges the training of ViTs. Compared with CNNs,
ViTs are sensitive to the choice of optimizer, data augmentation, learning rate, training schedule length and warmup
epoch (Touvron et al. 2020, 2021; Chen, Hsieh, and Gong
2021; Xiao et al. 2021). The reasons for training difficulty
are empirically analysed in (Xiao et al. 2021), and the authors conjecture that the issue lies with the patchify stem of

Related Work
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Since the breakthrough performance on ImageNet via AlexNet (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), CNNs have become a dominant architecture in computer vision field. Following the
primary design rule of stacking low-to-high convolutions
in series by going deeper, many popular architectures are
proposed, such as VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014),
GoogleNet (Szegedy et al. 2015) and ResNet (He et al.
2016). To further exploit the capacity of visual representation, many innovations have been proposed, such as
ResNeXt (Xie et al. 2017), SENet (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018),
EfficientNet (Tan and Le 2019) and NFNet (Brock et al.
2021). For most of these CNNs, Conv+BN+ReLU becomes
a standard block. In this paper, we investigate this basic
block for training vision transformers as a lightweight stem.
Vision Transformers (ViTs). Since Dosovitskiy et
al. (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) first successfully applies transformer for image classification by dividing the images
into non-overlapping patches, many ViT variants are pro-

* The first two authors contribute equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2495

