The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hyperbolic Disentangled Representation for Fine-Grained Aspect Extraction
Chang-You Tai1 , Ming-Yao Li1 , Lun-Wei Ku1
1

Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
johnnyjana730@gmail.com, xuauul@gmail.com, lwku@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Automatic identification of salient aspects from user reviews
is especially useful for opinion analysis. There has been significant progress in utilizing weakly supervised approaches,
which require only a small set of seed words for training
aspect classifiers. However, there is always room for improvement. First, no weakly supervised approaches fully utilize
latent hierarchies between words. Second, each seed word’s
representation should have different latent semantics and be
distinct when it represents a different aspect. In this paper we
propose HDAE, a hyperbolic disentangled aspect extractor
in which a hyperbolic aspect classifier captures words’ latent
hierarchies, and an aspect-disentangled representation models
the distinct latent semantics of each seed word. Compared to
previous baselines, HDAE achieves average F1 performance
gains of 18.2% and 24.1% on Amazon product review and
restaurant review datasets, respectively. In addition, the embedding visualization experience demonstrates that HDAE is a
more effective approach to leveraging seed words. An ablation
study and a case study further attest the effectiveness of the
proposed components.

Figure 1: a) Seed word color and its hypernym pairs. b) An
illustration of latent semantics under seed word picture. For
example, in the TV domain’s image aspect, pixel of picture
and screen picture exist.

Introduction
Researchers have begun to focus on aspect extraction, the
automatic detection of fine-grained segments with predefined
aspects (Hu and Liu 2004; Liu 2012; Pontiki et al. 2016),
due to its potential for downstream tasks. For example, aspect extraction benefits users and customers when searching
through review segments for aspects of interest on the Internet. Aspect extraction is also crucial for document summarization (Angelidis and Lapata 2018), recommendation
justification (Ni, Li, and McAuley 2019), and review-based
recommendation (Chin et al. 2018).
Aspect extraction research can be divided into supervised
approaches, unsupervised approaches, and weakly supervised
approaches.1 Among these, many studies have been conducted on weakly supervised approaches (Karamanolakis
et al. 2019; Angelidis and Lapata 2018; Zhuang et al. 2020)
since they allow the model to be trained without substantial human-labeled data. For example, Angelidis and Lapata
(2018) initialize fine-grained aspect representations using
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We touch on unsupervised and supervised approaches in the
related work section.

11358

only a small number of descriptive keywords, or seed words,
to identify highly salient opinions in review segments. Also,
Karamanolakis et al. (2019) propose a student-teacher framework that more effectively leverages seed words by using a
bag-of-words classifier teacher.
However, there is room for improvement in such seed word
based methods. First, they neglect to consider the latent hierarchies between words, and it is assumed that capturing latent
hierarchies between words will further improve seed word
based methods on aspect inference, for instance by better
identifying and organizing seed words and their hypernym
pairs (Huang et al. 2020; López, Heinzerling, and Strube
2019). For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a), the general seed
word color near the top can be used to find the more specific
words blue or green in the middle, after which even more specific words can be found such as ultramarine or azure celeste.
If seed words or their hypernym pairs exist in one review
segment, the model can infer that it is of the corresponding
aspect.
To allow the model to fully capture latent hierarchies between words, we introduce hyperbolic space (Nickel and
Kiela 2017; Murty et al. 2018; Xu and Barbosa 2018; López,
Heinzerling, and Strube 2019; López and Strube 2020). Compared to Euclidean space, hyperbolic space effectively encodes hierarchical structure information (Nickel and Kiela
2017), the latent hierarchies between words in this paper. In
particular, when embedding tree-like structures, compared
to the volume in Euclidean space, which leads to high distortion embeddings (Sa et al. 2018; Sarkar 2011), volume in
hyperbolic space grows exponentially and can embed trees

