The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Weakly Supervised Video Moment Localization with
Contrastive Negative Sample Mining
Minghang Zheng1 , Yanjie Huang1 , Qingchao Chen2 , Yang Liu1,3 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
{minghang, qingchao.chen, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn
Query: The person takes two glasses from the cabinet.

Abstract
Video moment localization aims at localizing the video segments which are most related to the given free-form natural
language query. The weakly supervised setting, where only
video level description is available during training, is getting
more and more attention due to its lower annotation cost.
Prior weakly supervised methods mainly use sliding windows to generate temporal proposals, which are independent
of video content and low quality, and train the model to distinguish matched video-query pairs and unmatched ones collected from different videos, while neglecting what the model
needs is to distinguish the unaligned segments within the
video. In this work, we propose a novel weakly supervised
solution by introducing Contrastive Negative sample Mining (CNM). Specifically, we use a learnable Gaussian mask
to generate positive samples, highlighting the video frames
most related to the query, and consider other frames of the
video and the whole video as easy and hard negative samples
respectively. We then train our network with the Intra-Video
Contrastive loss to make our positive and negative samples
more discriminative. Our method has two advantages: (1) Our
proposal generation process with a learnable Gaussian mask
is more efficient and makes our positive sample higher quality. (2) The more difficult intra-video negative samples enable our model to distinguish highly confusing scenes. Experiments on two datasets show the effectiveness of our method.
Code can be found at https://github.com/minghangz/cnm.

Similarity

Similarity

2.2s Ground Truth 16.8s

Positive

Time

Time

(a) Existing methods

Negative

Query: person take a timed picture.

Similarity

Easy negative

3.0s

Ground Truth

Positive

14.5s

Time

Easy negative

Hard negative
(b) Ours methods

Figure 1: (a) Existing methods focus on distinguishing
matched and unmatched video-query pairs (collected from
different videos), while neglecting the matching level of different segments within one video. (b) We attach importance
to mine positive and negative samples within the same video.
We predict a learnable positive sample and consider the segments outside the positive sample as the easy negative sample, and the whole video as the hard negative sample.

Introduction
Video moment localization is an important yet challenging task with potential applications in video surveillance (Collins et al. 2000), robot manipulation (Kemp,
Edsinger, and Torres-Jara 2007), etc. The goal is to localize temporally a video segment (i.e., start and end time)
that best corresponds to a query sentence from untrimmed
videos. Fully supervised video moment localization has
witnessed remarkable progress recently (Zhao et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2021a; Zhou et al. 2021). However, annotating the ground truth temporal boundary for each query sentence is labor-intensive and time-consuming, which undermines fully supervised approaches in real-world large-scale

scenarios. Therefore the weakly supervised setting, where
only video-level descriptions are available during training,
is more practical and draws increasing attention from the
community.
However, existing weakly supervised solutions (Mithun,
Paul, and Roy-Chowdhury 2019; Gao et al. 2019; Lin et al.
2020; Ma et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021) have two limitations: Firstly, given a specific query, they mainly focus on
distinguishing different videos by calculating the semantic
consistency between the video and the query while neglecting the matching level of different video segments within
one video. Specifically, as shown in Figure 1(a), most exist-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3517

