The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Theory of and Experiments on Minimally Invasive Stability Preservation
in Changing Two-Sided Matching Markets
Niclas Boehmer, Klaus Heeger, Rolf Niedermeier
Technische Universität Berlin, Faculty IV, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Berlin, Germany
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de, heeger@tu-berlin.de, rolf.niedermeier@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

matching which is stable with respect to an updated preference profile (where some agents performed swaps in their
preferences) and which is as similar as possible to the given
matching. They referred to this as the “incremental” scenario
and studied the computational complexity of this question
for S TABLE M ARRIAGE and S TABLE ROOMMATES (both
being one-to-one matching problems).
In this work, we address multiple so-far unstudied aspects
of our introductory school choice example. First, we theoretically and experimentally relate different types of changes
to each other, including swapping two agents in some preference list (as studied by Bredereck et al. (2020)) and deleting an agent (as in our introductory example). Second, we
initiate the study of the incremental variant of many-to-one
stable matchings (H OSPITAL R ESIDENTS). Third, as perfect stability might not always be essential, for instance, in
large markets, we introduce the incremental variant of A L MOST S TABLE M ARRIAGE (where the new matching is allowed to be blocked by few agent pairs) and study its computational complexity and practical impact. Fourth, we experimentally analyze how many adjustments are typically
needed when a certain amount of change occurs; moreover,
we give some recommendations to market makers for adapting stable matchings to change.

Following up on purely theoretical work, we contribute further theoretical insights into adapting stable two-sided matchings to change. Moreover, we perform extensive empirical
studies hinting at numerous practically useful properties. Our
theoretical extensions include the study of new problems (that
is, incremental variants of A LMOST S TABLE M ARRIAGE and
H OSPITAL R ESIDENTS), focusing on their (parameterized)
computational complexity and the equivalence of various
change types (thus simplifying algorithmic and complexitytheoretic studies for various natural change scenarios). Our
experimental findings reveal, for instance, that allowing the
new matching to be blocked by a few pairs significantly decreases the difference between the old and the new matching.

1

Introduction

In our dynamic world, change is omnipresent in society and
business.1 Typically, there is no permanent stability. We address this issue in the context of stable matchings in twosided matching markets and their adaptivity to change. Consider as an example the dynamic nature of centrally assigning students to public schools. Here, students are matched
to schools, trying to accommodate the students’ preferences
over the schools as well as possible. However, due to students reallocating or deciding to visit a private school, according to Feigenbaum et al. (2020), in New York typically
around 10% of the students drop out after a first round of
assignments, triggering some readjustments in the schoolstudent matchings in a further round.
Matching students to schools can be modeled as an instance of the H OSPITAL R ESIDENTS problem, where we
are given a set of residents and hospitals each with preferences over the agents from the other set. One wants to find a
“stable” assignment of each resident to at most one hospital
such that a given capacity for each hospital is respected. To
model the task of adjusting a matching to change, Bredereck
et al. (2020) introduced the problem, given a stable matching
with respect to some initial preference profile, to find a new

1.1

Related Work

We are closest to the purely theoretical work of Bredereck
et al. (2020), using their formulation of incremental stable
matching problems (we refer to their related work section
for an extensive discussion of related and motivating literature before 2020). Among others, they proved that I NCRE MENTAL S TABLE M ARRIAGE is polynomial-time solvable
but is NP-hard (and W[1]-hard parameterized by the allowed
change between the two matchings) if the preferences may
contain ties. We complement and enhance some of Bredereck et al.’s findings, focusing on two-sided markets and
contributing extensive experiments.
Besides the work of Bredereck et al. (2020), there are
several other works dealing with adapting a (stable) matching to a changing agent set or changing preferences (Bhattacharya et al. 2015; Kanade, Leonardos, and Magniez
2016; Ghosal, Kunysz, and Paluch 2020; Nimbhorkar and
Rameshwar 2019; Feigenbaum et al. 2020; Gajulapalli et al.
2020). Closest to our work, Gajulapalli et al. (2020) de-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Motivated by this, Boehmer and Niedermeier (2021) recently
challenged the computational social choice community to adapt
classical models to also account for dynamic aspects.

4851

