The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Privacy-Preserving Face Recognition in the Frequency Domain
Yinggui Wang∗1 , Jian Liu1 , Man Luo1 , Le Yang2 , Li Wang1
1

Ant Group, 2 University of Canterbury
wyinggui@gmail.com, {rex.lj, sankuai.luoman}@antgroup.com, le.yang@canterbury.ac.nz, raymond.wangl@antgroup.com

Abstract
Some applications require performing face recognition (FR)
on third-party servers, which could be accessed by attackers
with malicious intents to compromise the privacy of users’
face information. This paper advocates a practical privacypreserving frequency-domain FR scheme without key management. The new scheme first collects the components with
the same frequency from different blocks of a face image
to form component channels. Only part of the channels are
retained and fed into the analysis network that performs an
interpretable privacy-accuracy trade-off analysis to identify
channels important for face image visualization but not crucial for maintaining high FR accuracy. For this purpose, the
loss function of the analysis network consists of the empirical FR error loss and a face visualization penalty term, and
the network is trained in an end-to-end manner. We find
that with the developed analysis network, more than 94%
of the image energy can be dropped while the face recognition accuracy stays almost undegraded. In order to further
protect the remaining frequency components, we propose a
fast masking method. Effectiveness of the new scheme in removing the visual information of face images while maintaining their distinguishability is validated over several large face
datasets. Results show that the proposed scheme achieves a
recognition performance and inference time comparable to
ArcFace operating on original face images directly.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Image perception in the frequency domain; (b)
Framework of privacy-preserving FR.

a heuristic analysis of the impact of high-frequency information on image classification is conducted. But it does not
identify which frequency components are crucial for image classification. In this paper, we shall propose a trade-off
analysis network that can score the importance of each frequency component in images. This lays down the foundation
for designing image processing techniques for new accurate
FR systems that can explore processed face images with little visual information. Fig. 1(b) shows the framework of the
privacy-preserving FR that we adopt. During model training,
data owners perform some preprocessings, such as face detection, alignment and anti-spoofing, and then mask the face
images. These masked images are utilized to training the FR
model. During inference, the built-in camera at the client
side captures the image of the user’s face and then sends it
after masking to the cloud server for face recognition. After
FR is done, the encrypted identification result will be transferred to the client side.
The model used for FR is one trained using the masked

Introduction
The capability of accurately recognizing faces as passwords
while preserving the privacy of users’ face information is
essential for the success of applications based on the clientserver model. This paper presents a practical face image
recognition scheme without key management. It can remove
a significant part of the visual information in original images
for privacy protection and increase the difficulty of face recovery, while retaining their distinguishability.
Fig. 1(a) illustrates image perception in the frequency domain. Human perception of images mainly depends on the
semantic information of images (i.e., visualization or lowfrequency components), while existing deep neural network
(DNN) based face recognition (FR) systems rely on both
low- and high-frequency components. In (Wang et al. 2020),
∗

Corresponding author. All authors contribute equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2558

