The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeTarNet: Decoupling Translation and Rotation by Siamese Network for Point
Cloud Registration
Zhi Chen, Fan Yang, Wenbing Tao ∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Artifical Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{z chen, fanyang, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Correct match

Abstract
Point cloud registration is a fundamental step for many tasks.
In this paper, we propose a neural network named DetarNet
to decouple the translation t and rotation R, so as to overcome the performance degradation due to their mutual interference in point cloud registration. First, a Siamese Network
based Progressive and Coherent Feature Drift (PCFD) module is proposed to align the source and target points in highdimensional feature space, and accurately recover translation
from the alignment process. Then we propose a Consensus
Encoding Unit (CEU) to construct more distinguishable features for a set of putative correspondences. After that, a Spatial and Channel Attention (SCA) block is adopted to build a
classification network for finding good correspondences. Finally, the rotation is obtained by Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). In this way, the proposed network decouples
the estimation of translation and rotation, resulting in better
performance for both of them. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed DetarNet improves registration performance on both indoor and outdoor scenes. Our code will
be available in https://github.com/ZhiChen902/DetarNet.

Wrong match

(a) translation and rotation

Source point

Target point

(b) rotation

Figure 1: (a): A toy example shows the challenge when
translation and rotation are coupled. When accurately estimating translation in advance and there only exists rotation
as shown in (b), the consensus between inliers is easier to be
mined.
Bai et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2021) to find correct 3D correspondences between two point clouds and estimate the relative
pose (translation t and rotation R) of them. The core of these
methods is to learn the consensus (Bai et al. 2021) of correct
correspondences (inliers). Each correspondence can be abstracted as an arrow between a pair of points, as shown in
Fig. 1. The consensus of inliers is that the length and direction of inliers are satisfied with some consistency. As shown
in Fig. 1 (a), due to the coupling of translation and rotation, the consistency between inliers is difficult to be mined.
However, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), if we can first eliminate
the translation transformation and only the rotation is left,
it is much easier for us to find out the correct correspondences. Inspired by this observation, we expect to decouple
the whole rigid transformation into separate translation and
rotation estimation.
Considering the non-linearity of the rotation space (Peng
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2018), it is more feasible to first recover the translation t because it is linear and easy to handle.
However, decoupling t and solving it accurately in advance
is still challenging in two aspects: 1) It is hard for traditional geometric optimization methods to only recover t without
considering R. These methods usually need to jointly optimize t and R. Although centroid alignment (Arun, Huang,
and Blostein 1987) can yield a rough t, it can only be used
to assist the optimization of the whole rigid transformation
due to the existence of outliers. 2) Although deep learning
networks have made remarkable progress in point cloud registration, translation transformation is still hard to be sepa-

Introduction
Point cloud registration is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision, which is widely applied to 3D reconstruction, robotics, autonomous driving and medical tasks. It
aims to establish correspondences between two point clouds,
and estimate the rigid transformation (translation t and rotation R). The most commonly used way is first establishing
coarse correspondences, and then recovering rigid transformation. The main challenge is that there always exist wrong
correspondences (outliers). Although some methods attempt to generate more accurate correspondences through handcrafted (Rusu, Blodow, and Beetz 2009; Rusu et al. 2008) or
deep-learning technique based descriptors (Zhou et al. 2018;
Yew and Lee 2018; Choy, Park, and Koltun 2019), it is hard
to be totally outlier-free when dealing with complicated scenarios. Thus, it is worth studying how to better perform
point cloud registration in the scenarios when the initial correspondences contain outliers.
Recently, some methods have studied how to use the neural networks (Pais et al. 2020; Choy, Dong, and Koltun 2020;
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

401

