The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Scaling Neural Program Synthesis with Distribution-Based Search
Nathanaël Fijalkow1, 2 , Guillaume Lagarde1 , Théo Matricon1 ,
Kevin Ellis3 , Pierre Ohlmann4 , and Akarsh Potta5
1

2

CNRS, LaBRI and Université de Bordeaux, France
The Alan Turing Institute of data science, United Kingdom
3
Cornell University, United States
4
University of Paris, France
5
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India

Abstract

to act as a language model over source code that conditions
on input-outputs (Polosukhin and Skidanov 2018). Here, we
‘pop up’ a level and instead ask: given a neural net that
probabilistically generates source code, how can we most
efficiently deploy that model in order to find a program
consistent with some input-outputs? This concern arises because program synthesis requires solving a hard combinatorial search problem (exploring a possibly infinite space of
programs), so taming this combinatorial explosion makes
the difference between a practically useful system, and a
system which cannot scale to anything but the most trivial
of programs.
At a high-level the approaches we develop in this work
follow a 2-stage pipeline: in the first stage a learned model
predicts probabilistic weights, and in the second stage a
symbolic search algorithm uses those weights to explore the
space of source code. Our contributions target the second
stage of this pipeline, and we focus on theoretical analysis of sampling-based search algorithms, new search algorithms based on neurally-informed enumeration, and empirical evaluations showing that recent neural program synthesizers can compose well with our methods.
This 2-stage pipelined approach has several benefits. The
first is that the cost of querying the neural network is usually
very small compared to the cost of combinatorial search, yet
in practice the neural model learns to provide rough-andready probabilistic predictions to guide the search. A second
benefit is that even if the probabilistic predictions are inaccurate, our methods maintain soundness and completeness
(but may take longer to run). Another appeal is that it can
be naturally combined with other classical approaches for
program synthesis.
Our contributions:

We consider the problem of automatically constructing computer programs from input-output examples. We investigate
how to augment probabilistic and neural program synthesis methods with new search algorithms, proposing a framework called distribution-based search. Within this framework,
we introduce two new search algorithms: H EAP S EARCH,
an enumerative method, and SQRT S AMPLING, a probabilistic method. We prove certain optimality guarantees for
both methods, show how they integrate with probabilistic
and neural techniques, and demonstrate how they can operate
at scale across parallel compute environments. Collectively
these findings offer theoretical and applied studies of search
algorithms for program synthesis that integrate with recent
developments in machine-learned program synthesizers.

Introduction
Writing software is tedious, error-prone, and accessible only
to a small share of the population – yet coding grows increasingly important as the digital world plays larger and
larger roles in peoples’ lives. Program synthesis seeks to
make coding more reliable and accessible by developing
methods for automatically constructing programs (Gulwani,
Polozov, and Singh 2017). For example, the FlashFill system (Gulwani, Polozov, and Singh 2017) in Microsoft Excel makes coding more accessible by allowing nontechnical
users to synthesize spreadsheet programs by giving inputoutput examples, while the TF-coder system (Shi, Bieber,
and Singh 2020) seeks to make coding neural networks
more reliable by synthesizing TensorFlow code from inputoutputs. Where these systems have been most successful
is when they pair a specialized domain-specific language
(DSL) to a domain-specific search algorithm for synthesizing programs in that DSL. A recent trend – both in industry (Kalyan et al. 2018) and academia (Devlin et al. 2017) –
is to employ machine learning methods to learn to quickly
search for a program in the DSL (Balog et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Polosukhin and Skidanov 2018; Kalyan et al. 2018; Zohar and
Wolf 2018; Chen, Liu, and Song 2018). Many such recent
works have explored engineering better neural networks for
guiding program search, effectively by training the network

• A theoretical framework called distribution-based search
for evaluating and comparing search algorithms in the
context of machine-learned predictions.
• Two new search algorithms: H EAP S EARCH, an enumerative method, and SQRT S AMPLING, a probabilistic
method. We prove a number of theoretical results about
them, in particular that they are both loss optimal.
• A generic method for parallelizing any search algorithm
that explores a space of (syntax) trees

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6623

