The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Expected Emphatic Traces for Deep RL
Ray Jiang1 , Shangtong Zhang2 , Veronica Chelu3 , Adam White1, 4 , Hado van Hasselt1
1

DeepMind, London, UK
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
4
Amii, Department of Computing, Science, University of Alberta
rayjiang@deepmind.com, shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk, veronica.chelu@mail.mcgill.ca, hado@deepmind.com,
adamwhite@deepmind.com
2

Abstract

result in high variance and poor performance during learning.
This can be improved in practice by bootstrapping more, for
instance by cleverly clipping the IS ratios as in the V-trace algorithm (Espeholt et al. 2018) or ABTD (Mahmood, Yu, and
Sutton 2017), though bootstrapping too much can exacerbate
issues related to the deadly triad.
In order to prevent divergence, we can try to correct the
mismatch between the state distribution in the replay buffer
and the current policy. The emphatic TD(λ) or ETD(λ) algorithm (Sutton, Mahmood, and White 2016) reweights the
TD(λ) updates with an “emphatic” state weighting based
on a “followon” trace that, intuitively, keeps track of how
important each state is in the learning process. For instance,
states that are heavily used to update other state values, via
bootstrapping, will receive more emphasis, which ensures
their values are sufficiently accurate even if they are updated
infrequently. This prevents divergent learning dynamics.
ETD(λ) uses eligibility traces and has not yet been combined with neural network function approximation or replay.
Fortunately, the idea of emphatic weighting is not restricted
to trace-based (“backward-view”) algorithms and can be extended to other settings. For instance, n-step Emphatic TD
(NETD) (Jiang et al. 2021) is a recent algorithm that combines emphatic weighting with n-step forward-view updates
as well as V-trace learning targets. For consistency with the
canonical name TD(n), for n-step TD learning, we call this algorithm ETD(n) in this paper. This was shown to outperform
V-trace at scale in Atari and diagnostic MDP experiments
(Jiang et al. 2021).
The emphatic weightings used in ETD(n) are sequentially
accumulated over time, in the form of trajectory-dependent
traces, and can thus only be computed from online sequential trajectories, or full episodes of offline trajectories. In
this paper we investigate how to combine emphatic weightings with non-sequential, off-line data sampled from a replay
buffer. The idea is to estimate expected emphatic weightings
as a function of state (Zhang et al. 2020; van Hasselt et al.
2020), allowing us to appropriately weight the learning updates even if the inputs are sampled out of order. This reduces
well-known variance issues with emphatic weightings (Ghiassian et al. 2018; Imani, Graves, and White 2018; Zhang
et al. 2020). We show in Sec. that well-estimated emphatic
weights reduce the potentially high variance of ETD(n) and
achieve convergence with an upper bound on the bias from

Off-policy sampling and experience replay are key for improving sample efficiency and scaling model-free temporal
difference learning methods. When combined with function
approximation, such as neural networks, this combination is
known as the deadly triad and is potentially unstable. Recently,
it has been shown that stability and good performance at scale
can be achieved by combining emphatic weightings and multistep updates. This approach, however, is generally limited to
sampling complete trajectories in order, to compute the required emphatic weighting. In this paper we investigate how
to combine emphatic weightings with non-sequential, off-line
data sampled from a replay buffer. We develop a multi-step
emphatic weighting that can be combined with replay, and
a time-reversed n-step TD learning algorithm to learn the
required emphatic weighting. We show that these state weightings reduce variance compared with prior approaches, while
providing convergence guarantees. We tested the approach at
scale on Atari 2600 video games, and observed that the new
X-ETD(n) agent improved over baseline agents, highlighting
both the scalability and broad applicability of our approach.

Many deep reinforcement learning systems are not sample
efficient. A simple and effective way to improve sample efficiency is to make better use of prior experience via replay
(Lin 1992; Mnih et al. 2015; Schaul et al. 2016; Hessel et al.
2018). Previous work demonstrated, somewhat surprisingly,
that increasing the amount of replay in a model-free learning system can surpass the sample efficiency and final performance of model-based agents which utilize significantly
more computation (van Hasselt, Hessel, and Aslanides 2019).
While improving on sample efficiency, using experience
replay also introduces more potential for instability. Most
approaches update from mini-batches of previous experience
corresponding to older policies, and is therefore off-policy
(Mnih et al. 2015; Hessel et al. 2018). Unfortunately combining bootstrapping via temporal-difference updates, function
approximation and off-policy learning—known as the deadly
triad (Sutton and Barto 2018)—can destabilize learning resulting in “soft divergence”, slower learning, and reduced
sample efficiency even if the parameters do not fully diverge
(van Hasselt et al. 2018). Additionally, learning methods
based on off-policy importance sampling (IS) corrections can
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7015

