The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-View Intent Disentangle Graph Networks for Bundle Recommendation
Sen Zhao1,3 Wei Wei* 1,3 , Ding Zou1,3 , Xianling Mao2
1

Cognitive Computing and Intelligent Information Processing (CCIIP) Laboratory, School of Computer Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL)
{senzhao, weiw, m202173662}@hust.edu.cn, maoxl@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

User

Bundle recommendation aims to recommend the user a bundle of items as a whole. Previous models capture the user’s
preferences on both items and the association of items. Nevertheless, they usually neglect the diversity of the user’s intents
on adopting items and fail to disentangle the user’s intents in
representations. In the real scenario of bundle recommendation, a user’s intent may be naturally distributed in the different bundles of that user (Global view), while a bundle may
contain multiple intents of a user (Local view). Each view has
its advantages for intent disentangling: 1) From the global
view, more items are involved to present each intent, which
can demonstrate the user’s preference under each intent more
clearly. 2) From the local view, it can reveal the association
among items under each intent since items within the same
bundle are highly correlated to each other. To this end, we
propose a novel model named Multi-view Intent Disentangle
Graph Networks (MIDGN), which is capable of precisely and
comprehensively capturing the diversity of the user’s intent
and items’ associations at the finer granularity. Specifically,
MIDGN disentangles the user’s intents from two different
perspectives, respectively: 1) In the global level, MIDGN disentangles the user’s intent coupled with inter-bundle items;
2) In the Local level, MIDGN disentangles the user’s intent
coupled with items within each bundle. Meanwhile, we compare the user’s intents disentangled from different views under the contrast learning framework to improve the learned
intents. Extensive experiments conducted on two benchmark
datasets demonstrate that MIDGN outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods by over 10.7% and 26.8%, respectively.

Bundle b2

Bundle b1

(a) Traditional graph without user’s intents
User
breakfast

Bundle b2

Bundle b1

cooking
Bundle b1

Bundle b2

(b) Global view on the user’s intents
User
breakfast

cooking

Bundle b1

breakfast

cooking

Bundle b2

(c) Local view on the user’s intents

Figure 1: An example of the user’s multi-intent pattern for
bundle recommendation.

items bundling is also a widely-adopted solution to increase
the exposure of items that are seldom purchased in isolation. To this end, the problem of bundle recommendation
(BR)(Zhu et al. 2014) is proposed to recommend a bundle
of items that the user has interest to purchase together.
Similar to conventional recommendation system, learning
the user’s preferences is the main theme for bundle recommendation. Existing methods mainly focus on capturing the
user’s preferences on both items and the bundle of items.
Liu et al. (2014) and Cao et al. (2017) simultaneously utilize the user’s interactions with both items and bundles under the Bayesian Personalized Ranking(BPR) (Rendle et al.
2014) framework. Chen et al. (2019) jointly model userbundle and user-item interactions in a multi-task manner,
but they may neglect the user’s preference over the association of items within bundles, which is also of crucial importance to bundle recommendation. Chang et al. (2020) unify
user-bundle-item affiliation into a heterogeneous graph and
uses graph convolution networks (GCN) to learn the user
and bundle’s representation, capturing item level semantics,
however these works may neglect the diversity of the user’s

Introduction
Recently, the blossom of Internet Technology has revolutionized our routine activities by providing a tremendous
amount of valuable contents, which however lead to the serious information overload problem(Zhao et al. 2019; Wei
et al. 2019). To alleviate this problem, recommendation system (Zheng et al. 2010) has been an effective tool to help
the user quickly discover items of potential interest to themselves. In general, conventional recommendation systems
(Wu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020b,c,e,d) aim to recommend
individual items to users, but in practice (e.g., E-commerce),
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4379

