The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Accurate Facial Motion Retargeting with Identity-Consistent
and Expression-Exclusive Constraints
Langyuan Mo1,2 , Haokun Li1 , Chaoyang Zou3 , Yubing Zhang3 , Ming Yang3 ,
Yihong Yang4 , Mingkui Tan1,5 *
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, 2 Pazhou Laboratory, 3 CVTE Research, 4 MINIEYE,
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (South China University of Technology), Ministry of Education
{selymo, selihaokun}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {zhangyubing, yangming}@cvte.com,
zouchaoyang2021@gmail.com, vivid2vivian@hotmail.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn
Abstract
We address the problem of facial motion retargeting that aims
to transfer facial motion from a 2D face image to 3D characters.
Existing methods often formulate this problem as a 3D face
reconstruction problem, which estimates the face attributes
such as face identity and expression from face images. However, due to the lack of ground-truth labels for both identity
and expression, most 3D-face reconstruction-based methods
fail to capture the facial identity and expression accurately.
As a result, these methods may not achieve promising performance. To address this, we propose an identity-consistent
constraint to learn accurate identities by encouraging consistent identity prediction across multiple frames. Based on a
more accurate identity, we are able to obtain a more accurate
facial expression. Moreover, we further propose an expressionexclusive constraint to improve performance by avoiding the
co-occurrence of contradictory expression units (e.g., “brow
lower” vs. “brow raise”). Extensive experiments on facial motion retargeting and 3D face reconstruction tasks demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed method over existing methods. Our code and supplementary materials are available at
https://github.com/deepmo24/CPEM.

1

Figure 1: Limitations of existing 3D face reconstructionbased methods for facial expression estimation. Since there
exists no independent supervision of identity and expression, existing methods may produce an incorrect identity
(i.e., small eye) with an incorrect expression (i.e., no eye narrowing) in order to reconstruct a 3D face shape correctly.

reconstruction problem based on the 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM)(Blanz and Vetter 1999). Specifically, they predict
the coefficients of the face shape (i.e., face identity and expression) and combine these coefficients with the face model
to reconstruct a 3D face for training. In this way, they can
obtain the facial expression derived from the reconstructed
3D face. However, these methods may fail to capture facial
expressions accurately for the following reasons.
First, reconstructing accurate identity is necessary for capturing accurate expressions, which, however, is very difficult
due to the lack of ground-truth labels for the face identity
and expression. Specifically, the 3D face mainly consists of
two parts: identity and expression. Most existing 3D face
reconstruction methods mainly focus on whether the reconstructed face shape is accurate or not. However, in practice,
inaccurate identity and expression can also generate a satisfied face shape (see Figure 1), which can not satisfy the
requirements of the retargeting task, i.e., accurate expression. Thus, besides obtaining an accurate 3D face shape, how
to predict an accurate identity is also vital for the desire of
accurate expression. To this end, some methods attempt to enforce identity consistency across multiple images of the same
person. FML (Tewari et al. 2019) and Personalized (Chaudhuri et al. 2020) used average pooling to aggregate the identity features from multiple images. RingNet (Sanyal et al.

Introduction

Facial motion retargeting, which aims to transfer facial motion (i.e., facial expression and head pose) from monocular
RGB images to 3D targets, is a key technology for many
applications, such as virtual actors in movies and games, and
avatars in virtual reality and teleconferencing (Zollhöfer et al.
2018; Egger et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2020; Peihao et al. 2020).
Different from the face reenactment task (Ha et al. 2020; Yao
et al. 2021) that transfers facial motion from 2D images to 2D
images, the task of facial motion retargeting aims to transfer
facial motion from 2D images to 3D characters. However, this
task is very challenging since it requires capturing accurate
facial expressions from only 2D images. More critically, it is
difficult to train facial expression extraction models due to
the insufficiency of annotated data in real-world applications.
Most existing methods (Tuan Tran et al. 2017; Genova et al.
2018; Deng et al. 2019; Chaudhuri et al. 2020; Shang et al.
2020) attempt to learn facial expressions by solving a 3D face
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1981

