The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DAN ETs: Deep Abstract Networks for Tabular Data Classification and Regression
Jintai Chen1 , Kuanlun Liao1 , Yao Wan2 , Danny Z. Chen3 , Jian Wu4, *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
4
The First Affiliated Hospital, and Department of Public Health, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
jtchen721@gmail.com, stevekll@zju.edu.cn, wanyao@hust.edu.cn, dchen@nd.edu, wujian2000@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Ke et al. 2017; Prokhorenkova et al. 2018; Ho 1995) on tabular data, some recent work resorted to combining multiple
neural networks within the framework of ensemble learning (Popov et al. 2019; Abutbul et al. 2021; Ke et al. 2019).
Although ensemble learning can boost the performances of
neural networks on tabular data (in the cost of increased
computational resources), with such methods, the power of
neural networks in tabular feature processing is not yet fully
exploited. Besides, there are not many efficient neural components specifically designed for tabular data (analogous to
convolution for computer vision). Consequently, known neural networks were mainly based on sundry components and
thus were not very extensible.
In this paper, we present a flexible neural component called
Abstract Layer (A BST L AY) for tabular feature abstraction,
and build Deep Abstract Networks (DAN ETs) based on A B ST L AY s for tabular data classification and regression. Since
tabular features are generally irregular, it is hard to introduce
fixed inductive biases (such as dependency among spatially
neighboring features in images) in designing neural networks
for tabular data processing (e.g., classification and regression).
To this end, we assume that there are some underlying feature groups in a tabular data structure, and the features in the
groups are correlative and can be exploited to attain higherlevel features relevant to the prediction targets. We propose
to decouple the process of higher-level tabular feature abstraction into two steps: (i) correlative feature grouping, and
(ii) higher-level feature abstraction from grouped features.
We employ an A BST L AY to perform these two steps, and
DAN ETs repeat these two steps by stacking A BST L AYs to
represent critical semantics of tabular data.
Fig. 1 gives a running example to illustrate our insights. As
shown in Fig. 1(a), feasible underlying feature groups and the
potential feature abstraction paths are organized as follows.
The height and weight can be grouped together to compute
more comprehensive features that represent the physique.
Similarly, features representing liver health and kidney health
can be abstracted from the raw features, and the features
representing health conditions can further be abstracted from
the three high-level features. In contrast, in Fig. 1(b), our
method learns to find and group correlative features and then
abstract them into higher-level features. This process repeats
until global semantics are obtained. The higher-level tabular
features are abstracted by one neural layer (A BST L AY), and

Tabular data are ubiquitous in real world applications. Although many commonly-used neural components (e.g., convolution) and extensible neural networks (e.g., ResNet) have
been developed by the machine learning community, few of
them were effective for tabular data and few designs were
adequately tailored for tabular data structures. In this paper,
we propose a novel and flexible neural component for tabular data, called Abstract Layer (A BST L AY), which learns to
explicitly group correlative input features and generate higherlevel features for semantics abstraction. Also, we design a
structure re-parameterization method to compress the trained
A BST L AY, thus reducing the computational complexity by a
clear margin in the reference phase. A special basic block is
built using A BST L AYs, and we construct a family of Deep
Abstract Networks (DAN ETs) for tabular data classification
and regression by stacking such blocks. In DAN ETs, a special shortcut path is introduced to fetch information from raw
tabular features, assisting feature interactions across different levels. Comprehensive experiments on seven real-world
tabular datasets show that our A BST L AY and DAN ETs are
effective for tabular data classification and regression, and the
computational complexity is superior to competitive methods.
Besides, we evaluate the performance gains of DAN ET as it
goes deep, verifying the extendibility of our method. Our code
is available at https://github.com/WhatAShot/DANet.

Introduction
Data organized in tabular structures, e.g., medical indicators (Hassan et al. 2020; Mirroshandel et al. 2016) and banking records (Roy et al. 2018; Babaev et al. 2019; Addo et al.
2018), are ubiquitous in daily life. However, unlike the boom
of deep learning in the computer vision and natural language
processing fields, very few neural networks were adequately
designed for tabular data (Arik and Pfister 2020; Yang et al.
2018; Ke et al. 2018; Roy et al. 2018; Babaev et al. 2019;
Nair and Hinton 2010; Guo, Tang et al. 2017), and hence the
performances (e.g., in classification and regression tasks) of
such neural networks were still somewhat inferior (Abutbul
et al. 2021). Inspired by the success of ensemble learning
(e.g., XGBoost) (Friedman 2001; Chen and Guestrin 2016;
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3930

