The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Backdoor Attacks on the DNN Interpretation System
Shihong Fang, Anna Choromanska
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
NYU Tandon School of Engineering
sf2584@nyu.edu, ac5455@nyu.edu

Abstract

results can be helpful in the application of model debugging (Bojarski et al. 2017), machine teaching (Mac Aodha
et al. 2018) and medical diagnosis (Esteva et al. 2017; Quellec
et al. 2017; Rajpurkar et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018). Moreover,
the attention maps are used in the other fields like incremental learning (Dhar et al. 2019), transfer learning (Komodakis
and Zagoruyko 2017), self-supervised learning (Selvaraju
et al. 2021), and defense schemes (Chou, Tramèr, and Pellegrino 2020), etc. Saliency maps are one of the key tools
behind explainable and trustworthy AI that lies in the central focus of governmental institutions (DARPA 2018; NSF
2020). The success of the saliency maps is based on the assumption that they are reliable and trustworthy but in this
work we question such assumption by proposing a new type
of attack on the interpretation system. Currently, the DNN
training often requires large computational resources, large
amount of data, and often long training time, therefore sharing public deep learning models or outsourcing the training
process became popular. The attack happens when the users
download malicious models that have embedded backdoor
mechanisms (Gu et al. 2019). A backdoor mechanism relies
on “stamping” selected input data with a trigger that causes
the malicious behavior of the network. Classical approach to
backdoor attack relies on causing the network to misclassify
such an example. To the best of our knowledge, there exist no
backdoor mechanisms that instead of changing the prediction
of the model, attack the interpretation system of the DNN.
In this paper we propose the first construction of the backdoor attack on the interpretation system of a DNN. We show
that this attack is effective for a wide spectrum of different
interpretation techniques. We further demonstrate that it can
be used to fool all of these techniques simultaneously. As
opposed to commonly used trigger patterns, we show that it
is possible to devise a trigger that can be a widely-used photo
effect or a Moiré artifact. Our work can be motivated from
the examples in Figure 1.
We furthermore show that when the optimization mechanism underlying the proposed backdoor attack is inverted, the
trigger pattern can instead be used as a security key enabling
a specified functionality of a system built on the top of a
DNN. We specifically consider the interpretation system that
in such inverted setting will construct a valid saliency map
only when provided with the proper key. This extension has
a flavor of model watermarking (Adi et al. 2018).

Interpretability is crucial to understand the inner workings of
deep neural networks (DNNs). Many interpretation methods
help to understand the decision-making of DNNs by generating saliency maps that highlight parts of the input image that
contribute the most to the prediction made by the DNN. In this
paper we design a backdoor attack that alters the saliency map
produced by the network for an input image with a specific
trigger pattern while not losing the prediction performance significantly. The saliency maps are incorporated in the penalty
term of the objective function that is used to train a deep model
and its influence on model training is conditioned upon the
presence of a trigger. We design two types of attacks: a targeted
attack that enforces a specific modification of the saliency map
and a non-targeted attack when the importance scores of the
top pixels from the original saliency map are significantly
reduced. We perform empirical evaluations of the proposed
backdoor attacks on gradient-based interpretation methods,
Grad-CAM and SimpleGrad, and a gradient-free scheme, VisualBackProp, for a variety of deep learning architectures. We
show that our attacks constitute a serious security threat to
the reliability of the interpretation methods when deploying
models developed by untrusted sources. We furthermore show
that existing backdoor defense mechanisms are ineffective in
detecting our attacks. Finally, we demonstrate that the proposed methodology can be used in an inverted setting, where
the correct saliency map can be obtained only in the presence
of a trigger (key), effectively making the interpretation system
available only to selected users.

Introduction
As deep learning approaches establish state-of-the-art performances in image (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016), speech (Abdel-Hamid et al. 2012), and
video (Karpathy et al. 2014) recognition, image segmentation (Chen et al. 2016) and natural language processing (Weston, Chopra, and Adams 2014), explaining the prediction
of the DNN becomes a challenging task due to its multilayer structure and highly non-convex nature. Saliency maps,
which justify the prediction results by assigning scores to reflect the importance of each pixel, is one of the most popular
tools to interpret DNN decisions in vision. The interpretation
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

561

