The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fair and Truthful Giveaway Lotteries
Tal Arbiv,1,2 Yonatan Aumann1
1

2

Bar Ilan University
The College of Management Academic Studies
talarbiv7@gmail.com, aumann@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

How should these lotteries be designed? If people were
only interested in attending the events individually, then randomly choosing the entrants - one by one - is the natural, fair
and efficient solution. However, many people do not want to
enjoy these events alone, but rather with family, friends, and
the like. Indeed, some of these lotteries explicitly allow individuals to register in groups, which, if win, are all admitted
together. How should such group lotteries be designed? This
is the topic of this paper.

We consider a setting where a large number of agents are all
interested in attending some public resource of limited capacity. Attendance is thus allotted by lottery. If agents arrive individually, then randomly choosing the agents – one
by one - is a natural, fair and efficient solution. We consider
the case where agents are organized in groups (e.g. families,
friends), the members of each of which must all be admitted
together. We study the question of how best to design such
lotteries. We first establish the desired properties of such lotteries, in terms of fairness and efficiency, and define the appropriate notions of strategy proofness (providing that agents
cannot gain by misrepresenting the true groups, e.g. joining or splitting groups). We establish inter-relationships between the different properties, proving properties that cannot
be fulfilled simultaneously (e.g. leximin optimality and strong
group stratagy proofness). Our main contribution is a polynomial mechanism for the problem, which guarantees many of
the desired properties, including: leximin optimality, Paretooptimality, anonymity, group strategy proofness, and adjunctive strategy proofness (which provides that no benefit can be
obtained by registering additional - uninterested or bogus individuals). The mechanism approximates the utilitarian optimum to within a factor of 2, which, we prove, is optimal
for any mechanism that guarantees any one of the following
properties: egalitarian welfare optimality, leximin optimality,
envyfreeness, and adjunctive strategy proofness.

Each summer, dozens of brown bears descend daily on McNeil River State Game Sanctuary and Refuge to feed on the
salmon that swim past in their upstream migration. Only
ten lucky visitors, chosen by lottery, are admitted (daily)
to watch this spectacle. Similar lotteries are administered
for entrance permits to dozens of other natural attractions
across the US and Canada, as for awarding tickets to the
White House Easter Egg Roll, and the National Christmas
Tree Lighting Ceremony. In Venice, Italy, a lottery is used to
award 15 lucky citizens with prime seats for observing the
traditional Regata Storica on the Grand Canal. No official
data is available, but it is safe to assume that hundreds such
lotteries, if not more, are carried out worldwide each year.

Examples. How can/should the lottery be conducted? One
option is to choose the individuals at random. However, this
means that members of large families are severely disadvantaged; if the probability of a lone person to attend is p, then
the probability of a k person family to attend is only ≈ pk .
Another method, commonly used in practice, is to randomly
order the groups, and admit groups in order - so long as the
capacity is not exceeded. If a group overfills the resource,
then the next in order is considered, until no more groups
can be admitted. This method, however, again unduly penalizes large groups. Consider the McNeil River park with its
10 person limit, and suppose five couples and two 5-person
families have registered. Then, the random order method
gives more than 1/2 probability for each of the couples to
attend, but less than 0.4 to the families. The reason is that the
families can only attend if they are first, second or third in
line - and even that not always - while the couples have considerably more options. Furthermore, with probability 2/3,
only 9 people end up being admitted. At the same time, by
grouping the two families separately, and the five couples
separately, it is possible to admit each person with probability 1/2, and also obtain 100% utilization of the resource.
Next, consider a mechanism that only aims to maximize
utilization, that is, the number of persons admitted. Suppose
there is one family of size 5 and two of size 3. Then, the
mechanism admits the 5 person family with probability 1,
and each of the others with probability 1/2 each. In this
case, the smaller families are better off jointly registering
as a 6-person family - misrepresenting their true structure to secure admittance with probability 1 (and - in the course
- reducing the utilization). So, such a mechanism promotes
cheating.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contributions. In this paper we study the design of such
giveaway lotteries. We seek lotteries that are fair, efficient

1

Introduction

4785

