The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Distillation of RL Policies with Formal Guarantees via Variational Abstraction of
Markov Decision Processes
Florent Delgrange,1 Ann Nowé,1 Guillermo A. Pérez 2
1

2

AI Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
University of Antwerp – Flanders Make
florent.delgrange@ai.vub.ac.be

Abstract

that approximates the unknown environment. We build upon
the DeepMDP framework (Gelada et al. 2019) to provide
guarantees on the quality of the abstraction induced by this
model. DeepMDPs are provided with such guarantees when
their loss functions are minimized. These can be defined on
the entire state space (global) or on states visited under a
given policy (local). The guarantees concern a state embedding function, linking the latent and original MDPs and are
defined as bounds on the difference of their value function
and bisimulation distance. The latter was only developed for
global losses. While these are interesting in theory, they are
often infeasible to measure in practice. In contrast, we introduce such bounds in the local setting and further consider
an action embedding function to handle continuous actions.
Importantly, we focus on general MDPs and do not restrict
our attention to deterministic ones as was done by Gelada
et al. to enable the approximation and minimization of their
losses via neural networks. We also give PAC approximation
schemes to compute both the losses and said bounds.
Our VAE is trained by maximizing a lower bound on the
likelihood of traces generated by executing the RL policy
in the environment. We derive a loss function, incorporating
variational versions of the local losses, that enables learning (i) discrete state and action spaces, (ii) an MDP defined
over these spaces, (iii) state and action embedding functions,
linking the original and discrete MDPs, and (iv) a distilled
version of the RL policy set over the discrete spaces which
can be executed in both models via the embedding functions.
An important challenge for our approach is the posterior collapse problem which often occurs when optimizing a variational model (e.g., Alemi et al. 2018). We present a novel approach based on prioritized experience replay (Schaul et al.
2016) to resolve this when learning a discrete latent model.
All of the above result in an efficient way of training a
VAE to obtain a discrete latent model that is provably approximately bisimilar to the unknown MDP, further yielding
a distilled version of the RL policy. These enable the application of formal methods and tools that have been developed for discrete MDPs: for instance, P RISM (Kwiatkowska,
Norman, and Parker 2011), M ODEST (Hartmanns and Hermanns 2014), and S TORM (Hensel et al. 2021).
Other related work. Frameworks providing formal guarantees during the RL process include the work of Junges
et al. (2016), Shielded-RL (Alshiekh et al. 2018; Jansen et al.

We consider the challenge of policy simplification and verification in the context of policies learned through reinforcement learning (RL) in continuous environments. In wellbehaved settings, RL algorithms have convergence guarantees in the limit. While these guarantees are valuable, they are
insufficient for safety-critical applications. Furthermore, they
are lost when applying advanced techniques such as deepRL. To recover guarantees when applying advanced RL algorithms to more complex environments with (i) reachability,
(ii) safety-constrained reachability, or (iii) discounted-reward
objectives, we build upon the DeepMDP framework to derive
new bisimulation bounds between the unknown environment
and a learned discrete latent model of it. Our bisimulation
bounds enable the application of formal methods for Markov
decision processes. Finally, we show how one can use a policy obtained via state-of-the-art RL to efficiently train a variational autoencoder that yields a discrete latent model with
provably approximately correct bisimulation guarantees. Additionally, we obtain a distilled version of the policy for the
latent model.

1

Introduction

While reinforcement learning (RL) has been applied to a
wide range of challenging domains, from game playing
(Mnih et al. 2015) to real-world applications such as effective canal control (Ren et al. 2021), more widespread deployment in the real world is hampered by the lack of guarantees provided with the learned policies. Although there are
RL algorithms which have limit-convergence guarantees in
the discrete setting (Tsitsiklis 1994) — and even in some
continuous settings with function approximation, e.g., Nowe
(1994) — these are lost when applying more advanced techniques which make use of general nonlinear function approximators (Tsitsiklis and Roy 1997) to deal with continuous Markov decision processes (MDPs) such as deep-RL
(e.g., Mnih et al. 2015). In this paper, we apply such advanced RL algorithms to unknown continuous MDPs with
(i) reachability, (ii) safety-constrained reachability, or (iii)
discounted-reward objectives. To recover the formal guarantees, we use the obtained policy to train a variational
autoencoder (VAE) which gives us a discrete latent model
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6497

