The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MTLDesc: Looking Wider to Describe Better
Changwei Wang1,4, * , Rongtao Xu1,4, * , Yuyang Zhang1,4 ,
Shibiao Xu2,† , Weiliang Meng1,3,4,† , Bin Fan5 , Xiaopeng Zhang1,4
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Zhejiang Lab; 4 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
{wangchangwei2019, xurongtao2019, yuyang.zhang, weiliang.meng, xiaopeng.zhang}@ia.ac.cn,
shibiaoxu@bupt.edu.cn, bin.fan@ieee.org
2

Abstract
Limited by the locality of convolutional neural networks,
most existing local features description methods only learn
local descriptors with local information and lack awareness
of global and surrounding spatial context. In this work, we
focus on making local descriptors “look wider to describe better” by learning local Descriptors with More Than just Local
information (MTLDesc). Specifically, we resort to context
augmentation and spatial attention mechanisms to make our
MTLDesc obtain non-local awareness. First, Adaptive Global
Context Augmented Module and Diverse Local Context Augmented Module are proposed to construct robust local descriptors with context information from global to local. Second, Consistent Attention Weighted Triplet Loss is designed
to integrate spatial attention awareness into both optimization and matching stages of local descriptors learning. Third,
Local Features Detection with Feature Pyramid is given to
obtain more stable and accurate keypoints localization. With
the above innovations, the performance of our MTLDesc significantly surpasses the prior state-of-the-art local descriptors on HPatches, Aachen Day-Night localization and InLoc indoor localization benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/vignywang/MTLDesc.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Matching results under illumination and viewpoint
changes. (a): Matching images. (b): Baseline (SuperPoint).
(c): MTLDesc w/ Context Augmentation but w/o Consistent
Attention Weighting. (d): MTLDesc both w/ Context Augmentation and w/ Consistent Attention Weighting. Green
dots: Correct matches. Red dots: Incorrect matches.

Introduction

mation: i) Ambiguity regions with repetitive patterns (texture, color, shape, etc.) is difficult to be distinguished only
by local information, as shown in the first row (trees) and
the fourth row (river and ground) in Fig. 1 (b); ii) Local visual information becomes unreliable and indistinguishable
for challenging scenes with large illumination and viewpoint
changes, which will lead to massive incorrect matches (the
second and fourth rows of Fig. 1 (b)). On this account, robust non-local context can be employed to better distinguish
challenging local regions. We propose Context Augmentation and Consistent Attention Weighting to look wider for
describing better, enabling our descriptors to gain awareness
beyond the local region, in turn to effectively mitigate above
weaknesses as shown in Fig. 1 (d).
CNN-based backbones like L2Net (Tian, Fan, and Wu
2017) and VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) are widely
adopted by the local descriptors learning methods. Due to
the inherent locality of CNN, features can only be extracted

Local descriptors currently play a key role in various vision
applications such as image matching, image retrieval, SfM,
SLAM, and visual localization. With the industry’s rapid development, these applications must deal with more complex
and challenging scenarios (various conditions such as day,
night, and seasons). As the local features detection and description are the critical for these applications, there is an
urgent need to further boost their performance.
Geoffrey Hinton said that “local ambiguities have to be
resolved by finding the best global interpretation” in his first
paper (Hinton 1976). This idea still holds true in local descriptors learning. There are two main weaknesses for learning local descriptors only using limited local visual infor* These authors contributed equally.
†

Shibiao Xu and Weiliang Meng are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2388

