The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Universal Adversarial Perturbation by Adversarial Example
Maosen Li1 , Yanhua Yang1∗ , Kun Wei1 , Xu Yang1 , Heng Huang2
1

2

Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
{maosenli95, yangyanhua.xd, weikunsk, xuyang.xd, henghuanghh}@gmail.com

The perturbation is restricted by `p -norm k·kp to ensure adversarial examples to be imperceptible for human. The first
batch of efforts on adversarial attack have shown that the
adversarial example for a given clean example x can be efficiently crafted by performing gradient updates (Papernot
et al. 2016; Carlini and Wagner 2017). These approaches,
which generate adversarial samples based on a specific instance but often fail to transfer across samples, are categorized as instance-specific adversarial attacks.
Several other parallel studies have shown that the principally curved directions of a deep classifier are also aligned
among data points (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2018; Fawzi
et al. 2018), which gives rise to the existence of instanceagnostic approach to craft adversarial perturbations. Different from the instance-specific approach, instance-agnostic
approach learns the universal adversarial perturbation (UAP)
on the data distribution independent of a specific instance,
that is, the generated UAP is sufficient to fool most instances drawn from the corresponding data distribution. The
UAP approaches are not only effective, but also adaptable
for a variety of tasks, such as image segmentation (Hendrik Metzen et al. 2017), natural language processing (Wallace et al. 2019), and automatic check-out (Liu et al. 2020).
In addition to conventional data-dependent methods which
rely heavily on the quality and quantity of the training
data (Khrulkov and Oseledets 2018; Wiyatno et al. 2019),
recently, the success of data-independent unsupervised UAP
further strengthens the practicality of UAP by alleviating
data dependency. Compared to instance-specific methods,
data-independent approaches focus on the real vulnerability
of the learned model and the lower bound is also reported
on the achievable fooling ratios, which provides meaningful
theoretical guidance (Mopuri, Ganeshan, and Babu 2018).
In essence, both instance-specific perturbation and UAP
are generated features rather than ‘bugs’ (Ilyas et al. 2019).
Although both can fool target models, they differ in that, as
a feature, the instance-specific perturbation is ‘non-robust’
and less dominant, whereas the UAP is ‘robust’ and more
dominant (Zhang et al. 2020). However, most of existing
instance-agnostic approaches directly use original data to
train UAP, which are often only partially available and cannot guarantee the truly universal, such that the generated
UAP contains undesired non-robust features. To this end,
the vital issue of generating UAP lies in how to reduce non-

Abstract
Deep learning models have shown to be susceptible to universal adversarial perturbation (UAP), which has aroused wide
concerns in the community. Compared with the conventional
adversarial attacks that generate adversarial samples at the instance level, UAP can fool the target model for different instances with only a single perturbation, enabling us to evaluate the robustness of the model from a more effective and
accurate perspective. The existing universal attack methods
fail to exploit the differences and connections between the
instance and universal levels to produce dominant perturbations. To address this challenge, we propose a new universal attack method that unifies instance-specific and universal attacks from a feature perspective to generate a more
dominant UAP. Specifically, we reformulate the UAP generation task as a minimax optimization problem and then utilize the instance-specific attack method to solve the minimization problem thereby obtaining better training data for
generating UAP. At the same time, we also introduce a consistency regularizer to explore the relationship between training data, thus further improving the dominance of the generated UAP. Furthermore, our method is generic with no additional assumptions about the training data and hence can
be applied to both data-dependent (supervised) and dataindependent (unsupervised) manners. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed method improves the performance by a significant margin over the existing methods in
both data-dependent and data-independent settings. Code is
available at https://github.com/lisenxd/AT-UAP.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
performance in various computer vision tasks, however, recent research works have demonstrated that the existing
DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples (Wang et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2018, 2020). In general, given a DNN
f (x) : x ∈ X −→ y ∈ Y, which maps input x to label y,
adversarial attack is designed to seek an adversarial example
x∗ , leading to misclassification (Li et al. 2019; Wang 2021).
The generation of adversarial examples can be formulated
as the following constrained optimization problem:
f (x∗ ) 6= f (x), s.t. kx∗ − xkp ≤  .
(1)
∗

Correspond author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1350

