The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Robust Policy against Disturbance in Transition Dynamics
via State-Conservative Policy Optimization
Yufei Kuang1 , Miao Lu1 , Jie Wang1,2∗ , Qi Zhou1 , Bin Li1 , Houqiang Li1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{yfkuang, lumiao, zhouqida}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jiewangx, binli, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

domain randomization (DR) (Tobin et al. 2017), which randomizes the parameters in source environments to generate
an ensemble of similar transition dynamics. DR uses these
dynamics to approximate the potential disturbance in target
environments. Another line of research is based on robust
Markov decision process (RMDP) theory (Iyengar 2005),
which considers the worst-case disturbance in transition dynamics at each step during training. For example, robust adversarial reinforcement learning (RARL) algorithm (Pinto
et al. 2017) models the disturbance as trainable forces in
source environments based on the insight that environment
discrepancy can be viewed as extra forces, and then RARL
learns the worst-case disturbance by adversarial training.
Learning robust policies by modeling the disturbance
in advance, though effective, has two limitations in practice. First, these algorithms usually require task-specific
prior knowledge to model the disturbance (Mankowitz et al.
2020). For example, to randomize the environmental parameters during training, DR requires a pre-given uncertainty
set that contains specific parameters and their corresponding
variation ranges; to approximate the disturbance in target
environments, RARL employs extra forces that are manually designed for each task. However, when we train policies
for new tasks or test in unseen environments, we may lack
enough knowledge about the disturbance (Tessler, Efroni,
and Mannor 2019). Second, these algorithms usually assume
control of specially designed simulators (Packer et al. 2018),
as disturbing the agents during training in the real world can
be dangerous. However, sometimes building new simulators
can be expensive, and sometimes the disturbance is even intractable to model in simulators (e.g., disturbance caused by
wear-and-tear errors and aerodynamic effects in robot control tasks) (Abdullah et al. 2019). In general, learning robust policies by modeling the disturbance and applying it to
source environments can be impractical in many scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm to learn robust policies without modeling the disturbance in advance.
First, we reduce the disturbance in transition dynamics to
that in state space based on the intuition that any disturbance
in transition dynamics eventually influences the process via
the change of future states. Then, we propose the StateConservative Markov Decision Process (SC-MDP), which
considers the worst-case disturbance in state space at each
step. Compared with the RMDP, SC-MDP reduces the origi-

Deep reinforcement learning algorithms can perform poorly
in real-world tasks due to the discrepancy between source and
target environments. This discrepancy is commonly viewed
as the disturbance in transition dynamics. Many existing algorithms learn robust policies by modeling the disturbance
and applying it to source environments during training, which
usually requires prior knowledge about the disturbance and
control of simulators. However, these algorithms can fail in
scenarios where the disturbance from target environments is
unknown or is intractable to model in simulators. To tackle
this problem, we propose a novel model-free actor-critic
algorithm—namely, State-Conservative Policy Optimization
(SCPO)—to learn robust policies without modeling the disturbance in advance. Specifically, SCPO reduces the disturbance in transition dynamics to that in state space and then
approximates it by a simple gradient-based regularizer. The
appealing features of SCPO include that it is simple to implement and does not require additional knowledge about the
disturbance or specially designed simulators. Experiments in
several robot control tasks demonstrate that SCPO learns robust policies against the disturbance in transition dynamics.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved remarkable success in many complex control tasks (Mnih et al.
2015; Lillicrap et al. 2016; Tobin et al. 2017; OpenAI et al.
2019). However, existing DRL algorithms tend to perform
poorly in real-world tasks due to the environment discrepancy (Rajeswaran et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2021). For example, policies trained to control robots in source environments
can fail to generalize in target environments with slightly
changed physical parameters (e.g., mass and friction). This
discrepancy usually comes from test-generalization and
simulation-transfer in real-world tasks, and it is commonly
viewed as the disturbance in transition dynamics (Pinto et al.
2017; Tessler, Efroni, and Mannor 2019). Therefore, research on learning robust policies against the disturbance in
transition dynamics is receiving increasing attention.
In order to learn robust policies, many previous algorithms model the disturbance and apply it to source environments during training. One simple and effective algorithm is
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7247

