The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generalizable Person Re-identification via
Self-Supervised Batch Norm Test-Time Adaption
Ke Han1,2 , Chenyang Si1 , Yan Huang1,3 * , Liang Wang1,3,4,5 , Tieniu Tan1,3,4
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
5
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Artificial Intelligence Research (CAS-AIR)
ke.han@cripac.ia.ac.cn, chenyang.si.mail@gmail.com, {yhuang, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

In this paper, we investigate the generalization problem of
person re-identification (re-id), whose major challenge is the
distribution shift on an unseen domain. As an important tool
of regularizing the distribution, batch normalization (BN) has
been widely used in existing methods. However, they neglect
that BN is severely biased to the training domain and inevitably suffers the performance drop if directly generalized
without being updated. To tackle this issue, we propose Batch
Norm Test-time Adaption (BNTA), a novel re-id framework
that applies the self-supervised strategy to update BN parameters adaptively. Specifically, BNTA quickly explores the
domain-aware information within unlabeled target data before inference, and accordingly modulates the feature distribution normalized by BN to adapt to the target domain.
This is accomplished by two designed self-supervised auxiliary tasks, namely part positioning and part nearest neighbor
matching, which help the model mine the domain-aware information with respect to the structure and identity of body
parts, respectively. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, we conduct extensive experiments on three re-id
datasets and confirm the superior performance to the stateof-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. (1) The empirical
distribution of the BN outputs shifts largely from the source
to the target domain when BN layers are frozen, but the shift
is mitigated when BN layers are updated. (2) Our model is
jointly optimized via FSL and SSL heads during training.
BN layers are updated via SSL, while other layers remain
frozen during test-time adaption.

Introduction

of dealing with the stimulated generalization situations (Bai
et al. 2021; Choi et al. 2021). The second methods aim to
learn domain-invariant re-id features by the memory mechanism (Song et al. 2019), hard example mining (Tamura and
Murakami 2019) or adversarial learning (Chen et al. 2021).
The third methods advance the common usage of batch normalization (BN), e.g., combining it with instance normalization (IN) to offset domain-related information captured
by BN (Jia, Ruan, and Hospedales 2019; Jin et al. 2020).
The third methods reveal that BN discourages the generalization ability of the model, due to learning the knowledge
biased to the source domain. We further explicitly investigate the correlation between distributions of BN outputs
and domains in Fig. 1. (1). The red and green lines indicate the empirical Gaussian-like distributions output by the
same (freezing) BN layer on the source and target domain,
respectively. They exhibit a great distribution shift, e.g., the
variance increases obviously from the red line to the green
one, suggesting the BN outputs on the target domain are dispersed more widely. The reason lies in that BN parameters

Person re-identification (re-id) aims to match individuals
with the same identity across cameras at different locations
over a large disjoint space. A number of efforts have been
made by the re-id community over the past years, making remarkable progress in scenarios where training and test data
come from the same domain. In reality, however, if tested
directly on a previously unseen domain, most existing methods suffer significant performance degradation due to the
distribution shift in background (Song et al. 2018), resolution (Han et al. 2021), clothing styles (Huang et al. 2021a),
etc. Improving the generalization ability is therefore greatly
important for promoting the study of re-id.
Recently, generalizable re-id methods have drawn increasing attention, which can be roughly divided into three
categories. The methods of the first category, based on metalearning, mimic the train-test splits to improve the ability
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

817

