The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unifying Knowledge Base Completion with
PU Learning to Mitigate the Observation Bias
Jonas Schouterden, Jessa Bekker, Jesse Davis, Hendrik Blockeel
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Leuven.AI - KU Leuven Institute for AI, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
{jonas.schouterden, jessa.bekker, jesse.davis, hendrik.blockeel}@kuleuven.be

Abstract

a model from the initial incomplete KB. One common way
to do this is to take a rule-based approach (Galárraga et al.
2013; Pellissier Tanon et al. 2017; Zupanc and Davis 2018).
This would result in learning rules like hX, wonOscar, Yi ∧
hX, isMarriedTo, Zi ⇒ hZ, livesIn, USAi, meaning that partners of Oscar winners usually live in the USA. A common
measure for the quality of (intermediate) models is confidence (precision), which is the fraction of correctly predicted
facts.
However, learning from the incomplete KB is challenging
for two important reasons. First, KBs operate under Open
World semantics which means that the truth value of any
triple not in the KB is unknown. These triples could be true
(i.e., they belong in the KB) or false (i.e., they should be
excluded from the KB). Practically, this means the data only
contains positive examples, whereas most learners require
both positive and negative examples. It also implies that a
rule’s confidence cannot be computed without making additional assumptions. Second, the way knowledge bases are
constructed makes it highly unlikely that the facts included in
the observed KB are an i.i.d sample of the facts in the ideal
knowledge base, aka the ground truth. Indeed, studies have
shown that knowledge bases suffer from observation biases:
They contain cultural biases, contain more facts about famous
people and represents men and women differently (Callahan
and Herring 2011; Wagner et al. 2015; Soulet et al. 2018).
If knowledge base completion is applied while ignoring the
observation bias, then the newly inferred facts are likely to
strengthen the bias. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, this is
what all current KBC methods do.
PU learning (learning from positive and unlabeled examples) (Bekker and Davis 2020), which is concerned with
learning a binary classifier while only having access to positive and unlabeled examples, is well-equipped for addressing
both these challenges. First, it perfectly matches the type of
data available for KBC: the positive examples are the facts in
the KB whereas the unlabeled data is any potential fact that
is not included in the KB. Second, recent work in PU learning (Kato, Teshima, and Honda 2018; Bekker, Robberechts,
and Davis 2019; Gong et al. 2021) has explicitly modeled
the selection mechanism that determines the probability of
observing a positive example’s label, i.e., the observation
bias.
Motivated by this, we view the KBC task as a PU Learning

Methods for Knowledge Base Completion (KBC) reason about
a knowledge base (KB) in order to derive new facts that should
be included in the KB. This is challenging for two reasons.
First, KBs only contain positive examples. This complicates
model evaluation which needs both positive and negative examples. Second, those facts that were selected to be included
in the knowledge base, are most likely not an i.i.d. sample of
the true facts, due to the way knowledge bases are constructed.
In this paper, we focus on rule-based approaches, which traditionally address the first challenge by making assumptions that
enable identifying negative examples, which in turn makes it
possible to compute a rule’s confidence or precision. However,
they largely ignore the second challenge, which means that
their estimates of a rule’s confidence can be biased. This paper
approaches rule-based KBC through the lens of PU learning,
which can cope with both challenges. We make three contributions. (1) We provide a unifying view that formalizes the
relationship between multiple existing confidences measures
based on (i) what assumption they make about and (ii) how
their accuracy depends on the selection mechanism. (2) We introduce two new confidence measures that can mitigate known
biases by using propensity scores that quantify how likely a
fact is to be included the KB. (3) We show through theoretical and empirical analysis that taking the bias into account
improves the confidence estimates, even when the propensity
scores are not known exactly.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Bases (KBs) such as Wikidata (Vrandecic and
Krötzsch 2014), YAGO (Rebele et al. 2016) and DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007) are large collections of knowledge
about the world. They contain entities, such as Audrey, Belgium and BestActress1960, and facts about those entities such
as hAudrey, wasBornIn, Belgiumi and hAudrey, wonOscar,
BestActress1960i. KBs are typically constructed through
crowdsourcing or automatically extracting information from
the web (Rebele et al. 2016). Consequently, these KBs are
incomplete as they do not contain all facts.
Knowledge Base Completion (KBC) (Nickel et al. 2015)
aims to address the issue of incompleteness by reasoning over
the knowledge base in order to derive new facts that should
be included in the KB. This is typically achieved by learning
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4137

