The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Novelty Controlled Paraphrase Generation with Retrieval Augmented Conditional
Prompt Tuning
Jishnu Ray Chowdhury 1 * , Yong Zhuang 2 , Shuyi Wang 2
1

University of Illinois, at Chicago
2
Bloomberg
jraych2@uic.edu, yzhuang52@bloomberg.net, swang1072@bloomberg.net

Abstract

the direction of parameter-efficient methods, we propose Retrieval Augmented Prompt Tuning (RAPT) as a method of
augmenting prompt tuning with kNN-based retrieved examples to further enhance the quality of paraphrases.
Besides adaptation of pre-trained language models, we
also explicitly focus on the novelty of generated paraphrases
because trivial paraphrases with minimal changes may not
be as helpful for applications such as data augmentation. We
consider the novelty of a paraphrase to be associated with
the edit distance of the paraphrase from the input. Roughly,
the more edits (word deletion, word insertion, substitution,
etc.) there are in a paraphrase, the more “novel” we consider
it to be. Paraphrases can be generated with different levels of
novelty. For example, simply changing one word would still
count as paraphrasing. Usually, however, the level of lexical novelty of a generated paraphrase is left upon the model
to decide. In this work, we instead propose a simple modelagnostic method to put more control on the users themselves
to decide the level of novelty of the generation. To this end,
we propose Novelty Conditioned RAPT (NC-RAPT) that
uses specialized prompts for different levels of novelty for
novelty-controlled paraphrase generation. Overall, we make
the following contributions:

Paraphrase generation is a fundamental and long-standing
task in natural language processing. In this paper, we concentrate on two contributions to the task: (1) we propose Retrieval Augmented Prompt Tuning (RAPT) as a parameterefficient method to adapt large pre-trained language models for paraphrase generation; (2) we propose Novelty Conditioned RAPT (NC-RAPT) as a simple model-agnostic
method of using specialized prompt tokens for controlled
paraphrase generation with varying levels of lexical novelty.
By conducting extensive experiments on four datasets, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches for
retaining the semantic content of the original text while inducing lexical novelty in the generation.

Introduction
The task of paraphrase generation aims at rephrasing a given
text while retaining its meaning. The task has several applications including text simplification, semantic parsing,
query re-writing, and data augmentation.
Recently, the use of pre-trained Transformer-based language models has become nearly ubiquitous for different
natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Devlin et al. 2019;
Radford et al. 2019) including paraphrase generation (Witteveen and Andrews 2019; West et al. 2021). While the standard method of utilizing a pre-trained language model for
NLP tasks is to fine-tune all the parameters in the model,
it is not the most parameter-efficient. For example, MegatronLM (Shoeybi et al. 2019) has more than 11 billion parameters to fine-tune. Various methods have emerged to
utilize large-scale pre-trained language models in a more
parameter-efficient manner. Such methods include variants
of adapter tuning (Houlsby et al. 2019), prompt tuning (Shin
et al. 2020; Li and Liang 2021; Lester, Al-Rfou, and Constant 2021), and Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al.
2021). Particularly, prompt tuning and LoRA can cut down
the number of trainable parameters by a factor of thousands.
These approaches are particularly important today as pretrained models continuously become larger than before. In

1. We propose Retrieval Augmented Prompt Tuning
(RAPT) as a parameter-efficient method for paraphrase
generation.
2. We propose Novelty Conditioned RAPT (NC-RAPT)
that uses specialized prompts to generate paraphrases
with different levels of novelty.

Task Definition
We define paraphrase generation as a sequence-to-sequence
problem. Given some input sequence of tokens x1:n =
(x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xn ) as the input query, we want a model
to paraphrase the input into another sequence y1:m =
(y1 , y2 , y3 , . . . , ym ) serving as the output.
In our experiments, we mainly explore GPT-based models
which are pre-trained on autoregressive language modeling
or auto-completion. Thus, we frame our problem similar to
an auto-completion task such that the downstream task remains similar to the pre-training task (potentially making the
transfer of pre-trained knowledge easier).
To frame paraphrasing as an auto-completion task for

* The work was done during an internship with Bloomberg.
Correspondence to: Jishnu Ray Chowdhury, Yong Zhuang, Shuyi
Wang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10535

