The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On Paraconsistent Belief Revision in LP
Nicolas Schwind1 , Sébastien Konieczny2 , Ramón Pino Pérez2
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
2
CRIL - CNRS, Université d’Artois, Lens, France
nicolas-schwind@aist.go.jp, {konieczny,pinoperez}@cril.fr

Abstract

of which is that the consequence relation must contain all
classical consequences). If one does not want this to occur
then one quickly enters into unknown territories.
To motivate this work, let us recall that the AGM revision
postulates aim to formalize three intuitive principles:

Belief revision aims at incorporating, in a rational way, a new
piece of information into the beliefs of an agent. Most works
in belief revision suppose a classical logic setting, where the
beliefs of the agent are consistent. Moreover, the consistency
postulate states that the result of the revision should be consistent if the new piece of information is consistent. But in
real applications it may easily happen that (some parts of)
the beliefs of the agent are not consistent. In this case then it
seems reasonable to use paraconsistent logics to derive sensible conclusions from these inconsistent beliefs. However,
in this context, the standard belief revision postulates trivialize the revision process. In this work we discuss how to
adapt these postulates when the underlying logic is Priest’s
LP logic, in order to model a rational change, while being
a conservative extension of AGM/KM belief revision. This
implies, in particular, to adequately adapt the notion of expansion. We provide a representation theorem and some examples of belief revision operators in this setting.

• primacy of update. The new piece of information must
be believed after the change;
• consistency. The result of the change has to be a consistent belief base whenever the new piece of information is
consistent;
• minimal change. We want the result to be as close as
possible to the previous beliefs: we do not want to add
unnecessary new beliefs and we want to give up only the
beliefs that prevent the first two principles from holding.
Minimal change is really at the heart of belief change, as
the revised base should be as pertinent as possible. So it is
not a principle that can be relaxed.
Primacy of update is a very natural requirement. Nonetheless, in some applications it may be sensible to expect a different behaviour. Sometimes we may want to be given the
choice on whether to accept only a part of the new piece of
information (Hansson 1998; Makinson 1998; Hansson et al.
2001; Booth et al. 2012; Falappa et al. 2012; Booth et al.
2014; Garapa, Fermé, and Reis 2020). Or we may not want
to give such a high priority on the new piece of information with respect to the current beliefs, which could lead us
to promotion (Schwind, Konieczny, and Marquis 2018) or
improvement (Konieczny, Medina Grespan, and Pino Pérez
2010; Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2008), or, when we want to
give the same weight to both, to merging operators (Revesz
1993; Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2002, 2011; Schwind and
Konieczny 2020). So relaxations of this principle have been
highly investigated.
Contrastingly, the relaxations of the last principle, consistency, have rarely been investigated. We can see several reasons for that. First because, as explained above, the AGM
framework requires working with a logic that is an extension of classical logic. So it prevents us from working with
paraconsistent logics, that do not contain all classical consequences (in particular when the current belief base is not
classically consistent). Another reason could be that adding
a new piece of information into the beliefs of the agent when
working in a paraconsistent logic could appear simple: as

Introduction
Belief revision aims at incorporating, in a rational way, a
new piece of information into the beliefs of an agent. The
core of belief change theory (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and
Makinson 1985; Gärdenfors 1988; Katsuno and Mendelzon 1991; Hansson 1999; Fermé and Hansson 2011) is
well-established now, and the numerous representation theorems, for instance (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson
1985; Gärdenfors 1988; Katsuno and Mendelzon 1991; Alchourrón and Makinson 1985) as well as the results showing the closeness between belief change and non-monotonic
inference (Gärdenfors 1990; Kraus, Lehmann, and Magidor 1990; Lehmann and Magidor 1992) and possibilistic
logic (Dubois and Prade 1991; Dubois, Lang, and Prade
1994) confirm that the AGM framework (for Alchourrón,
Gärdenfors and Makinson 1985) correctly models this fundamental process.
Nonetheless, some adaptations are required when one
leaves the standard classical setting. In particular, one fundamental assumption of the AGM framework is that one
works in extensions of classical logic (AGM postulates are
stated for any logic satisfying some basic requirements, one
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5879

