The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Natural Black-Box Adversarial Examples against Deep Reinforcement Learning
Mengran Yu and Shiliang Sun*
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University,
3663 North Zhongshan Road, Shanghai 200062, P.R. China
mengranyu97@gmail.com, slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

adversarial states and attack DRL agents every time step
(Huang et al. 2017). To decrease the risk of being detected,
two techniques were proposed to reduce the number of attack steps. The one was that the attacker only injected perturbations when the value function estimated over the clean
state was above a certain threshold, which meant that these
states were critical (Kos and Song 2017). The other one
identified pivotal states according to the difference between
probabilities of the best action and the worst action (Lin et al.
2017; Yang et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020). In this line of work,
they leveraged the optimization-based C&W attack (Carlini
and Wagner 2017) to generate adversarial perturbations.
In realistic applications, the black-box setting is more
challenging and practical than the white-box setting. The
common practice of black-box attacks against DRL agents
retrains a substitute policy in the same environment, crafts
adversarial examples with the surrogate policy by utilizing
white-box methods, and attacks the target policy depending
on the transferability of adversarial examples (Huang et al.
2017; Behzadan and Munir 2017). However, recent research
indicates that adversarial examples for substitute networks
are not always able to transfer to target networks and thus
cannot probe the vulnerability of DRL (Narodytska and Kasiviswanathan 2016; Chen et al. 2017). Therefore, this paper designs an RL-based framework, which directly generates adversarial examples according to the feedback of target policies and circumvents the transferability requirement
of adversarial examples crafted by substitute policies.
Moreover, current attack approaches in DRL are based on
algorithms of crafting adversarial examples in image classification, e.g., FGSM and C&W. They only utilize simple
pixel space metrics to encourage visual realism such as L∞
and L1 distance. However, adversarial examples generated
by these methods look unnatural (Xiao et al. 2018; Zhao,
Dua, and Singh 2018; Jandial et al. 2019). Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) are introduced to efficiently produce semantically more natural adversarial examples. As illustrated in Zhao, Dua, and Singh (2018), GANsbased crafting methods perturbed the benign digit image
in a selective manner that slightly thickening the bottom
stroke of the digit and thinning the one above it could make
the target model misclassify the input image “3” into “2”,
while FGSM added numerous gradient-based noises in the
non-digital region of the input. Moreover, recent work has

Black-box attacks in deep reinforcement learning usually retrain substitute policies to mimic behaviors of target policies
as well as craft adversarial examples, and attack the target
policies with these transferable adversarial examples. However, the transferability of adversarial examples is not always
guaranteed. Moreover, current methods of crafting adversarial examples only utilize simple pixel space metrics which
neglect semantics in the whole images, and thus generate unnatural adversarial examples. To address these problems, we
propose an advRL-GAN framework to directly generate semantically natural adversarial examples in the black-box setting, bypassing the transferability requirement of adversarial examples. It formalizes the black-box attack as a reinforcement learning (RL) agent, which explores natural and
aggressive adversarial examples with generative adversarial
networks and the feedback of target agents. To the best of
our knowledge, it is the first RL-based adversarial attack on
a deep RL agent. Experimental results on multiple environments demonstrate the effectiveness of advRL-GAN in terms
of reward reductions and magnitudes of perturbations, and
validate the sparse and targeted property of adversarial perturbations through visualization.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved significant
performance in widespread applications, e.g., video game
playing (Mnih et al. 2015), robotics (Levine et al. 2016),
and autonomous driving (Isele et al. 2018). Deep neural
networks (DNNs) are usually adopted to approximate the
value function and the policy in DRL, however, they are
well known to be susceptive to adversarial examples with
imperceptible perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2014; Kurakin,
Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Carlini and Wagner 2017).
This motivates researchers to investigate the vulnerability of
DRL, especially in safety-critical tasks.
Although there have been several attempts in attacking
DRL to evaluate the fragility, most approaches to construct
adversarial examples against agents are conducted in the
white-box setting. As the first attempt, the conventional
gradient-based fast gradient sign method (FGSM) (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) was adopted to construct
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8936

