The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Why Fair Labels Can Yield Unfair Predictions:
Graphical Conditions for Introduced Unfairness
Carolyn Ashurst,1,2 Ryan Carey,2 Silvia Chiappa,3 Tom Everitt3
1

Alan Turing Institute, 2 University of Oxford, 3 DeepMind
cashurst@turing.ac.uk, ry.duff@gmail.com, csilvia@deepmind.com, tomeveritt@deepmind.com

Abstract

the questions: why and when does introduced unfairness
occur, and how can it be removed? To answer these questions,
we use structural causal models and their associated graphs to
represent the relationships between the variables underlying
the training data (§2). We also build on influence diagrams, by
including the predictor and the loss function of the machine
learning system in the same graph. This allows us to reuse
results for predictors that are optimal given the available
features.

In addition to reproducing discriminatory relationships in the
training data, machine learning systems can also introduce
or amplify discriminatory effects. We refer to this as introduced unfairness, and investigate the conditions under which
it may arise. To this end, we propose introduced total variation as a measure of introduced unfairness, and establish
graphical conditions under which it may be incentivised to
occur. These criteria imply that adding the sensitive attribute
as a feature removes the incentive for introduced variation under well-behaved loss functions. Additionally, taking a causal
perspective, introduced path-specific effects shed light on the
issue of when specific paths should be considered fair.

1

Our key contributions are establishing conditions for introduced total variation, and insight into why it can occur
(§5). We find that predictors can be unfair in spite of fair
labels because a feature they depend on is statistically dependent with the sensitive attribute. We also show that the
class of loss function influences the conditions under which
introduced total variation is incentivised (§5.2). In particular,
we consider P-admissible loss functions (Miller, Goodman,
and Smyth 1993) — those for which it is optimal to output
the expected label given the input features — such as mean
squared error and cross-entropy. Predictors that are optimal
with respect to a P-admissible loss function can introduce unfairness because they are unable to disentangle information
that they have about the sensitive attribute from the information they have about the target label. Indeed, making the
sensitive attribute available as a feature is always enough to
prevent introduced total variation being incentivised under
P-admissible loss. We discuss benefits and limitations of this
approach to preventing introduced unfairness.

Introduction

It is often said that “unfair data leads to unfair models”,
because machine learning systems tend to learn biases present
in the training data. However, sometimes a model can produce
unfair predictions even when the training labels are fair. More
generally, a model can amplify the unfairness present in
training labels.
To quantify this effect, which we refer to as introduced
unfairness, we propose computing a suitable measure of disparity for the training labels and the model predictions, and
then comparing the two values. One such measure is the total
variation (Zhang and Bareinboim 2018b), a generalisation
of demographic disparity that describes the strength of the
statistical relationship between a sensitive variable (such as
gender) and an outcome (such as the score given to an applicant’s resume). If the total variation of the predictions is
greater than that of the training labels we say that there is
introduced total variation (§3).
Introduced total variation is distinct from existing measures of unfairness like separation and sufficiency, which
generalise equalised odds and predictive parity respectively
(§4). For binary classifiers, separation prevents introduced
total variation, while sufficiency prevents reduced total variation. In contrast, absence of introduced total variation guarantees neither separation or sufficiency.
Introduced unfairness would seem to be avoidable, since it
is never present for a perfectly accurate predictor. This raises

The notion of introduced unfairness can be applied to
causal definitions of fairness as readily as statistical ones (§6).
In particular, path-specific effects (Pearl 2001) can help with
understanding and addressing complex unfairness scenarios
that are relevant to many real-world applications (Kilbertus
et al. 2017; Chiappa 2019; Nabi and Shpitser 2018). We
define path-specific introduced effects as the difference in
some particular path-specific effect on labels and predictions.
Building on this measure, we present some new considerations for how to determine whether paths should be labelled
fair.
The prevalence of introduced total variation is analysed in
simulation in Section 7. Finally, we review related work (§8)
and discuss findings, limitations, and how these results can
be applied (§9).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9494

