The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reducing Flipping Errors in Deep Neural Networks
Xiang Deng1 * , Yun Xiao2 , Bo Long2 , Zhongfei Zhang1
1

Computer Science Department, State University of New York at Binghamton
2
JD.com
xdeng7@binghamton.edu, xiaoyun1@jd.com, bo.long@jd.com, zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied in
various domains in artificial intelligence including computer
vision and natural language processing. A DNN is typically
trained for many epochs and then a validation dataset is used
to select the DNN in an epoch (we simply call this epoch
“the last epoch”) as the final model for making predictions
on unseen samples, while it usually cannot achieve a perfect accuracy on unseen samples. An interesting question is
“how many test (unseen) samples that a DNN misclassifies in
the last epoch were ever correctly classified by the DNN before the last epoch?”. In this paper, we empirically study this
question and find on several benchmark datasets that the vast
majority of the misclassified samples in the last epoch were
ever classified correctly before the last epoch, which means
that the predictions for these samples were flipped from “correct” to “wrong”. Motivated by this observation, we propose
to restrict the behavior changes of a DNN on the correctlyclassified samples so that the correct local boundaries can be
maintained and the flipping error on unseen samples can be
largely reduced. Extensive experiments1 on different benchmark datasets with different modern network architectures
demonstrate that the proposed flipping error reduction (FER)
approach can substantially improve the generalization, the robustness, and the transferability of DNNs without introducing any additional network parameters or inference cost, only
with a negligible training overhead.

Figure 1: RFEs of different DNNs on CIFAR-100 and Standford Dogs.
2015; He et al. 2016a), which leads to a large amount of
computation and memory costs. In this work, we aim to enhance the performance of a DNN classifier without introducing any additional network parameters, without increasing inference cost, and almost without training overhead by
exploring the learning dynamics of DNNs.
Currently, DNNs are typically trained for many epochs
and then a validation dataset is used to select the DNN in
the best epoch as the final model for making predictions on
unseen samples or the validation dataset is used to set up
the total number of training epochs and then the DNN at
the last epoch is selected as the final model. Without losing generality, we simply denote the selected epoch in both
cases by the last epoch. An interesting question regarding the
generalization of a DNN classifier is “how many misclassified test samples in the last epoch were ever correctly classified by the DNN before the last epoch?”. To quantitatively
study this question, we first introduce several novel metrics
and definitions: (1) Wrongly Flipped Samples (WFSs) are
the samples that are misclassified by the DNN in the last
epoch but were ever classified correctly by the DNN before the last epoch; (2) Relative Flipping Error (RFE) is
the ratio of WFSs to the total number of misclassified test
F Ss
samples (MTSs) in the last epoch, i.e., RF E = #W
#M T Ss .
We report the RFEs of various modern networks on two
different benchmark datasets including a regular classification dataset, i.e., CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009)
and a fine-grained classification dataset, i.e., Standford Dogs
(Khosla et al. 2011). As shown in Figure 1, across different modern network architectures on both datsets, a large
percentage of the wrongly-classified test samples in the last

Introduction
The superior performances of deep neural networks (DNNs)
have driven their wide deployment in varieties of applications in artificial intelligence such as medical diagnosis
(Miotto et al. 2016), automated vehicle control (Levinson
et al. 2011), and financial business (Ozbayoglu, Gudelek,
and Sezer 2020). Despite the remarkable performances, it
is appealing and necessary to further improve them, thus
benefiting these applications and extending the application
horizon to more accuracy-critical or safety-critical domains.
However, furthering improving the performance of a DNN
usually needs to substantially, even exponentially, increase
the number of its parameters (Simonyan and Zisserman
* Interns at JD.com.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code: https://github.com/Xiang-Deng-DL/FER

6506

