The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Breaking the Convergence Barrier: Optimization via Fixed-Time Convergent
Flows
Param Budhraja* ,1 Mayank Baranwal* ,2 Kunal Garg3 and Ashish Hota1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Tata Consultancy Services Research, Mumbai
3
University of California, Santa Cruz
budhrajap99@iitkgp.ac.in, baranwal.mayank@tcs.com, kunalgarg@ucsc.edu, ahota@ee.iitkgp.ac.in
2

Abstract

In developing accelerated optimization algorithms, the
discrete-time framework often proves non-intuitive and
restrictive from an analytical standpoint. In contrast,
continuous-time algorithms provide better intuition, and
simpler and elegant proofs are often obtained by leveraging the tools of Lyapunov stability theory. Indeed, the connection between ordinary differential equations and optimization has been recognized for several decades. For instance, (Brown and Bartholomew-Biggs 1989) is one of
the early works that leveraged the continuous-time framework to develop faster discrete-time algorithms. Similarly,
the continuous-time version of gradient descent, termed gradient flow (GF) dynamics, was analyzed in (Su, Boyd, and
Candès 2016). In (Wibisono, Wilson, and Jordan 2016),
the family of Bregman-Lagrangians was used to generate second-order Lagrangian flows and exponential convergence rates were established. Despite much progress, there
remain two main limitations for continuous-time algorithms:
(1) most of the analysis has focused on asymptotic and exponential convergence, i.e., convergence as time tends to infinity; and (2) there have been few systematic studies on developing discrete-time implementations such that the accelerated convergence properties of the continuous-time algorithm are preserved.
In this paper, we focus on continuous-time (accelerated)
gradient flow dynamics with fixed-time convergence guarantees. The notion of finite-time stability (FTS), which is a
precursor to the notion of fixed-time stability, was proposed
in the seminal work (Bhat and Bernstein 2000). A system
is said to be finite-time stable if the trajectories converge to
the equilibrium in a finite amount of time, called the settling
time. The settling time may depend on the initial conditions,
and can potentially grow unbounded as the initial conditions
go farther away from the equilibrium point. Fixed-time stability (FxTS), on the other hand, is a stronger notion, which
requires the settling time to be uniformly bounded for all initial conditions, i.e., convergence within a fixed time can be
guaranteed (Polyakov 2011).
In the recent few years, continuous-time optimization
methods under the notions of FTS and FxTS have gained
significant interest. In (Cortés 2006), the author proposed a
normalized version of GF and proved its finite-time stability.
For convex optimization problems with equality constraints,
the authors in (Chen and Ren 2018), designed discontinu-

Accelerated gradient methods are the cornerstones of largescale, data-driven optimization problems that arise naturally
in machine learning and other fields concerning data analysis.
We introduce a gradient-based optimization framework for
achieving acceleration, based on the recently introduced notion of fixed-time stability of dynamical systems. The method
presents itself as a generalization of simple gradient-based
methods suitably scaled to achieve convergence to the optimizer in a fixed-time, independent of the initialization. We
achieve this by first leveraging a continuous-time framework
for designing fixed-time stable dynamical systems, and later
providing a consistent discretization strategy, such that the
equivalent discrete-time algorithm tracks the optimizer in a
practically fixed number of iterations. We also provide a theoretical analysis of the convergence behavior of the proposed
gradient flows, and their robustness to additive disturbances
for a range of functions obeying strong convexity, strict convexity, and possibly nonconvexity but satisfying the PolyakŁojasiewicz inequality. We also show that the regret bound
on the convergence rate is constant by virtue of the fixed-time
convergence. The hyperparameters have intuitive interpretations and can be tuned to fit the requirements on the desired
convergence rates. We validate the accelerated convergence
properties of the proposed schemes on a range of numerical
examples against the state-of-the-art optimization algorithms.
Our work provides insights on developing novel optimization
algorithms via discretization of continuous-time flows.

Introduction and Related Work
Optimization algorithms lie at the heart of modern artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques (Sra,
Nowozin, and Wright 2012). In most applications, fast and
efficient algorithms are desired for solving the optimization
problem at hand. This is particularly true in machine learning applications where large data sets lead to larger problem instances and potentially larger computational time. As
a result, stochastic gradient descent (SGD), its variants such
as mini-batch SGD (Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David 2014),
Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015), momentum-based, and accelerated stochastic methods have emerged as popular choices
(Huo et al. 2018; Li, Fang, and Lin 2020).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6115

