The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepType 2: Superhuman Entity Linking
All You Need Is Type Interactions
Jonathan Raiman
Paris-Saclay, NVIDIA
jonathanraiman@gmail.com

Abstract

of examples needed to tackle NLP tasks thanks to finetuning and world-knowledge pre-encoded in model weights.
Entity linking (EL) similarly benefited from this wave of pretrained language models (Logeswaran et al. 2019; Ling et al.
2020; Févry et al. 2020) where systems without task-specific
features match the accuracy of those with EL features and
structured data (Sil et al. 2018; Raiman and Raiman 2018).
Despite advances from novel architectures and pre-training,
EL systems fall short of human performance with accuracies
ranging from 90% to 96% on standard benchmark datasets
(Raiman and Raiman 2018; Ling et al. 2020), while other
NLP tasks such as sentiment-analysis (Raffel et al. 2019),
named entity recognition (Yamada et al. 2020), or part of
speech tagging rival human performance with accuracies
above 97%.
Have we reached a performance ceiling on EL? We split
this question into two parts: what is human performance on
this task, and can we match it? We answer through two key
contributions:

Across multiple domains from computer vision to speech
recognition, machine learning models have been shown to
match or outperform human experts at recognition tasks. We
lack such a comparison point for Entity Linking. We construct
a human benchmark on two standard datasets (TAC KBP 2010
and AIDA (YAGO)) to measure human accuracy. We find that
current systems still fall short of human performance.
We present DeepType 2, a novel entity linking system that
closes the gap. Our proposed approach overcomes shortcomings of previous type-based entity linking systems, and does
not use pre-trained language models to reach this level. Three
key innovations are responsible for DeepType 2’s performance:
1) an abstracted representation of entities that favors shared
learning and greater sample efficiency, 2) autoregressive entity
features indicating type interactions (e.g. list type homogeneity, shared employers, geographical co-occurrence) with previous predictions that enable globally coherent document-wide
predictions, 3) the entire model is trained end to end using
a single entity-level maximum likelihood objective function.
This is made possible by associating a context-specific score to
each of the entity’s abstract representation’s sub-components
(types), and summing these scores to form a candidate entity
logit. In this paper, we explain how this factorization focuses
the learning on the salient types of the candidate entities. Furthermore, we show how the scores can serve as a rationale for
predictions.
The key contributions of this work are twofold: 1) we create
the first human performance benchmark on standard benchmarks in entity linking (TAC KBP 2010 and AIDA (YAGO))
which will be made publicly available to support further analyses, 2) we obtain a new state of the art on these datasets and are
the first to outperform humans on our benchmark. We perform
model ablations to measure the contribution of the different
facets of our system. We also include an analysis of human and
algorithmic errors to provide insights into the causes, notably
originating from journalistic style and historical context.

1. We establish a human performance benchmark on two
frequently used standard Entity Linking datasets TAC
KBP 2010 (Ji et al. 2010) (TAC) and AIDA (YAGO)
(Hoffart et al. 2011) (AIDA) with annotations we make
publicly available. We observe an accuracy gap remains
between a human panel and prior algorithmic approaches
of 1.96% on TAC and 0.08% on AIDA leaving room for
algorithmic improvement.
2. We present DeepType 2, a new EL system that improves
over the state of art (SoTA) on seven standard EL datasets
and attains higher than human accuracy from our benchmark on TAC and AIDA. Most of our gains are explained
by type interactions: an entity representation that captures
rich inter-entity relations by encoding entities using their
typed Wikidata neighbors. Predictions are coherent thanks
to a document-wide score trained by a contrastive loss;
the score retains type-system’s explanatory power by capturing the per-type contribution to each prediction. The
system also enables practical use of document coherency
features by materializing them on-the-fly during search
with a knowledge base in the loop.

Introduction
Breakthroughs in natural language understanding from highcapacity language models with mask-based losses (Devlin
et al. 2018) and pre-training on web-sized corpuses (Raffel
et al. 2019) have produced a massive shift in the number

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 states the EL
problem; Section 3 presents related work; Section 4 describes
our approach; Section 5 presents experiments measuring hu-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8028

