The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Explainable Planner Selection for Classical Planning
Patrick Ferber1,2 and Jendrik Seipp3
2

1
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
patrick.ferber@unibas.ch, jendrik.seipp@liu.se

Abstract

for optimal planning Ma et al. (2020) predict which planner
has the highest chance of solving a task and which second
planner is most likely to solve it if the first planner fails.
In this work, we focus on the simplest type of online planner scheduling: portfolio-based planner selection (Xu et al.
2008). Planner selectors have a collection of planners and
predict the runtime of each planner or the likelihood of each
planner solving the given task. Based on these predictions,
they select and execute a single planner.
We want to analyze how complex performance models for
planners have to be, in order for them to compete with the
strongest planner selectors. Focusing on portfolio selection
simplifies this analysis, because a single planner selection
is easier to analyze than a selected subset of planners and
their runtimes. Also, running a single planner often incurs
shorter runtimes and is sometimes necessary to solve hard
tasks. Finally, the IBaCoP system (Cenamor, de la Rosa,
and Fernández 2016) already demonstrates for the subsetselection case that it is possible to learn strong models that
are interpretable at the same time.
When building a planner selector, an important step is
finding a set of suitable features to describe the task for the
predicting model. Fawcett et al. (2014) collect a large set of
handcrafted features and train different models for predicting the runtimes of several planners. In the same spirit, de la
Rosa, Cenamor, and Fernández (2017) design features that
help to discriminate between planner runtimes for planning
instances that differ only in the random seed passed to the
instance generator.
To avoid handcrafting features and potentially ignoring
important features Sievers et al. (2019a) translate a given
task into a graph (Sievers et al. 2019b) which preserves all
information about the original task. They interpret the adjacency matrix of the graph as an image, scale the image down
to 128x128 pixels, and train a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to predict which planner will solve the given task.
The hope is that the neural network automatically detects
good features and indeed their model results in a strong planner which won in the International Planning Competition
(IPC) in 2018. This is quite surprising since the 128x128
pixel image ignores a lot of information: many entries of the
adjacency matrix are combined into the same pixel and the
image does not distinguish between different types of nodes
in the original graph. Nonetheless, the coverage scores of

Since no classical planner consistently outperforms all others, it is important to select a planner that works well for a
given classical planning task. The two strongest approaches
for planner selection use image and graph convolutional neural networks. They have the drawback that the learned models are complicated and uninterpretable. To obtain explainable models, we identify a small set of simple task features
and show that elementary and interpretable machine learning
techniques can use these features to solve roughly as many
tasks as the complex approaches based on neural networks.

Introduction
Classical planning is the task of finding a sequence of actions that transforms an initial state into a goal state (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). Over the last decades researchers introduced a large collection of planning algorithms, also called planners. All of them exhibit different
strengths and weaknesses and therefore no single planner
is preferable to all others for all planning tasks (e.g., Howe
et al. 1999; Seipp et al. 2012). Consequently, it is often beneficial to combine multiple planners in a portfolio.
There are several types of portfolios, differing in whether
they run a single or multiple planners and whether the planners, their time limits and their order are chosen offline, before seeing the task or online, when the task is known. For
an overview of planning portfolios, see Vallati (2012) and
Cenamor, de la Rosa, and Fernández (2016).
The first category of portfolio approaches from the literature learns a schedule for multiple planners offline (e.g.,
Helmert, Röger, and Karpas 2011; Núñez, Borrajo, and
Linares López 2015; Seipp et al. 2015). The schedule defines the order and time limits for a set of planners which
are then run in sequence. This approach is based on the insight that a planner often solves a task either quickly or not
at all within the given resource limits.
The second category of planning portfolios computes a
schedule of multiple planners online for a given input task
(e.g., Roberts and Howe 2006). In the setting of satisficing
planning, Cenamor, de la Rosa, and Fernández (2016) let
their IBaCoP system predict a useful subset of planners, and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9741

