The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Transfer with von Neumann Conditional Divergence
Ammar Shaker1 * , Shujian Yu2,3 * , Daniel Oñoro-Rubio1
1
NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany
UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
ammar.shaker@neclab.eu, yusj9011@gmail.com, daniel.onoro@neclab.eu
2

Abstract

which trains a single network on a series of interrelated
tasks (Parisi, Kemker et al. 2019; Delange et al. 2021), with
the goal of improving positive transfer and mitigating negative interference (Riemer et al. 2019).
Tremendous efforts have been made to improve transferability across multiple domains (Ganin, Ustinova et al.
2016; Zhao, Zhang et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019). Most of
the works aim to learn domain-invariant features t without
the knowledge of class label or desired response y. Common techniques to match feature marginal distributions include the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Pan et al.
2010; Zhu, Zhuang, and Wang 2019), the moment matching (Zellinger et al. 2017), the H divergence (Zhao, Zhang
et al. 2018), the Wasserstein distance (Wang et al. 2019),
etc. For classification, p(y|t) can be modeled with a multinomial distribution (Pei et al. 2018; Zhao, Gong et al. 2020).
However, it is still an open problem to explicitly capture the
functional dependence between t and y for regression.
Let us consider a network that consists of a feature extractor fθ : X → T (parametrized by θ) and a predictor hφ :
T → Y (parameterized by φ); the similarity of latent representation t includes two aspects: the invariance of marginal
distributions (i.e., p(fθ (x))) across different domains and
the functional closeness of using t to predict y. The predictive power of hφ can be characterized by the conditional
distribution p(y|t). From an information-theoretic perspective, the conditional entropy H(y|t) = −E(log(p(y|x)))
also measures the dependence between y and t.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

The similarity of feature representations plays a pivotal role
in the success of problems related to domain adaptation. Feature similarity includes both the invariance of marginal distributions and the closeness of conditional distributions given
the desired response y (e.g., class labels). Unfortunately, traditional methods always learn such features without fully taking into consideration the information in y, which in turn may
lead to a mismatch of the conditional distributions or the mixup of discriminative structures underlying data distributions.
In this work, we introduce the recently proposed von Neumann conditional divergence to improve the transferability
across multiple domains. We show that this new divergence
is differentiable and eligible to easily quantify the functional
dependence between features and y. Given multiple source
tasks, we integrate this divergence to capture discriminative
information in y and design novel learning objectives assuming those source tasks are observed either simultaneously or
sequentially. In both scenarios, we obtain favorable performance against state-of-the-art methods in terms of smaller
generalization error on new tasks and less catastrophic forgetting on source tasks (in the sequential setup).

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable successes in diverse machine learning problems and applications (Pouyanfar, Sadiq et al. 2018). However, most of deep learning applications are limited to a single or isolated task, in which a network is usually trained from scratch based on a large scale
labeled dataset (Donahue, Jia et al. 2014). As a result, the
training of deep neural networks becomes frustrating when
labeled data is scarce or expensive to obtain. In these scenarios, the efficient transfer of information from one or multiple tasks to another and the prevention of negative transfer
amongst all tasks become fundamental techniques for the
successful deployment of a deep learning system (Yosinski
et al. 2014; Riemer et al. 2019).
Different problems arise depending on the number of
tasks and how tasks arrive (e.g., concurrently or sequentially). These problems range from the standard domain
adaptation from a single source domain to a target domain (Pan et al. 2010), up to the continual learning

• We introduce the von Neumann conditional divergence
DvN (Yu et al. 2020) to the problems of domain adaptation. This new divergence can easily quantify the functional dependence between latent features t and the desired response y, in both classification and regression.
• We show the utility of DvN in a standard domain adaptation setup in which multiple source tasks are observed
either simultaneously (a.k.a., multi-source domain adaptation) or sequentially (a.k.a., continual learning).
• For multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA),
– Given a hypothesis set H and the new loss function
induced by DvN , we define a new domain discrepancy
distance DM-disc (P, Q) to measure the closeness of two
distributions P and Q.

* A. Shaker and S. Yu are the corresponding authors

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8231

