The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contrastive Quantization with Code Memory for Unsupervised Image Retrieval
Jinpeng Wang1,2,4 , Ziyun Zeng1,4 , Bin Chen2 * , Tao Dai3 , Shu-Tao Xia1,4
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen University
4
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{wjp20, zengzy21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn, daitao.edu@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

enough. On the one hand, most existing studies in unsupervised deep hashing focus on preserving the information from
continuous features. They mostly use quantization loss (Lin
et al. 2016; Chen, Cheung, and Wang 2018) and similarity
reconstruction loss (Shen et al. 2018) as the learning objectives, resulting in heavy reliance on the quality of extracted
features from pre-trained backbones (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al.
2016). If an adopted backbone generalizes poorly in the target domain, the unsatisfactory features will degrade the output binary codes fundamentally. On the other hand, Lin et al.
(2016); Huang et al. (2017) introduced rotation invariance
of images to learn deep hashing, but weak negative samples
and ineffective training schemes led to inferior performance.
This paper focuses on unsupervised deep quantization. To
make better use of unlabeled training data, we perform Contrastive Learning (CL) (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006)
that learns representations by mining visual-semantic invariance from inputs (Chen et al. 2020; He et al. 2020).
CL has become a promising direction toward deep unsupervised representation, but CL-based deep quantization remains non-trivial. Specifically, we find three challenges in
this task: (i) Sampling bias. Without label supervision, a
randomly sampled batch may contain positive samples that
are falsely taken as negatives. (ii) Model degradation. We
observe that quantization codewords of the same codebook
tend to get closer during CL, which gradually degrades the
representation ability and harms the model. (iii) The conflict between effect and efficiency in training. CL benefits
from a large batch size that ensures enough negative samples, while a single GPU can afford a limited batch size.
Training by CL often requires multi-GPU synchronization,
which is complex in engineering and less efficient. To improve the efficiency, some recent studies (Wu et al. 2018;
Misra and Maaten 2020) enable small-batch CL by caching
embeddings in a memory bank and reusing them as negatives in later iterations. However, as the encoder updates, the
cached embeddings will expire and affect the effect of CL.
To tackle the problems, we propose Contrastive Quantization with Code Memory (MeCoQ) that combines memorybased CL and deep quantization in a mutually beneficial
framework. Specifically, (i) MeCoQ is bias-aware. We adopt
a debiased framework (Chuang et al. 2020) that can correct
the sampling bias in CL. (ii) MeCoQ avoids degeneration.

The high efficiency in computation and storage makes hashing (including binary hashing and quantization) a common
strategy in large-scale retrieval systems. To alleviate the reliance on expensive annotations, unsupervised deep hashing
becomes an important research problem. This paper provides
a novel solution to unsupervised deep quantization, namely
Contrastive Quantization with Code Memory (MeCoQ).
Different from existing reconstruction-based strategies, we
learn unsupervised binary descriptors by contrastive learning, which can better capture discriminative visual semantics. Besides, we uncover that codeword diversity regularization is critical to prevent contrastive learning-based
quantization from model degeneration. Moreover, we introduce a novel quantization code memory module that boosts
contrastive learning with lower feature drift than conventional feature memories. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that MeCoQ outperforms state-of-the-art
methods. Code and configurations are publicly released.

Introduction
Hashing (Wang et al. 2017) plays a key role in Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search and has been
widely applied in large-scale systems to improve search
efficiency. There are two technical branches in hashing,
namely binary hashing and quantization. Binary hashing
methods (Charikar 2002; Heo et al. 2012) transform data
into the Hamming space such that distances are measured
quickly with bitwise operations. Quantization methods (Jegou, Douze, and Schmid 2010) divide real data space into
disjoint cells. Then the data points in each cell are approximately represented as the centroid. Since the inter-centroid
distances can be pre-computed as a lookup table, quantization methods can efficiently calculate pairwise distance.
With the progress in deep learning, the past few years
have seen many deep hashing methods (Yuan et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2016) with impressive performance. Unfortunately, annotating tons of data in real-world applications is expensive,
making it hard to apply these supervised methods. Recent
research interests have arisen in unsupervised deep hashing
to address this issue, but existing works are not satisfactory
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2468

