The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Mastering the Explicit Opinion-Role Interaction: Syntax-Aided Neural Transition
System for Unified Opinion Role Labeling
Shengqiong Wu,1 Hao Fei,1 * Fei Li,1 Meishan Zhang,2 Yijiang Liu,1 Chong Teng,1 Donghong Ji1
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry
of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
Institute of Computing and Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
{whuwsq, hao.fei, lifei csnlp, cslyj, tengchong, dhji}@whu.edu.cn, mason.zms@gmail.com
ROOT

Abstract

ccomp

xcomp

nsubj
(a) nsubj root
det
mark
obj
(b) He says the agency seriously needs money to develop
NN
RB
VBZ
NN
TO
VB
(c) PRP VBZ DT

Unified opinion role labeling (ORL) aims to detect all possible opinion structures of ‘opinion-holder-target’ in one shot,
given a text. The existing transition-based unified method, unfortunately, is subject to longer opinion terms and fails to
solve the term overlap issue. Current top performance has
been achieved by employing the span-based graph model,
which however still suffers from both high model complexity
and insufficient interaction among opinions and roles. In this
work, we investigate a novel solution by revisiting the transition architecture, and augmenting it with a pointer network
(PointNet). The framework parses out all opinion structures
in linear-time complexity, meanwhile breaks through the limitation of any length of terms with PointNet. To achieve the
explicit opinion-role interactions, we further propose a unified dependency-opinion graph (UDOG), co-modeling the
syntactic dependency structure and the partial opinion-role
structure. We then devise a relation-centered graph aggregator (RCGA) to encode the multi-relational UDOG, where
the resulting high-order representations are used to promote
the predictions in the vanilla transition system. Our model
achieves new state-of-the-art results on the MPQA benchmark. Analyses further demonstrate the superiority of our
methods on both efficacy and efficiency.

(d)

holder

target

holder

target

Figure 1: Illustration of the ORL structure (d) based on an
example sentence (b) with its corresponding dependency
structure (a) and POS tags (c).
model (Zhang et al. 2019). Unified methods effectively circumvent the noise propagation and thus achieve better performances. Nevertheless, these joint models either fail to
solve the term overlap issue1 , one ubiquitous case in relevant
data, or stay vulnerable to the detection of lengthy mentions.
Hopefully, a recent work (Xia et al. 2021) proposes a unified system based on the span graph model. It works by exhaustively enumerating all possible opinion and role terms,
which successfully help address the term overlap challenge
(Fu et al. 2021). Unfortunately, it still suffers from two crucial weaknesses. The first one is the high model complexity,
owing to its span enumeration nature. Our data statistics indicate that 14.1% of opinion and role terms span more than
8 tokens, while the terms shorter than 3 tokens account for
54.8%. And the span-based graph model tries to search out
as many terms as possible at the cost of huge computation
and time consumption. The second issue lies in the insufficient interaction between the extraction of opinion and role
terms, i.e., it takes two separate subtask decoders based on
a shared encoder. Essentially, the detection of opinion and
role terms should be made inter-dependent on each other.
For example in Fig. 1, by capturing the interactions between
opinions and roles, the recognition of ‘He’ as a holder role
for the opinion ‘says’ could meanwhile inform the detection
of ‘the agency’ as a target role for ‘says’, since an opinion
governs both holder and target. Likewise, the role as target
of ‘the agency’ can further lead to the prediction of an oppo-

Introduction
Interest in opinion role labeling (ORL) has been increasing in real-world applications as it fine-granularly analyzes
users’ opinions (as shown in Fig. 1), i.e., what (holder) expressed what opinions towards what (target) (Kim and Hovy
2006; Kannangara 2018; Tang et al. 2019). For ORL task,
traditional work adopts pipeline methods, i.e., either first
extracting all terms (opinion and role terms) and then detecting the role type (Breck et al. 2007; Yang et al. 2012)
or first extracting opinion terms and then finding their corresponding role terms (Zhang, Liang, and Fu 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020). Yet, such cascade schemes can result in error
propagation and meanwhile ignore the interaction between
opinion and role terms. Thereupon, follow-up studies design
unified (aka. end-to-end) methods for ORL, i.e., modeling
the task as an ‘opinion-holder-target’ structure extraction via
LSTM-based model (Katiyar et al. 2016) or transition-based

1
For example in Fig. 1, the role term ‘the agency’ involves with
two opinion structure simultaneously. More generally, overlap issue refers to one word participating in multiple different span terms
(Zeng et al. 2018; Fei, Ren, and Ji 2020; Li et al. 2021).

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11513

