The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

BM-NAS: Bilevel Multimodal Neural Architecture Search
Yihang Yin1 , Siyu Huang2 , Xiang Zhang3
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Harvard University
3
The Pennsylvania State University
yyin009@e.ntu.edu.sg, huang@seas.harvard.edu, xzz89@psu.edu

Abstract

Modality A

Modality B

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown superior performances on various multimodal learning problems. However, it often requires huge efforts to adapt DNNs to individual multimodal tasks by manually engineering unimodal
features and designing multimodal feature fusion strategies.
This paper proposes Bilevel Multimodal Neural Architecture Search (BM-NAS) framework, which makes the architecture of multimodal fusion models fully searchable via a
bilevel searching scheme. At the upper level, BM-NAS selects the inter/intra-modal feature pairs from the pretrained
unimodal backbones. At the lower level, BM-NAS learns the
fusion strategy for each feature pair, which is a combination of predefined primitive operations. The primitive operations are elaborately designed and they can be flexibly combined to accommodate various effective feature fusion modules such as multi-head attention (Transformer) and Attention on Attention (AoA). Experimental results on three multimodal tasks demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the proposed BM-NAS framework. BM-NAS achieves competitive performances with much less search time and fewer
model parameters in comparison with the existing generalized multimodal NAS methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Somedaywilldo/BM-NAS.

A(1) A(2) A(3)

B(1) B(2) B(3)

Predecessors

A

Previous Cells

B

Cell(2)
Cell(1)

Input X

Cell(3)

Input Y

Step(1)
Step(2)

Output
Framework
selected edge
unselected edge
ﬁxed edge

Output Z
Inner Structure of a Cell

Figure 1: An overview of our BM-NAS framework for multimodal learning. a Cell is a searched feature fusion unit that
accepts two inputs from modality features or other Cells. In
a bilevel fashion, we search the connections between Cells
and the inner structures of Cells, simultaneously.
Neural architecture search (NAS) (Zoph and Le 2017; Liu
et al. 2018a) is a promising data-driven solution to this concern by searching for the optimal neural network architecture from a predefined space. By applying NAS to multimodal learning, MMnas (Yu et al. 2020) searches the architecture of Transformer model for visual-text alignment
and MMIF (Peng et al. 2020) searches the optimal CNNs
structure to extract multi-modality image features for tomography. These methods lack generalization ability since
they are designed for models on specific modalities. MFAS
(Pérez-Rúa et al. 2019) is a more generalized framework
which searches the feature fusion strategy based on the unimodal features. However, MFAS only allows fusion of intermodal features, and the fusion operations are not searchable. It results in a limited space of feature fusion strategies when dealing with various modalities in different multimodal tasks.
In this paper, we propose a generalized framework, named
Bilevel Multimodal Neural Architecture Search (BM-NAS),
to adaptively learn the architectures of DNNs for a variety
of multimodal tasks. BM-NAS adopts a bilevel searching
scheme that it learns the unimodal feature selection strategy at the upper level and the multimodal feature fusion
strategy at the lower level, respectively. As shown in the

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved a great success on various unimodal tasks (e.g., image categorization
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016),
language modeling (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2018),
and speech recognition (Amodei et al. 2016)) as well as the
multimodal tasks (e.g., action recognition (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014; Vielzeuf et al. 2018), image/video captioning (You et al. 2016; Jin et al. 2019, 2020; Yan et al. 2021),
visual question answering (Lu et al. 2016; Anderson et al.
2018), and cross-modal generation (Reed et al. 2016; Zhou
et al. 2019)). Despite the superior performances achieved by
DNNs on these tasks, it usually requires huge efforts to adapt
DNNs to the specific tasks. Especially with the increase of
modalities, it is exhausting to manually design the backbone architectures and the feature fusion strategies. It raises
urgent concerns about the automatic design of multimodal
DNNs with minimal human interventions.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8901

