d User

iry
ple

on User

est for
iction

The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Safe Distillation Box
Jingwen Ye1,2 , Yining Mao1 , Jie Song1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Cheng Jin3 , Mingli Song1,4
1
Zhejiang University
National University of Singapore
3
Fudan University
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
jingweny@nus.edu.sg, {yining.mao, sjie, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao@nus.edu.sg, jc@fudan.edu.cn
2

“Dog”

(Open)

Abstract

Unauthorized User

Knowledge distillation (KD) has recently emerged as a
powerful strategy to transfer knowledge from a pre-trained
teacher model to a lightweight student, and has demonstrated
its unprecedented success over a wide spectrum of applications. In spite of the encouraging results, the KD process
per se poses a potential threat to network ownership protection,
since the knowledge
contained in network can be efSafe Distillation
Box
fortlessly distilled and hence exposed to a malicious user. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework, termed as Safe
Distillation Box (SDB), that allows us to wrap a pre-trained
model in a virtual box for intellectual property protection.
Specifically, SDB preserves the inference capability of the
wrapped model to all users, but precludes KD from unauthorized users. For authorized users, on the other hand, SDB
carries out a knowledge augmentation
scheme to strengthen
(Locked)
“Dog”
the KD performances and the results of the student model.
In other words, all users may employ a model in SDB for
inference, but only authorized users get access to KD from
Request
for The proposed
Network
the
model.
SDB imposes no constraints over
the
model architecture,
and may readily serve as a plug-andDistillation
Response
play solution to protect the ownership of a pre-trained network. Experiments across various datasets and architectures
demonstrate that, with SDB, the performance of an unauthorized KD drops significantly while that of an authorized gets
enhanced, demonstrating the effectiveness of SDB.

Request for
[Prediction]

Authorized User

Return:
[“Dog”]

Request for
[Distillation]

Return:
[“Dog”]

Request for
[Distillation]

[

Return:

]

Requiry
Sample

Request for
[Prediction]

Return:
[*#%@^]

Figure 1: Illustration of SDB. Designed to protect the model
ownership, SDB wraps a pre-trained network in a virtual
box, and pairs the model with a randomly generated key. Authorized
Common
User users with the valid key have access to both the inference functionality and KD, while unauthorized users are
only permitted to employ the model for inference. Moreover,
SBD comes with a knowledge augmentation strategy that reIntroduction
inforces the KD performances for authorized users, enabling
Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to transfer knowledge
them to train competent student models with smaller sizes.
from a pre-trained teacher model to“Dog”
another student model, (Open)
which usually comes in a smaller size. In recent years, KD
Request for
has demonstrated encouraging success across various reownership protection. As KD inherently involves makingDistillation
Authorised User
search domains in artificial intelligence, including but not
the student model imitate the predictions or features of the
limited to deep model compression (Yu et al. 2017), increteacher, the network intellectual property may easier get
mental learning (Rosenfeld and Tsotsos 2020), and continleaked to malicious users. This issue is especially critical for
ual learning (Lange et al. 2021). Many recent efforts have
privacy-sensitive applications, since with the leaked knowlfocused on improving the efficiency of KD, and showcased
edge, malicious users may potentially reverse engineer the
that the KD process can be lightened without much comlearning model or even the private data, and further redispensation on performances (Park et al. 2019; Mirzadeh et al.
tribute or abuse them illegally.
2020; Chen et al. 2020).
There have been some prior efforts on protecting model
In spite of the practical task setup and the promising reownership,
but none of them, unfortunately, has explored sesults, the KD process itself, in reality, poses a threat to model
curing the KD process to only authorized uses. For example,
the network watermarking (Merrer, Pérez, and Trédan 2019;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Zhang et al. 2018b) aims to verify and protect network intel3117

