The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Introducing Symmetries to Black Box Meta Reinforcement Learning
Louis Kirsch1 2 , Sebastian Flennerhag1 , Hado van Hasselt1 , Abram Friesen1 , Junhyuk Oh1 ,
Yutian Chen1
1
DeepMind
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI, SUPSI
louis@idsia.ch, {flennerhag,hado,abef,junhyuk,yutianc}@deepmind.com
2

Abstract

with backpropagation-based optimization, such as memory
requirements, catastrophic forgetting, and differentiability.
Unfortunately, black-box methods have not yet been successful at discovering general-purpose RL algorithms that
compete with the generality of human-engineered algorithms. In this work, we show that black-box methods exploit fewer symmetries than backpropagation-based methods. We hypothesise that introducing more symmetries to
black-box meta-learners can improve their generalisation capabilities. We test this hypothesis by introducing a number
of symmetries into an existing black-box meta learning algorithm, including (1) the use of the same learned learning
rule across all nodes of the neural network (NN), (2) the
flexibility to work with any input, output, and architecture
sizes, and (3) invariance to permutations of the inputs and
outputs (for dense layers). Permutation invariance implies
that for any permutation of inputs and outputs the learning algorithm produces the same policy. As we show, this
is similar to dense NNs trained with backpropagation that
also exhibit permutation invariance. We refer to such agents
as symmetric learning agents (SymLA).
To introduce these symmetries, we build on variable
shared meta learning (VSML) (Kirsch and Schmidhuber
2021), which we adapt to the RL setting. VSML arranges
multiple RNNs like weights in a NN and performs message passing between these RNNs. We then perform meta
training and meta testing similar to black-box MetaRNNs,
also known as RL2 (Wang et al. 2016; Duan et al. 2016).
We experimentally validate SymLA on bandits, classic control, and grid worlds, comparing generalisation capabilities
to MetaRNNs. SymLA improves generalisation when varying action dimensions, permuting observations and actions,
and significantly changing tasks and environments.

Meta reinforcement learning (RL) attempts to discover new
RL algorithms automatically from environment interaction.
In so-called black-box approaches, the policy and the learning
algorithm are jointly represented by a single neural network.
These methods are very flexible, but they tend to underperform compared to human-engineered RL algorithms in terms
of generalisation to new, unseen environments. In this paper,
we explore the role of symmetries in meta-generalisation. We
show that a recent successful meta RL approach that metalearns an objective for backpropagation-based learning exhibits certain symmetries (specifically the reuse of the learning rule, and invariance to input and output permutations)
that are not present in typical black-box meta RL systems.
We hypothesise that these symmetries can play an important role in meta-generalisation. Building off recent work
in black-box supervised meta learning, we develop a blackbox meta RL system that exhibits these same symmetries.
We show through careful experimentation that incorporating
these symmetries can lead to algorithms with a greater ability to generalise to unseen action & observation spaces, tasks,
and environments.

Introduction
Recent work in meta reinforcement learning (RL) has begun
to tackle the challenging problem of automatically discovering general-purpose RL algorithms (Kirsch, van Steenkiste,
and Schmidhuber 2020; Alet et al. 2020; Oh et al. 2020).
These methods learn to reinforcement learn by optimizing for earned reward over the lifetimes of many agents in
multiple environments. If the discovered learning principles
are sufficiently general-purpose, then the learned algorithms
should generalise to significantly different unseen environments. Depending on the structure of the learned algorithm,
these methods can be partitioned into backpropagationbased methods, which learn to use the backpropagation algorithm to reinforcement learn, and black-box-based methods,
in which a single (typically recurrent) neural network jointly
specifies the agent and RL algorithm (Wang et al. 2016;
Duan et al. 2016). While backpropagation-based methods
are more prevalent due to their relative ease of implementation and theoretical guarantees, black-box methods are expressive and have the potential to avoid some of the issues

Preliminaries
Reinforcement Learning
The RL setting in this work follows the standard (PO)MDP
formulation. At every time step, t = 1, 2, . . . the agent receives a new observation ot ∈ O generated from the environment state st ∈ S and performs an action at ∈ A sampled from its (recurrent) policy πθ = p(at |o1:t , a1:t−1 ). The
agent receives a reward rt ∈ R ⊂ R and the environment
transitions to the next state. This transition is defined by the

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7202

