The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Deeper Understanding of State-Based Critics
in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Xueguang Lyu, Andrea Baisero, Yuchen Xiao, Christopher Amato
Northeastern University
{lu.xue, baisero.a, xiao.yuch, c.amato}@northeastern.edu

Abstract

by providing both intuition and analysis of theoretical properties of state-based critics, complimented with empirical
findings and suggestions.
First, we show how the state-based critic is not entirely
sound in theory. We provide bias analysis to conclude that the
state-based critic may incur unbounded bias on the policy gradient compared to the asymptotically unbiased history-based
critic. Second, even assuming that the state-based critic is
unbiased, we analyze policy gradient variance and show that
the policy gradient variance with the state-based critic cannot
be less than that of the history-based critic. We also give
trivial and intuitive toy examples that highlight the essence
of our arguments and provide an intuitive understanding of
the theories.
We also compare the empirical performance of state-based
and history-based critics. Supported by a wide array of experiments, we also discuss the implications of our theories
in practice. We highlight particular circumstances regarding
reactive policies, information gathering, and representation
learning. We demonstrate how the effectiveness of different
types of critics depends on observation models of the tasks
and highlight the deficiencies of popular benchmarks. We
also test an alternative critic that combines state and history information, which demonstrates reliability across tasks.
Through linking empirical results with theory, we establish a
deeper understanding of where the state-based critics work
and where they fall short.

Centralized Training for Decentralized Execution, where training is done in a centralized offline fashion, has become a popular solution paradigm in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning.
Many such methods take the form of actor-critic with statebased critics, since centralized training allows access to the
true system state, which can be useful during training despite
not being available at execution time. State-based critics have
become a common empirical choice, albeit one which has had
limited theoretical justification or analysis. In this paper, we
show that state-based critics can introduce bias in the policy
gradient estimates, potentially undermining the asymptotic
guarantees of the algorithm. We also show that, even if the
state-based critics do not introduce any bias, they can still
result in a larger gradient variance, contrary to the common
intuition. Finally, we show the effects of the theories in practice by comparing different forms of centralized critics on a
wide range of common benchmarks, and detail how various
environmental properties are related to the effectiveness of
different types of critics.

1

Introduction

The rising popularity of Centralized Critics in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has led to the usage of state
information becoming common practice. The rationale behind state-based critics is straightforward—centralized critics
train in a centralized offline manner and usually have access
to the environment state, which appears desirable compared
to local observations. Because critics can be discarded after
the training of actors, they do not hinder independent execution by each agent. As a result, state-based critics have
become a convenient and popular design decision for centralized training with actor-critic methods (Foerster et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2020; Du et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020;
Su, Adams, and Beling 2021; Du et al. 2021; Schroeder de
Witt et al. 2019; Baker et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021). However, state-based critics have received little formal analysis,
making the state-based critic’s benefits and downsides insufficiently understood in the field. In this paper, we point out that
there exists misconceptions in the field towards state-based
critics. Our primary contribution is to fill this knowledge gap

2

Related Work

Centralized Training for Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008; Foerster
et al. 2016) has shown significant benefits for learning
decentralized policies by addressing environmental nonstationarity that emerges in independent learning methods.
CTDE provides access to global information during training
while having decentralized execution. Learning decentralized
actors with a centralized critic has thus arisen as a direct
and widespread use of the CTDE framework. There are
many variants of the information used by the centralized
critic, such as the environment state, joint observation, joint
action-observation history, or even mixed combinations.
COMA (Foerster et al. 2018), as the first deep multi-agent
actor-critic-based algorithm with CTDE, learns a centralized
critic to provide joint Q-value estimations with explicit ac-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9396

