The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Off-Policy Learning for Ranking Policies with Logged Feedback
Teng Xiao, Suhang Wang
The Pennsylvania State University
{tengxiao, szw494}@psu.edu

Abstract

lenges. (1) Missing online interactions. In contrast to probability ranking methods, training an optimal RL algorithm
requires a large number of online interactions with the environments (real users) (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019),
which is impractical as it could hurt user experiences when
the RL agent is not well-trained, especially at the beginning of training. Without online interactions, RL algorithms
such as the Q-learning (Haarnoja et al. 2017) and ActorCritic (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Lillicrap et al. 2015) suffer
from the overestimation issue (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019; Kumar et al. 2020), a phenomenon that unseen
state-action pairs are erroneously estimated to have unrealistic values if there is no online interaction with real users,
which is also verified by our preliminary analysis in § 2.2.
(2) Lack of characteristics of ranking. Off-policy RL methods, such as one-step Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan 1992)
and variants of deep Q networks (DQN) (Schaul et al. 2016),
enjoy the advantage of learning from any samples from the
same environment (i.e., off-policy learning). However, as
shown in our analysis § 2.2, these methods can be seen as a
regression problem that focuses on directly estimating optimal state-action value. However, in recommendation, we are
more interested in the relative ranking of the actions (items)
given user states and optimizing the ranking metric instead
of the absolute values of actions, which is the main difference between recommendation and the robotics domain
where only one optimal action is needed at each time step.
(3) Partial and sparse feedback. In RS, click data, which is
called implicit data, are easy to collect because they represent the behavior logs of the users. As the implicit data is
not the explicit feedback of the users’ preferences, one cannot know whether unclicked feedback is negative feedback
or unlabeled positive feedback. Directly considering the reward of unclicked feedback as negative would lead to a suboptimal ranking algorithm. As shown in (Chen et al. 2019),
standard off-policy learning methods do not take into account unobserved feedbacks. Motivated by the discussions
above, in this paper, we investigate the problem of learning a ranking algorithm that can simultaneously maximize
the future reward and optimize the ranking metric based on
logged feedbacks. It is a challenging problem as: (i) There
is a huge optimization gap between MLE and RL since they
are totally different learning paradigms for ranking as we
discussed above; (ii) In practice, there is no access to the

Probabilistic learning to rank (LTR) has been the dominating
approach for optimizing the ranking metric, but cannot maximize long-term rewards. Reinforcement learning models have
been proposed to maximize user long-term rewards by formulating the recommendation as a sequential decision-making
problem, but could only achieve inferior accuracy compared
to LTR counterparts, primarily due to the lack of online interactions and the characteristics of ranking. In this paper, we
propose a new off-policy value ranking (VR) algorithm that
can simultaneously maximize user long-term rewards and optimize the ranking metric offline for improved sample efficiency in a unified Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework. We theoretically and empirically show that the EM
process guides the leaned policy to enjoy the benefit of integration of the future reward and ranking metric, and learn
without any online interactions. Extensive offline and online
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods.

1

Introduction

With the advances of deep learning, various deep learning
based recommender systems (RS) have been proposed to
capture the dynamics of user preferences. However, they are
mainly based on the probability ranking principle (Robertson 1977) that the optimal ranking should rank items in
terms of probability of relevance to a user. Typically, these
methods are trained based on Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) on the past logged feedbacks with supervised
pointwise (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008), pairwise (Rendle et al. 2012), or listwise (Cao et al. 2007) loss functions.
Probability learning to rank (LTR) is one of the guiding technical principles behind the optimization of ranking models in information retrieval. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) is gaining a lot of attraction in recommender system (Chen et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2018b; Zou et al. 2020;
Xiao and Wang 2021; Xin et al. 2020). Different from probability LTR which focuses on picking a model under the
immediate feedback distribution, RL in general focuses on
learning policy that takes actions in a dynamic environment
so as to maximize the long-term reward.
Despite its attraction, optimizing the RL objective under
the real recommendation scenario has the following chalCopyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8700

