The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Bridging Sample Complexity and Model Capacity
Shibin Mei, Chenglong Zhao, Shengchao Yuan, Bingbing Ni*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{adair327, cl-zhao, sc yuan, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

2006), which build on strong assumptions for data distribution and complex calculations. Branchaud et al. (BranchaudCharron, Achkar, and Jodoin 2019) develop CSG metric for
dataset complexity assessment based on class overlap and
spectral clustering of image datasets. Schmidt et al (Schmidt
et al. 2018) utilize a simple setting of mixture of two spherical Gaussians with one component per class. They theoretically analyze the model capacity required for standard training and adversarial training, and further extend their conclusion to complex datasets.
Instead of discussing sample complexity from the whole
dataset, we focus on the most representative points in the
dataset. These key-points, defined as dominating data, can
serve as data anchors, which play an essential role in model
fitting. Concretely, the whole dataset can be divided as several clusters based on point distance, and the dominating
data can be extracted from these clusters. We assume that if
the model fits on these dominating data, the learned patterns
can easily generalize to the whole dataset. Similar viewpoints can also be embodied in support vector machine (Noble 2006) and prototype learning (Yang et al. 2018; Zhang
et al. 2018). In this paper, we use the concept of dominating
data as a medium to explore the relationship between sample
complexity and model capacity.
We argue that the amount of dominating data is a good
metric for the sample complexity. Furthermore, we give the
definition of model capacity, and theoretically give the upper
and lower bounds of the model capacity required for training
under a certain amount of dominant data. Inspired by continuous mapping, we also provide a qualitative evaluation for
sample complexity of a given dataset based on clusters. Besides, considering the dominating data wrapped by clusters
can be regarded as unit distribution, we can further analysis
the relationship between sample complexity and data distribution, and give a new method to compute the sample complexity by inter-class and intra-class distribution. We think
this investigation has broad implications for present representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We give a new definition of sample complexity and theoretically build the relationship between sample complexity and model capacity.
• We further discuss the relationship between sample complexity and data distribution, and measure the sample

In this paper, we give a new definition for sample complexity,
and further develop a theoretical analysis to bridge the gap between sample complexity and model capacity. In contrast to
previous works which study on some toy samples, we conduct
our analysis on more general data space, and build a qualitative relationship from sample complexity to model capacity
required to achieve comparable performance. Besides, we introduce a simple indicator to evaluate the sample complexity
based on continuous mapping. Moreover, we further analysis
the relationship between sample complexity and data distribution, which paves the way to understand the present representation learning. Extensive experiments on several datasets
well demonstrate the effectiveness of our evaluation method.

Introduction
Over the past decades, the boom in deep neural networks
(DNNs) has promoted the rapid development of artificial intelligence communities (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Girshick
2015; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015). Along with these
advances, a large amount of newly proposed datasets and
deep neural network structures (Simonyan and Zisserman
2014; He et al. 2016) further promote the breakthrough of
deep learning. However, there exist two common concerns
in the most basic classification tasks, that is, how to evaluate the sample complexity of a given dataset and how to
build the relationship between datasets sample complexity
and model capacity.
To tackle these problems, various methods have been proposed to discuss the connection between dataset and model.
Some researchers (Branchaud-Charron, Achkar, and Jodoin
2019; Ho and Basu 2002) start from assessing different
datasets by a series of complexity measures, which are then
used to evaluate the complexity of classification problem.
The class entanglement is evaluated based on the assumption that discriminative and separated classes are conducive
to classification tasks. Ho et al. (Ho and Basu 2002) propose
to evaluate the sample complexity by a combination of 12
descriptors, which is effective for small non-image two-class
datasets. These metrics are then generalized by (OrriolsPuig, Macia, and Ho 2010; Sotoca, Mollineda, and Sánchez
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1972

