The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How Many Representatives Do We Need? The Optimal Size of a Congress Voting
on Binary Issues
Manon Revel* 1 , Tao Lin* 2 and Daniel Halpern* 2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Harvard University
mrevel@mit.edu, tlin@g.harvard.edu, dhalpern@g.harvard.edu

Abstract

In response, every ten years between 1785 and 1913, the
American congress was enlarged–in aggregate from 65 to
435–adapting to evolving state populations (Szpiro 2010).
However, since 1913, this number of representatives has remained constant, bringing the current number of inhabitants
per representative well below Madison’s objective.
Quantitative research rationalizing the optimal congress
size dates back to at least the 1970s. Taagepera (1972) concluded that the number of representatives should be the cube
root of the population size. These findings are regarded as
seminal (Jacobs and Otjes 2015) and have influenced political decisions and referendums, such as the 2020 Italian
referendum to reduce the size of both chambers from 945
to 600 parliamentary (Margaritondo 2021; De Sio and Angelucci 2019).
Yet, recent work using machinery from physics and economics revisited these claims and showed that the optimal
number should be larger, at least proportional to the square
root of the population size (e.g., Auriol and Gary-Bobo
2012; Margaritondo 2021). In particular, Magdon-Ismail
and Xia (2018) explored an epistemic setup that groups voters into pods of size L, and each pod selects one representative. The authors find that the congress size ought to be
linear under this model when voting is cost-less.
Note that our setup for decision-making in a congress on
binary issues, applied here in a democratic context, resembles an ensemble of classifiers in machine learning: classifiers are “voters” who predict a binary outcome, and they
collectively decide, through a majority rule, on the decision’s outcome (Magdon-Ismail and Xia 2018). To obtain a
good ensemble of classifiers, one can measure the accuracy
of all classifiers and keep only the most accurate ones. Designers have used these ideas to reduce uncertainty in decisions and increase the classifiers’ performance by combining
their predictions (Yang 2011; Polikar 2012; Sagi and Rokach
2018).
We can now reformulate our research question in these
terms: how many agents should we include to maximize the
accuracy of the decision?

Aggregating opinions of a collection of agents is a question of interest to a broad array of researchers, ranging from
ensemble-learning theorists to political scientists designing
democratic institutions. This work investigates the optimal
number of agents needed to decide on a binary issue under
majority rule. We take an epistemic view where the issue at
hand has a ground truth “correct” outcome and each one of
n voters votes correctly with a fixed probability, known as
their competence level or competence. These competencies
come from a fixed distribution D. Observing the competencies, we must choose a specific group that will represent the
population. Finally, voters sample a decision (either correct
or not), and the group is correct as long as more than half the
chosen representatives voted correctly. Assuming that we can
identify the best experts, i.e., those with the highest competence, to form an epistemic congress we find that the optimal
congress size should be linear in the population size. This result is striking because it holds even when allowing the top
representatives to become arbitrarily accurate, choosing the
correct outcome with probabilities approaching 1. We then
analyze real-world data, observing that the actual sizes of representative bodies are much smaller than the optimal ones our
theoretical results suggest. We conclude by examining under
what conditions congresses of sub-optimal sizes would still
outperform direct democracy, in which all voters vote. We
find that a small congress would beat direct democracy if the
rate at which the societal bias towards the ground truth decreases with the population size fast enough, and we quantify
the speed needed for constant and polynomial congress sizes.

Introduction
Modern governments often take the form of a representative democracy, that is, a college of chosen representatives
form a congress to make decisions on behalf of the citizenry. Clearly, the performance of the congress depends
on the number of representatives, and this optimal number
of representatives has been subject to great debate.1 In the
Federalist Paper No. 56, Madison argued that there should
be a representative for every thirty thousand inhabitants.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See activists at https://thirty-thousand.org who advocate for
enlarging the congress.

Our Contribution
Through novel proofs techniques, we strengthen the pessimistic results of Magdon-Ismail and Xia (2018) for
congress under the epistemic approach, finding that even
9431

