The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Modeling Attrition in Recommender Systems with Departing Bandits
Omer Ben-Porat* 1 , Lee Cohen* 1 , Liu Leqi* 2 , Zachary C. Lipton2 , Yishay Mansour1,3
1
2

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Google Research

Abstract

In traditional formalizations of RSs as MABs, the recommender’s decisions affect only the rewards obtained. However, real-life recommenders face a dynamic that potentially
alters the exploration-exploitation tradeoff: Dissatisfied users
have the option to depart the system, never to return. Thus,
recommendations in the service of exploration not only impact instantaneous rewards but also risk driving away users
and therefore can influence long-term cumulative rewards by
shortening trajectories of interactions.
In this work, we propose departing bandits which augment
conventional MABs by incorporating these policy-dependent
horizons. To motivate our setup, we consider the following
example: An RS for recommending blog articles must choose
at each time among two categories of articles, e.g., economics
and sports. Upon a user’s arrival, the RS recommends articles
sequentially. After each recommendation, the user decides
whether to “click” the article and continue to the next recommendation, or to “not click” and may leave the system.
Crucially, the user interacts with the system for a random
number of rounds. The user’s departure probability depends
on their satisfaction from the recommended item, which in
turn depends on the user’s unknown type. A user’s type encodes their preferences (hence the probability of clicking) on
the two topics (economics and sports).
When model parameters are given, in contrast to traditional MABs where the optimal policy is to play the best
fixed arm, departing bandits require more careful analysis to
derive an optimal planning strategy. Such planning is a local
problem, in the sense that it is solved for each user. Since the
user type is never known explicitly (the recommender must
update its beliefs over the user types after each interaction),
finding an optimal recommendation policy requires solving
a specific partially observable MDP (POMDP) where the
user type constitutes the (unobserved) state (more details in
Section 5.1). When the model parameters are unknown, we
deal with a learning problem that is global, in the sense that
the recommender (learner) is learning for a stream of users
instead of a particular user.
We begin with a formal definition of departing bandits
in Section 2, and demonstrate that any fixed-arm policy is
prone to suffer linear regret. In Section 3, we establish the
UCB-based learning framework used in later sections. We
instantiate this framework with a single
√ user type in Section 4,
where we show that it achieves Õ( T ) regret for T being

Traditionally, when recommender systems are formalized as
multi-armed bandits, the policy of the recommender system influences the rewards accrued, but not the length of interaction.
However, in real-world systems, dissatisfied users may depart
(and never come back). In this work, we propose a novel multiarmed bandit setup that captures such policy-dependent horizons. Our setup consists of a finite set of user types, and multiple arms with Bernoulli payoffs. Each (user type, arm) tuple
corresponds to an (unknown) reward probability. Each user’s
type is initially unknown and can only be inferred through
their response to recommendations. Moreover, if a user is dissatisfied with their recommendation, they might depart the
system. We first address the case where all users share the
same type, demonstrating that a recent UCB-based algorithm
is optimal. We then move forward to the more challenging
case, where users are divided among two types. While naive
approaches cannot handle this setting,√we provide an efficient
learning algorithm that achieves Õ( T ) regret, where T is
the number of users.

1

Introduction

At the heart of online services spanning such diverse industries as media consumption, dating, financial products, and
more, recommendation systems (RSs) drive personalized experiences by making curation decisions informed by each
user’s past history of interactions. While in practice, these
systems employ diverse statistical heuristics, much of our
theoretical understanding of them comes via stylized formulations within the multi-armed bandits (MABs) framework.
While MABs abstract away from many aspects of real-world
systems they allow us to extract crisp insights by formalizing
fundamental tradeoffs, such as that between exploration and
exploitation that all RSs must face (Joseph et al. 2016; Liu
and Ho 2018; Patil et al. 2020; Ron, Ben-Porat, and Shalit
2021). As applies to RSs, exploitation consists of continuing to recommend items (or categories of items) that have
been observed to yield high rewards in the past, while exploration consists of recommending items (or categories of
items) about which the RS is uncertain but that could potentially yield even higher rewards.
* Equal contribution, alphabetical order.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6072

