The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transformer Uncertainty Estimation with Hierarchical Stochastic Attention
Jiahuan Pei1,2 * , Cheng Wang2† , György Szarvas2
1

2

University of Amsterdam
Amazon Development Center Germany GmbH, Berlin, Germany
{jpei, cwngam, szarvasg}@amazon.de

Abstract
𝑧𝑗

Transformers are state-of-the-art in a wide range of NLP
tasks and have also been applied to many real-world products. Understanding the reliability and certainty of transformer model predictions is crucial for building trustable
machine learning applications, e.g., medical diagnosis. Although many recent transformer extensions have been proposed, the study of the uncertainty estimation of transformer
models is under-explored. In this work, we propose a novel
way to enable transformers to have the capability of uncertainty estimation and, meanwhile, retain the original predictive performance. This is achieved by learning a hierarchical stochastic self-attention that attends to values and a set of
learnable centroids, respectively. Then new attention heads
are formed with a mixture of sampled centroids using the
Gumbel-Softmax trick. We theoretically show that the selfattention approximation by sampling from a Gumbel distribution is upper bounded. We empirically evaluate our model on
two text classification tasks with both in-domain (ID) and outof-domain (OOD) datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that our approach: (1) achieves the best predictive performance and uncertainty trade-off among compared methods; (2) exhibits very competitive (in most cases, improved)
predictive performance on ID datasets; (3) is on par with
Monte Carlo dropout and ensemble methods in uncertainty
estimation on OOD datasets.

1

𝑥𝑖

𝑓

𝑦

𝑧𝑗

𝑊𝑖𝑗

𝑥𝑖

(a)

(b)
𝑧𝑗
𝑥𝑖

𝑓𝑗

𝑓

𝑧𝑗

𝑦
𝑥𝑖

𝑊𝑖𝑗 = 𝜇𝑖𝑗 + 𝜖 ∗ 𝜎𝑖𝑗
𝜖~𝐺𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(0,1)

𝑦

𝑊𝑖𝑗

𝑟𝑖~𝐵𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑙𝑖(1 − 𝑝)
(c) 𝑟𝑖
𝑝 ∈ [0; 1]

𝑦𝑗

𝑊𝑖𝑗

𝑧𝑗
𝑧𝑘 𝑓 k
𝑥𝑖

𝑥𝑖

𝑓

𝑊𝑖k

𝑦k

𝑥𝑖

𝑓

𝑦

𝑦

𝑔𝑖~𝐺𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑙[−log(− log 𝑢 ]
𝑔𝑖 𝑢~𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚(0,1)

(e)

(d)

Figure 1: The methods of uncertainty estimation. (a) Deterministic neural network outputs a single-point prediction;
(b) Bayesian neural network captures uncertainty via sampling from a Gaussian distribution; (c) Variational dropout
captures uncertainty via sampling dropout masks from a
Bernoulli distribution; (d) Ensemble captures uncertainty
by combining multiple independently trained deterministic
models with different random seeds; (e) Gumbel-Softmax
trick for uncertainty estimation, the randomness comes from
the sampling categorical distribution from a Gumbel.
2020) are the representative state-of-the-art type of neural
architectures that have shown remarkable performance on
various recent Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Gillioz
et al. 2020) and Information Retrieval (IR) (Ren et al. 2021)
tasks.
Although transformers excel in terms of predictive performance (Tetko et al. 2020; Han et al. 2021), they do not
offer the opportunity for practitioners to inspect the model
confidence due to their deterministic nature, i.e., incapability to assess if transformers are confident about their predictions. This influence is non-trivial because transformers
are cutting-edge basic models for NLP. Thus, estimating the
predictive uncertainty of transformers benefits a lot in terms
of building and examining model reliability for the downstream tasks.
To estimate the uncertainty of neural models’ prediction,
one common way is to inject stochasticity (e.g., noise or randomness) (Kabir et al. 2018; Gawlikowski et al. 2021). It
enables models to output a predictive distribution, instead

Introduction

Uncertainty estimation and quantification are important
tools for building trustworthy and reliable machine learning
systems (Lin, Engel, and Eslinger 2012; Kabir et al. 2018;
Riedmaier et al. 2021). Particularly, when such machinelearned systems are applied to make predictions that involve important decisions, e.g., medical diagnosis (Ghoshal
and Tucker 2020), financial planning and decision-making
(Baker et al. 2020; Oh and Hong 2021), and autonomous
driving (Hoel, Wolff, and Laine 2020). The recent development of neural networks has shown excellent predictive
performance in many domains. Among those, transformers,
including the vanilla transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) and
its variants such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019; Wang et al.
* This work has been done while doing internship at Amazon.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11147

