The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Active Learning for Domain Adaptation: An Energy-Based Approach
Binhui Xie,1 Longhui Yuan,1 Shuang Li,1, * Chi Harold Liu,1 Xinjing Cheng,2, 3 Guoren Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Inceptio Technology, Shanghai, China
{binhuixie, longhuiyuan, shuangli, chiliu, wanggr}@bit.edu.cn, cnorbot@gmail.com

Abstract

domain (Pan and Yang 2010; Tzeng et al. 2015, 2017; Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015; Long et al. 2018; Bousmalis et al.
2017; Li et al. 2021a,c; Saito et al. 2018). The performance
of DA, in spite of great success, often falls far behind that of
supervised learning. In practice, it is feasible to obtain extra
annotations for target data, but to save cost, it is better to select the most informative subset via active learning (Prince
2004; Hanneke 2014; Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2009).
While previous active learning studies drastically lower
human annotation costs, they are impractical when test data
are collected from out-of-distribution. How can we design
an efficient and practical sampling strategy for domain adaptation? For one thing, it is essential to determine which target
samples will, once labeled, boost the accuracy and generalization considerably. For another, it remains the boundary to
explore how to effectively utilize limited labeled data from
the target domain to perform adaptation. Aware of this need,
researchers have developed an array of active domain adaptation (Active DA) methods (Chattopadhyay et al. 2013; Rai
et al. 2010; Su et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2021; Prabhu et al. 2021;
Chan and Ng 2007). Prior works mainly focus on assessing how private each target data is according to the output
of a domain discriminator or calculating its distance to the
cluster centroids. However, these additional procedures either select target samples that are originally well aligned
with the source domain or increase the computational overhead, which limits their capability. Therefore, a simple yet
efficient solution is urgently desired.
In this paper, we advocate the use of energy-based models (EBMs) (LeCun et al. 2006) to help realize the potential of active learning under domain shift. For any given
x (e.g., an image), an EBM approach gives the lowest energy to the correct answer y (e.g., a label). Grathwohl et al.
(2020) and Liu et al. (2020) have demonstrated that energybased training improves calibration and better distinguishes
in- and out-of-distribution samples than the standard discriminative classifier. At this point, we begin with investigating the distributions of free energy on source and target
domains using diverse methods and make several observations from Fig. 1. First, a model trained only on labeled
source data will cause the free energy distribution of the supervised source data to be lower than that of the unlabeled
target data, that is, free energy biases between the two domains (Fig. 1(a)). Then, an interesting finding is that these

Unsupervised domain adaptation has recently emerged as an
effective paradigm for generalizing deep neural networks to
new target domains. However, there is still enormous potential to be tapped to reach the fully supervised performance.
In this paper, we present a novel active learning strategy to
assist knowledge transfer in the target domain, dubbed active domain adaptation. We start from an observation that
energy-based models exhibit free energy biases when training (source) and test (target) data come from different distributions. Inspired by this inherent mechanism, we empirically reveal that a simple yet efficient energy-based sampling strategy sheds light on selecting the most valuable target samples than existing approaches requiring particular architectures or computation of the distances. Our algorithm,
Energy-based Active Domain Adaptation (EADA), queries
groups of target data that incorporate both domain characteristic and instance uncertainty into every selection round.
Meanwhile, by aligning the free energy of target data compact
around the source domain via a regularization term, domain
gap can be implicitly diminished. Through extensive experiments, we show that EADA surpasses state-of-the-art methods on well-known challenging benchmarks with substantial
improvements, making it a useful option in the open world.
Code is available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/EADA.

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed great strides in diverse
machine learning problems with the success of deep neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012a).
At the moment, however, these leaps in performance come
only when labeled data is abundant. This limits their usage
in many practical applications, such as autonomous driving with massive unlabeled data (Yogamani et al. 2019) and
medical diagnosis with high labeling cost (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015). Moreover, even labeling all available
data is not an excellent solution, as it’s impossible to fully
capture the way the world looks in a single dataset, let alone
the fact that the test data rarely matches the data seen during
training. Recognizing these challenges, domain adaptation
(DA) has been studied extensively, which transfers models
trained on a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8708

