The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PUMA: Performance Unchanged Model Augmentation for Training Data Removal
Ga Wu, Masoud Hashemi, Christopher Srinivasa
Borealis AI
{ga.wu, masoud.hashemi, christopher.srinivasa}@borealisai.com

Abstract

In the literature, a few initial works attempted to address
the data removal challenge. For example, (Ginart et al. 2019)
devised a general notion of removal efficiency and proposed
two model-specific data removal algorithms (for k-means
clustering models). Similarly, (Guo et al. 2020) introduced
a notion of Certified Removal and verified the effectiveness
of their data removal approach on linear classifiers. However,
those methods usually focus on specific ML algorithms and
are hard to generalize to deep neural networks that dominate the latest ML research and applications. (Bourtoule et al.
2019), alternatively, proposed a data removal-friendly model
by ensembling multiple ML models trained on disjoint data
partitions. As such, the data removal operation would only
involve a sub-model. (Graves, Nagisetty, and Ganesh 2020)
proposed a more generalized single-model solution by explicitly estimating the contribution (gradients) of each training
data point as an additive function. Unfortunately, such approaches require high costs; maintaining many sub-models
and tracking the model training process are barely feasible
for real-world applications. In addition, existing data removal
works merely pay attention to the performance degradation
problem when removing marked data points. While (Ginart
et al. 2019)’s criterion includes a constraint such as performance of the resulting model should not be worse than that
of a model trained from scratch with remaining data, it does
not intend to preserve the performance of the original model.

Preserving the performance of a trained model while removing unique characteristics of marked training data points is
challenging. Recent research usually suggests retraining a
model from scratch with remaining training data or refining
the model by reverting the model optimization on the marked
data points. Unfortunately, aside from their computational inefficiency, those approaches inevitably hurt the resulting model’s
generalization ability since they remove not only unique characteristics but also discard shared (and possibly contributive)
information. To address the performance degradation problem,
this paper presents a novel approach called Performance Unchanged Model Augmentation (PUMA). The proposed PUMA
framework explicitly models the influence of each training
data point on the model’s generalization ability with respect to
various performance criteria. It then complements the negative
impact of removing marked data by reweighting the remaining data optimally. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the
PUMA framework, we compared it with multiple state-of-theart data removal techniques in the experiments, where we show
the PUMA can effectively and efficiently remove the unique
characteristics of marked training data without retraining the
model that can 1) fool a membership attack, and 2) resist performance degradation. In addition, as PUMA estimates the
data importance during its operation, we show it could serve
to debug mislabelled data points more efficiently than existing
approaches.

In this paper, we propose a novel approach, Performance
Unchanged Model Augmentation (PUMA), to efficiently
erase the unique characteristics of marked data points from a
trained model without causing performance degradation. In
particular, the proposed PUMA framework explicitly models
the influence of each training data point on the model with
respect to various performance criteria (that are not necessarily the model training objectives). It then complements
the negative impact of removing marked data by reweighting
the remaining data points sparsely and optimally through a
constrained optimization. Consequently, PUMA can preserve
model performance by linearly patching the original model
via reweighting operation while eliminating unique characteristics of marked data points. In the experiments, we compare
PUMA with existing data removal approaches and show that
PUMA has two desired properties: 1) It can successfully fool
a membership attack (Shokri et al. 2017), 2) It can resist
performance degradation.

Introduction
As many countries and territories become increasingly concerned with personal data protection, the corresponding protection regulations1 entitle individuals to revoke their authorization of using their data for data analysis and machine
learning (ML) model training. While retraining ML models by removing marked data points is a feasible solution,
frequent data removal requests inevitably put enormous computational pressure on the infrastructures responsible for realtime ML services. Furthermore, cumulative data loss results
in quick performance degradation. Hence, effectively eliminating data’s unique characteristics while preserving model
performance is a critical and challenging research question.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
CCPA in California, GDPR in Europe, PIPEDA in Canada,
LGPD in Brazil, and NDBS in Australia.

8675

