The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bag Graph: Multiple Instance Learning Using Bayesian Graph Neural Networks
Soumyasundar Pal*, Antonios Valkanas*, Florence Regol, Mark Coates
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
{soumyasundar.pal, antonios.valkanas, florence.robert-regol}@mail.mcgill.ca, mark.coates@mcgill.ca

Abstract

The resulting algorithms cannot model any interaction between the instances (Zhou, Sun, and Li 2009), so they struggle when strong dependencies exist and provide valuable information (Quellec et al. 2017). More recently, MIL methods have embraced bag embedding approaches (Wang et al.
2018). These methods employ pooling to combine instance
representations into an embedding for the entire bag.
The presence of structure between the instances in a bag
motivated the use of a graph to model the dependencies.
In (Zhang et al. 2011), a relational graph was used to specify similarities between instances. With the recent advances
in graph neural networks (GNNs), there have been efforts
to use these to represent the structure of instances within a
bag (Tu et al. 2019; Yin et al. 2019).
Our key observation is that while graphs have been used
to model relationships between instances, they have not been
employed to specify relationships between bags. In some
applications, side-information provides a clear mechanism
for constructing a graph. For example, in a real estate application when the goal is to predict mean neighborhood
rental prices, we may assume that nearby neighborhoods
have similar pricing (Valkanas, Regol, and Coates 2020). A
graph can then be constructed with edges representing geographic proximity. The identified dependencies are valuable
in a graph-based learning framework, leading to improved
predictive performance. In other cases, there is no graph
available, or the available graph information is noisy. Even
in these circumstances it can be beneficial to explicitly learn
a graph structure to represent dependencies between bags
and to exploit this structure when forming label predictions.
The primary contributions of this paper are:
1. We formulate an end-to-end multiple instance learning
architecture that incorporates (i) neural network based
MIL models (e.g., Deep Sets (Zaheer et al. 2017) or Set
Transformer (Lee et al. 2019)) to model instance interactions within bags; and (ii) a Bayesian graph neural network to jointly learn a graph topology to represent dependencies between bags and to assign labels;
2. We demonstrate that various instantiations of the proposed technique achieve comparable classification performance to state-of-the art methods on MIL benchmark
datasets, outperform competitors in a text categorization
experiment and in electoral result prediction, and offer a
significant advantage in an MIL regression task.

Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a weakly supervised
learning problem where the aim is to assign labels to sets or
bags of instances, as opposed to traditional supervised learning where each instance is assumed to be independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) and is to be labeled individually. Recent work has shown promising results for neural network models in the MIL setting. Instead of focusing on each
instance, these models are trained in an end-to-end fashion
to learn effective bag-level representations by suitably combining permutation invariant pooling techniques with neural
architectures. In this paper, we consider modelling the interactions between bags using a graph and employ Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to facilitate end-to-end learning. Since
a meaningful graph representing dependencies between bags
is rarely available, we propose to use a Bayesian GNN framework that can generate a likely graph structure for scenarios
where there is uncertainty in the graph or when no graph is
available. Empirical results demonstrate the efficacy of the
proposed technique for several MIL benchmark tasks and a
distribution regression task.

Introduction
In numerous supervised learning settings, our aim is to assign a label to a group (or bag) of instances as opposed to
assigning labels to the individual instances. Example applications include drug activity prediction (Dietterich, Lathrop,
and Lozano-Pérez 1997), disease diagnosis (Quellec et al.
2017), and election outcome prediction (Flaxman, Wang,
and Smola 2015). The number of instances in each group
can vary, and we often only have access to a subset of bag
labels; the instances themselves do not have labels attached.
This task is known as the multiple instance learning problem. Early MIL methods such as (Ramon and De Raedt
2000) used an instance space approach where instances in
each bag are processed individually and then a bag label is
constructed by aggregating the instances’ predictions. While
this approach leads to explainable predictions, it treats instances as i.i.d. samples from an underlying distribution.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Code to reproduce our experiments is available
https://github.com/networkslab/BagGraph

at:

7922

