The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Max-Margin Contrastive Learning
Anshul Shah1 * , Suvrit Sra2 , Rama Chellappa1 , Anoop Cherian3∗†
1
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
3
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA
{ashah95, rchella4}@jhu.edu, suvrit@mit.edu, cherian@merl.com
2

Abstract

the standard noise-constrastive estimation (NCE) (Gutmann
and Hyvärinen 2010) procedure. In NCE, the goal is to learn
data distributions by classifying the unlabeled data against
random noise. However, recently developed contrastive learning methods learn representations by designing objectives
that capture data invariances. Specifically, instead of using
random noise as in NCE, these methods transform data samples to sets of samples, each set consisting of transformed
variants of a sample, and the auxiliary task is to classify one
set (positives) against the rest (negatives). Surprisingly, even
by using simple data transformations, such as color jittering, image cropping, or rotations, these methods are able to
learn superior and generalizable representations, sometimes
even outperforming supervised learning algorithms in downstream tasks (e.g., CMC (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2020),
MoCo (Chen et al. 2020c; He et al. 2020), SimCLR (Chen
et al. 2020a), and BYOL (Grill et al. 2020)).
Typically, contrastive learning methods use the NCE-loss
for the learning objective, which is usually a logistic classifier
separating the positives from the negatives. However, as is
often found in NCE algorithms, the negatives should be close
in distribution to the positives for the learned representations
to be useful – a criteria that often demands a large number
of negatives in practice (e.g., 16K in SimCLR (Chen et al.
2020a)). Further, standard contrastive learning approaches
make the implicit assumption that the positives and negatives
belong to distinct classes in the downstream task (Arora et al.
2019). This requirement is hard to enforce in an unsupervised
training regime and defying this assumption may hurt the
downstream performance due to beneficial discriminative
cues being ignored.
In this paper, we explore alternative formulations for contrastive learning beyond the standard logistic classifier. Rather
than contrasting the positive samples against all the negatives
in a batch, our key insight is to design an objective that:
(i) selects a suitable subset of negatives to be contrasted
against, and (ii) provides a means to relax the effect of false
negatives on the learned representations. Fig. 1 presents an
overview of the idea. A natural objective in this regard is the
classical support vector machine (SVM), which produces a
discriminative hyperplane with the maximum margin separating the positives from the negatives. Inspired by SVMs, we

Standard contrastive learning approaches usually require a
large number of negatives for effective unsupervised learning
and often exhibit slow convergence. We suspect this behavior is due to the suboptimal selection of negatives used for
offering contrast to the positives. We counter this difficulty
by taking inspiration from support vector machines (SVMs)
to present max-margin contrastive learning (MMCL). Our approach selects negatives as the sparse support vectors obtained
via a quadratic optimization problem, and contrastiveness is
enforced by maximizing the decision margin. As SVM optimization can be computationally demanding, especially in an
end-to-end setting, we present simplifications that alleviate the
computational burden. We validate our approach on standard
vision benchmark datasets, demonstrating better performance
in unsupervised representation learning over state-of-the-art,
while having better empirical convergence properties.

Introduction
Learning effective data representations is crucial to the success of any machine learning model. Recent years have seen a
surge in algorithms for unsupervised representation learning
that leverage the vast amounts of unlabeled data (Chen et al.
2020a; Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018; Lee et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2019; Zhan et al. 2020). In such algorithms, an
auxiliary learning objective is typically designed to produce
generalizable representations that capture some higher-order
properties of the data. The assumption is that such properties
could potentially be useful in (supervised) downstream tasks,
which may have fewer annotated training samples. For example, in (Noroozi and Favaro 2016; Santa Cruz et al. 2018),
the pre-text task is to solve patch jigsaw puzzles, so that the
representations learned could potentially capture the natural
semantic structure of images. Other popular auxiliary objectives include video frame prediction (Oord, Li, and Vinyals
2018), image coloring (Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016), and
deep clustering (Caron et al. 2018), to name a few.
Among the auxiliary objectives typically used for representation learning, one that has gained significant momentum
recently is that of contrastive learning, which is a variant of
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Code : https://github.com/anshulbshah/MMCL

8220

