The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effect by Data Combination
Kazuhiko Shinoda1 , Takahiro Hoshino2,3
1

Graduate School of Economics, Keio University
2
Faculty of Economics, Keio University
3
RIKEN AIP
k-shinoda@keio.jp, bayesian@jasmine.ocn.ne.jp

Abstract

regardless of the individual’s intentions. In online advertisement placement, the probability of watching the ad depends
on the bidding strategy of other companies because ads that
are actually displayed are determined through the real-timebidding even if one tries to randomly place the ad.
In such cases, it is well known that the local average treatment effect (LATE) can be identified and estimated using the
treatment assignment as an instrumental variable (IV) and
conditions milder than unconfoundedness (Imbens and Angrist 1994; Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996; Frölich 2007).
LATE is the treatment effect measured for the subpopulation of compliers, individuals who always follow the given
assignment.
We suppose that we cannot observe all relevant variables
in a single dataset for technical or privacy reasons. For example, in online-to-offline (O2O) marketing, where treatments
are implemented online and outcomes are observed offline,
it is often difficult to match the records of the same individuals observed separately online and offline. Additionally, with
the global anti-tracking movement gaining momentum, it
may become more difficult to combine multiple pieces of information online as well. Although causal inference by data
combination has been actively studied (Ridder and Moffitt
2007; Bareinboim and Pearl 2016; Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2020), LATE estimation using multiple datasets has
not received much attention despite its practical importance.
We extend the problem setting considered in (Yamane et al.
2018), where two different treatment regimes are available,
to allow for the existence of noncompliance.
For the estimation, we show that the direct estimation
method originally developed for the average treatment effect
(ATE) under the complete compliance (Yamane et al. 2018)
can be applied to the LATE estimation in our setting. However, their method has a practical issue in that model selection and hyperparameter tuning can be unstable owing to its
minimax objective formulation. We then propose a weighted
least squares estimator to avoid the minimax objective, and
improve the stability in practice. Unlike the inverse probability weighted (IPW) estimator (Wooldridge 2002, 2007;
Seaman and White 2013), which is often employed to estimate treatment effects, the proposed estimator directly uses
the estimated propensity-score-difference (PSD) as a weight
without inversion. Therefore, our method can also avoid the
common issue in the IPW methods, that is, high variance at

It is important to estimate the local average treatment effect
(LATE) when compliance with a treatment assignment is incomplete. The previously proposed methods for LATE estimation required all relevant variables to be jointly observed
in a single dataset; however, it is sometimes difficult or even
impossible to collect such data in many real-world problems
for technical or privacy reasons. We consider a novel problem setting in which LATE, as a function of covariates, is
nonparametrically identified from the combination of separately observed datasets. For estimation, we show that the direct least squares method, which was originally developed for
estimating the average treatment effect under complete compliance, is applicable to our setting. However, model selection
and hyperparameter tuning for the direct least squares estimator can be unstable in practice since it is defined as a solution to the minimax problem. We then propose a weighted
least squares estimator that enables simpler model selection
by avoiding the minimax objective formulation. Unlike the
inverse probability weighted (IPW) estimator, the proposed
estimator directly uses the pre-estimated weight without inversion, avoiding the problems caused by the IPW methods.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through experiments using synthetic and real-world datasets.

Introduction
Estimating the causal effects of treatment on an outcome of
interest is central to optimal decision making in many realworld problems, such as policymaking, epidemiology, education, and marketing (Skovron and Titiunik 2015; Wood
et al. 2008; Oreopoulos 2006; Varian 2016). However, the
identification and estimation of treatment effects usually relies on the untestable assumption referred to as unconfoundedness, namely, independence between the treatment status and potential outcomes (Imbens and Rubin 2015). Violations of unconfoundedness may occur not only in observational studies, but also in randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) when compliance to the assigned treatment is not
complete. For example, even if a coupon is distributed randomly to measure its effect on sales, the probability of using the coupon is likely to depend on the unobserved nature
of the individuals. Moreover, noncompliance can also occur
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8295

