The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deceptive Decision-Making under Uncertainty
Yagiz Savas, Christos K. Verginis, Ufuk Topcu
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
yagiz.savas@utexas.edu, christos.verginis@austin.utexas.edu, utopcu@utexas.edu

Abstract

The agent aims to follow a deceptive strategy that misleads
the observer about the true goal either by exaggerating its
behavior towards a decoy goal or by creating ambiguity.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel approach
that systematically generates globally optimal deceptive
strategies in stochastic environments by combining the principle of maximum entropy with stochastic control. The proposed approach involves a number of parameters that enables the agent to exhibit tunable deceptive behaviors and
allows the integration of probabilistic resource constraints
into the formulation. An overview of the proposed approach
is shown in Fig. 1.
We express the observer’s predictions on the agent’s true
goal by developing a prediction model based on the principle of maximum entropy (Ziebart et al. 2008; Ziebart, Bagnell, and Dey 2010). The model is based on three factors,
namely, the observer’s prior beliefs on the agent’s true goal,
a cost function expressing the agent’s expected goal-directed
behavior, and a constant expressing how much efficiency the
observer expects from the agent.
We synthesize deceptive strategies for the agent by developing a planning model based on stochastic optimal control (Puterman 2014). The model takes the observer’s predictions as an input and constructs a constrained optimization
problem that is solved via linear programming. The model
is based on three factors, namely, the agent’s true goal, a
function expressing the type of deception, e.g., exaggeration
or ambiguity, and a discount factor controlling the trade-off
between the trajectory length and deception.
We present three experiments. Firstly, we illustrate the effects of different parameters in the proposed approach on
the agent’s deceptive behavior. Secondly, we present online
user studies and compare the proposed approach to two recently proposed deception methods (Masters and Sardina
2017; Dragan, Holladay, and Srinivasa 2015) as well as a
baseline. Finally, we present a large-scale case study on the
streets of Manhattan, New York with real travel time distributions and illustrate the use of deception in realistic scenarios under probabilistic constraints on travel time.

We study the design of autonomous agents that are capable of
deceiving outside observers about their intentions while carrying out tasks in stochastic, complex environments. By modeling the agent’s behavior as a Markov decision process, we
consider a setting where the agent aims to reach one of multiple potential goals while deceiving outside observers about
its true goal. We propose a novel approach to model observer
predictions based on the principle of maximum entropy and
to efficiently generate deceptive strategies via linear programming. The proposed approach enables the agent to exhibit
a variety of tunable deceptive behaviors while ensuring the
satisfaction of probabilistic constraints on the behavior. We
evaluate the performance of the proposed approach via comparative user studies and present a case study on the streets of
Manhattan, New York, using real travel time distributions.

Introduction
Deception is an important capability that is present in many
human activities, ranging from sports (Jackson and CañalBruland 2019) to business (Chelliah and Swamy 2018) and
military (Tsu 2016). By making deceptive decisions, e.g.,
by hiding information or conveying false information, teams
win games, companies secretly develop new products, and
troops gain strategic advantage during battles. Although the
outcomes of decisions are typically uncertain, e.g., due to incomplete knowledge and imperfect predictions, humans are
still able to deceive one another effectively.
In this paper, we develop a novel approach that enables
autonomous systems to make deceptive decisions under uncertainty. Such a deception capability has the potential to
improve security in adversarial environments, increase success rates in competitive settings, and create more engaging
interactions in games. For example, a delivery drone may
protect itself from attacks by deceiving potentially hostile
observers about its destination.
We consider an autonomous agent that carries out a task
in a complex, stochastic environment. We model the agent’s
behavior as a Markov decision process (MDP) and express
its task as reaching one of multiple potential goal states in
the MDP. Being aware of the potential goals, the observer
aims to predict the agent’s true goal from its trajectories.

Related Work Deception in autonomous systems has
been studied in the literature from different perspectives.
In (Masters and Sardina 2017), the authors generate deceptive plans in deterministic environments. For exaggerated

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5332

