The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Disentangled Attribute Representations for Robust Pedestrian Attribute
Recognition
Jian Jia1, 2 , Naiyu Gao1, 2 , Fei He1, 2 , Xiaotang Chen1, 2 , Kaiqi Huang1, 2, 3
1 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2 CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China,
3 CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China

{jiajian2018, gaonaiyu2017, hefei2018}@ia.ac.cn, {xtchen, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

tion that distinguish it from other classification tasks (singlelabel classification and general multi-label classification).
We believe that the essence of pedestrian attribute recognition is two-folds.
On the one hand, unlike the single-label classification,
as a sub-task of multi-label classification, pedestrian attribute recognition requires a disentangled and discriminative feature for each attribute to predict the corresponding
attribute. However, almost all existing methods adopt the
same feature learning manner as the single-label classification task, such as classification in ImageNet (Deng et al.
2009). For example, most works (Liu et al. 2017; Wang
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018c, 2019a; Tan et al. 2020) use
the identical average-pooled image feature to classify different attributes, and some works (Zhao et al. 2018, 2019)
adopt a shared attribute-group feature to classify attributes
in the same group. Although these works propose various approaches and achieve promising results, we argue
that it is inferior to represent different attributes with one
shared and entangled feature, named by the One-sharedFeature-for-Multiple-Attributes (OFMA) mechanism. The
fundamental reason for the inferiority is that, given fixed
feature channel dimension, angles between the shared optimal feature learned by the OFMA mechanism and individual attribute classifiers converge to 90 degrees as the number
of attributes increases, which impairs the robustness of the
model. The detailed analysis is introduced in Section . As far
as we know, our work is the first to reveal the limitations of
this mechanism mathematically. Besides pedestrian attribute
recognition, our analysis of limitations of the OFMA mechanism also applies to general multi-label classification.
On the other hand, different from general multi-label classification in COCO (Lin et al. 2014) and PASCAL-VOC
(Everingham et al. 2010), in which samples of the same category can appear at any location in the image, each pedestrian attribute has a relatively consistent spatial distribution
across the samples, and some attributes share similar spatial
regions. For example, “Hat” and “Glasses” attributes appear
at the top of the image, while “Boots” and “Sandals” locates
at the bottom of the image.
However, how to exploit the two essential characteristics
and incorporate them into model construction is nontrivial.
To alleviate the limitations of the OFMA mechanism, we introduce the One-specific-Feature-for-One-Attribute (OFOA)

Although various methods have been proposed for pedestrian
attribute recognition, most studies follow the same feature
learning mechanism, i.e., learning a shared pedestrian image
feature to classify multiple attributes. However, this mechanism leads to low-confidence predictions and non-robustness
of the model in the inference stage. In this paper, we investigate why this is the case. We mathematically discover that
the central cause is that the optimal shared feature cannot
maintain high similarities with multiple classifiers simultaneously in the context of minimizing classification loss. In
addition, this feature learning mechanism ignores the spatial and semantic distinctions between different attributes. To
address these limitations, we propose a novel disentangled
attribute feature learning (DAFL) framework to learn a disentangled feature for each attribute, which exploits the semantic and spatial characteristics of attributes. The framework mainly consists of learnable semantic queries, a cascaded semantic-spatial cross-attention (SSCA) module, and a
group attention merging (GAM) module. Specifically, based
on learnable semantic queries, the cascaded SSCA module iteratively enhances the spatial localization of attribute-related
regions and aggregates region features into multiple disentangled attribute features, used for classification and updating learnable semantic queries. The GAM module splits attributes into groups based on spatial distribution and utilizes
reliable group attention to supervise query attention maps.
Experiments on PETA, RAPv1, PA100k, and RAPv2 show
that the proposed method performs favorably against stateof-the-art methods.

Introduction
Pedestrian attribute recognition aims to predict multiple attributes for one pedestrian image. Due to the wide range
of applications in person re-identification (Lin et al. 2019),
person retrieval (Li et al. 2018b), and scene understanding (Jaderberg et al. 2015), pedestrian attribute recognition has attracted increasing attention from industry and
academia. From the perspectives of exploiting additional human knowledge and adopting attention mechanisms, numerous methods have been proposed and got significant performance improvements. However, recent works often neglect essential characteristics of pedestrian attribute recogniCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1069

