The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PolygonE: Modeling N-ary Relational Data as Gyro-Polygons in Hyperbolic Space
Shiyao Yan1,2,3 , Zequn Zhang* 1,2 , Xian Sun1,2 , Guangluan Xu1,2 , Shuchao Li1,2 , Qing Liu1,2 , Nayu
Liu1,2,3 , Shensi Wang1,2,3
1

Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology(NIST), Aerospace Information Research Institute
3
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
yanshiyao19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, zqzhang1@mail.ie.ac.cn

2

Abstract

However, the best-performing models (Guan et al. 2020;
Rosso, Yang, and Cudré-Mauroux 2020; Liu, Yao, and Li
2021) generally break down n-ary relational facts into subtuples (triples, pairs, quintuples, etc.). Such decomposition leads to both structural and semantical information
loss (Rosso, Yang, and Cudré-Mauroux 2020). It makes
sense to keep an n-ary relational fact intact. Still, some models (Liu, Yao, and Li 2020) work for single-arity data only,
suffering from inflexibility.
Moreover, we note that n-ary relational KBs are characterized by more abundant and complicated hierarchy structures with more entities involved in a single fact. Figure 1(a)
shows several Wikipedia-exampled n-ary relational facts
centered around the movie director James Cameron. We hierarchize the involved entities, from H1 to H3 , the number
of involved entities grows exponentially, which is in good
coherence with the superlinear length growth (Ungar 2009)
in a hyperbolic poincaré ball (as intuitively shown in Figure 1(b)). And it’s noted that the higher the arity, the more
pronounced the exponential characteristic. Existing works
generally overlook such hierarchical information, which, if
well captured, can benefit n-ary relational KB embeddings.
With the above consideration, we model n-ary relational
facts as gyro-polygons (i.e., polygons in hyperbolic space),
and propose a model termed as PolygonE where the polygon structure ensures fact integrity by representing fact semantic in the gyro-centroid, and it also ensures the model’s
applicability to arbitrary arity data. While hyperbolic space
guarantees hierarchy capturing. Primarily, we represent entities in a fact as vertexes of a gyro-polygon and relations as entity translocations. Significantly, we optimize the
relation-adjusted gyro-polygon by minimizing the vertexgyrocentroid geodesic. Experimental results illustrate that
PolygonE achieves excellent results on WikiPeople, JF17K,
and FB-AUTO. And visualization of embeddings shows that
PolygonE captures the hierarchies within n-ary relational
KBs. To summarize, our contribution can be summarized as
follows:
• We propose PolygonE where we model n-ary relational
facts as gyro-polygons to ensure structural and semantical integrity, adjustability to arbitrary arity fact, and hierarchy capturing. To our knowledge, gyro-polygon structure has not been studied in knowledge base embedding.
• We design a fact plausibility scoring strategy based on

N-ary relational knowledge base (KBs) embedding aims to
map binary and beyond-binary facts into low-dimensional
vector space simultaneously. Existing approaches typically
decompose n-ary relational facts into subtuples, and they generally model n-ary relational KBs in Euclidean space. However, n-ary relational facts are semantically and structurally
intact; decomposition undermines the semantical and structural integrity. Moreover, compared to the binary relational
KBs, n-ary ones are characterized by more abundant and
complicated hierarchy structures, which could not be well
expressed in Euclidean space. To address the issues, we propose a gyro-polygon embedding framework to realize n-ary
fact integrity keeping and hierarchy capturing, termed PolygonE. Specifically, n-ary relational facts are modeled as gyropolygons in the hyperbolic space, where we denote entities
in facts as vertexes of gyro-polygons and relations as entity
translocation operations. Importantly, we design a fact plausibility measuring strategy based on the vertex-gyrocentroid
geodesic to optimize the relation-adjusted gyro-polygon. Experimental results demonstrate that PolygonE shows SOTA
performance on all benchmark datasets and generalizes well
on binary data. Finally, we also visualize the embedding to
help comprehend PolygonE’s awareness of hierarchies.

Introduction
N-ary relational KBs comprise both binary and beyondbinary relational facts, among which binary relational facts
in the form of (h,r,t) have been extensively explored in the
past decade. In contrast, the beyond-binary ones are less
studied (Ji et al. 2021). The latest research finds that beyondbinary relational facts contain abundant semantics and are
closer to human-intelligent compared to their traditional binary counterparts (Wang et al. 2017). For the excellent potential that n-ary relational KBs showcase in NLP downstream tasks like textual entailment, question answering,
and natural language understanding (Hogan et al. 2021), recently, lots of efforts (Rouces, de Melo, and Hose 2015;
Zhang et al. 2018; Liu, Yao, and Li 2021) are poured into
representing binary and beyond-binary facts simultaneously.
And Existing works have seen gratifying progress in embedding n-ary relational KBs.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4308

