The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficiency of Ad Auctions with Price Displaying
Matteo Castiglioni1 , Diodato Ferraioli2 , Nicola Gatti1 , Alberto Marchesi1 , Giulia Romano1 *
1

Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, Milan, Italy
Università degli Studi di Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II, Fisciano, Italy
{matteo.castiglioni, nicola.gatti, alberto.marchesi, giulia.romano}@polimi.it, dferraioli@unisa.it
2

Abstract

et al. 2018) and bidding strategies (He et al. 2013), and the
optimization of conversion funnels (Nuara et al. 2019).
In this paper, we focus on recently-emerged online advertising settings where ad auctions are employed to display
ads of similar products or services together with their prices.
This is the case of, e.g., Google Hotel Ads and Tripadvisor, where users search for the availability of a hotel room
in a given date. The web page of results shows a ranking
of banners advertising similar hotel rooms that match the
search criteria. Each banner displays the name of the advertiser providing the online booking service, together with the
per-night selling price of the room. Such settings are similar
to standard ad auctions, since the ads are ranked depending
on the advertisers’ bids. On the other hand, they also fundamentally differ from them, as the ad allocation must also
take prices into account, and these are displayed inside the
banners so as to provide a direct comparison among them.
This dramatically affects users’ behavior, as well as the efficiency and the properties of ad auctions. The goal of this
work is to investigate how the additional degree of freedom
introduced by prices influences the problem of finding an
optimal ad allocation and the revenue of the mechanisms.
The price-displaying feature of our setting introduces externalities among the ads, since the probability that a user
clicks on an ad depends on the prices displayed with both
the ad being clicked and the other ads in the allocation. Several forms of externalities are investigated in the literature on
ad auctions. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous work takes into account price displaying. For instance,
Kempe and Mahdian (2008) and Aggarwal et al. (2008) introduce a basic user model that is currently adopted by most
of the mechanisms. In this model, a Markovian user observes the slots in a top-down fashion, moving down slot by
slot with a given continuation probability and stopping on a
slot to observe its ad with the remaining probability. Kempe
and Mahdian (2008) also propose richer models where the
probability with which a user moves from a slot to the next
one depends on the ad actually displayed in the former. In
this case, it is not known whether the ad allocation problem
admits a polynomial-time algorithm; however, Farina and
Gatti (2016, 2017) provide several algorithms showing that
in special cases a constant approximation can be achieved.
Further externalities models are explored by Fotakis, Krysta,
and Telelis (2011) and Gatti et al. (2018), which allow for

Most of the economic reports forecast that almost half of the
worldwide market value unlocked by AI over the next decade
(up to 6 trillion USD per year) will be in marketing&sales. In
particular, AI will enable the optimization of more and more
intricate economic settings, in which multiple different activities need to be jointly automated. This is the case of, e.g.,
Google Hotel Ads and Tripadvisor, where auctions are used
to display ads of similar products or services together with
their prices. As in classical ad auctions, the ads are ranked
depending on the advertisers’ bids, whereas, differently from
classical settings, ads are displayed together with their prices,
so as to provide a direct comparison among them. This dramatically affects users’ behavior, as well as the properties of
ad auctions. We show that, in such settings, social welfare
maximization can be achieved by means of a direct-revelation
mechanism that jointly optimizes, in polynomial time, the ads
allocation and the advertisers’ prices to be displayed with
them. However, in practice it is unlikely that advertisers allow the mechanism to choose prices on their behalf. Indeed,
in commonly-adopted mechanisms, ads allocation and price
optimization are decoupled, so that the advertisers optimize
prices and bids, while the mechanism does so for the allocation, once prices and bids are given. We investigate how this
decoupling affects the efficiency of mechanisms. In particular, we study the Price of Anarchy (PoA) and the Price of
Stability (PoS) of indirect-revelation mechanisms with both
VCG and GSP payments, showing that the PoS for the revenue may be unbounded even with two slots, and the PoA
for the social welfare may be as large as the number of slots.
Nevertheless, we show that, under some assumptions, simple modifications to the indirect-revelation mechanism with
VCG payments achieve a PoS of 1 for the revenue.

Introduction
Most of the economic reports forecast that artificial intelligence (AI) will unlock up to 12 trillion USD per year worldwide by the next decade, and almost half of this amount will
derive from the marketing&sales area (see, e.g., (Chui et al.
2018)). In particular, AI is playing a crucial role to tackle
various problems, including, e.g., auction design (Bachrach
et al. 2014), the automation of advertisers’ budget (Nuara
* All the authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4933

