The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation
with Deep Implicit Shape Representation
Wanli Peng, Jianhang Yan, Hongtao Wen and Yi Sun∗
Dalian University of Technology, China
{1136558142, yjh97, wenht}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lslwf@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

a render-and-compare pipeline (Wang et al. 2020; Yang, Yu,
and Yang 2021; Manhardt et al. 2020) that is trained by the
correspondence between the reconstructed object 3D model
and object observation to derive pose parameters (R, t and
s). The high-quality 3D geometric representation of objects
is therefore crucial to self-supervised pose estimation, especially for category-level pose estimation. However, existing
discrete 3D representations such as voxels, point clouds and
meshes are not enough to represent high-quality shapes. At
present, self-supervised category-level pose estimation without 6D pose labels and suitable 3D models is a challenging
task and there are few studies in this field.
In our work, we move forward along this challenging direction to explore self-supervised category-level 6D pose
estimation. An overview of the architecture is illustrated
in Fig. 1. Inspired by the recently proposed continuous
deep implicit functions which are more expressive and efficient for representing complex shapes than existing discrete 3D representations, we use a deep implicit function
called DeepSDF (Park et al. 2019) as 3D object representation in this paper. To enable the self-supervised method to
estimate the pose of unseen objects in a category without an
explicit 3D model for each object, we first train a DeepSDF
decoder on synthetic data to learn categorical shape prior,
then build a self-supervised framework to estimate the pose
parameters and shape latent vector for shape reconstruction. The self-supervised framework also needs to be pretrained with synthetic data in order to have a good initial
state. Given the initial network output (pose and shape latent vector) in the self-supervised training, we first reconstruct the object’s shape from the DeepSDF decoder and
then design several novel loss functions based on DeepSDF
to enforce an optimal alignment in 3D space between the
reconstructed shape and ground truth point cloud with the
predicted rotation, translation, and scale factor. The discrepancy in shape produces error gradients that backpropagate
to the pose parameters and the shape latent vectors so that
both pose and shape can be optimized. Our code is available
at https://github.com/swords123/SSC-6D.
In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows:

Category-level 6D pose estimation can be better generalized to unseen objects in a category compared with instancelevel 6D pose estimation. However, existing category-level
6D pose estimation methods usually require supervised training with a sufficient number of 6D pose annotations of objects which makes them difficult to be applied in real scenarios. To address this problem, we propose a self-supervised
framework for category-level 6D pose estimation in this paper. We leverage DeepSDF as a 3D object representation and
design several novel loss functions based on DeepSDF to help
the self-supervised model predict unseen object poses without any 6D object pose labels and explicit 3D models in real
scenarios. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
comparable performance with the state-of-the-art fully supervised methods on the category-level NOCS benchmark.

1

Introduction

6D object pose estimation is an important task in computer
vision that provides object location and orientation. It is
widely applied in robotic manipulation and 3D scene understanding. Currently, most existing works (Peng et al. 2019;
He et al. 2020; Zakharov, Shugurov, and Ilic 2019; Xiang
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019a) focus on instance-level pose
estimation, relying on 6D pose annotations and exact 3D object models available beforehand. However, it is difficult to
annotate the 6D pose and build a 3D model for every object
in real scenarios. Recently, category-level 6D pose estimation (Wang et al. 2019b; Chen et al. 2021, 2020; Tian, Ang,
and Lee 2020) that can predict both the 6D pose and size
of unseen objects without explicit 3D models has started to
gain attention.
Category-level 6D pose estimation commonly learns a
categorical shape prior shared by all instances within a category, which enables 6D pose and size estimation even for
unseen object instances. However, existing methods usually
require supervised training with a sufficient amount of 6D
pose annotations of objects. Yet, annotating 6D poses for every object in the real world is an unfeasible task. The key to
solving this problem is to adopt self-supervised learning for
pose estimation. Generally, self-supervised methods employ

• We propose a self-supervised framework with a deep
implicit 3D surface representation for category-level 6D
pose estimation, which can predict unseen object poses
without an explicit 3D model and pose annotation for

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2082

