The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Model-Based Image Signal Processors via Learnable Dictionaries
Marcos V. Conde, Steven McDonagh, Matteo Maggioni, Aleš Leonardis, Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract

perceptually pleasant RGB images, suitable for the human
visual system. However, the characteristics of RAW imagery
(e.g. linear relationship with scene irradiance, raw and untampered signal and noise samples) are often better suited
for the ill-posed, inverse problems that commonly arise in
low-level vision tasks such as denoising, demosaicing, HDR,
super-resolution (Qian et al. 2019; Abdelhamed, Lin, and
Brown 2018; Wronski et al. 2019; Gharbi et al. 2016; Liu
et al. 2020). For tasks within the ISP, this does not come as a
choice but rather a must, as the input domain is necessarily in
the RAW domain due to the camera hardware design (Buckler, Jayasuriya, and Sampson 2017; Ignatov et al. 2021).
Unfortunately, RAW image datasets are not nearly as abundant and diverse as their RGB counterparts, and thus some of
the performance potential of CNN-based approaches cannot
be fully utilized. To bridge this gap, recent methods aim to
estimate the mapping from sRGB.
The recent work of Brooks et al. introduces a generic camera ISP model composed of five canonical steps, each of
them approximated by an invertible, differentiable function.
Their proposed ISP can be conveniently plugged-in to any
RGB training pipeline to enable RAW image processing. As
each of the functions is constrained to perform a single task
within the ISP, intermediate representations are fully interpretable, allowing for complete flexibility and interpretability
in the ISP layout. Despite successful application to image
denoising, this approach requires manually setting the true
internal camera parameters, and these cannot be learnt from
data. Although some DSLR cameras do provide access to
such parameters, ISP layouts and their related inner settings
are generally protected and inaccessible to the end user.
Alternative recent learning-based approaches (Punnappurath and Brown 2020; Zamir et al. 2020; Xing, Qian, and
Chen 2021) attempt to learn the ISP in an end-to-end manner, in order to circumvent the noted problems. Focused on
the RAW data synthesis from sRGB images, CycleISP (Zamir et al. 2020) adopts cycle consistency to learn both the
forward (RAW-to-RGB) and reverse (RGB-to-RAW) directions of the ISP using 2 different networks and is trainable
end-to-end. The authors show that RGB data can then be
leveraged successfully to aid a RAW denoising task. The ISP
is thus learned as a black-box, is not modular and therefore
lacks both interpretability for intermediate representations
and control of the ISP layout. However, these traits can be

Digital cameras transform sensor RAW readings into RGB
images by means of their Image Signal Processor (ISP). Computational photography tasks such as image denoising and
colour constancy are commonly performed in the RAW domain, in part due to the inherent hardware design, but also
due to the appealing simplicity of noise statistics that result
from the direct sensor readings. Despite this, the availability
of RAW images is limited in comparison with the abundance
and diversity of available RGB data. Recent approaches have
attempted to bridge this gap by estimating the RGB to RAW
mapping: handcrafted model-based methods that are interpretable and controllable usually require manual parameter
fine-tuning, while end-to-end learnable neural networks require large amounts of training data, at times with complex
training procedures, and generally lack interpretability and
parametric control. Towards addressing these existing limitations, we present a novel hybrid model-based and data-driven
ISP that builds on canonical ISP operations and is both learnable and interpretable. Our proposed invertible model, capable
of bidirectional mapping between RAW and RGB domains,
employs end-to-end learning of rich parameter representations,
i.e. dictionaries, that are free from direct parametric supervision and additionally enable simple and plausible data augmentation. We evidence the value of our data generation process by
extensive experiments under both RAW image reconstruction
and RAW image denoising tasks, obtaining state-of-the-art
performance in both. Additionally, we show that our ISP can
learn meaningful mappings from few data samples, and that
denoising models trained with our dictionary-based data augmentation are competitive despite having only few or zero
ground-truth labels.

1

Introduction

Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks have made
great strides in many computer vision applications in the last
decade, in part thanks to the proliferation of camera devices
and the resulting availability of large-scale image datasets.
The majority of these datasets contain sRGB image data,
which is obtained via an in-camera Image Signal Processor
(ISP) that converts the camera sensor’s RAW readings into
* Marcos V. Conde is now with Computer Vision Lab, Institute
of Computer Science, University of Würzburg.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

481

