The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Explain, Edit, and Understand: Rethinking User Study Design
for Evaluating Model Explanations
Siddhant Arora* 1 , Danish Pruthi* 1 , Norman Sadeh1 ,
William W. Cohen2 , Zachary C. Lipton1 , Graham Neubig1
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Google AI
{siddhana, ddanish, sadeh, zlipton, gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu, wcohen@google.com
Abstract

2016; Hendricks et al. 2016; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan
2017; Smilkov et al. 2017), what precisely it means for a
feature to be salient remains a point of conceptual ambiguity.
Thus, many proposed techniques are evaluated only via visual inspection of a few examples where the highlighted features agree with the author’s (and reader’s) intuitions. Across
papers, one common motivation for such attributions is to
improve human “understanding” of the models (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017). However, whether these attributions confer understanding is seldom evaluated explicitly and there is relatively little work that characterizes what
explanations enable people to do.
One suggestion to evaluate model understanding is to use
simulatability as a proxy for understanding—i.e., if a participant can accurately predict the output of the model on
unseen examples (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017). Following
this idea, a few prior studies examine if explanations help
humans predict model output (Chandrasekaran et al. 2018;
Hase and Bansal 2020). Such studies are typically divided
into a training and a test phase. In the training phase, participants see a few input, output, explanations triples, and in
the test phase, they are asked to guess the model output for
unseen examples.1 Many prior studies on evaluating model
explanations have reached negative results, noting that they
do not definitively aid humans in predicting model behavior
on visual question answering (Chandrasekaran et al. 2018)
and text classification tasks (Hase and Bansal 2020).
In this paper, we rethink the user design for evaluating
model explanations for text classification tasks, and propose
two key changes. First, we provide participants with query
access to the model: they can alter input documents to observe how model predictions and explanations change in real
time. Second, we extend the simulation task by prompting participants to edit examples to reduce the model
confidence towards the predicted class. While prior work
(Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton 2019) prompts humans to edit
examples for data augmentation, editing exercises haven’t
been explored for evaluating explanations. This editing exercise allows us to capture detailed metrics, e.g., average con-

In attempts to “explain” predictions of machine learning
models, researchers have proposed hundreds of techniques
for attributing predictions to features that are deemed important. While these attributions are often claimed to hold the
potential to improve human “understanding” of the models,
surprisingly little work explicitly evaluates progress towards
this aspiration. In this paper, we conduct a crowdsourcing
study, where participants interact with deception detection
models that have been trained to distinguish between genuine
and fake hotel reviews. They are challenged both to simulate
the model on fresh reviews, and to edit reviews with the goal
of lowering the probability of the originally predicted class.
Successful manipulations would lead to an adversarial example. During the training (but not the test) phase, input spans
are highlighted to communicate salience. Through our evaluation, we observe that for a linear bag-of-words model, participants with access to the feature coefficients during training
are able to cause a larger reduction in model confidence in the
testing phase when compared to the no-explanation control.
For the BERT-based classifier, popular local explanations do
not improve their ability to reduce the model confidence over
the no-explanation case. Remarkably, when the explanation
for the BERT model is given by the (global) attributions of a
linear model trained to imitate the BERT model, people can
effectively manipulate the model.

Introduction
Owing to their remarkable predictive accuracy on supervised
learning problems, deep learning models are increasingly
deployed in consequential domains, such as medicine (Kim
et al. 2019; Aggarwal et al. 2021), and criminal justice (Kleinberg et al. 2017). Frustrated by the difficulty of
communicating what precisely these models have learned,
a large body of research has sprung up proposing methods
that are purported to explain their predictions (Doshi-Velez
and Kim 2017; Lipton 2018; Guidotti et al. 2018). Typically, these so-called explanations take the form of saliency
maps, attributing the prediction to a subset of the input features, or assigning weights to the features according to their
salience. To date, while hundreds of such attribution techniques have been proposed (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin

1
Chandrasekaran et al. (2018) present model explanations during the testing phase, whereas Hase and Bansal (2020) do not include explanations at test time, as explanations could “leak” model
output (see Pruthi et al. (2020); Jacovi and Goldberg (2021).).

* denotes equal contribution.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5277

