The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MIP-GNN: A Data-Driven Framework for Guiding Combinatorial Solvers
Elias B. Khalil,* 1, 2 Christopher Morris,* 3 Andrea Lodi4
1
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
Scale AI Research Chair in Data-Driven Algorithms for Modern Supply Chains
3
Mila – Quebec AI Institute and McGill University
4
CERC, Polytechnique Montréal and Jacobs Technion-Cornell Institute, Cornell Tech and Technion – IIT
khalil@mie.utoronto.ca, chris@christophermorris.info, andrea.lodi@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

with data-driven insights (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021;
Cappart et al. 2021; Kotary et al. 2021).
Many CO problems can be naturally described using graphs,
either as direct input (e.g., routing on road networks) or by encoding variable-constraint interactions (e.g., of a MILP model)
as a bipartite graph. As such, machine learning approaches
such as graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017;
Scarselli et al. 2009) have recently helped bridge the gap between machine learning, relational inputs, and combinatorial
optimization (Cappart et al. 2021). GNNs compute vectorial
representations of each node in the input graph in a permutationequivariant fashion by iteratively aggregating features of neighboring nodes. By parameterizing this aggregation step, a GNN
is trained end-to-end against a loss function to adapt to the
given data distribution. Hence, GNNs can be viewed as a relational inductive bias (Battaglia et al. 2018), encoding crucial
graph structures underlying the CO/MIP instance distribution
of interest.

Mixed-integer programming (MIP) technology offers a generic
way of formulating and solving combinatorial optimization
problems. While generally reliable, state-of-the-art MIP solvers
base many crucial decisions on hand-crafted heuristics, largely
ignoring common patterns within a given instance distribution of
the problem of interest. Here, we propose MIP-GNN, a general
framework for enhancing such solvers with data-driven insights.
By encoding the variable-constraint interactions of a given mixedinteger linear program (MILP) as a bipartite graph, we leverage
state-of-the-art graph neural network architectures to predict
variable biases, i.e., component-wise averages of (near) optimal
solutions, indicating how likely a variable will be set to 0 or 1 in
(near) optimal solutions of binary MILPs. In turn, the predicted
biases stemming from a single, once-trained model are used to
guide the solver, replacing heuristic components. We integrate
MIP-GNN into a state-of-the-art MIP solver, applying it to tasks
such as node selection and warm-starting, showing significant
improvements compared to the default setting of the solver on
two classes of challenging binary MILPs. Our code and appendix
are publicly available at https://github.com/lyeskhalil/mipGNN.

Present Work

Introduction
Nowadays, combinatorial optimization (CO) is an interdisciplinary field spanning optimization, operations research, discrete mathematics, and computer science, with many critical
real-world applications such as vehicle routing or scheduling; see, e.g., (Korte and Vygen 2012) for a general overview.
Mixed-integer programming technology offers a generic way of
formulating and solving CO problems by relying on combinatorial solvers based on tree search algorithms, such as branch and
cut, see, e.g., (Nemhauser and Wolsey 1988; Schrijver 1999;
Bertsimas and Weismantel 2005). Given enough time, these
algorithms find certifiably optimal solutions to NP-hard problems. However, many essential decisions in the search process,
e.g., node and variable selection, are based on heuristics (Lodi
2013). The design of these heuristics relies on intuition and
empirical evidence, largely ignoring that, in practice, one often
repeatedly solves problem instances that share patterns and
characteristics. Machine learning approaches have emerged to
address this shortcoming, enhancing state-of-the-art solvers
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10219

We introduce MIP-GNN, a general GNN-based framework
for guiding state-of-the-art branch-and-cut solvers on (binary)
mixed-integer linear programs. Specifically, we encode the
variable-constraint interactions of a MILP as a bipartite graph
where a pair of variable/constraint nodes share an edge iff
the variable has a non-zero coefficient in the constraint; see
Figure 1. To guide a solver in finding a solution or certifying
optimality faster for a given instance, we perform supervised
GNN training to predict variable biases (Hsu et al. 2008),
which are computed by component-wise averaging over a set
of near-optimal solutions of a given MILP. Intuitively, these
biases encode how likely it is for a variable to take a value of 1
in near-optimal solutions. To tailor the GNN more closely to
the task of variable bias prediction, we propagate a “residual
error”, indicating how much the current assignment violates
the constraints. Further, the theory, outlined in the appendix,
gives some initial insights into the theoretical capabilities of
such GNNs architecture in the context of MILPs.
We integrate such trained GNNs into a state-of-the-art MIP
solver, namely CPLEX (IBM 2020), by using the GNN’s
variable bias prediction in crucial tasks within the branch-andcut algorithm, such as node selection and warm-starting. On a
large set of diverse, real-world binary MILPs, modeling the
generalized independent set problem (Colombi, Mansini, and

