The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Incentivizing Collaboration in Machine Learning via Synthetic Data Rewards
Sebastian Shenghong Tay1,2 , Xinyi Xu1,2 , Chuan Sheng Foo2 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
sebastian.tay@u.nus.edu, xuxinyi@comp.nus.edu.sg, foo chuan sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

possibly inequitable benefits from such a form of collaboration (Lo and DeMets 2016). To elaborate on the latter, parties would be more willing to participate in the collaboration if fairness is guaranteed. For example, if only one party
contributes high-quality data but all parties receive equal rewards, then clearly the other parties benefit disproportionately from the collaboration and that contributing party has
no incentive to participate, especially when all parties are
self-interested. One may define fairness as every party receiving a reward commensurate to its contribution (however
contribution is measured), which incentivizes not only participation but also non-trivial contributions from all parties.
To resolve the above issues, the notion of collaborative
ML (also referred to as multi-party ML (Chen et al. 2020))
allows multiple self-interested parties to mutually benefit
from collaboration in data sharing/pooling by incentivizing non-trivial contributions from them while accounting
for fairness and data privacy. A prior work of collaborative ML (Sim et al. 2020) has focused on the supervised
learning setting where every party contributes training data
and receives a model as reward with predictive performance
commensurate to its contribution, while another work (Ohrimenko, Tople, and Tschiatschek 2019) has developed a marketplace where parties pay money for better performing ML
models on their specific learning tasks and receive money
when their contributed data improve the ML models of other
parties. A key limitation of these works is that trained ML
models are distributed to the parties as rewards, which limits
each party’s flexibility to experiment with different model
architectures and hyperparameters. If more competitive architectures emerge in the future, the parties cannot take advantage of these new architectures without reinitiating the
collaboration. Another limitation of distributing trained ML
models as rewards is that it precludes the possibility of performing a different learning task on the same dataset as the
ML model is tied to a specific task.
One way of overcoming the above limitations is to distribute synthetic data to the parties as rewards (in short,
synthetic data rewards) instead of trained models. It has
been demonstrated that augmenting real data with synthetic
data can improve model performance: For example, some
works (Bowles et al. 2018; Frid-Adar et al. 2018; Sandfort et al. 2019) have used generative adversarial networks
(GANs) for data augmentation to improve classification per-

This paper presents a novel collaborative generative modeling (CGM) framework that incentivizes collaboration among
self-interested parties to contribute data to a pool for training a generative model (e.g., GAN), from which synthetic
data are drawn and distributed to the parties as rewards commensurate to their contributions. Distributing synthetic data
as rewards (instead of trained models or money) offers taskand model-agnostic benefits for downstream learning tasks
and is less likely to violate data privacy regulation. To realize
the framework, we firstly propose a data valuation function
using maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) that values data
based on its quantity and quality in terms of its closeness to
the true data distribution and provide theoretical results guiding the kernel choice in our MMD-based data valuation function. Then, we formulate the reward scheme as a linear optimization problem that when solved, guarantees certain incentives such as fairness in the CGM framework. We devise a
weighted sampling algorithm for generating synthetic data to
be distributed to each party as reward such that the value of its
data and the synthetic data combined matches its assigned reward value by the reward scheme. We empirically show using
simulated and real-world datasets that the parties’ synthetic
data rewards are commensurate to their contributions.

Introduction
For the state-of-the-art deep learning models, training with
a large quantity of data is important to prevent overfitting
and achieve good generalization. So, when there are multiple parties with each owning a dataset sampled from the
same distribution, pooling their datasets and training on the
pooled dataset would yield an improved machine learning (ML) model for every participating party. For example,
banks that use ML models to predict their customers’ credit
ratings (Tsai and Chen 2010) would benefit from pooling
their datasets as every bank can now train its ML model on a
much larger dataset with more unique customers. This benefit would be even more pronounced in applications where
data is difficult/costly to obtain and every party has limited
data, such as in medical imaging (Sandfort et al. 2019).
However, data sharing/pooling is challenging in practice
due to issues of data privacy (Devereaux et al. 2016) and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9448

