The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Characterizing the Program Expressive Power of Existential Rule Languages
Heng Zhang1 , Guifei Jiang2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
College of Software, Nankai University, China
heng.zhang@tju.edu.cn, g.jiang@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

In OMQA, there have been mainly two lines of research
on the language expressive power. The first line of research
regards every ontology together with a classical query as a
database query, usually called an ontology-mediated query.
The main goal of this line is to understand which class of
databases can be defined by an ontology-mediated query.
We call such kind of expressive power the data expressive
power. In contrast, the second line is concerned with which
kind of domain knowledge can be expressed in an ontology
language; or more formally, which classes of database-query
pairs are definable in the language. Expressive power of this
kind is known as the program expressive power, which was
first proposed by Arenas, Gottlob, and Pieris (2014).
A number of papers are devoted to characterizing data
expressive power of existential rule languages. An incomplete list is as follows: Gottlob, Rudolph, and Simkus (2014)
proved that weakly (frontier-)guarded TGD queries with
stratified negations capture the class of EXPTIME-queries;
nearly (frontier-)guarded TGD queries have the same expressive power as Datalog. Rudolph and Thomazo (2015)
showed that TGD queries capture the class of recursively
enumerable queries closed under homomorphisms. Krötzsch
and Rudolph (2011) identified that jointly acyclic TGD
queries have the same expressive power as Datalog, which
was later extended to TGD queries with terminating Skolem
chase in (Zhang, Zhang, and You 2015). In description logics, Bienvenu et al. (2014) characterized the data expressive
power of ALC and its variants by some interesting complexity classes and fragments of disjunctive Datalog.
Unlike the data expressive power, the program expressive
power of existential rule languages is not well-understood
yet. Arenas, Gottlob, and Pieris (2014) proved that Datalog is strictly less expressive than warded Datalog∃ , and
obtained a similar separation for the variants with stratified negations and negative constraints. Zhang, Zhang, and
You (2016) proposed a semantic definition for ontologies
in OMQA, and proved that disjunctive embedded dependencies (DEDs) capture the class of recursively enumerable OMQA-ontologies. In addition, it is implicit in (Zhang,
Zhang, and You 2015) that the weakly-acyclic TGDs have
the same program expressive power as all its extensions with
terminating Skolem chase. This paper continues this line
of work and aims at characterizing the program expressive
power of several important languages including TGDs, dis-

Existential rule languages are a family of ontology languages
that have been widely used in ontology-mediated query answering (OMQA). However, for most of them, the expressive
power of representing domain knowledge for OMQA, known
as the program expressive power, is not well-understood yet.
In this paper, we establish a number of novel characterizations for the program expressive power of several important
existential rule languages, including tuple-generating dependencies (TGDs), linear TGDs, as well as disjunctive TGDs.
The characterizations employ natural model-theoretic properties, and automata-theoretic properties sometimes, which
thus provide powerful tools for identifying the definability of
domain knowledge for OMQA in these languages.

Introduction
Existential rule languages, a.k.a. Datalog±, had been initially introduced in databases as dependency languages to
specify the semantics of data stored in a database (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995). As one of the most popular dependency languages, tuple-generating dependencies (TGDs)
and its extensions, including (disjunctive) embedded dependencies and disjunctive TGDs, had been extensively studied.
Recently, these languages have been rediscovered as languages for data exchange (Fagin et al. 2005), data integration (Lenzerini 2002), ontology reasoning (Calı̀ et al. 2010)
and knowledge graph (Bellomarini et al. 2017).
A major computational task based on existential rule languages is known as ontology-mediated query answering
(OMQA), which generalizes the traditional database querying by enriching database with a domain ontology. Unfortunately, even for TGDs, the problem of OMQA was proved
to be undecidable (Beeri and Vardi 1981). Towards efficient
reasoning, many decidable sublanguages have been identified, including linear TGDs and guarded TGDs (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012), frontier-guarded TGDs (Baget
et al. 2011), sticky TGDs (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Pieris 2012),
weakly-acyclic TGDs (Fagin et al. 2005) and shy programs (Leone et al. 2012). With these languages, it is thus
important to identify their expressive power so that, given an
application, we know which language should be used.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5950

