The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with General Utilities
via Decentralized Shadow Reward Actor-Critic
Junyu Zhang,1 Amrit Singh Bedi,2 Mengdi Wang,3 Alec Koppel4
1

Dept. of ISEM, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
CISD, US Army Research Laboratory, USA
3
Dept. of EE, Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University/Deepmind, Princeton, USA
4
Supply Chain Optimization Technologies, Amazon, USA
{junyuz@nus.edu.sg, amrit0714@gmail.com, mengdiw@princeton.edu, aekoppel@amazon.com}
Abstract

generally, stochastic games, a key question is the payoff
structure (Shapley 1953; Başar and Olsder 1998). We focus on common payoffs among agents, i.e., the utility of the
team is the sum of local utilities (Busoniu, Babuska, and
De Schutter 2008), which contrasts with competitive settings where one agent’s gain is another’s loss, or combinations thereof (Littman 1994). Whereas typically cooperative
MARL defines the global utility as the average over agents’
local reward accumulations, here we define a new mechanism for cooperation that permits agents to incorporate risksensitivity (Huang and Kallenberg 1994; Borkar and Meyn
2002; Prashanth and Ghavamzadeh 2016), prior experience
(Argall et al. 2009), or exploration (Hazan et al. 2019; Tarbouriech and Lazaric 2019). The usual common-payoff setting focuses on global cumulative return of rewards, which is
a linear function of the the state-action occupancy measure.
By contrast, the aforementioned decision-making goals define nonlinear functions of the state-action occupancy measure (Kallenberg 1994). Such functions, which we call general utilities, have recently yielded impressive performance
in practice via prioritizing exploration (Mahajan et al. 2019;
Gupta et al. 2020), risk-sensitivity (Mystery 2021), and prior
experience (Le et al. 2017; Lee and Lee 2019). However, to
the best of our knowledge, there exists few formal guarantees for algorithms designed to optimize general utilities in
multi-agent settings.

We posit a new mechanism for cooperation in multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) based upon any nonlinear
function of the team’s long-term state-action occupancy measure, i.e., a general utility. This subsumes the cumulative return but also allows one to incorporate risk-sensitivity, exploration, and priors. We derive the Decentralized Shadow Reward Actor-Critic (DSAC) in which agents alternate between
policy evaluation (critic), weighted averaging with neighbors
(information mixing), and local gradient updates for their policy parameters (actor). DSAC augments the classic critic step
by requiring agents to (i) estimate their local occupancy measure in order to (ii) estimate the derivative of the local utility
with respect to their occupancy measure, i.e., the “shadow reward”. DSAC converges to a stationary point in sublinear rate
with high probability, depending on the amount of communications. Under proper conditions, we further establish the
non-existence of spurious stationary points for this problem,
that is, DSAC finds the globally optimal policy. Experiments
demonstrate the merits of goals beyond the cumulative return
in cooperative MARL.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework for directly
estimating the parameters of a controller through repeated
interaction with the environment (Sutton and Barto 2018),
and has gained attention for its ability to alleviate the need
for a physically exact model across a number of domains,
such as robotic manipulation (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters
2013), web services (Zhao et al. 2018), and logistics (Feinberg 2016), and various games (Silver et al. 2016). In RL,
an agent in a given state takes an action, and transitions to
another according to a Markov transition density, whereby
a reward informing the merit of the action is revealed by
the environment. Mathematically, this setting may be encapsulated by a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman
2014), in which the one seeks to select actions to maximize
the long-term accumulation of rewards.
In many domains, multiple agents interact in order to obtain favorable outcomes, as in finance (Lee, Zhang et al.
2002), social networks (Jaques et al. 2019), and games
(Vinyals et al. 2019). In multi-agent RL (MARL) and more

This gap motivates us to put forth the first decentralized
MARL scheme for general utilities, and establish its consistency and sample complexity. Our approach hinges upon
first noting that the embarking point for most RL methodologies is the Policy Gradient Theorem (Williams 1992; Sutton et al. 2000) or Bellman’s equation, both of which break
down for general utilities. One potential path forward is a
recent generalization of the PG Theorem for general utilities (Zhang et al. 2020b), which expresses the gradient as
product of the partial derivative of the utility with respect
to the occupancy measure, and the occupancy measure with
respect to the policy. However, in the team setting, this later
factor is a global nonlinear function of agents’ policies,
and hence does not permit decentralization. Thus, we define
an agent’s local occupancy measure as the joint occupancy
measure of all agents’ polices with all others’ marginalized
out, and its local general utility as any (not-necessarily concave) function of its marginal occupancy measure. The team

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9031

