The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AdaLoss: A Computationally-Efficient and Provably Convergent
Adaptive Gradient Method
Xiaoxia Wu1 * , Yuege Xie2 , Simon Shaolei Du3 , and Rachel Ward2
1

Microsoft

2

The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract

The ssUniversity of Washington

descent (GD) methods with well-tuned stepsizes, the adaptive methods are provably robust to their hyper-parameters
in the sense that they still converge at suboptimal parameter
specifications, but modulo (slightly) slower convergence rate
(Levy, Yurtsever, and Cevher 2018a; Ward, Wu, and Bottou
2020). Hence, adaptive gradient methods are widely used
by practitioners to save a large amount of human effort and
computer power in manually tuning the hyper-parameters.
Among many variants of adaptive gradient methods, one
that requires a minimal amount of hyper-parameter tuning is
AdaGrad-Norm (Ward, Wu, and Bottou 2020), which has the
following update

We propose a computationally-friendly adaptive learning rate
schedule, “AdaLoss”, which directly uses the information of
the loss function to adjust the stepsize in gradient descent
methods. We prove that this schedule enjoys linear convergence in linear regression. Moreover, we provide a linear
convergence guarantee over the non-convex regime, in the
context of two-layer over-parameterized neural networks. If
the width of the first-hidden layer in the two-layer networks
is sufficiently large (polynomially), then AdaLoss converges
robustly to the global minimum in polynomial time. We numerically verify the theoretical results and extend the scope
of the numerical experiments by considering applications in
LSTM models for text clarification and policy gradients for
control problems.

1

3

with

wj+1 = wj − η∇fξ (wj )/bj+1

(1)

b2j+1 = b2j + ∥∇fξ (wj )∥2 ;

(2)

above, wj is the target solution to the problem
Pnof minimizing
the finite-sum objective function F (w) := i=1 fi (w), and
∇fξ (wj ) is the stochastic (sub)-gradient that depends on the
random index ξ ∼ Unif{1, 2, . . . } satisfying the conditional
equality Eξ [∇fξ (wj )|wj ] = ∇F (wj ). However, computing the norm of the (sub)-gradient ∇fξ (wj ) ∈ Rd in high
dimensional space, particularly in settings which arise in
training deep neural networks, is not at all practical. Inspired
by a Lipschitz relationship between the objective function
F and its gradient for a certain class of objective functions
(see details in Section 2), we propose the following scheme
for bk which is significantly more computationally tractable
compared to computing the norm of the gradient1 :

Introduction

Gradient-based methods are widely used in optimizing neural networks. One crucial component in gradient methods
is the learning rate (a.k.a. step size) hyper-parameter, which
determines the convergence speed of the optimization procedure. An optimal learning rate can speed up the convergence
but only up to a certain threshold value; once it exceeds this
threshold value, the optimization algorithm may no longer
converge. This is by now well-understood for convex problems; excellent works on this topic include (Nash and Nocedal 1991), (Nesterov 2005), (Haykin et al. 2005), (Bubeck
et al. 2015), and the recent review for large-scale stochastic
optimization (Bottou, Curtis, and Nocedal 2018).
While determining the optimal step size is theoretically important for identifying the optimal convergence rate, the optimal learning rate often depends on certain unknown parameters of the problem. For example, for a convex and L-smooth
objective function, the optimal learning rate is O(1/L) where
L is often unknown to practitioners. To solve this problem,
adaptive methods (Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011; McMahan and Streeter 2010) are proposed since they can change
the learning rate on-the-fly according to gradient information received along the way. Though these methods often
introduce additional hyper-parameters compared to gradient

AdaLoss b2j+1 = b2j + α|fξ (wj ) − c|
where α > 0 and c are the tuning parameters. With this
update, we theoretically show that AdaLoss converges with
an upper bound that is tighter than AdaGrad-Norm under
certain conditions.
Theoretical investigations into adaptive gradient methods
for optimizing neural networks are scarce. Existing analyses
only deal with general (non)-convex and smooth functions,
and thus, only concern convergence to first-order stationary
points (Li and Orabona 2018; Chen et al. 2019). However, it
is sensible to instead target global convergence guarantees for
adaptive gradient methods in this setting in light of a series of
recent breakthrough papers showing that (stochastic) GD can

* Work done at UT Austin. See full version (including appendix)
at arxiv: 2109.08282
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8691

Code is available at github.com/willway1023yx/adaloss

