The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deformable Graph Convolutional Networks
Jinyoung Park, Sungdong Yoo, Jihwan Park, Hyunwoo J. Kim*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{lpmn678, ysd424, jseven7071, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

the hidden representation of each node by aggregating messages from its local neighborhoods. For example, Graph
Convolution Networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017) operate convolutions on input graphs inspired by first-order
approximation of spectral graph convolutions (Hammond,
Vandergheynst, and Gribonval 2011).
However, most graph convolution that aggregates messages from local neighborhoods implicitly assumes that input graphs are homophilic graphs, where connected nodes
have similar features or belong to the same class. So the
smoothing over the input graphs effectively removes noise
in the input features and significantly improve the representational power when the assumption holds. However, on heterophilic graphs where connected nodes have dissimilar features and different labels, the conventional graph convolutional neural networks often underperform simple methods
such as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that completely ignores the graph structure. In addition, since the conventional
graph convolution receives messages from local neighbors,
it has the limited capability to capture long-range dependencies between distant yet relevant nodes for the target tasks.
To address these limitations, we propose a Deformable
Graph Convolutional Network (Deformable GCN) that
softly changes the receptive field of each node by adaptively
aggregating the outputs of deformable graph convolution in
multiple latent spaces. Started from a general definition of
the discrete convolution with finite support, we extend the
deformable 2D convolution (Dai et al. 2017) to a latent
space for graph-structured data. Similar to the convolution
defined on a grid space for images, our convolution kernel generates different transformations for various relations.
Our framework models useful relations between nodes represented by the difference of learned node positional embeddings. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a Deformable Graph Convolution (Deformable GConv) that performs convolution in a latent
space and adaptively deforms the convolution kernels to
handle heterophily and variable-range dependencies between nodes.
• We propose novel architecture Deformable Graph Convolution Networks (Deforamble GCN) that simultaneously learn node representations (features) and node positional embeddings (coordiantes) and efficiently perform Deformable GConv in multiple latent spaces using

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have significantly improved
the representation power for graph-structured data. Despite
of the recent success of GNNs, the graph convolution in
most GNNs have two limitations. Since the graph convolution is performed in a small local neighborhood on the input graph, it is inherently incapable to capture long-range
dependencies between distance nodes. In addition, when a
node has neighbors that belong to different classes, i.e.,
heterophily, the aggregated messages from them often negatively affect representation learning. To address the two
common problems of graph convolution, in this paper, we
propose Deformable Graph Convolutional Networks (Deformable GCNs) that adaptively perform convolution in multiple latent spaces and capture short/long-range dependencies
between nodes. Separated from node representations (features), our framework simultaneously learns the node positional embeddings (coordinates) to determine the relations
between nodes in an end-to-end fashion. Depending on node
position, the convolution kernels are deformed by deformation vectors and apply different transformations to its neighbor nodes. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that Deformable GCNs flexibly handles the heterophily and achieve
the best performance in node classification tasks on six heterophilic graph datasets. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/DeformableGCN.

Introduction
Graphs are flexible representations for modeling relations
in data analysis problems and are widely used in various domains such as social network analysis (Wang, Cui,
and Zhu 2016), recommender system (Berg, Kipf, and
Welling 2017), chemistry (Gilmer et al. 2017), natural language processing (Erkan and Radev 2004), and computer
vision (Johnson et al. 2015). In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success in many
graph-related applications such as node classification (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2018),
link prediction (Zhang and Chen 2018; Schlichtkrull et al.
2018), and graph classification (Errica et al. 2019; Ying
et al. 2018). Most existing GNNs learn node representations via message passing schemes, which iteratively learn
* is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7949

