The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Group-Aware Threshold Adaptation for Fair Classification
Taeuk Jang1 , Pengyi Shi2 , Xiaoqian Wang1∗
1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA, 47907
2
Krannert School of Management, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA, 47907
{jang141, shi178, joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract

However, obtaining fairness is not a trivial problem, as
the dataset itself will be biased when it is accumulated artificially (Jang, Zheng, and Wang 2021). Simply modifying sensitive features (such as race, gender) from the data
does not solve the bias, because there is indirect discrimination (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini 2008) caused by the
feature relevance, which means sensitive information can be
inferred from other features.
In order to alleviate discrimination from different perspectives, various quantitative measurements of group equity (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and Raghavan 2016; Chouldechova 2017) have
been proposed. It has been proven that the pursuit of fairness is subject to a trade-off between fairness and accuracy
(Liu et al. (2019), Kim et al. (2020)).
Moreover, Pleiss et al. (2017) studied the trade-offs between fairness notions that cannot be satisfied at the same
time. Therefore, recent works (Feldman et al. 2015; Zhang,
Lemoine, and Mitchell 2018; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016)
usually target at a certain fairness notion. However, these
approaches suffer from the lack of flexibility, i.e., target fairness cannot be adjusted to meet the needs. If the fairness
constraints change under some circumstances, traditional
fairness models need to be re-trained from scratch, which
is computationally demanding and sometimes inapplicable
due to model settings.
To overcome the limitations, we propose a novel postprocessing method to improve fairness in a model-agnostic
manner i.e., we only need the prediction of an unknown
model. Our GSTAR (Group Specific Threshold Adaptation for faiR classification) model learns adaptive classification thresholds for each demographic group in classification task to improve the trade-off between fairness and accuracy. Given an existing classification model, GSTAR approximates the probability distribution of the model output
and utilizes confusion matrix to quantify accuracy and fairness w.r.t. the group-aware classification thresholds. This allows us to: 1) prevent from burdening additional complexity
or deteriorate the stability of the training process of the classifier; 2) integrate different fairness notions into one unified
objective function; 3) easily adapt one pre-trained model to
other fairness constraints.
We summarize our contributions of this paper as follows:

The fairness in machine learning is getting increasing attention, as its applications in different fields continue to expand
and diversify. To mitigate the discriminated model behaviors between different demographic groups, we introduce a
novel post-processing method to optimize over multiple fairness constraints through group-aware threshold adaptation.
We propose to learn adaptive classification thresholds for
each demographic group by optimizing the confusion matrix estimated from the probability distribution of a classification model output. As we only need an estimated probability distribution of model output instead of the classification model structure, our post-processing model can be applied to a wide range of classification models and improve
fairness in a model-agnostic manner and ensure privacy. This
even allows us to post-process existing fairness methods to
further improve the trade-off between accuracy and fairness.
Moreover, our model has low computational cost. We provide rigorous theoretical analysis on the convergence of our
optimization algorithm and the trade-off between accuracy
and fairness. Our method theoretically enables a better upper bound in near optimality than previous method under the
same condition. Experimental results demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods and obtains the
result that is closest to the theoretical accuracy-fairness tradeoff boundary.

Introduction
Machine learning is broadening its impact in various fields
including credit analysis, job screening and etc. Consequently, the importance of fairness in machine learning is
emerging. However, recent models have been found to behave differently between demographic groups in favorable
predictions. For example, it has been discovered that COMPAS, the criminal risk assessment software currently used
to help pretrial release decisions, has biases between different races (Dressel and Farid 2018). Specifically, blacks
got higher risk scores predicted from the model than whites
with similar profiles. Therefore, discrimination truly exists
and resolving it is critical as its direct and potential impact
is growing tremendously.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We propose a novel post-processing method, named
6988

