The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Sentence Representation via Contrastive Learning with Mixing
Negatives
Yanzhao Zhang1,2 , Richong Zhang1,2 * , Samuel Mensah3 , Xudong Liu1,2 , Yongyi Mao4
1

Beijing Advanced Institution for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
4
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
zhangyanzhao00@gmail.com,zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn, s.mensah@sheffield.ac.uk,
liuxd@act.buaa.edu.cn,ymao@uottawa.ca
Mix Negative
Positive
Anchor

Abstract
Unsupervised sentence representation learning is a fundamental problem in natural language processing. Recently,
contrastive learning has made great success on this task. Existing constrastive learning based models usually apply random sampling to select negative examples for training. Previous work in computer vision has shown that hard negative examples help contrastive learning to achieve faster convergency and better optimization for representation learning. However, the importance of hard negatives in contrastive
learning for sentence representation is yet to be explored. In
this study, we prove that hard negatives are essential for maintaining strong gradient signals in the training process while
random sampling negative examples is ineffective for sentence representation. Accordingly, we present a contrastive
model, MixCSE, that extends the current state-of-the-art SimCSE by continually constructing hard negatives via mixing
both positive and negative features. The superior performance
of the proposed approach is demonstrated via empirical studies on Semantic Textual Similarity datasets and Transfer task
datasets.

z1
Random Negatives
ω
o

Figure 1: An illustration of the embedding distribution induced by our method. The mix negative features is closer to
the anchor as compared to the random negatives.
Elsewhere, Wang and Isola (2020) identified two properties
for good computer vision representations (Chen et al. 2020;
He et al. 2020). That is, (1) alignment: representations of
similar examples should be close to each other; (2) uniformity: the embeddings should be distributed uniformly in the
representation space. We find that these two properties are
also suitable for learning good sentence representations.
Learning representations such that the embeddings of
similar examples are close to each other while dissimilar ones are far apart can be considered as an instance of
contrastive learning (Wang and Liu 2021). Although it has
received much attention in the computer vision community, only a few works (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021; Yan
et al. 2021) have employed contrastive learning coupled with
pre-trained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2018) for sentence representations. Since BERT suffers from
anistropy (Li et al. 2020) (i.e., the learned embeddings are
distributed into a narrow cone), contrastive learning alleviates this problem by distributing the embeddings uniformly,
leading to significant improvement in current sentence representation methods (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021).
In the context of unsupervised sentence representation
learning, the core idea of contrastive learning is to train a
neural network (i.e., typically BERT) for all sentence inputs
by constructing similar (positive) pairs and dissimilar (negative) pairs. The goal is to learn a good sentence embedding where positive pairs are pulled together while negative
pairs are pushed apart in space. Thus, the network uses a
contrastive loss to minimize the distance of a positive pair
and maximize the distance of a negative pair. Given an an-

Introduction
Sentence representation learning is a basic task of natural
language processing (NLP). Briefly, an embedding model
learns to map a sentence to a single d dimensional vector.
This area has found strong applications in several NLP tasks
including semantic textual similarity (Zhang et al. 2020),
information retrieval (Cer et al. 2018) and text classification (Pang and Lee 2005, 2004).
Early work (Conneau et al. 2017) considered learning sentence representations in a supervised way. However, obtaining ample training data is expensive in practice. This has
raised the desire to use little supervision as possible. Recently, several works (Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021; Yan et al.
2021) have opted to learn sentence representations in an
unsupervised fashion, taking advantage of large availability of unlabeled data. Among proposed works, the common
consensus is that the semantic information of the sentence
should be preserved when learning a good representation.
* Corresponding author: zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11730

