The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Exploring Visual Context for Weakly Supervised Person Search
Yichao Yan1 * † , Jinpeng Li2* , Shengcai Liao2 , Jie Qin2 , Bingbing Ni1 , Ke Lu3 , Xiaokang Yang1
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
{yanyichao, nibingbing, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, {ljpadam, qinjiebuaa}@gmail.com, scliao@ieee.org, luk@ucas.ac.cn

Context-Guided Feature Learning

Abstract

Re-id
features

Person search has recently emerged as a challenging task
that jointly addresses pedestrian detection and person reidentification. Existing approaches follow a fully supervised
setting where both bounding box and identity annotations are
available. However, annotating identities is labor-intensive,
limiting the practicability and scalability of current frameworks. This paper inventively considers weakly supervised
person search with only bounding box annotations. We proposed to address this novel task by investigating three levels
of context clues (i.e., detection, memory and scene) in unconstrained natural images. The first two are employed to
promote local and global discriminative capabilities, while
the latter enhances clustering accuracy. Despite its simple design, our CGPS achieves 80.0% in mAP on CUHK-SYSU,
boosting the baseline model by 8.8%. Surprisingly, it even
achieves comparable performance with several supervised
person search models. Our code is available at https://github.
com/ljpadam/CGPS

Bg

Memory features Clustering

Figure 1: Overall pipeline of the proposed context-guided
person search framework for weakly supervised person
search. Without identity annotations, initial pseudo labels
(colored points) are generated with ImageNet-pretrained
weights. We employ the detection context to pull features
belonging to the same identity together, while pushing the
re-id features of the pedestrians away from the background
features. A hard-negative mining strategy is designed to effectively employ the information in the memory. We use the
scene context to generate more accurate clustering results.

Introduction
Person search (Zheng et al. 2017; Xiao et al. 2017) aims
to retrieve a query person from unconstrained natural images. It therefore needs to simultaneously address the tasks
of pedestrian detection and person re-identification (re-id).
Supervised person search in particular has been extensively
studied in recent years (Liu et al. 2017; Xiao et al. 2019;
Munjal et al. 2019). Nevertheless, annotating the identities remains labor-intensive. In contrast, relatively accurate
bounding box annotations could be automatically generated from existing pedestrian detectors (Brazil, Yin, and Liu
2017; Liu et al. 2018, 2019). Motivated by this, in this work,
we consider person search in the weakly supervised setting,
in which there only exist bounding box annotations.
Intuitively, this task can be addressed with a two-step
person search model, by first locating the pedestrians with
a detector, and then applying an unsupervised person reid model. However, there are two major issues with this
straightforward solution. 1) Two-step approaches employ
two separate models to address pedestrian detection and

person re-id, requiring twice as many parameters as onestep models, and introducing high computational overhead.
Moreover, these models cannot achieve end-to-end inference
and are thus inefficient. 2) As existing unsupervised re-id
methods take cropped person images as input, they do not
have access to the rich context information when training the
detection model, or the scene context. Therefore, directly extending an existing unsupervised person re-id model to address our task without considering the detection and scene
context would make the solution suboptimal.
To address the first issue, in this work, we propose a
novel weakly supervised person search framework, termed
as the Context-Guided Person Search Network (CGPS). Our
model follows the typical architecture of a one-step person
search method (Xiao et al. 2017), but it is only supervised
with bounding box annotations. To learn re-id features, we
adopt similar spirit of an unsupervised re-id model (Ge et al.
2020), and apply the clustering method to acquire human
identities for unsupervised re-id training. This framework
naturally inherits the advantages of existing one-step person
search models in terms of efficiency, while at the same time
avoiding the need for labor-intensive identity annotations.

* indicates equal contribution
†

Corresponding author: Yichao Yan
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3027

