The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semantic Feature Extraction for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Junhan Kim, Kyuhong Shim, Byonghyo Shim
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{junhankim, khshim, bshim}@islab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) is a technique to train
a deep learning model to identify unseen classes using the attribute. In this paper, we put forth a new GZSL technique that
improves the GZSL classification performance greatly. Key
idea of the proposed approach, henceforth referred to as semantic feature extraction-based GZSL (SE-GZSL), is to use
the semantic feature containing only attribute-related information in learning the relationship between the image and
the attribute. In doing so, we can remove the interference, if
any, caused by the attribute-irrelevant information contained
in the image feature. To train a network extracting the semantic feature, we present two novel loss functions, 1) mutual
information-based loss to capture all the attribute-related information in the image feature and 2) similarity-based loss
to remove unwanted attribute-irrelevant information. From
extensive experiments using various datasets, we show that
the proposed SE-GZSL technique outperforms conventional
GZSL approaches by a large margin.

Figure 1: Images and attributes for different bird species
sampled from the CUB dataset (Welinder et al. 2010).

of this technique, dubbed as generalized zero-shot learning
(GZSL), is to learn the relationship between the image and
the attribute from seen classes and then use the trained model
in the identification of unseen classes. In (Akata et al. 2015),
for example, an approach to identify unseen classes by measuring the compatibility between the image feature and attribute has been proposed. In (Mishra et al. 2018), a network
synthesizing the image feature from the attribute has been
employed to generate training data of unseen classes. In extracting the image feature, a network trained using the classification task (e.g., ResNet (He et al. 2016)) has been popularly used. A potential drawback of this extraction method
is that the image feature might contain attribute-irrelevant
information (e.g., human fingers in Fig. 1), disturbing the
process of learning the relationship between the image and
the attribute (Tong et al. 2019; Han, Fu, and Yang 2020; Li
et al. 2021).
In this paper, we propose a new GZSL technique that
removes the interference caused by the attribute-irrelevant
information. Key idea of the proposed approach is to extract the semantic feature, feature containing the attributerelated information, from the image feature and then use it
in learning the relationship between the image and the attribute. In extracting the semantic feature, we use a modified
autoencoder consisting of two encoders, viz., semantic and
residual encoders (see Fig. 2). In a nutshell, the semantic

Introduction
Image classification is a long-standing yet important task
with a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, industrial automation, medical diagnosis, and biometric identification (Fujiyoshi, Hirakawa, and Yamashita 2019;
Ren, Hung, and Tan 2017; Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox
2015; Sun et al. 2013). In solving the task, supervised learning (SL) techniques have been popularly used for its superiority (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016).
Well-known drawback of SL is that a large number of training data are required for each and every class to be identified. Unfortunately, in many practical scenarios, it is difficult to collect training data for certain classes (e.g., endangered species and newly observed species such as variants
of COVID-19). When there are unseen classes where training data is unavailable, SL-based models are biased towards
the seen classes, impeding the identification of the unseen
classes.
Recently, to overcome this drawback, a technique to train
a classifier using manually annotated attributes (e.g., color,
size, and shape; see Fig. 1) has been proposed (Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Chao et al. 2016). Key idea
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1166

