The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Elicitation of Necessarily Optimal Matchings
Jannik Peters
Research Group Efficient Algorithms, TU Berlin, Germany
jannik.peters@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

only one ice pop of each kind is left, causing discussion on
how to fairly divide the ice. Quickly, the group agrees that
a rank-maximal allocation would be the fairest they could
currently think of. Now there is just one problem left, due
to time constraints and hunger, the researchers do not want
to all give their whole ranking to each other. Instead, they
agree that they should start off with naming the ice pop they
like the most. But how should they continue after this, and
who should be asked for their second favorite ice?
To deal with this problem Hosseini, Menon, Shah, and
Sikdar (2021) initiated the study of finding matchings that
are necessarily optimal by eliciting partial preferences from
the agents. In their model Hosseini et al. (2021) use so-called
top-k preferences in which each agent has only elicited a
prefix of their true preferences. To obtain these preferences,
they introduce the next-best query model, in which agents
can be asked to reveal the top house they have not revealed
yet. The goal in this setting is to ask as few queries as possible in order to find a matching that is necessarily optimal,
i.e., optimal under every possible linear extension of the
top-k preferences. The performance of such an elicitation
algorithm is then measured in terms of the so-called competitive ratio, i.e., the ratio between the number of queries
of the algorithm and the number of queries of an optimal
algorithm with knowledge of the complete preferences.
√ As
their main results, Hosseini et al. (2021) gave an O( n)competitive elicitation algorithm for finding a necessarily
Pareto optimal matching, showed that no elicitation algorithm√
for finding a necessarily Pareto optimal matching can
be o( n)-competitive, and proved that no elicitation algorithm for finding a necessarily rank-maximal matching can
be 43 −ε-competitive for any ε > 0. Further, they conjectured
that an online algorithm with a constant competitive ratio
for eliciting necessarily rank-maximal matchings is possible, and left this as their most important open question.

In this paper, we study the problem of eliciting preferences
of agents in the house allocation model. For this we build
on a recently introduced model and focus on the task of
eliciting preferences to find matchings which are necessarily optimal, i.e., optimal under all possible completions of
the elicited preferences. In particular, we investigate the elicitation of necessarily Pareto optimal (NPO) and necessarily
rank-maximal (NRM) matchings. Most importantly, we answer an open question and give an online algorithm for eliciting an NRM matching in the next-best query model which
is 3/2-competitive, i.e., it takes at most 3/2 as many queries
as an optimal algorithm. Besides this, we extend this field of
research by introducing two new natural models of elicitation
and by studying both the complexity of determining whether
a necessarily optimal matching exists in them, and by giving
online algorithms for these models.

1

Introduction

One of the key settings in the area of matching under preferences is the so-called house allocation or assignment problem. In this problem we are given two sets, a set of agents
A and a set of houses H with agents having preferences
over houses. This simple setting has found multiple real
life applications, for instance in the allocation of people
to jobs (Hylland and Zeckhauser 1979), papers to reviewers (Garg et al. 2010), or students to student dorms (Chen
and Sönmez 2002). Over the years, various solution concepts have been designed for the house allocation problem,
for instance Pareto optimality (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez
1998) (Abraham et al. 2004), popularity (Abraham et al.
2007) or rank-maximality (Irving et al. 2006).
However, most of the work on house allocation problems
assumes the preferences of the agents to be given in their
entirety, while in many real-world applications only partial
preferences might be known and eliciting complete rankings
from agents might be costly.
As an expository (non-serious) example (based on a real
life story), imagine a group of AI researchers meeting in
their office kitchen to celebrate the acceptance of multiple
papers. For this occasion, the researchers decide to eat some
ice pops. However, after opening the freezer, they notice that

Our Results
We contribute to this line of research in the following way.
First, we confirm the conjecture of Hosseini et al. (2021)
and show that an online algorithm with a 32 -competitive ratio for eliciting a necessarily rank-maximal matching does
exist in the next-best query model. Further, we show that
this algorithm is optimal and no online-algorithm can have
a competitive ratio better than 32 . Besides this, our many fo-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5164

