The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ELMA: Energy-Based Learning for Multi-Agent Activity Forecasting
Yu-Ke Li1 , Pin Wang1 , Li-Xiong Chen2 , Zheng Wang3 * , Ching-Yao Chan1 *
1

2

California PATH, UC Berkeley,
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University,

Abstract
talk talk

This paper describes an energy-based learning method that
predicts the activities of multiple agents simultaneously. It
aims to forecast both upcoming actions and paths of all agents
in a scene based on their past activities, which can be jointly
formulated by a probabilistic model over time. Learning this
model is challenging because: 1) it has a large number of
time-dependent variables that must scale with the forecast
horizon and the number of agents; 2) distribution functions
have to contain multiple modes in order to capture the spatiotemporal complexities of each agent’s activities. To address
these challenges, we put forth a novel Energy-based Learning approach for Multi-Agent activity forecasting (ELMA)
to estimate this complex model via maximum log-likelihood
estimation. Specifically, by sampling from a sequence of factorized marginalized multi-modal distributions, ELMA generates the possible future actions efficiently. Moreover, by
graph-based representations, ELMA also explicitly resolves
the spatio-temporal dependencies of all agents’ activities in
a single pass. Our experiments on two large-scale datasets
prove that ELMA outperforms recent leading studies by an
obvious margin.

wait

walk
texting

?
?
walk

Figure 1: An example of multi-agent activity forecasting.
Given the observed activities (in solid bounding boxes and
lines) of two agents, we want to forecast the possibility of
their future actions (in dashed bounding boxes) and locations (in dashed lines). Two outcomes of multi-agent interactions are displayed, and it can be readily seen that one
agent’s activities also depend on the activities of the other.
must rely on good guesses. Hence, modeling complex multimodel distributions accurately is essential for performance.
We believe, however, that actions and paths of all agents
are preferably addressed in a unified framework derived by
a novel concept that we term as multi-agent activity forecasting. We introduce this concept because apparent acrossagent dependencies exist. On the one hand, an agent has to
adjust his/her reasonable route instantaneously depending
on the past actions taken by others in the surrounding; on
the other hand, new routes may impose new constraints on
all other agents’ next moves. Given that an agent’s activities
has very high variance in nature, the underlying joint distribution of both actions and paths is highly complex and likely
to be multi-modal. In other word, existing methods, cannot
be applied to address this new task directly due to the escalated complexity of the underlying joint distribution.
In order to make effective predictions out of complex distributions, we introduce an Energy-based Learning solution
for Multi-Agent activity forecasting, ELMA, that approximates complex distributions implicitly with learnable energy
functions (LeCun et al. 2006). In contrast to VAE and GAN,
ELMA covers multimodal distributions without complying

Introduction
Being able to predict an agent’s upcoming behavior is important for intelligent systems to understand the physical
world. For instance, autonomous vehicles have to share the
road reasonably with nearby pedestrians in real-time under
all circumstances. This means the system must be able to
foresee which direction an agent is moving to (i.e., path) and
what the agent is going to do (i.e., action) as Fig. 1 depicts.
Existing work performs path prediction and action prediction in an agent-independent manner. Be the model a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Walker et al. 2017), generative
adversarial networks (GAN) (Gupta et al. 2018; Chen, Bao,
and Kong 2020) or GLOW (Guan et al. 2020), variables
are partitioned into independent subsets with an assumption
of a relatively simple distribution. Specifically, for conditional distributions over which future variables are dependent on past observations, a set of additional latent variables
that explain the generation of multi-model joint distribution
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1482

