The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

KAM Theory Meets Statistical Learning Theory:
Hamiltonian Neural Networks with Non-zero Training Loss
Yuhan Chen1 * , Takashi Matsubara2 * , Takaharu Yaguchi1 * ,
1

Kobe University, 1–1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan 657–8501
Osaka University, 1–3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan 560–8531
193x226x@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp, matsubara@sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp, yaguchi@pearl.kobe-u.ac.jp
2

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on theories of the properties of
the most fundamental model, comprising Hamiltonian neural networks (HNNs) (Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski
2019)

Many physical phenomena are described by Hamiltonian
mechanics using an energy function (the Hamiltonian). Recently, the Hamiltonian neural network, which approximates
the Hamiltonian as a neural network, and its extensions have
attracted much attention. This is a very powerful method, but
its use in theoretical studies remains limited. In this study, by
combining the statistical learning theory and Kolmogorov–
Arnold–Moser (KAM) theory, we provide a theoretical analysis of the behavior of Hamiltonian neural networks when the
learning error is not completely zero. A Hamiltonian neural
network with non-zero errors can be considered as a perturbation from the true dynamics, and the perturbation theory of
the Hamilton equation is widely known as the KAM theory.
To apply the KAM theory, we provide a generalization error
bound for Hamiltonian neural networks by deriving an estimate of the covering number of the gradient of the multi-layer
perceptron, which is the key ingredient of the model. This error bound gives a sup-norm bound on the Hamiltonian that is
required in the application of the KAM theory.

du
∂HNN
=S
dt
∂u

(2)

and their extensions in practical situations, where the learning error is not completely zero. In this case, the trained
model can be regarded as a perturbed Hamiltonian system
due to the modeling error of the energy function. In addition, S is a general skew-symmetric matrix and hence (2)
can model Hamiltonian partial differential equations (Matsubara, Ishikawa, and Yaguchi 2020).
In mathematical physics, perturbed Hamiltonian systems
are well studied. For example, because whether the solar
system will continue to exist in the future is of fundamental
interest in astronomy, the stability of the solar system under
perturbations is a very important issue that has been studied for a long time (e.g., Féjoz (2013); Laskar (1996)). The
Kolmogorov–Arnold–Moser (KAM) theory gives an answer
to questions of this type; essentially, periodic motions of
such systems are stable under small perturbations. The stability of periodic motions is of particular importance in science. In addition to the stability of celestial systems, the recursive nature of physical phenomena is also of interest in
physics. For example, in the famous numerical experiments
using the Korteweg–De Vries (KdV) equation by Zabusky
and Kruskal (1965), it was confirmed that the waveform
given as the initial condition initially collapsed due to severe oscillations, and then returned to its original shape after
a long time. Whether such phenomena can be reproduced by
deep learning models is an important problem that greatly
affects the usefulness of deep physical models.
In this paper, we give an answer to this question by combining the KAM theory and statistical learning theory. Because trained models are also perturbed Hamiltonian systems, it is expected that the periodic behaviors of the systems are preserved even if the loss function does not vanish
completely provided it is sufficiently small. However, this
expectation cannot be proved in a straightforward way, because the application of the KAM theory requires that the
energy function be close enough to that of the true dynamics in the whole phase space. Noticing that the error of the

Introduction
Many physical phenomena are described by energy-based
theories, such as Hamiltonian mechanics (e.g., Furihata and
Matsuo (2010)). The governing equation of Hamiltonian
mechanics is
∂H
du
=S
,
(1)
dt
∂u
where u : t ∈ R 7→ u(t) ∈ RN , H : u ∈ RN 7→ H(u) ∈ R,
and S is a skew-symmetric matrix. H represents the energy
function of the system. In recent years, there has been a lot
of research on predicting the corresponding physical phenomena by learning the energy function H in such equations
with a neural network HNN (e.g., Chen et al. (2020); Cranmer et al. (2020); Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski (2019);
Matsubara, Ishikawa, and Yaguchi (2020); Zhong, Dey, and
Chakraborty (2020)); however, to the best of our knowledge,
theoretical analysis of such models has not been performed
sufficiently, except for SympNet (Jin et al. 2020b) for the
Hamilton equation, where the universal approximation theorems for discrete-time neural network models are provided.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6322

