The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

UniMS: A Unified Framework for Multimodal Summarization with Knowledge
Distillation
Zhengkun Zhang1 * , Xiaojun Meng2 , Yasheng Wang2 , Xin Jiang2 , Qun Liu2 , Zhenglu Yang1†
1

TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University, China, 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
zhangzk2017@mail.nankai.edu.cn,
{xiaojun.meng, wangyasheng, Jiang.Xin, qun.liu}@huawei.com,
yangzl@nankai.edu.cn
Abstract

With the rapid increase of multimedia data, a large body of
literature has emerged to work on multimodal summarization, the majority of which target at refining salient information from textual and visual modalities to output a pictorial summary with the most relevant images. Existing methods mostly focus on either extractive or abstractive summarization and rely on qualified image captions to build image
references. We are the first to propose a Unified framework
for Multimodal Summarization grounding on BART, UniMS,
that integrates extractive and abstractive objectives, as well
as selecting the image output. Specially, we adopt knowledge
distillation from a vision-language pretrained model to improve image selection, which avoids any requirement on the
existence and quality of image captions. Besides, we introduce a visual guided decoder to better integrate textual and
visual modalities in guiding abstractive text generation. Results show that our best model achieves a new state-of-the-art
result on a large-scale benchmark dataset. The newly involved
extractive objective as well as the knowledge distillation technique are proven to bring a noticeable improvement to the
multimodal summarization task.

ImgSel

NFL Hall of Famer Nick Buoniconti is pledging his brain
to research into football-linked brain injuries. The
Miami Dolphins legend, 76, was diagnosed with
dementia in May, and his doctors suspect he also suffers
from chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a critical
disease which scientists believe is caused by blows to
the head. [Speaking on Friday, Buoniconti cried as he
Ext
said he is leaving his brain with the famed
research team at Boston University, which
diagnosed CTE posthumously in the late Patriots star
Aaron Hernandez, in the hopes that he can help speed
up attempts to diagnose CTE during life.] [It comes a
month after his son Marc, who was left paralyzed for life
after a clash in a college football game 32 years ago,
said he believes youth football should be banned.]
‘My life, as I know it, has been taken away from me,’
Buoniconti wept on Friday, sat in a wheelchair next to
his wife Lynn. …

Abs

Nick Buoniconti, 76, was a legend with the Miami
Dolphins. He was diagnosed with dementia in May, and
his doctors now believe he also suffers CTE. On Friday,
Buoniconti announced he is leaving his brain with
Boston University. The famed brain research
team diagnosed CT posthumously in the late Patriots
star Aaron Hernandez. Last month, Buoniconti's son
Marc, who was left paralyzed for life after a clash in a
college football game 32 years ago, said youth football
should be banned.

Figure 1: The illustration of multimodal summarization task.
Our unified framework is able to achieve extractive and abstractive summarization objectives, as well as the image selection objective with no need of using image captions.

Introduction
Existing researchers (Srihari 1994; He and Deng 2017; Baltrusaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019) have evidenced that
in order to understand the world around us, it needs to be
able to interpret and reason from multimodal information.
Recently proposed Multimodal Summarization with Multimodal Output (Zhu et al. 2018) (MSMO) that condenses
long multimodal news to a short pictorial version, as shown
in Fig. 1, is a new fashion of summarization. This method
improves users’ satisfaction with the ability to quickly grasp
news highlights, and brings both research and commercial
value in the face of information explosion.
A large amount of methods (Zhu et al. 2018, 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021) are proposed for improving multimodal summarization. They serve as baselines for the large-scale benchmark dataset collected by Zhu et al. (2018), and provide insights for recent work on multimodal summarization. In or-

der to obtain the pictorial summary including a piece of condensed text with images as shown in Fig. 1, existing methods
typically consist of two objectives.
Firstly, as a critical modality of the pictorial summary, the
objective of abstractive text summarization plays an important role in improving multimodal summarization. Recent
advances in denoising autoencoder for pretraining sequenceto-sequence models such as BART (Lewis et al. 2020) have
been shown to capture many language relevant facets for
downstream tasks, which leads to a large improvement on
text summarization metrics. We believe the existing highcapacity language model benefits summarization remarkably even in a multimodal setting. However, the original
BART model has no support for multimodal input and output. Therefore, we are motivated to integrate textual and visual modalities into the BART model and extend its architecture to further improve the multimodal summarization task.

* Work is done at the internship of Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei

Technologies.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11757

