The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Unified Framework for Real Time Motion Completion
Yinglin Duan1 , Yue Lin1 , Zhengxia Zou2∗ , Yi Yuan3 , Zhehui Qian3 , Bohan Zhang3
1

NetEase Games AI Lab, Guangzhou, China,
2
Beihang University,
3
Netease, Inc., Hangzhou, China
{duanyinglin, gzlinyue, yuanyi, qianzhehui, hzzhangbohan}@corp.netease.com, zhengxiazou@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Motion completion, as a challenging and fundamental problem, is of great significance in film and game applications.
For different motion completion application scenarios (inbetweening, in-filling, and blending), most previous methods deal with the completion problems with case-by-case
methodology designs. In this work, we propose a simple but
effective method to solve multiple motion completion problems under a unified framework and achieve a new state-ofthe-art accuracy on LaFAN1 (+17% better than the previous
SoTA) under multiple evaluation settings. Inspired by the recent great success of self-attention-based transformer models, we consider the completion as a sequence-to-sequence
prediction problem. Our method consists of three modules a standard transformer encoder with self-attention that learns
long-range dependencies of input motions, a trainable mixture embedding module that models temporal information
and encodes different key-frame combinations in a unified
form, and a new motion perceptual loss for better capturing
high-frequency movements. Our method can predict multiple missing frames within a single forward propagation in
real-time without post-processing. We also introduce a novel
large-scale dance movement dataset for exploring the scaling capability of our method and its effectiveness in complex
motion applications.

Figure 1: Motion completion results by our method based on
input key frames (blue ones). We propose a unified framework that can solve multiple motion completion problems
and achieve a new SoTA on a high-quality motion completion dataset – LaFAN1 (Harvey et al. 2020).
the motion between the past given frames and a provided
further keyframe (Harvey et al. 2020).
* In-filling. As an extension of in-betweening, in-filling
poses the characters on specific positions of the timeline (Ciccone, Öztireli, and Sumner 2019) and complements the rest of the frames (Kaufmann et al. 2020).
* Blending. Blending focuses on the automatic generation
of the transition between a pair of pre-defined motions.
Blending is widely used in video games, such as in-game
choreography systems.

Introduction
Motion completion is an important and challenging problem
that provides fundamental technical support for animation
authoring of 3D characters and has been recently successfully applied in film production and video games (Thomas
2009; Ciccone, Öztireli, and Sumner 2019). In recent years,
deep learning methods have greatly promoted the research
progress of motion completion. With recent advances in
this field, manpower can now be greatly saved, where highquality motion can be generated from a set of historical or
sparse key-frames by learning from large-scale motion capture data sets (Kaufmann et al. 2020; Harvey et al. 2020).
We consider the motion completion in the following three
scenarios:

However, most previous motion completion methods
deal with different completion scenarios (in-betweening, infilling, and blending) with case-by-case designs. In this paper, we propose a novel completion method that deals with
all the above processing scenarios under a unified framework. In our method, we leverage the recent popular deep
learning architecture called Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017), which is built based on the self-attention mechanism
and is widely used in neural language processing, computer
vision, and reinforcement learning (Tay et al. 2020; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Parisotto et al. 2020). We adopt BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), a recent well-known transformer encoder
as our backbone, where known frames (key-frames) and unknown frames (need to be complemented) are fed together
as input, and thus all the frames can be predicted in a sin-

* In-betweening. Animators are required to complement
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4459

