The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

From Good to Best: Two-Stage Training for Cross-Lingual Machine Reading
Comprehension
Nuo Chen1 * , Linjun Shou2† , Ming Gong2 , Jian Pei3
1

ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
STCA NLP Group, Microsoft, Beijing
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
nuochen@pku.edu.cn, {lisho,migon}@microsoft.com, jpei@cs.sfu.ca
Abstract

Language

en

es

ar

hi

vi

Cross-lingual Machine Reading Comprehension (xMRC) is
challenging due to the lack of training data in low-resource
languages. The recent approaches use training data only in a
resource-rich language like English to fine-tune large-scale
cross-lingual pre-trained language models. Due to the big
difference between languages, a model fine-tuned only by a
source language may not perform well for target languages.
Interestingly, we observe that while the top-1 results predicted by the previous approaches may often fail to hit the
ground-truth answers, the correct answers are often contained in the top-k predicted results. Based on this observation, we develop a two-stage approach to enhance the model
performance. The first stage targets at recall: we design a
hard-learning (HL) algorithm to maximize the likelihood that
the top-k predictions contain the accurate answer. The second stage focuses on precision: an answer-aware contrastive
learning (AA-CL) mechanism is developed to learn the fine
difference between the accurate answer and other candidates.
Our extensive experiments show that our model significantly
outperforms a series of strong baselines on two cross-lingual
MRC benchmark datasets.

EM score

64.24

48.30

35.14

41.93

42.36

Table 1: EM scores across different languages on MLQA
dataset.
if they have similar meanings. The cross-lingual pre-trained
models are then fine-tuned by training data only in a source
language (e.g., English), and finally applied to various target languages. This approach has shown promising results
on tasks such as entity recognition (Liang et al. 2021; Kruengkrai et al. 2020), question answering (Asai et al. 2018;
Zhou et al. 2021), as well as xMRC (Yuan et al. 2020; Liang
et al. 2021). However, due to the big difference between languages, the model fine-tuned only on the source language
may not perform well on target languages.
Table 1 is the results from our empirical study by applying the previous approach.specificlly, we use English data
to fine-tune the cross-lingual XLM-R model (Conneau et al.
2019) on MLQA dataset (Lewis et al. 2020). The numbers
in the table are exact match (EM) scores, which is a widelyadopted metric for MRC task to evaluate the match degree
between the model predicted result and the ground-truth answer. For each case, we take the top-1 output from the model
as the predicted result. From Table 1, we clearly see the result on English is much better than that on other languages.
The reason is that the model fine-tuned by only English
training data. Meanwhile, the model can still achieve 35 to
48 EM scores on non-English languages even though it has
never been trained by any examples from those languages.
This suggests that the model has inherited certain extent of
language transfer capability from the cross-lingual PLMs.
We then extend the set of model predicted results by including top-k outputs from the model. That is, we regard the
model “successfully” predicts the answer if any one in the
top-k outputs matches the ground-truth answer. The modified EM scores with varying numbers of k are illustrated
in Table 2 (note the numbers in the column of “Top-1” are
just those in Table 1). From Table 2, we can see the scores
have substantial gains for all languages when we increase k.
The gain in English is the smallest (around 10 points when
k=10 vs. k=1), since the model has been well fine-tuned on
this language by the native training examples. In other lan-

Introduction
Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) has been intensively studied in the Natural Language Understanding community in the past years (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Yu et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2021; Seo et al. 2017; Liang et al. 2021;
Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018;
Reddy, Chen, and Manning 2019; You et al. 2020). When
scaling out MRC to multiple languages, i.e., the task of
cross-lingual MRC or xMRC for short, one challenge is the
lack of training data in low-resource languages, where no
training examples are available. To tackle this challenge,
recent approaches build on large-scale cross-lingual pretrained language models, such as mBERT (Pires, Schlinger,
and Garrette 2019) and XLM-R (Conneau et al. 2019).
These pre-trained models map the representations of different languages into a universal semantic space, where the expressions in different languages are represented close to each
* Work done during internship at Microsoft STCA.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10501

