The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Parameterized Task Structure
for Generalization to Unseen Entities
Anthony Liu* 1 , Sungryull Sohn* 2 , Mahdi Qazwini1 , Honglak Lee1,2
1

University of Michigan
2
LG AI Research
anthliu@umich.edu, srsohn@lgresearch.ai, mqazwini@umich.edu, honglak@eecs.umich.edu

Abstract

form new tasks. These components can be numerous, leading to a combinatorial number of subtasks. For example, the
cooking task shown in Figure 1 contains subtasks that follow a verb-objects structure. The verb Pickup admits many
subtasks, where any object x composes into a new subtask
(e.g. Pickup egg, Pickup pot). Solving compositional
tasks also requires reasoning (Andreas, Klein, and Levine
2017; Oh et al. 2017). Without reasoning on the relations
between components between tasks, exploring the space of a
combinatorial number of subtasks is extremely inefficient.
In this work, we propose to tackle the problem of hierarchical and compositional tasks. Prior work has tackled learning
hierarchical task structures by modelling dependencies between subtasks in a graph structure (Sohn, Oh, and Lee 2018;
Sohn et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019). In these
settings, during training, the agent tries to efficiently adapt
to a task by inferring the latent graph structure, then uses the
inferred graph to maximize reward during test. However, this
approach does not scale for compositional tasks. Prior work
tries to infer the structure of subtasks individiually – they do
not consider the relations between compositional tasks.
We propose the parameterized subtask graph inference
(PSGI) approach for tackling hierarchical and compositional
tasks. We present an overview of our approach in Figure 1.
This approach extends the problem introduced by (Sohn et al.
2020). Similar to (Sohn et al. 2020), we assume options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) (low level policies) for completing subtasks have been trained or are given as subroutines
for the agent. These options are imperfect, and require certain conditions on the state to be meet before they can be
successfully executed. We model the problem as a transfer
RL problem. During training, an exploration policy gathers
trajectories. These trajectories are then used to infer the latent
b Gb models the hierarchies
parameterized subtask graph, G.
between compositional tasks and options in symbolic graph
structure (shown in 1). In PSGI, we infer the preconditions
of options, subtasks that must be completed before an option can be successfully executed, and the effects of options,
subtasks that are completed after they are executed. The parameterized subtask graph is then used to maximize reward in
the test environment by using GRProp, a method introduced
by (Sohn, Oh, and Lee 2018) which propagates a gradient
through Gb to learn the test policy.
In PSGI, we use parameterized options and subtasks. This

Real world tasks are hierarchical and compositional. Tasks can
be composed of multiple subtasks (or sub-goals) that are dependent on each other. These subtasks are defined in terms of
entities (e.g., apple, pear) that can be recombined to form
new subtasks (e.g., pickup apple, and pickup pear).
To solve these tasks efficiently, an agent must infer subtask
dependencies (e.g. an agent must execute pickup apple
before place apple in pot), and generalize the inferred dependencies to new subtasks (e.g. place apple
in pot is similar to place apple in pan). Moreover,
an agent may also need to solve unseen tasks, which can involve unseen entities. To this end, we formulate parameterized
subtask graph inference (PSGI), a method for modeling subtask dependencies using first-order logic with subtask entities.
To facilitate this, we learn entity attributes in a zero-shot manner, which are used as quantifiers (e.g. is pickable(X))
for the parameterized subtask graph. We show this approach
accurately learns the latent structure on hierarchical and compositional tasks more efficiently than prior work, and show
PSGI can generalize by modelling structure on subtasks unseen during adaptation.

1

Introduction

Real world tasks are hierarchical. Hierarchical tasks are composed of multiple sub-goals that must be completed in certain
order. For example, the cooking task shown in Figure 1 requires an agent to boil some food object (e.g. Cooked egg).
An agent must place the food object x in a cookware object
y, place the cookware object on the stove, before boiling
this food object x. Parts of this task can be decomposed into
sub-goals, or subtasks (e.g. Pickup egg, Put egg on
pot). Solving these tasks requires long horizon planning
and reasoning ability (Erol 1996; Xu et al. 2018; Ghazanfari
and Taylor 2017; Sohn, Oh, and Lee 2018). This problem is
made more difficult of rewards are sparse, if only few of the
subtasks in the environment provide reward to the agent.
Real world tasks are also compositional (Carvalho et al.
2020; Loula, Baroni, and Lake 2018; Andreas, Klein, and
Levine 2017; Oh et al. 2017). Compositional tasks are often made of different “components” that can recombined to
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7534

