The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Saliency Grafting: Innocuous Attribution-Guided Mixup
with Calibrated Label Mixing
Joonhyung Park1 , June Yong Yang1 , Jinwoo Shin1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Eunho Yang 1,2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
AITRICS
{deepjoon, laoconeth, jinwoos, sjhwang82, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

size of a dataset by producing virtual samples from the training data through means such as injecting noise (Amodei
et al. 2016) or cropping out regions (DeVries and Taylor 2017). Datasets diversified with these augmented samples are shown to effectively improve the generalization
performance of the trained model. Furthermore, data augmentation is proven to be effective not only for promoting generalization but also in boosting the robustness of a
model (Hendrycks et al. 2019) and acquiring visual representations without human supervision (Chen et al. 2020; He
et al. 2020).
To this end, conventional augmentation methods have
focused on creating new images by transforming a given
image using means such as flipping, resizing, and more.
However, a recently proposed augmentation method called
Mixup (Zhang et al. 2017) proposed the idea of crafting
a new sample out of a pair of samples by taking a convex combination of them. Inspired by this pioneering work,
Yun et al. (2019) proposed CutMix, a progeny of Mixup and
Cutout (DeVries and Taylor 2017), which crops a random
region of an image and pasting it on another. These methods are able to generate a wider variety of samples while
effectively compensating for the loss of information caused
by actions such as cropping. However, such context-agnostic
nature of these methods gives way to creating samples that
are potentially harmful. Since the images are combined randomly without considering their contexts and labels, incorrect augmentation is destined to occur (see Figure 1(d)). For
instance, an object can be cropped out and replaced by a different kind of object from another image, or the background
part of the image can be pasted on top of an existing object. Even worse, their labels are naively mixed according
only to their mixing proportions, disregarding any information transfer or loss caused by the data mixing. The harmfulness of semantically unaware label mixing was previously
reported in (Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019). This mismatch in
data and its supervision signal yields harmful samples.
To address this problem, saliency-guided augmentation
methods have been recently proposed (Walawalkar et al.
2020; Kim, Choo, and Song 2020; Uddin et al. 2021).
These approaches allegedly refrain from generating harmful samples by preserving the region of maximum saliency
based on the saliency maps of the image. Attentive Cutmix (Walawalkar et al. 2020) preserves the maximum

The Mixup scheme suggests mixing a pair of samples to create an augmented training sample and has gained considerable attention recently for improving the generalizability of
neural networks. A straightforward and widely used extension of Mixup is to combine with regional dropout-like methods: removing random patches from a sample and replacing it
with the features from another sample. Albeit their simplicity
and effectiveness, these methods are prone to create harmful samples due to their randomness. To address this issue,
‘maximum saliency’ strategies were recently proposed: they
select only the most informative features to prevent such a
phenomenon. However, they now suffer from lack of sample
diversification as they always deterministically select regions
with maximum saliency, injecting bias into the augmented
data. In this paper, we present a novel, yet simple Mixupvariant that captures the best of both worlds. Our idea is twofold. By stochastically sampling the features and ‘grafting’
them onto another sample, our method effectively generates
diverse yet meaningful samples. Its second ingredient is to
produce the label of the grafted sample by mixing the labels in a saliency-calibrated fashion, which rectifies supervision misguidance introduced by the random sampling procedure. Our experiments under CIFAR, Tiny-ImageNet, and
ImageNet datasets show that our scheme outperforms the current state-of-the-art augmentation strategies not only in terms
of classification accuracy, but is also superior in coping under
stress conditions such as data scarcity and object occlusion.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented success in various computer vision tasks, e.g.,
image classification (He et al. 2016a), generation (Brock,
Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) and segmentation (He et al.
2017). However, due to their over-parameterized nature,
DNNs require an immense amount of training data to generalize well for test data. Otherwise, DNNs are predisposed to
memorize the training samples and exhibit lackluster performance on the unseen data - in other words, incur overfitting.
Acquiring a sufficient amount of data for a given task is
not always possible as it consumes valuable manpower and
budget. One common approach to combat such data scarcity
is data augmentation, which aims to enlarge the effective
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7957

