The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Complexity of Deliberative Coalition Formation*
Edith Elkind, Abheek Ghosh† , Paul Goldberg
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{edith.elkind,abheek.ghosh,paul.goldberg}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

to focus on what unites them rather than on what differentiates them, and seek to identify a common platform that
would enjoy broad popular support and enable them to overturn the status quo. In doing so, they may pursue a variety of
goals: to increase their chances of winning seats in an election, to place themselves in a better position in post-electoral
bargaining, or—in the most extreme cases—to initiate a revolt against the current regime. This common platform may
be quite different from the party’s true position—what matters is that it attracts a large number of supporters and that it
offers an improvement over the status quo, i.e., is preferable
to the policies of the current governing party.
In a recent paper, Elkind et al. (2021, 2020) propose a
simple model that aims to capture essential features of such
scenarios1 . In this model, both voters and proposals are associated with points in a metric space, with voters’ preference being driven by distances: voters prefer proposals that
are close to them to ones that are further away. The number
of voters is finite, but the set of feasible proposals may be
any (potentially infinite) subset of the metric space. There
is also a distinguished point, referred to as the status quo
and denoted by r. A voter v approves a proposal p if her
distance to p is strictly less than her distance to r. Voters
deliberate in order to identify a proposal that is supported
by as many voters as possible. At each point, each voter selects some approved proposal to support, with voters who
support a given proposal forming a deliberative coalition
around it. This collection of deliberative coalitions—a deliberative coalition structure—evolves based on transition
rules: for instance, one transition rule allows two coalitions
to identify a new proposal supported by all members of both
coalitions and to form a new joint coalition around it. The
transition rules aim to capture the behavior of agents who
are consensus-driven—i.e., they desire to form a large coalition to overturn the status quo—and myopic, in the sense
that they make a decision whether to participate in a transition based on the outcome of that transition only and not the
entire deliberative process.

Elkind et al. (2021) introduced a model for deliberative coalition formation, where a community wishes to identify a
strongly supported proposal from a space of alternatives, in
order to change the status quo. In their model, agents and
proposals are points in a metric space, agents’ preferences
are determined by distances, and agents deliberate by dynamically forming coalitions around proposals that they prefer
over the status quo. The deliberation process operates via kcompromise transitions, where agents from k (current) coalitions come together to form a larger coalition in order to support a (perhaps new) proposal, possibly leaving behind some
of the dissenting agents from their old coalitions. A deliberation succeeds if it terminates by identifying a proposal with
the largest possible support. For deliberation in d dimensions,
Elkind et al. consider two variants of their model: in the Euclidean model, proposals and agent locations are points in Rd
and the distance is measured according to || · ||2 ; and in the
hypercube model, proposals and agent locations are vertices
of the d-dimensional hypercube and the metric is the Hamming distance. They show that in the Euclidean model 2compromises are guaranteed to succeed, but in the hypercube
model for deliberation to succeed it may be necessary to use
k-compromises with k ≥ d. We complement their analysis
by (1) proving that in both models it is hard to find a proposal
with a high degree of support, and even a 2-compromise transition may be hard to compute; (2) showing that a sequence
of 2-compromise transitions may be exponentially long; (3)
strengthening the lower bound on the size of the compromise
for the d-hypercube model from d to 2Ω(d) .

1

Introduction

Imagine a nominally democratic country where the current
ruling party has been in power for many years, through a
combination of clever political strategizing and a range of
more or less non-democratic means (e.g., gerrymandering,
vote suppression, media control, etc.). Even if, initially, political parties and alliances other than the ruling party may
differ in positions they take on various issues facing the society, after many years of being out of power, they may choose

1
The conference version of their paper (Elkind et al. 2021) was
published in AAAI’21, and an extended version was presented at
COMSOC’21 and is available from arXiv (Elkind et al. 2020). One
of the models we consider, namely, the hypercube model, is only
described in the arXiv version, so in what follows we refer to the
arXiv version only.

* Extended version of the paper is available at https://arxiv.org/

abs/2202.12594
†
Supported by Clarendon Fund and SKP Scholarship.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4975

