The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FrePGAN: Robust Deepfake Detection Using Frequency-Level Perturbations
Yonghyun Jeong1,2* , Doyeon Kim1 , Youngmin Ro1,3* , Jongwon Choi4†
1

Samsung SDS, Seoul, Korea
Clova, NAVER, Seoul, Korea
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea
4
Department of Advanced Imaging, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
{yonghyunjjj, ddkim.0131}@gmail.com , youngmin.ro@uos.ac.kr , choijw@cau.ac.kr
2

Abstract

ProGAN

StyleGAN

StyleGAN2

BigGAN

CycleGAN

StarGAN

GauGAN

Deepfake

Apple

Horse

Orange

Zebra

(b)

(a)

Various deepfake detectors have been proposed, but challenges still exist to detect images of unknown categories or
GAN models outside of the training settings. Such issues
arise from the overfitting issue, which we discover from our
own analysis and the previous studies to originate from the
frequency-level artifacts in generated images. We find that
ignoring the frequency-level artifacts can improve the detector’s generalization across various GAN models, but it can
reduce the model’s performance for the trained GAN models. Thus, we design a framework to generalize the deepfake
detector for both the known and unseen GAN models. Our
framework generates the frequency-level perturbation maps
to make the generated images indistinguishable from the real
images. By updating the deepfake detector along with the
training of the perturbation generator, our model is trained
to detect the frequency-level artifacts at the initial iterations
and consider the image-level irregularities at the last iterations. For experiments, we design new test scenarios varying
from the training settings in GAN models, color manipulations, and object categories. Numerous experiments validate
the state-of-the-art performance of our deepfake detector.

Figure 1: Various Patterns of Frequency Artifacts. The
frequency-level artifacts can be extracted by averaging the
frequency-level spectrum of the generated images. The appearance of artifacts is evident but uniquely vary by the type
of GAN model or object category. Thus, we can analyze that
the artifacts are easily detected by their evident appearances
but can cause overfitting to the training settings. Thus, the artifacts should be ignored for generalized detection, but they
are still useful for specific detection of GAN models.

Introduction
The recent rise of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Karras et al. 2018; Karras,
Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020) has allowed the
easy and extensive generation of highly realistic fake images, as known as deepfakes. Unfortunately, the risk of malicious abuse of deepfakes also rises with such an advancement (Nguyen et al. 2019), and the importance of detecting
deepfakes has become crucial. The target range of deepfakes
has broadened from swapping the face of the celebrity on the
body of pornography to spreading misinformation in social
media as fake news, and even alluring victims to transfer
money for scams (Tolosana et al. 2020; Nguyen et al. 2019).
To solve this issue, the tech giants and the academia have
joined together for ‘Deepfake Detection Challenge’ (Dolhansky et al. 2019, 2020) to promote the current issues and
encourage fellow researchers to tackle this problem.
As confirmed by several previous studies (Chen et al.
2021), the CNN-based generative models are known to have

limitations in reconstructing the high-frequency components. However, as shown in Fig. 1, although the frequencylevel artifacts are effective to detect the generated images for
the specific GAN models, it is easy for the detectors to be
overfitted to the training settings, due to the unique appearances of the frequency-level artifacts varying by the CNN
structures and training categories. Thus, it can be analyzed
that the frequency-level artifacts are effective to detect the
generated images from the known GAN models, but the key
to the generalization of deepfake detectors is to reduce the
effect of frequency-level artifacts during training.
Based on intuition, we propose a novel framework composed of two modules: the Frequency Perturbation GAN
∗

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

†

1060

Most work was done in Samsung SDS.
Corresponding author

