The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reward-Weighted Regression Converges to a Global Optimum
Miroslav Štrupl1 * , Francesco Faccio1∗ , Dylan R. Ashley1 ,
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava2 , Jürgen Schmidhuber1,2,3
1

The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera italiana (USI) & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
NNAISENSE, Lugano, Switzerland
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{struplm, francesco, dylan.ashley}@idsia.ch, rupesh@nnaisense.com, juergen@idsia.ch
Abstract

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a branch of artificial intelligence that considers learning agents interacting with an environment (Sutton and Barto 2018). RL has enjoyed several
notable successes in recent years. These include both successes of special prominence within the artificial intelligence
community—such as achieving the first superhuman performance in the ancient game of Go (Silver et al. 2016)—and
successes of immediate real-world value—such as providing
autonomous navigation of stratospheric balloons to provide
internet access to remote locations (Bellemare et al. 2020).
One prominent family of algorithms that tackle the RL
problem is the Reward-Weighted Regression (RWR) family (Peters and Schaal 2007). The RWR family is notable
in that it naturally extends to continuous state and action
spaces. The lack of this functionality in many methods
serves as a strong limitation. This prevents them from tackling some of the more practically relevant RL problems—
such as many robotics tasks (Plappert et al. 2018). Recently, RWR variants were able to learn high-dimensional
continuous control tasks (Peng et al. 2019). RWR works by
transforming the RL problem into a form solvable by wellstudied expectation-maximization (EM) methods (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977). EM methods are, in general,

guaranteed to converge to a point whose gradient is zero with
respect to the parameters. However, these points could be
both local minima or saddle points (Wu 1983). These benefits and limitations transfer to the RL setting, where it has
been shown that an EM-based return maximizer is guaranteed to yield monotonic improvements in the expected return (Dayan and Hinton 1997). However, it has been challenging to assess under which conditions—if any—RWR
is guaranteed to converge to the optimal policy. This paper
presents a breakthrough in this challenge.
The EM probabilistic framework requires that the reward
obtained by the RL agent is strictly positive, such that it can
be considered as an improper probability distribution. Several reward transformations have been proposed, e.g., Peters
and Schaal (2007, 2008); Peng et al. (2019); Abdolmaleki
et al. (2018b), frequently involving exponential transformations. In the past, it has been claimed that
R ∞ a positive, strictly
increasing transformation uτ (s) with 0 uτ (r) dr = const
would not alter the optimal solution for the MDP (Peters
and Schaal 2007). Unfortunately, as we demonstrate in Appendix A, this is not the case. We must, as a consequence,
consider only linear transformation of the reward if we want
prove convergence. A possible disadvantage of relying on
linear transformations is that it is necessary to know a lower
bound on the reward to construct such a transformation.
In this work, we provide the first proof of RWR’s global
convergence in a setting without function approximation or
reward transformations1 . The paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 introduces the MDP setting and other preliminary material; Section 3 presents a closed-form update for
RWR based on the state and action-value functions and Section 4 shows that the update induces monotonic improvement related to the variance of the action-value function
with respect to the action sampled by the policy; Section 5
proves global convergence of the algorithm in the general
compact setting and convergence rates in the finite setting; Section 6 illustrates experimentally that—for a simple
MDP—the presented update scheme converges to the optimal policy; Section 7 discusses related work; and Section 8
concludes. The extended version of this paper is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.09088.

* Equal contribution. Correspondence to struplm@idsia.ch
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Without loss of generality we do assume that a linear reward
transformation is already provided, such that the reward is positive.

Reward-Weighted Regression (RWR) belongs to a family of
widely known iterative Reinforcement Learning algorithms
based on the Expectation-Maximization framework. In this
family, learning at each iteration consists of sampling a batch
of trajectories using the current policy and fitting a new policy to maximize a return-weighted log-likelihood of actions.
Although RWR is known to yield monotonic improvement
of the policy under certain circumstances, whether and under which conditions RWR converges to the optimal policy
have remained open questions. In this paper, we provide for
the first time a proof that RWR converges to a global optimum when no function approximation is used, in a general
compact setting. Furthermore, for the simpler case with finite
state and action spaces we prove R-linear convergence of the
state-value function to the optimum.

1

Introduction

8361

