The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CQA-Face: Contrastive Quality-Aware Attentions for Face Recognition
Qiangchang Wang1 , Guodong Guo1,2,3*
1

Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, USA
2
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
qiangchang.wang@gmail.com, guoguodong01@baidu.com

Abstract
Few existing face recognition (FR) models take local representations into account. Although some works achieved this
by extracting features on cropped parts around face landmarks, landmark detection may be inaccurate or even fail in
some extreme cases. Recently, without relying on landmarks,
attention-based networks can focus on useful parts automatically. However, there are two issues: 1) It is noticed that these
approaches focus on few facial parts, while missing other potentially discriminative regions. This can cause performance
drops when emphasized facial parts are invisible under heavy
occlusions (e.g. face masks) or large pose variations; 2) Different facial parts may appear at various quality caused by occlusion, blur, or illumination changes. In this paper, we propose contrastive quality-aware attentions, called CQA-Face,
to address these two issues. First, a Contrastive Attention
Learning (CAL) module is proposed, pushing models to explore comprehensive facial parts. Consequently, more useful
parts can help identification if some facial parts are invisible. Second, a Quality-Aware Network (QAN) is developed
to emphasize important regions and suppress noisy parts in a
global scope. Thus, our CQA-Face model is developed by integrating the CAL with QAN, which extracts diverse qualityaware local representations. It outperforms the state-of-theart methods on several benchmarks, demonstrating its effectiveness and usefulness.

Figure 1: Effects of the CQA-Face model on three positive pairs. (a)&(f): Input faces are affected by blur changes
(1), pose variations (2), and aging (3). (b-d)&(g-i): 1st , 2nd ,
and 3rd local branches of local CNNs where different local
patches are located in each local branch. (e)&(k): Discriminative local patches are emphasized in local CNNs. For a
good illustration, only three local branches are used to show
class activation maps (CAMs) (Zhou et al. 2016).

There are mainly two groups of methods to extract
discriminative local representations: landmark-based and
attention-based methods. Landmark-based works detected
face landmarks first and then extract local features on
cropped regions centered around landmarks (Sun, Wang,
and Tang 2014a; Ding and Tao 2017; Kang, Kim, and Kim
2018). However, these methods largely depend on accuracy
of landmark detection and may even suffer from detection
failure under dramatic pose variations or heavy occlusions.
For example, due to the ongoing outbreak of the COVID-19,
people are wearing face masks. Because some facial parts
(e.g. noses or mouths) are invisible, landmark detection may
be inaccurate or failed. Besides, even if face landmarks are
detected, the cropped parts may include masks which would
inevitably deteriorate the extracted face features. Without relying on landmarks, some models employ attention modules
to automatically locate useful parts (Wang and Guo 2019;
Kang et al. 2019). However, no mechanism is designed to
select the local patches effectively, which may miss some
important facial parts, and thus limit the performance.
FR is challenging mainly because of two reasons: 1) High
intra-class variations. Faces from the same subject may appear at different poses or occlusion levels. In such a case, if
only few facial parts are located, the extracted features may
not be sufficient when these parts are invisible under occlusions (e.g. face masks) or pose variations. 2) Small inter-

Introduction
Face recognition (FR) has many practical applications. Previous works can be divided into two categories: global-based
approaches and local-based methods. The former learns features on global face images (Deng et al. 2019; Cao et al.
2020). However, they rarely consider representations on local patches to improve discrimination of face features. Three
positive pairs are shown in Fig. 1 (a)&(f), the holistic faces
change dramatically by blur changes in (1), pose variations
in (2), and age gaps in (3). However, some local patches remain similar which can help the verification. For example,
the similar eyes in (1) or the similar noes in (2)&(3).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author.
†
This work was done when the first author was an intern at
IDL, Baidu Research.

2504

