The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Mitigating Reporting Bias for Semi-supervised Temporal Commonsense Inference
with Probabilistic Soft Logic
Bibo Cai, Xiao Ding∗ , Bowen Chen, Li Du, Ting Liu
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{bbcai, xding, bwchen, ldu, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Her husband quickly gets up while she browns the meat.

Acquiring high-quality temporal common sense (TCS)
knowledge from free-form text is a crucial but challenging
problem for event-centric natural language understanding,
due to the language reporting bias problem: people rarely
report the commonly observed events but highlight the special cases. For example, one may rarely report “I get up from
bed in 1 minute”, but we can observe “It takes me an hour
to get up from bed every morning” in text. Models directly
trained upon such corpus would capture distorted TCS knowledge, which could influence the model performance. Prior
work addresses this issue mainly by exploiting the interactions among temporal dimensions (e.g., duration, temporal
relation between events) in a multi-task view. However, this
line of work suffers the limitation of implicit, inadequate and
unexplainable interactions modeling. In this paper, we propose a novel neural-logic based Soft Logic Enhanced Event
Temporal Reasoning (SLEER) model for acquiring unbiased
TCS knowledge, in which the complementary relationship
among dimensions are explicitly represented as logic rules
and modeled by t-norm fuzzy logics. SLEER can utilize logic
rules to regularize its inference process. Experimental results
on four intrinsic evaluation datasets and two extrinsic datasets
show the efficiency of our proposed method.

Next, brown the meat on all sides, this takes about 15 minutes.
(Brown the meat, Duration,
15minutes)

one step
(Brown the meat, Duration,
15minutes)

+

two step

Frequency of brown the meat
is less than every minute
Get up may last less than 15
minutes

(Get up, while, Brown the meat)

Figure 1: Reasoning the duration of Get up and Frequency
of Brown the meat with complementary relation between dimensions

However, the automatically obtained TCS can follow a
distorted distribution due to the reporting bias phenomenon
(Gordon and Van Durme 2013; Zhang et al. 2017; Shwartz
and Choi 2020; Paik et al. 2021): people rarely report obvious things but sometimes highlight rarities. For example, we
can hardly observe mentions of “I get up from the bed in 1
minute”, but we may find “Every morning after I wake up,
it takes me an hour to get up from the bed” in text. By incorporating such biased TCS knowledge, NLP systems can
hardly achieve satisfactory performances.
To address this issue, recent studies proposed to perform
TCS inference by exploiting the complementary relationship
among temporal dimensions. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the second sentence illustrates the Duration of the
event “brown the meat on all sides” is “15 minutes”. Based
on this evidence, we can perform one-step inference and infer that the Frequency of this event is at most once every few
minutes. Additionally, combining the duration information
with another statement indicating “get up” happens during
“brown the meat” (illustrated by the first sentence), we can
make another two-step inference and conclude that the duration of “get up” is less than 15 minutes. Such phenomena
among temporal dimensions provides us the opportunity to
estimate event’s temporal attributes even if such temporal
information is never expressed explicitly in text.
However, previous works utilizes such complementary re-

Introduction
Time plays critical roles in daily life. Many natural language
processing problems, including information retrieval (Ning
et al. 2018; Vashishtha, Van Durme, and White 2019), summarization (Yan et al. 2011), causal inference (Noah Weber
2020) and reading comprehension (Ning et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2021), rely on system’s time understanding ability
to give correct answers or predictions. Hence, recent NLP
systems dedicate to incorporate temporal common sense
(TCS) knowledge (e.g., duration and frequency of events)
to improve time understanding ability (Zhou et al. 2021;
Lin, Chambers, and Durrett 2021). While manually annotating large-scale TCS knowledge is time and labor consuming. A more practical approach is to automatically extract TCS knowledge from text with well-designed patterns
(Zhou et al. 2020; Zhao, Lin, and Durrett 2021).
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10454

