The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TextHoaxer: Budgeted Hard-Label Adversarial Attacks on Text
Muchao Ye,1 Chenglin Miao,2 Ting Wang,1 Fenglong Ma1 *
1

The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802
2
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602
muchao@psu.edu, cmiao@uga.edu, ting@psu.edu, fenglong@psu.edu

Abstract

of DNN technologies in making machines better understand
human language, they still doubt the robustness and security of DNNs despite their superior prediction performance.
Thus, to improve the reliability of implementing DNNs in
real-world NLP applications, it is necessary to improve the
techniques for understanding the robustness of text DNNs.
To achieve this goal, the primary task is to reveal the sensitivity of DNNs by enhancing the adversarial attack technique, which is to generate adversarial examples on text
to fool DNNs and change their correct predictions to incorrect ones by adding small perturbation to the input text
data. Existing researches have gradually made the setting of
generating adversaries more and more realistic from conducting white-box adversarial attacks (Ebrahimi et al. 2018)
to black-box ones (Li et al. 2019; Ren et al. 2019; Maheshwary, Maheshwary, and Pudi 2021). In the early stage,
black-box methods are usually proposed in the soft-label setting, which requires the victim model to provide the probability scores of all categories (Li et al. 2019; Ren et al.
2019). However, it is still unrealistic because in the realworld scenarios, DNNs are deployed through application
programming interfaces (APIs), and users have no access
to both parameter gradients and probability distributions of
all categories. Thus, researchers further develop black-box
text adversarial attack methods in the hard-label (decisionbased) setting, which only utilizes the predicted labels with
the maximum probability output by the victim models (Maheshwary, Maheshwary, and Pudi 2021). Although we shall
be delightful to see such a progress in text adversarial attacks, there still exists a gap between the existing methodologies and the real-world adversarial attack setting.
To elaborate, in real-world applications, DNN systems
usually restrict the number of queries from users to defend
against malicious attacks. Therefore, it is impossible for attackers to constantly query the text DNN systems. However,
such an important constraint, i.e., hard-label adversarial attacks with a tight budget, is ignored by existing work (Maheshwary, Maheshwary, and Pudi 2021). In fact, this drawback stems from the optimization approach used by existing
work. Since text data are discrete and gradient-based optimization approaches cannot directly work on such a discrete
space, existing work uses the genetic algorithm (GA) for optimization. To move the adversarial examples close to the
decision boundary, the GA-based optimization approaches

This paper focuses on a newly challenging setting in hardlabel adversarial attacks on text data by taking the budget
information into account. Although existing approaches can
successfully generate adversarial examples in the hard-label
setting, they follow an ideal assumption that the victim model
does not restrict the number of queries. However, in realworld applications the query budget is usually tight or limited. Moreover, existing hard-label adversarial attack techniques use the genetic algorithm to optimize discrete text
data by maintaining a number of adversarial candidates during optimization, which can lead to the problem of generating low-quality adversarial examples in the tight-budget
setting. To solve this problem, in this paper, we propose a
new method named TextHoaxer by formulating the budgeted
hard-label adversarial attack task on text data as a gradientbased optimization problem of perturbation matrix in the continuous word embedding space. Compared with the genetic
algorithm-based optimization, our solution only uses a single initialized adversarial example as the adversarial candidate for optimization, which significantly reduces the number of queries. The optimization is guided by a new objective function consisting of three terms, i.e., semantic similarity term, pair-wise perturbation constraint, and sparsity constraint. Semantic similarity term and pair-wise perturbation
constraint can ensure the high semantic similarity of adversarial examples from both comprehensive text-level and individual word-level, while the sparsity constraint explicitly
restricts the number of perturbed words, which is also helpful
for enhancing the quality of generated text. We conduct extensive experiments on eight text datasets against three representative natural language models, and experimental results
show that TextHoaxer can generate high-quality adversarial
examples with higher semantic similarity and lower perturbation rate under the tight-budget setting.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have gone through rapid development in recent years, and they have been successfully
utilized in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks
such as text classification (Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015)
and natural language inference (Bowman et al. 2015). Although researchers are thrilled to witness the employment
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3877

