The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Dialog Policy Learning by Reasoning with Contextual Knowledge
Haodi Zhang1 , Zhichao Zeng1 , Keting Lu2 , Kaishun Wu1 , Shiqi Zhang3
1

Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Baidu, Inc.
3
Computer Science, SUNY Binghamton
{hdzhang, cengzhichao2019, wu}@szu.edu.cn, ktlu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhangs@binghamton.edu

Abstract

can be estimated using dialog state tracking methods. We
focus on dialog management in this research.
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms enable agents
to learn from trial-and-error experience (Sutton and Barto
2018), and have been applied to learning policies for dialog
management (Singh et al. 2002; Schatzmann et al. 2006).
On the one hand, existing RL-based dialog policy learning
methods highly rely on the “rewards” from dialogs, which
tend to be very sparse, unreliable, and potentially expensive.
On the other hand, it frequently happens that there is widely
available commonsense knowledge in dialog domains. For
instance, “rooms of 5-star hotels are usually expensive,”
and “many Chinese restaurants are located in Chinatowns.”
However, it is very difficult to incorporate such knowledge
into dialog policy learning, due to their fundamentally different paradigms of computation. The wide availability of
contextual knowledge and highly sparse feedback in dialog
domains together serve as the main motivation of this research.
In this paper, we develop a dialog agent that, for the first
time, incorporates declarative human knowledge into deep
RL-based dialog policy learning. In particular, the knowledge from people is used for reasoning about both internal
and external dialog state factors. Internal factors are those
for forming the dialog state space, e.g., star and price in
hotel booking. External factors are those that are not modeled in dialog states but can be potentially useful. For instance, people prefer local hotels in bad weather, where
weather is external. We use first-order logic for the representation of the dependencies between internal factors, and
use Markov logic network (MLN) (Richardson and Domingos 2006) algorithms to learn the rules’ weights for inference purposes. We use Answer set programming (Brewka,
Eiter, and Truszczyński 2011) for the representation of and
reasoning with human knowledge about external factors.
We have extensively conducted experiments using a realistic dialog platform PyDial (Ultes et al. 2017). Compared
with baselines from the literature and ablations of our own
approach, we observe significant improvements in dialog
learning efficiency and policy quality.

Goal-oriented dialog policy learning algorithms aim to learn a
dialog policy for selecting language actions based on the current dialog state. Deep reinforcement learning methods have
been used for dialog policy learning. This work is motivated
by the observation that, although dialog is a domain with rich
contextual knowledge, reinforcement learning methods are
ill-equipped to incorporate such knowledge into the dialog
policy learning process. In this paper, we develop a deep reinforcement learning framework for goal-oriented dialog policy learning that learns user preferences from user goal data,
while leveraging commonsense knowledge from people. The
developed framework has been evaluated using a realistic dialog simulation platform. Compared with baselines from the
literature and the ablations of our approach, we see significant improvements in learning efficiency and the quality of
the computed action policies.

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) research in its early years was
largely driven by the representation of and reasoning with
human knowledge. Those algorithms and systems can use
existing human knowledge to generate “new knowledge”,
or draw conclusions for different reasoning purposes, such
as inference, diagnosis, and planning (Davis and Marcus
2015). Learning methods have shown great promises, thanks
to the large-scale datasets and the massive computational
power (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Given all the successes from (knowledge-based) reasoning and (data-driven)
learning methods, there is the recent trend of research, including this work, that integrates the complementary advantages of knowledge-based and data-driven methods.
A typical dialog system includes at least the components
for dialog state tracking, dialog management, and language
synthesis (Young et al. 2013), while there are end-to-end dialog systems that integrate the components using deep neural networks (Bordes, Boureau, and Weston 2017; Serban
et al. 2016). Dialog management focuses on selecting dialog
actions based on the current dialog state toward achieving
long-term dialog goals, e.g., reserving hotel rooms, and purchasing flight tickets. The dialog actions can be realized using language synthesis methods, and the current dialog state

Background
In this section, we briefly introduce the three building blocks
of this work, namely dialog management with Deep rein-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11667

