The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Parameter Differentiation Based Multilingual Neural Machine Translation
Qian Wang1,2 , Jiajun Zhang1,2 *
2

1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{qian.wang, jjzhang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Multilingual neural machine translation (MNMT) aims to
translate multiple languages with a single model and has
been proved successful thanks to effective knowledge transfer
among different languages with shared parameters. However,
it is still an open question which parameters should be shared
and which ones need to be task-specific. Currently, the common practice is to heuristically design or search languagespecific modules, which is difficult to find the optimal configuration. In this paper, we propose a novel parameter differentiation based method that allows the model to determine
which parameters should be language-specific during training. Inspired by cellular differentiation, each shared parameter in our method can dynamically differentiate into more
specialized types. We further define the differentiation criterion as inter-task gradient similarity. Therefore, parameters with conflicting inter-task gradients are more likely to
be language-specific. Extensive experiments on multilingual
datasets have demonstrated that our method significantly outperforms various strong baselines with different parameter
sharing configurations. Further analyses reveal that the parameter sharing configuration obtained by our method correlates well with the linguistic proximities.

1

Parameters for 𝑡! , 𝑡" , 𝑡#
Parameters for 𝑡! , 𝑡"

Computation path for 𝑡! , 𝑡" , 𝑡#
Computation path for 𝑡! , 𝑡"

Parameters for 𝑡#

Computation path for 𝑡#

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: The illustration of parameter differentiation. Each
task ti represents a translation direction, e.g. EN→DE. (a)
Initialized as completely shared, (b) the model detects parameters that should be more specialized during training,
and (c) the shared parameters differentiated into more specialized types.

Despite the benefits of the joint training with a completely
shared model, the MNMT model also suffers from insufficient model capacity (Arivazhagan et al. 2019; Lyu et al.
2020). The shared parameters tend to preserve the general
knowledge but ignore language-specific knowledge. Therefore, researchers resort to heuristically design additional
language-specific components and build MNMT model with
a mix of shared and language-specific parameters to increase
the model capacity (Sachan and Neubig 2018; Wang et al.
2019b), such as the language-specific attention (Blackwood,
Ballesteros, and Ward 2018), lightweight language adapter
(Bapna and Firat 2019) or language-specific routing layer
(Zhang et al. 2021). These methods simultaneously model
the general knowledge and the language-specific knowledge
but require specialized manual design. Another line of works
for language-specific modeling aims to automatically search
for language-specific sub-networks (Xie et al. 2021; Lin
et al. 2021), in which they pretrain an initial large model that
covers all translation directions, followed by sub-network
pruning and fine-tuning. These methods include multi-stage
training and it is non-trivial to determine the initial model
size and structure.

Introduction

Neural machine translation (NMT) has achieved great success and drawn much attention in recent years (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015;
Vaswani et al. 2017). While conventional NMT can well
handle the translation of a single language pair, training
an individual model for each language pair is resourceconsuming, considering there are thousands of languages
in the world. Therefore, multilingual NMT is developed to
handle multiple language pairs in one model, greatly reducing the cost of offline training and online deployment (Ha,
Niehues, and Waibel 2016; Johnson et al. 2017). Besides,
the parameter sharing in multilingual neural machine translation encourages positive knowledge transfer among different languages and benefits low-resource translation (Zhang
et al. 2020; Siddhant et al. 2020).
* Corresponding author: Jiajun Zhang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11440

