The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How to Find a Good Explanation for Clustering?
Sayan Bandyapadhyay1 , Fedor Fomin1 , Petr A Golovach1 , William Lochet1 , Nidhi Purohit1 , Kirill
Simonov 2
1
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
{sayan.bandyapadhyay, fedor.fomin, petr.golovach, william.lochet, nidhi.purohit}@uib.no, kirillsimonov@gmail.com
2

Abstract

pre-modeling explainability deals with ML systems that are
inherently understandable or perceivable by humans. One
of the canonical approaches to pre-modelling explainability builds on decision trees (Molnar 2020; Murdoch et al.
2019). In fact, a significant amount of work on explainable
clustering is based on unsupervised decision trees (Bertsimas, Orfanoudaki, and Wiberg 2021; Fraiman, Ghattas, and
Svarc 2013; Geurts et al. 2007; Ghattas, Michel, and Boyer
2017; Lipton 2018; Moshkovitz et al. 2020). In each node of
the decision tree, the data is partitioned according to some
features’ threshold value. While such a threshold tree provides a clear interpretation of the resulting clustering, its cost
measured by the standard k-means/median objective can be
significantly worse than the cost of the optimal clustering.
Thus, on the one hand, the efficient algorithms developed
for k-means/median clustering (Aggarwal and Reddy 2013)
are often challenging to explain. On the other hand, the easily explainable models could output very costly clusterings.
Subsequently, Moshkovitz et al. (2020), in a fundamental
work, posed the natural algorithmic question of whether it is
possible to kill two birds with one stone? To be precise, is it
possible to design an efficient procedure for clustering that

k-means and k-median clustering are powerful unsupervised
machine learning techniques. However, due to complicated
dependences on all the features, it is challenging to interpret the resulting cluster assignments. Moshkovitz, Dasgupta,
Rashtchian, and Frost proposed an elegant model of explainable k-means and k-median clustering in ICML 2020. In this
model, a decision tree with k leaves provides a straightforward characterization of the data set into clusters.
We study two natural algorithmic questions about explainable clustering. (1) For a given clustering, how to find the
“best explanation” by using a decision tree with k leaves?
(2) For a given set of points, how to find a decision tree
with k leaves minimizing the k-means/median objective of
the resulting explainable clustering? To address the first question, we introduce a new model of explainable clustering. Our
model, inspired by the notion of outliers in robust statistics,
is the following. We are seeking a small number of points
(outliers) whose removal makes the existing clustering wellexplainable. For addressing the second question, we initiate
the study of the model of Moshkovitz et al. from the perspective of multivariate complexity. Our rigorous algorithmic
analysis sheds some light on the influence of parameters like
the input size, dimension of the data, the number of outliers,
the number of clusters, and the approximation ratio, on the
computational complexity of explainable clustering.

• Is explainable by a small decision tree; and
• Does not cost significantly more than the cost of an optimal k-means/median clustering?

Introduction

To address this question, Moshkovitz et al. (2020) introduced explainable k-means/median clustering. In this
scheme, a clustering is represented by a binary (threshold)
tree whose leaves correspond to clusters, and each internal
node corresponds to partitioning a collection of points by a
threshold on a fixed coordinate. Thus, the number of leaves
in such a tree is k, the number of clusters sought. Also,
any cluster assignment can be explained by the thresholds
along the corresponding root-leaf path. For example, consider Fig. 1: Fig. 1a shows an optimal 5-means clustering of
a 2D data set; Fig. 1b shows an explainable 5-means clustering of the same data set; The threshold tree inducing the
explainable clustering is shown in Fig. 1c. The tree has five
leaves, corresponding to 5 clusters. Note that in this model of
explainability, any clustering has a clear geometric interpretation, where each cluster is formed by a set of axis-aligned
cuts defined by the tree. As Moshkovitz et al. argue, the
classical k-means clustering algorithm leads to more com-

Interpretation or explanation of decisions produced by learning models, including clustering, is a significant direction in
machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI), and
has given rise to the subfield of Explainable AI. Explainable AI has attracted a lot of attention from the researchers
in recent years (see the surveys by Carvalho et al. (2019)
and Marcinkevičs and Vogt (2020)). All these works can
be divided into two main categories: pre-modelling (Wang
and Rudin 2015; Ustun and Rudin 2016; Hastie and Tibshirani 1986; Feng and Simon 2017; Lu et al. 2018) and postmodelling (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Shrikumar,
Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Breiman 2001; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Lundberg and Lee 2017) explainability. While post-modeling explainability focuses on giving reasoning behind decisions made by black box models,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3904

