The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Tests in Online Decision-Making
Gi-Soo Kim1 , Jane P. Kim2 , Hyun-Joon Yang2
1

2

Department of Industrial Engineering & Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine
gisookim@unist.ac.kr, janepkim@stanford.edu, yanghyun@stanford.edu

Abstract

(Tewari and Murphy 2017). The goal of Mobile Health
(mHealth) apps is to promote the user’s health through
personalized interventions tailored to the user specific
information acquired through devices such as phones or
wearable devices. One important issue related to mHealth
apps is that the frequency of data queries (e.g. queries to the
Health Kit API) impacts the app performance. As queries
become increasingly frequent, the processing time slows
down the app from the user perspective, which can result
in low adherence to the app and hence low reward. Hence,
the frequency of data queries and the reward feedback go
hand in hand. Beyond performance related costs, there could
also be costs of ethical valence (e.g. privacy) associated with
querying data and thus it is important to collect only data that
are correlated with the reward. Currently, there is little work
on assessing the utility of variables collected by wearables.
We consider testing the utility of context variables for
an actor-critic bandit algorithm (Lei, Tewari, and Murphy
2017). An actor-critic bandit algorithm maintains two
separate parameterized models, one for the actor, the action
allocation policy, and the other for the critic, the reward
model. The focus of this work is on testing the variables
used in the actor model, which requires that asymptotic
distributions of the actor parameter estimates are known.
Lei, Tewari, and Murphy (2017) proved that when the
reward model is linear and is correctly specified by the critic,
then the actor parameter estimates converge in probability
to the parameters of the optimal policy and asymptotically
follow a normal distribution.
Based on the asymptotic normality of the actor parameter
estimates, we can apply a Z-test to assess the significance
of the actor parameters. The validity of model-based tests,
such as those of Lei, Tewari, and Murphy (2017), relies on
the assumption that the linear model is correctly specified;
in other words, that the assumed statistical model represents
the true reward function. Linear functions may, however,
fail to accurately represent the true nature of the reward
function, and often there is no a priori reason to hypothesize
the reward should be of a certain functional form. When
the parameterized critic model is not correctly specified
(i.e. the true reward model is of a different form than the
working model), asymptotic normality may not hold. In this
paper, we propose a new actor-critic algorithm and a testing
procedure that is robust to the misspecification of the critic

Bandit algorithms are widely used in sequential decision
problems to maximize the cumulative reward. One potential
application is mobile health, where the goal is to promote
the user’s health through personalized interventions based
on user specific information acquired through wearable
devices. Important considerations include the type of, and
frequency with which data is collected (e.g. GPS, or
continuous monitoring), as such factors can severely impact
app performance and users’ adherence. In order to balance
the need to collect data that is useful with the constraint of
impacting app performance, one needs to be able to assess the
usefulness of variables. Bandit feedback data are sequentially
correlated, so traditional testing procedures developed for
independent data cannot apply. Recently, a statistical testing
procedure was developed for the actor-critic bandit algorithm.
An actor-critic algorithm maintains two separate models,
one for the actor, the action selection policy, and the other
for the critic, the reward model. The performance of the
algorithm as well as the validity of the test are guaranteed
only when the critic model is correctly specified. However,
misspecification is frequent in practice due to incorrect
functional form or missing covariates. In this work, we
propose a modified actor-critic algorithm which is robust to
critic misspecification and derive a novel testing procedure
for the actor parameters in this case.

Introduction
Bandit algorithms apply to sequential decision problems.
We assume a set of candidate actions, or arms, is revealed
sequentially to a learning agent along with side information
called contexts. The agent can pull one arm at a time and
receives a corresponding reward. The expected value of the
reward is an unknown function of the context information of
the chosen action. The goal of the agent is to adaptively learn
an action allocation policy so as to achieve high cumulative
reward. The main challenge is the exploration-exploitation
trade-off, which represents the dilemma between pulling
arms that the agent is uncertain about for the sake of learning
(exploration) and pulling the best arm based on current,
limited knowledge (exploitation).
Bandit algorithms can be particularly useful in the context
of personalizing health interventions in Mobile Health
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10016

