The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph Pointer Neural Networks
Tianmeng Yang1,2 * † , Yujing Wang1,2† , Zhihan Yue1 , Yaming Yang2 , Yunhai Tong1 , Jing Bai2
1

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{youngtimmy, zhihan.yue, yhtong}@pku.edu.cn, {yujwang, yayaming, jbai}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown advantages
in various graph-based applications. Most existing GNNs
assume strong homophily of graph structure and apply
permutation-invariant local aggregation of neighbors to learn
a representation for each node. However, they fail to generalize to heterophilic graphs, where most neighboring nodes
have different labels or features, and the relevant nodes are
distant. Few recent studies attempt to address this problem by
combining multiple hops of hidden representations of central nodes (i.e., multi-hop-based approaches) or sorting the
neighboring nodes based on attention scores (i.e., rankingbased approaches). As a result, these approaches have some
apparent limitations. On the one hand, multi-hop-based approaches do not explicitly distinguish relevant nodes from a
large number of multi-hop neighborhoods, leading to a severe
over-smoothing problem. On the other hand, ranking-based
models do not joint-optimize node ranking with end tasks
and result in sub-optimal solutions. In this work, we present
Graph Pointer Neural Networks (GPNN) to tackle the challenges mentioned above. We leverage a pointer network to
select the most relevant nodes from a large amount of multihop neighborhoods, which constructs an ordered sequence
according to the relationship with the central node. 1D convolution is then applied to extract high-level features from the
node sequence. The pointer-network-based ranker in GPNN
is joint-optimized with other parts in an end-to-end manner.
Extensive experiments are conducted on six public node classification datasets with heterophilic graphs. The results show
that GPNN significantly improves the classification performance of state-of-the-art methods. In addition, analyses also
reveal the privilege of the proposed GPNN in filtering out irrelevant neighbors and reducing over-smoothing.

!

(a) Local aggregation.

!

(b) Non-local aggregation.

Figure 1: Visual illustration of the local aggregation of existing GNNs and non-local aggregation in GPNN in one propagation step. The colors of nodes represent their labels, while
grey means ignored. Traditional GNNs aggregate all nodes
in the local neighborhood including noises, while GPNN selectively filters the irrelevant nodes and captures non-local
features.

inference (Gilmer et al. 2017). Most existing approaches
are based on a framework of message-passing neural networks (MPNNs), including ChebyNet (Defferrard, Bresson,
and Vandergheynst 2016), GCN (Kipf and Welling 2016),
GAT (Veličković et al. 2017) and GIN (Xu et al. 2018). They
learn each node’s representation by aggregating feature information from its neighbors. The aggregation often needs
to be permutation-invariant (e.g., Mean, Max or Sum) as
there is no ordering information of the neighboring nodes.
These methods are effective with an assumption of strong
homophily for graphs (such as citation networks (Newman 2002)), where neighboring nodes always possess similar features and belong to the same class. However, this
inductive bias is not suitable for graphs with heterophily.
In heterophilic graphs, most connected nodes are dissimilar and may belong to different classes, while the semantically relevant nodes are often multi-hops away. As Figure 1
(a) shows, normal local aggregation in GNNs might introduce noises for node representation in heterophilic graphs.
In such scenarios, even models that ignore the graph structure altogether (e.g., MLPs) can outperform state-of-the-art
GNNs (Zhu et al. 2020).
Few recent studies address heterophilic graphs by com-

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown advantages
in various graph-based applications. Most existing GNNs
assume strong homophily of connected nodes have been
successfully applied to representation learning on graphs,
as well as multiple real-world applications from web-scale
recommendation (Ying et al. 2018) to molecular chemistry
* This work is conducted during the author’s internship at Mi-

crosoft Research Asia.
†
These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8832

