The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SOIT: Segmenting Objects with Instance-Aware Transformers
Xiaodong Yu1 * , Dahu Shi1 * , Xing Wei2 , Ye Ren1 , Tingqun Ye1 , Wenming Tan1†
1
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{yuxiaodong7, shidahu}@hikvision.com, weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
{renye, yetingqun, tanwenming}@hikvision.com
2

Box

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end instance segmentation
framework, termed SOIT, that Segments Objects with
Instance-aware Transformers. Inspired by DETR, our method
views instance segmentation as a direct set prediction problem and effectively removes the need for many hand-crafted
components like RoI cropping, one-to-many label assignment, and non-maximum suppression (NMS). In SOIT, multiple queries are learned to directly reason a set of object embeddings of semantic category, bounding-box location, and pixel-wise mask in parallel under the global image context. The class and bounding-box can be easily embedded by a fixed-length vector. The pixel-wise mask, especially, is embedded by a group of parameters to construct
a lightweight instance-aware transformer. Afterward, a fullresolution mask is produced by the instance-aware transformer without involving any RoI-based operation. Overall, SOIT introduces a simple single-stage instance segmentation framework that is both RoI- and NMS-free. Experimental results on the MS COCO dataset demonstrate that
SOIT outperforms state-of-the-art instance segmentation approaches significantly. Moreover, the joint learning of multiple tasks in a unified query embedding can also substantially improve the detection performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuxiaodongHRI/SOIT.

NMS

Mask

RoI Crop

(a) Detect-then-segment pipeline.

Box

Mask
NMS
(b) Detect-and-segment pipeline.

Queries

Box

...

Mask

Introduction

(c) Fully end-to-end pipeline.

Instance segmentation is a fundamental yet challenging task
in computer vision, which requires an algorithm to predict
a pixel-wise mask with a category label for each instance of
interest in an image. As popularized in the Mask R-CNN
framework (He et al. 2017), state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods follow a detect-then-segment paradigm
(Cai and Vasconcelos 2019; Chen et al. 2019a; Vu, Kang,
and Yoo 2021). These methods employ an object detector to
produce the bounding boxes of instances and crop the feature maps via RoIAlign (He et al. 2017) according to the detected boxes. Then pixel-wise masks are predicted by a fully
convolutional network (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015) only in the detected region (as shown in Fig 1a). The
detect-then-segment paradigm is sub-optimal since it has

Figure 1: Comparisons of different instance-level perception
pipelines. We proposed the fully end-to-end framework as
shown in (c), which is RoI-free and NMS-free.

the following drawbacks: 1) Segmentation results heavily
rely on the object detector, incurring inferior performance in
complex scenarios; 2) RoIs are always resized into patches
of the same size (e.g., 14 × 14 in Mask R-CNN), which restricts the quality of segmentation masks, as large instances
would require higher resolution features to retain details at
the boundary. To overcome the drawbacks of this paradigm,
recent works (Chen et al. 2019b; Xie et al. 2020; Cao et al.
2020a; Peng et al. 2020) start to build instance segmentation frameworks on top of single-stage detectors (Lin et al.
2017b; Tian et al. 2019), getting rid of local RoI operations.

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3188

