The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MDPGT: Momentum-Based Decentralized Policy Gradient Tracking
Zhanhong Jiang1 , Xian Yeow Lee2 , Sin Yong Tan2 , Kai Liang Tan2 ,
Aditya Balu2 , Young M. Lee1 , Chinmay Hegde3 , Soumik Sarkar2
1

Johnson Controls Inc., 507 East Michigan St, Milwaukee, WI 53202,
2
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50010,
3
New York University, 6 MetroTech Center, Brooklyn, NY 11201,
{zhanhong.jiang, young.m.lee}@jci.com, {xylee, tsyong98, kailiang, baditya, soumiks}@iastate.edu, {chinmay.h}@nyu.edu
Abstract

agents share a centralized reward function (Simões, Lau, and
Reis 2020; Ackermann et al. 2019). However, in practice,
this is not necessarily the case, and instead a more general
yet challenging scenario is that agents have heterogeneous
reward functions. Inherently, the ultimate goal in such a
cooperative MARL setting is for agents to maximize the
global average of local long-term returns. To address this
problem, various algorithms have been proposed, including
distributed-learning (Arslan and Yüksel 2016; Nguyen and
Mukhopadhyay 2017) and distributed actor-critic (Li et al.
2020; Ryu, Shin, and Park 2020). More recent works have
successfully showed finite-sample analysis for decentralized
batch MARL (Zhang et al. 2021b) and leveraged advances in
analysis of descent-ascent algorithms (Lu et al. 2021).
These preliminary attempts have facilitated the theoretical
understanding of cooperative MARL by showing explicit
sample complexity bounds, which match that of standard
(vanilla) stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Additionally, recent works (Huang et al. 2020; Xu, Gao, and Gu 2019) in centralized RL have revealed that with simple variance reduction
techniques, this sample complexity can be reduced to O(−3 )
to reach an -stationary point (i.e., E[k∇J(x)k] ≤ , where J
is the return function and x ∈ Rd is the decision variable to be
optimized), which has been admitted as the best complexity
in decentralized optimization (Das et al. 2020; Karimireddy
et al. 2020). However, no similar matching bounds have yet
been reported in the decentralized (cooperative MARL) setting. Hence, this motivates the question:

We propose a novel policy gradient method for multi-agent reinforcement learning, which leverages two different variancereduction techniques and does not require large batches over
iterations. Specifically, we propose a momentum-based decentralized policy gradient tracking (MDPGT) where a new
momentum-based variance reduction technique is used to approximate the local policy gradient surrogate with importance
sampling, and an intermediate parameter is adopted to track
two consecutive policy gradient surrogates. MDPGT provably
achieves the best available sample complexity of O(N −1 −3 )
for converging to an -stationary point of the global average of
N local performance functions (possibly nonconcave). This
outperforms the state-of-the-art sample complexity in decentralized model-free reinforcement learning and when initialized with a single trajectory, the sample complexity matches
those obtained by the existing decentralized policy gradient
methods. We further validate the theoretical claim for the
Gaussian policy function. When the required error tolerance 
is small enough, MDPGT leads to a linear speed up, which has
been previously established in decentralized stochastic optimization, but not for reinforcement learning. Lastly, we provide empirical results on a multi-agent reinforcement learning
benchmark environment to support our theoretical findings.

Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an emerging
topic which has been explored both in theoretical (Nguyen
et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2018; Qu et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2021b) and empirical settings (Helou, Kalathil, and Xie 2020;
Mukherjee, Bai, and Chakrabortty 2020; Zhou et al. 2020).
Several appealing applications of MARL can be seen in
(Zhang, Yang, and Başar 2019; Nguyen, Nguyen, and Nahavandi 2020) and relevant references therein.
While MARL can primarily be cast into two different categories, i.e., cooperative (Li, Chen, and Chen 2020; Wang
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020) and competitive (Chen et al. 2020),
our focus is in the cooperative setting; see (Wei et al. 2021)
for details on the competitive setting. Cooperative MARL is
typically modeled as a networked multi-agent Markov decision process (MDP) (Zhang, Yang, and Basar 2018; Chu,
Chinchali, and Katti 2020; Zhang et al. 2018) in which the

Can we achieve a sample complexity of O(−3 ) in
decentralized MARL via variance reduction?
In this paper, we answer this question affirmatively by
proposing a variance-reduced policy gradient tracking approach, MDPGT (Algorithm 1), and analyzing it in Theorem 1.
Additionally, we propose a variation (based on a different
initialization) that enables state-of-the-art (SOTA) sample
complexity for decentralized MARL (Zhang et al. 2021b; Lu
et al. 2021). See Table 1 for SOTA comparisons. Specifically:
1. We propose MDPGT, in which we use a stochastic policy
gradient surrogate, a convex combination of the vanilla
stochastic policy gradient and an importance samplingbased stochastic recursive algorithm (SARAH) (Nguyen
et al. 2017) for the local gradient update. Instead of
directly applying the stochastic policy gradient surro-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9377

