The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Federated Learning for Face Recognition with Gradient Correction
Yifan Niu, Weihong Deng
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
nyf@bupt.edu.cn, whdeng@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

as backbone and a shared fully-connected layer is applied for
final classification, which is likely to lead to privacy leakage.
Therefore, these methods are not applicable to face recognition. Once the private class embedding is obtained, one
client’s private high-fidelity face images can be easily synthesized by other clients via optimizing random noise, such
as DeepInversion (Yin et al. 2020). Moreover, lots of GANbased face generation technics are also proposed to generate
a frontal photorealethistic face image with face embeddings.
On the other hand, existing federated methods are mainly focusing on shallow networks(e.g. 2 layer fully connected network), we found these methods may easily cause network
collapsing when applied to deeper network structure on facial datasets. Thus, we rethink the federated learning problem of face recognition on privacy issues, and remodel conventional Federated Averaging algorithm (FedAvg) (McMahan et al. 2017) via ensuring each client holds a private fullyconnected layer which not only guarantees higher privacy
but also contributes to network convergence.
In general, each client commonly holds a small-scale nonIID local dataset. When we follow the above setting, onece
the k-th client solves the optimization problem locally, the
classification task is relatively uncomplicated and the network tends to overfit and suffers from degradation of generalization ability. It leads to a phenomenon that class embeddings (the parameters of last fully-connected layer) of the
same client are almost orthogonal to each other, but part of
class embeddings of different clients are highly similar.
To solve aforementioned problem, we should constitute a
new training strategy to train a model with private decentralized non-IID (Non Identically and Independently Distributed) facial data. In this work, we first propose FedGC,
a novel and poweful federated learning framework for face
recognition, which combines local optimization and cross
client optimization injected by our proposed softmax regularizer. FedGC is a privacy-preserving federated learning
framework which guarantees that each client holds private
class embeddings. In face recognition, several variants of
softmax-based objective functions (Deng et al. 2019; Deng,
Zhou, and Zafeiriou 2017; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Sun, Wang, and Tang 2015; Taigman et al. 2014; Wang
et al. 2018b; Wolf, Hassner, and Maoz 2011) have been proposed in centralized methods. Hence, we propose a softmaxbased regularizer aiming to correct gradients of local soft-

With increasing appealing to privacy issues in face recognition, federated learning has emerged as one of the most
prevalent approaches to study the unconstrained face recognition problem with private decentralized data. However, conventional decentralized federated algorithm sharing whole
parameters of networks among clients suffers from privacy
leakage in face recognition scene. In this work, we introduce a framework, FedGC, to tackle federated learning for
face recognition and guarantees higher privacy. We explore
a novel idea of correcting gradients from the perspective of
backward propagation and propose a softmax-based regularizer to correct gradients of class embeddings by precisely injecting a cross-client gradient term. Theoretically, we show
that FedGC constitutes a valid loss function similar to standard softmax. Extensive experiments have been conducted to
validate the superiority of FedGC which can match the performance of conventional centralized methods utilizing full
training dataset on several popular benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Face Recognition has been the prominent biometric technique for identity authentication and has been widely applied in many areas. Recently, a variety of data-driven approaches using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) (Taigman et al. 2014; Kim, Park, and Shin 2020; Deng
et al. 2020; Duan, Lu, and Zhou 2019; Marriott, Romdhani,
and Chen 2021) have been proposed to improve the face
identification and verification accuracy. A large scale dataset
with diverse variance is crucial for discriminative face representation learning. Although existing datasets (Cao et al.
2018; Guo et al. 2016; Kemelmacher-Shlizerman et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2018a; Yi et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2021) were
created aiming to study the unconstrained face recognition
problem, they are still biased compared with the real world
data distribution. Considering privacy issue, we are not authorized to get access to mass face data in real world. Thus,
it is vital to train a model with private decentralized face data
to study the unconstrained face recognition problem in real
world scene.
Federated methods on object classification tasks are all
under a common setting where a shallow network is adopted
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1999

