The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hedonic Games with Fixed-Size Coalitions
Vittorio Bilò,1 Gianpiero Monaco,2 Luca Moscardelli3
1

Univ. of Salento, Italy
Univ. of L’Aquila, Italy
3
Univ. of Chieti-Pescara, Italy
vittorio.bilo@unisalento.it, gianpiero.monaco@univaq.it, luca.moscardelli@unich.it
2

Abstract

coalition structures (i.e., partitions of agents into groups),
needs to agree on (or be assigned to) a stable outcome. Stability is interpreted as a situation that is acceptable by everyone, either because they are all happy or because any subset
of unhappy agents cannot give life to a better outcome. There
are several notions of stability that may be defined in this
setting (e.g., individual stability (Bogomolnaia and Jackson
2002), Nash stability (Nash 1950), core stability (Banerjee,
Konishi, and Sönmez 2001), etc.), by discriminating on what
an agent or a group of agents is allowed to do when deviating
from a given outcome. All of them usually pose no restrictions on the number of agents that can belong to a coalition.
This freedom is not guaranteed in our social dinner example,
where the set of allowed coalition structures is restricted to
obey stringent constraints: there are k coalitions (the tables),
each coalition has a fixed size (the table capacity), and the
sum of the sizes of all coalitions equals n (exactly one seat
has been reserved for each participant).
Under these premises, classical stability notions become
infeasible. Nash stability, for instance, which allows an unhappy agent to join a more preferred coalition, cannot be
applied, as the capacity of a table is fixed and cannot be
increased. Also core stability, which allows a group of unhappy agents to create a new coalition, cannot be realized,
as new tables (of at least a certain capacity) cannot be added
to the current arrangement. Indeed, a given outcome can be
modified only if both the number of tables and their capacities stay the same, i.e., only if a group of agents agrees
on permuting their seats. The simplest permutation, which
involves two agents only, is called a swap. Swap stability has been considered in a variety of problems with superimposed structures, such as matching markets (Alcalde
1995; Aziz and Goldwaser 2017; Damamme et al. 2015;
Gourvès, Lesca, and Wilczynski 2017; Massand and Simon
2019) and Schelling games (Agarwal et al. 2020; Bilò et al.
2020; Gross-Humbert et al. 2021). However, to the best of
our knowledge, it has not been imported yet in the general
setting of hedonic games.
In this work, we introduce and formalize the model of
hedonic games with fixed-size coalitions and embark in the
study of swap stability in additively separable games, where
an agent’s preference is captured by a utility function which
sums up a contribution due to any other agent in the same
coalition. We distinguish among three different types of

In hedonic games, a set of n agents, having preferences over
all possible coalition structures, needs to agree on a stable
outcome. In this work, we initiate the study of hedonic games
with fixed-size coalitions, where the set of possible coalition
structures is restricted as follows: there are k coalitions, each
coalition has a fixed size, and the sum of the sizes of all coalitions equals n. We focus on the basic model of additively
separable hedonic games with symmetric preferences, where
an agent’s preference is captured by a utility function which
sums up a contribution due to any other agent in the same
coalition. In this setting, an outcome is stable if no pair of
agents can exchange coalitions and improve their utilities.
Conditioned on the definition of improvement, three stability notions arise: swap stability under transferable utilities,
which requires to improve the sum of the utilities of both
agents, swap stability, which requires to improve the utility of
one agent without decreasing the utility of the other one, and
strict swap stability, requiring to improve the utilities of both
agents simultaneously. We analyse the fundamental questions
of existence, complexity and efficiency of stable outcomes,
and that of complexity of a social optimum.

1

Introduction

It is social dinner time at your preferred conference. The organizers reserved the best restaurant of the city. When you
arrive at the place, you see that k tables, of various capacities, have been set to accommodate the n participants. As
you are a bit late, some seats are already taken. You would
like to share your table with some friends you have not seen
for a long time, as well as with some colleagues working
on common research topics. At the same time, you would
gladly avoid a couple of annoying persons you do not like
that much. Where are you going to sit? Indeed, this example can be recast in several other (perhaps more concrete)
settings, such as assigning desks to faculty members in a
department with multi-person offices, dividing a set of employees into project teams, assigning students to classrooms,
and so on.
All the above situations fall within the well-established
framework of hedonic games (Dreze and Greenberg 1980),
where a set of agents, having preferences over all possible
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9287

