The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transcoded Video Restoration by Temporal Spatial Auxiliary Network
Li Xu1 , Gang He1,2,∗ , Jinjia Zhou3 , Jie Lei1 , Weiying Xie1 , Yunsong Li1 , Yu-Wing Tai2
1
Xidian University, China
Kuaishou Technology, China
3
Hosei University, Japan
cherylxu@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {ghe, wyxie}@xidian.edu.cn, zhou@hosei.ac.jp,
{jielei, ysli}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, yuwing@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Hardware encoding is
done by the built-in codec

In most video platforms, such as Youtube, Kwai, and TikTok, the played videos usually have undergone multiple video
encodings such as hardware encoding by recording devices,
software encoding by video editing apps, and single/multiple video transcoding by video application servers. Previous
works in compressed video restoration typically assume the
compression artifacts are caused by one-time encoding. Thus,
the derived solution usually does not work very well in practice. In this paper, we propose a new method, temporal spatial auxiliary network (TSAN), for transcoded video restoration. Our method considers the unique traits between video
encoding and transcoding, and we consider the initial shallow encoded videos as the intermediate labels to assist the
network to conduct self-supervised attention training. In addition, we employ adjacent multi-frame information and propose the temporal deformable alignment and pyramidal spatial fusion for transcoded video restoration. The experimental results demonstrate that the performance of the proposed
method is superior to that of the previous techniques. The
code is available at https://github.com/icecherylXuli/TSAN.

Video transcoding is done to cater
intricate application scenarios

Transcoded video with twice
compression distortions is played

Re-distribution

Upload

Youtube, Kwai, TikTok, etc. servers

Mobile phone

Various terminal devices

(a) Example of video transcoding processes
Previous video restoration methods
such as DnCNN, EDCNN, STDF

A hybrid superposition degradation
Coding
Raw video

Restored video

Transcoding
Auxiliary supervision
(in training stage)

Proposed TSAN for transcoded videos

(b) Workflow comparison of previous restoration methods and our proposed TSAN
E
N
C
O
D
E
D
R
E
S
T
O
R
E
D

Introduction
Massive uncompressed video data is a substantial burden
for hardware storage and transmission. Without proper encoding, it is almost impossible to transmit a high resolution
video through the widespread 4G/5G network in real-time.
Over the past decades, many video coding algorithms have
been emerged to exploit video contents’ spatial and temporal
redundancy while pursuing an acceptable visual quality. The
classic video coding standards, such as H.262/MPEG-2 (Rec
1994), H.263 (Recommendation 1998), H.264/AVC (Telecom et al. 2003), H.265/HEVC (Sullivan et al. 2012), have
been developed rapidly. Indeed, due to the limitations of
transmission conditions and various mobile devices, almost
all the videos we encounter on the Internet were transcoded
to meet the target bitrates for efficient transmission. For example, a video taken directly using our mobile phone needs
to be compressed at least twice (hardware encoding in mobile phone before uploading, and the transcoding in video
server before re-distribution) before it can be shared on

Raw

Mobile phone
encoded

DnCNN 26.03 dB

EDCNN 26.10 dB

Transcoded
25.61 dB

STDF

26.56 dB

Proposed TSAN
26.87dB

(c) Example of subjective quality comparison

Figure 1: (a) Example of video transcoding processes. (b)
Workflow comparison of previous restoration methods and
our proposed TSAN. (c) Example of subjective quality comparison, including our TSAN, DnCNN (Zhang et al. 2017),
EDCNN (Pan et al. 2020), and STDF (Deng et al. 2020).
Youtube, Kwai or TikTok, etc., as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a).
Intuitively, transcoded videos that end users viewed usually
suffer from single/multiple transcoding degradation.
Recently, some learning-based methods have been explored to eliminate the artifacts of compressed images and
videos. However, they focused on improving the quality of
encoded videos without transcoding. The integral distortion
by video encoding and transcoding is not a simple superposition of two coding distortions, as transcoding will further
introduce different degrees of distortions in the degraded regions with severe or slight artifacts. In Fig.1 (c), only the

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2875

