The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Directed Graph Auto-Encoders
Georgios Kollias, Vasileios Kalantzis, Tsuyoshi Idé, Aurélie Lozano, Naoki Abe
IBM Research
T. J. Watson Research Center
{gkollias, vkal, tide, aclozano, nabe}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

They are based on the graph Laplacian, so they inherently
adopt a global graph view (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2016a). However they
incur more computational cost, typically addressed by approximating their convolutional filter.
In this work we focus on GCN-based models for representing the nodes of directed graphs (encoding), so that we can
faithfully reconstruct their directed edges (decoding). Our
goal is to identify both whether two nodes u and v should be
connected or not (which is the only goal for the undirected
case) and whether their connection has the direction u 7→ v
or v 7→ u or both. Many applications depend critically on
this distinctionality. For example in (directed) citation graphs
it cannot be the case that a publication cites a work that is
published later in time, in (directed) causal graphs a causal
node should prepend any of its effects, in knowledge graphs
subject nodes are expected to point to object nodes. As a consequence, failing to identify the correct orientation even in
a single edge could severely disrupt downstream tasks: time
ordering can become contradicting, paths to root causes can
be erroneously blocked, flow computations between entities
can be totally wrong.
Our encoder follows a color refinement scheme for directed graphs that reduces to the standard Weisfeiler-Leman
algorithm. Coupled with an unsymmetric decoder, our directed graph auto-encoder can accurately infer missing directed links from the limited, incomplete graph it has access
to during training time.
Our contributions are two-fold. First, we propose a novel
variant of the Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm that clearly emphasizes the dual role of directed graph nodes as both sources and
targets of directed links. This abstracts, for the first time, the
alternating update of authority and hub scalar values in HITS,
and the relations between left and right singular vectors computed in SVD and the GCN-based approaches for directed
graphs inspired by them. Second, we design parameterized
GCN layers for updating the pair-of-vectors representation
of the source and target roles of directed graph nodes in an
alternating manner, and use these layers as the encoder in
a directed graph auto-encoder architecture. We demonstrate
that the parameterization we introduce is performance-critical
for learning latent representations, and the proposed model
can outperform state-of-the-art methods for the directed link
prediction task on several popular citation network datasets

We introduce a new class of auto-encoders for directed graphs,
motivated by a direct extension of the Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm to pairs of node labels. The proposed model learns pairs
of interpretable latent representations for the nodes of directed
graphs, and uses parameterized graph convolutional network
(GCN) layers for its encoder and an asymmetric inner product
decoder. Parameters in the encoder control the weighting of
representations exchanged between neighboring nodes. We
demonstrate the ability of the proposed model to learn meaningful latent embeddings and achieve superior performance
on the directed link prediction task on several popular network
datasets.

Introduction
Graph-structured data are ubiquitous, commonly encountered
in diverse domains, ranging from biochemical interaction
networks, to networks of social and economic transactions. A
graph introduces dependencies between its connected nodes,
thus algorithms designed to work solely with feature vectors
of isolated nodes as inputs can yield suboptimal results. One
way to remedy this issue, without reverting to more complex
graph algorithms, is to enhance the representation of a graph
node so that both its features and embedding graph structure
are captured in a single vector.
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) produce vectorial representations of nodes that are graph-aware and have
been successfully used in downstream learning tasks including node classification, link prediction and graph classification. The construction of GCNs falls into two categories:
spatial-based and spectral-based. Spatial-based GCNs are
conveniently described as Message Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs) detailing the steps for aggregating information
from neighbor graph nodes (Gilmer et al. 2017; Micheli 2009;
Niepert, Ahmed, and Kutzkov 2016). They adopt a local view
of the graph structure around each node and are straightforward to describe and lightweight to compute; however they
also need local customizations to enhance the performance
of the representations they produce for downstream learning
tasks (Veličković et al. 2017). Spectral-based GCNs originate
in graph signal processing perspectives (Bruna et al. 2014).
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7211

