The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Playing Lottery Tickets with Vision and Language
Zhe Gan,1 Yen-Chun Chen,1 Linjie Li,1 Tianlong Chen,2
Yu Cheng,1 Shuohang Wang,1 Jingjing Liu,3 Lijuan Wang,1 Zicheng Liu1
1

Microsoft Corporation
University of Texas at Austin
3
Tsinghua University
{zhe.gan, yen-chun.chen, lindsey.li, yu.cheng, shuowa, lijuanw, zliu}@microsoft.com
tianlong.chen@utexas.edu, JJLiu@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Large-scale pre-training has recently revolutionized visionand-language (VL) research. Models such as LXMERT and
UNITER have significantly lifted the state of the art over a
wide range of VL tasks. However, the large number of parameters in such models hinders their application in practice. In parallel, work on the lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH)
has shown that deep neural networks contain small matching subnetworks that can achieve on par or even better performance than the dense networks when trained in isolation.
In this work, we perform the first empirical study to assess
whether such trainable subnetworks also exist in pre-trained
VL models. We use UNITER as the main testbed (also test
on LXMERT and ViLT), and consolidate 7 representative VL
tasks for experiments, including visual question answering,
visual commonsense reasoning, visual entailment, referring
expression comprehension, image-text retrieval, GQA, and
NLVR2 . Through comprehensive analysis, we summarize our
main findings as follows. (i) It is difficult to find subnetworks
that strictly match the performance of the full model. However, we can find “relaxed” winning tickets at 50%-70% sparsity that maintain 99% of the full accuracy. (ii) Subnetworks
found by task-specific pruning transfer reasonably well to the
other tasks, while those found on the pre-training tasks at
60%/70% sparsity transfer universally, matching 98%/96%
of the full accuracy on average over all the tasks. (iii) Besides UNITER, other models such as LXMERT and ViLT can
also play lottery tickets. However, the highest sparsity we can
achieve for ViLT is far lower than LXMERT and UNITER
(30% vs. 70%). (iv) LTH also remains relevant when using
other training methods (e.g., adversarial training).

Figure 1: Overview of our training paradigm for playing lottery tickets with vision and language. Matching subnetworks
(or winning tickets) can be found by Iterative Magnitudebased Pruning (IMP). We then re-train the found ticket
with the original parameter initialization to verify the downstream performance. Not only task-specific winning tickets
can be found when running IMP on each downstream task
separately, a task-agnostic winning ticket is also discovered
via IMP on joint pre-training. The task-agnostic ticket results in universally transferable subnetworks at 60%/70%
sparsity that matches 98%/96% of the full accuracy averaged over all the tasks considered.

Introduction
Inspired by the success of BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), visionand-language pre-training (VLP) has becoming an increasingly central paradigm for vision-and-language (VL) research. Models such as LXMERT (Tan and Bansal 2019),
ViLBERT (Lu et al. 2019a) and UNITER (Chen et al.
2020d), have achieved state-of-the-art performance across a
wide range of VL tasks, such as visual question answering
(VQA) (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017), visual commonsense reasoning (VCR) (Zellers et al. 2019), and imagetext retrieval (Lee et al. 2018). Despite its empirical success,

the memory and computation footprint of these pre-trained
models is huge because of their large number of parameters, making it infeasible to use them in resource-constrained
scenarios. A natural question that came to our mind: Can we
prune a large pre-trained VL model while preserving its performance and transferability?
In this work, we aim to answer this question via the
lens of lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) (Frankle and Carbin
2019), which states that there exist matching subnetworks
in dense neural networks that can be trained in isolation
from initialization to reach a comparable accuracy to the

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

652

