The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Rushing and Strolling among Answer Sets – Navigation Made Easy
Johannes Klaus Fichte1 , Sarah Alice Gaggl2 , Dominik Rusovac2
1

Research Unit Database and Artificial Intelligence, TU Wien, Austria
Logic Programming and Argumentation Group, TU Dresden, Germany
johannes.fichte@tuwien.ac.at, sarah.gaggl@tu-dresden.de, dominik.rusovac@tu-dresden.de
2

Abstract

answer set, for example, planning when certain routes are
gradually forbidden (Son et al. 2016), finding diverging
solutions (Everardo 2017; Everardo et al. 2019), reasoning in probabilistic applications (Lee, Talsania, and Wang
2017), or debugging answer sets (Oetsch, Pührer, and Tompits 2018; Gebser et al. 2008).
Now, if the user is interested in more than a few solutions
to gradually identify specific answer sets, tremendous solution spaces can easily become infeasible to comprehend.
In fact, it might not even be possible to compute all solutions in reasonable time. Examples where we easily see large
solution spaces are configuration problems (Soininen and
Niemelä 1999; Soininen et al. 2001; Tiihonen et al. 2003),
such as PC configuration, and planning problems (Dimopoulos, Nebel, and Koehler 1997; Lifschitz 1999; Nogueira et al.
2001). Consider the following example.
Example 1. Consider an online shopping situation where
we have a knowledge base on clothes and some rules specifying which combinations would suit well or not.

{outfit(X, Y ) :clothes(X, Y )};

Answer set programming (ASP) is a popular declarative programming paradigm with a wide range of applications in artificial intelligence. Oftentimes, when modeling an AI problem with ASP, and in particular when we are interested beyond simple search for optimal solutions, an actual solution,
differences between solutions, or number of solutions of the
ASP program matter. For example, when a user aims to identify a specific answer set according to her needs, or requires
the total number of diverging solutions to comprehend probabilistic applications such as reasoning in medical domains.
Then, there are only certain problem specific and handcrafted
encoding techniques available to navigate the solution space
of ASP programs, which is oftentimes not enough. In this paper, we propose a formal and general framework for interactive navigation toward desired subsets of answer sets analogous to faceted browsing. Our approach enables the user to
explore the solution space by consciously zooming in or out
of sub-spaces of solutions at a certain configurable pace. We
illustrate that weighted faceted navigation is computationally
hard. Finally, we provide an implementation of our approach
that demonstrates the feasibility of our framework for incomprehensible solution spaces.

← outfit(X, Y 1),
outfit(X, Y 2), Y 1 6= Y 2;
occasion(vancouver) ← outfit(jacket, . . .);
occasion(conference) ← outfit(suit, Y ), Y 6= yellow;

Introduction
Answer set programming (ASP) is a declarative programming paradigm, which has its roots in logic programming
and nonmonotonic reasoning. It is widely used for knowledge representation and problem solving (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczyński 2011). In ASP, a problem is encoded as a set
of rules (logic program) and is evaluated under stable model
semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988, 1991), using solvers
such as clingo (Gebser et al. 2011, 2014), WASP (Alviano
et al. 2015) or DLV (Alviano et al. 2017). Then, answer sets
represent solutions to the modeled problem.
Oftentimes when modeling with ASP, the number of solutions of the resulting program can be quite high. This is
not necessarily a problem when searching for a few solutions, e.g., optimal solutions (Gebser, Kaminski, and Schaub
2011; Alviano and Dodaro 2016a) or when incorporating
preferences (Brewka 2004; Brewka et al. 2015; Alviano,
Romero, and Schaub 2018). However, there are many situations where reasoning goes beyond simple search for one

occasion(wistler) ← outfit(boots, . . .) . . .
Together with input facts from a clothes database like
clothes(jacket,blue); clothes(shirt,red); . . . one easily obtains more than a million answer sets. As we plan to travel
to a conference in Vancouver, we want to find suitable outfits for this occasion. Say we zoom in on outfits including
shorts, which leads to a rather small, but still incomprehensible sub-space of solutions. Say we want to inspect the most
different outfits still remaining, then we aim to choose potential parts of our outfit that provide us with most diverse solutions. Now, we are almost good to go, seeking to find some
final additions to our outfit quickly.
Our example illustrates that different solutions in ASP programs can easily be hard to comprehend. Problem specific,
handcrafted encoding techniques to navigate the solution
space can be quite tedious.
Instead, we propose a formal and general framework for
interactive navigation toward desired subsets of answer sets

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5651

