The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Up to 100× Faster Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
Gongfan Fang1,3 * , Kanya Mo1∗ , Xinchao Wang2 , Jie Song1
Shitao Bei1 , Haofei Zhang1 , Mingli Song1,3†
1
Zhejiang University
National University of Singapore
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{fgf, sjie, best, haofeizhang, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn
Kanya.18@intl.zju.edu.cn, xinchao@nus.edu.sg
2

Accuracy of Student (%)

Abstract
Data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) has recently been
attracting increasing attention from research communities, attributed to its capability to compress a model only using synthetic data. Despite the encouraging results achieved, stateof-the-art DFKD methods still suffer from the inefficiency
of data synthesis, making the data-free training process extremely time-consuming and thus inapplicable for large-scale
tasks. In this work, we introduce an efficacious scheme,
termed as FastDFKD, that allows us to accelerate DFKD
by a factor of orders of magnitude. At the heart of our approach is a novel strategy to reuse the shared common features in training data so as to synthesize different data instances. Unlike prior methods that optimize a set of data independently, we propose to learn a meta-synthesizer that seeks
common features as the initialization for the fast data synthesis. As a result, FastDFKD achieves data synthesis within
only a few steps, significantly enhancing the efficiency of
data-free training. Experiments over CIFAR, NYUv2, and
ImageNet demonstrate that the proposed FastDFKD achieves
10× and even 100× acceleration while preserving performances on par with state of the art. Code is available at
https://github.com/zju-vipa/Fast-Datafree.

60
50

100x

10x

Fast-5 Fast-10
Fast-2

40

CMI-10

1x

ZSKT

30
20
10

10

DAFL

CMI-5

CMI-2
1

CMI-500
DeepInv-2k

DFQ

10

0

10

1

GPU Hours for Data Synthesis (Hours in log scale)

Figure 1: Accuracy (%) of student models v.s. GPU hours of
data synthesis on CIFAR-100 dataset. Our method, denoted
as “Fast”, achieves 10× to even 100× acceleration and performance on par with existing methods.

Starner 2017). Due to the much relaxed constraint on training data, DFKD has been receiving increasing attention from
research communities including computer vision (Chen
et al. 2019), natural language processing (Ma et al. 2020),
and graph learning (Deng and Zhang 2021). Typically,
DKFD follows a distilling-by-generating paradigm, where a
synthetic dataset is often crafted for training by “inverting”
the pre-trained teacher (Yin et al. 2019). To learn a comparable student model, the synthetic set should contain sufficient samples to enable a comprehensive knowledge transfer from teachers. Consequentially, this poses a significant
challenge to DFKD, since synthesizing a large-scale dataset
is inevitably time-consuming, especially for sophisticated
tasks like ImageNet recognition (Yin et al. 2019) and COCO
detection (Chawla et al. 2021).
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach, termed as
FastDFKD, to accelerate data synthesis process so as to
make data-free knowledge distillation more applicable for
large-scale tasks. Our motivation stems from the fact that,
data instances from the same domain usually share some
common features, and hence such shared features should be
explicitly utilized for data synthesis. For example, the textures of “fur” may frequently emerge in an animal dataset,
and thus can be reused to create different instances. Unfortunately, existing DFKD approaches have mainly focused on
synthesizing samples independently and, in fact, none of the
existing DFKD approaches has explored taking advantage

Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) has recently emerged as a popular paradigm to reuse pre-trained models that are nowadays
prevalent online. KD aims to train a compact student model
for efficient inference by imitating the behavior of the pretrained teacher (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Yang et al.
2020; Fang et al. 2021a). The conventional setup of KD requires possessing the original training data as input so as
to train the student. Unfortunately, due to confidential or
copyright reasons, in many cases the original data cannot
be released and only the pre-trained models are available to
users (Kolesnikov et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2019; Ye et al.
2019), which, in turn, imposes a major obstacle towards applying KD for a broader domain.
To remedy this issue, data-free knowledge distillation
(DFKD) approaches have been proposed by assuming that
no access to training data is available at all (Lopes, Fenu, and
* Equal contributions
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6597

