The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Conditional Generative Model Based Predicate-Aware Query Approximation
Nikhil Sheoran1 * , Subrata Mitra2† , Vibhor Porwal2 , Siddharth Ghetia3* ,
Jatin Varshney3* , Tung Mai2 , Anup Rao2 , Vikas Maddukuri3*
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Adobe Research
3
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
sheoran2@illinois.edu, {sumitra,viporwal,tumai,anuprao}@adobe.com,
siddhughetia@gmail.com, jvarshney@ee.iitr.ac.in, mvikas@ec.iitr.ac.in
Abstract
The goal of Approximate Query Processing (AQP) is to provide very fast but “accurate enough” results for costly aggregate queries thereby improving user experience in interactive
exploration of large datasets. Recently proposed MachineLearning-based AQP techniques can provide very low latency
as query execution only involves model inference as compared to traditional query processing on database clusters.
However, with increase in the number of filtering predicates
(WHERE clauses), the approximation error significantly increases for these methods. Analysts often use queries with
a large number of predicates for insights discovery. Thus,
maintaining low approximation error is important to prevent
analysts from drawing misleading conclusions. In this paper,
we propose E LECTRA, a predicate-aware AQP system that
can answer analytics-style queries with a large number of
predicates with much smaller approximation errors. E LEC TRA uses a conditional generative model that learns the conditional distribution of the data and at run-time generates a
small (≈ 1000 rows) but representative sample, on which
the query is executed to compute the approximate result. Our
evaluations with four different baselines on three real-world
datasets show that E LECTRA provides lower AQP error for
large number of predicates compared to baselines.

Figure 1: Median relative error vs. no. of predicates. Baselines have high error for important high-predicate queries.

2020; Thirumuruganathan et al. 2020; Ma and Triantafillou
2019). Prior AQP systems mainly relied on sampling-based
methods. For example, BlinkDB (Agarwal et al. 2013) and
recently proposed VerdictDB (Park et al. 2018b), first create
uniform/stratified samples and store them. Then at run-time,
they execute the queries against these stored samples thus
reducing query latency. In order to reduce error for different set of queries — using different columns for filters and
groupings — they need to create not one, but multiple sets of
stratified samples of the same dataset. This results in a significant storage overhead. Recently, following the promising
results (Mondal, Sheoran, and Mitra 2021; Mirhoseini et al.
2017; Kraska et al. 2018) of using Machine Learning (ML)
to solve several systems problems, few ML-based AQP techniques have been proposed. These use either special datastructures (DeepDB (Hilprecht et al. 2020)) or simple generative models (VAE-AQP (Thirumuruganathan et al. 2020))
to answer queries with lower latency.
However, a key drawback of these techniques is that as
the number of predicates (i.e. WHERE conditions) in the
query increases, the approximation error significantly increases (Fig. 1 for Flights dataset). E LECTRA is our technique shown in blue. The importance of the queries containing such large number of predicates is disproportionally
high. This is because, as expert analysts drill down for insights, they progressively use more and more predicates to
filter the data to arrive at the desired subset and breakdowns
where some interesting patterns might be present. Therefore,

Introduction
Interactive exploration and visualization tools, such as
Tableau, Microsoft Power BI, Qlik, Polaris (Stolte, Tang,
and Hanrahan 2002), and Vizdom (Crotty et al. 2015) have
gained popularity amongst data-analysts. One of the desirable properties of these tools is that the speed of interaction with the data, i.e., the queries and the corresponding
visualizations must complete at “human speed” (Crotty
et al. 2016) or at “rates resonant with the pace of human
thought” (Liu and Heer 2014).
To reduce the latency of such interactions, Approximate
Query Processing (AQP) techniques that can provide fast
but “accurate enough” results for queries with aggregates
(AVG, SUM, COUNT) on numerical attributes on a large
dataset, have recently gained popularity (Hilprecht et al.
* Work done while at Adobe Research
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8259

