The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepThermal: Combustion Optimization for
Thermal Power Generating Units Using Offline Reinforcement Learning
Xianyuan Zhan1 * , Haoran Xu2,3,4 ∗ , Yue Zhang2,3 , Xiangyu Zhu2,3 , Honglei Yin2,3 , Yu Zheng2,3,4
1

Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
JD iCity, JD Technology, Beijing, China
3
JD Intelligent Cities Research, Beijing, China
4
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
{zhanxianyuan, ryanxhr, zhangyuezjx, zackxiangyu, yinhonglei93}@gmail.com, msyuzheng@outlook.com
Abstract

ranging from 90% to 94%. Further improving the combustion
efficiency of TPGUs, especially through system control aspect is becoming an extremely challenging task. The difficulties arise from several aspects. First, TPGUs are highly complex and large systems, which contain lots of equipment, huge
amounts of sensors and complicated operation mechanisms.
The involvement of the large number of safety constraints
and domain knowledge further exacerbates the difficulty of
the task. Lastly, it is desirable to achieve long-term optimization with multiple objectives, such as increasing combustion
efficiency while reducing NOx emission. All these factors
and requirements result in an extremely difficult problem that
has not been well solved after decades of effort. Currently,
most coal-fired thermal power plants still use semi-automatic
control systems, and their control heavily depends on the
experience and expertise of human operators.
Conventional industrial control optimization approaches,
such as the widely used PID controller (Åström and Hägglund
2006) and model predictive control (MPC) algorithms (Garcia, Prett, and Morari 1989), neither have sufficient expressive power nor scale with the increase of problem size. When
facing large and complex systems, these methods will have
unavoidable modeling complexity and time cost to obtain the
optimal solutions. Hence most existing combustion optimization approaches decompose the TPGU into individual small
sub-systems that only optimize a limited amount of state and
control variables (Kalogirou 2003; Lee et al. 2007; Ma and
Lee 2011; Liu and Bansal 2014). The recent advances of deep
reinforcement learning (RL) provide another promising direction. Deep RL leverages expressive function approximators
and has achieved great success in solving complex tasks such
as games (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017) and robotic
control (Levine et al. 2016). However, all these achievements
are restricted to the online setting, where agents are allowed
to have unrestricted interaction with real systems or perfect
simulation environments. In real-world industrial control scenarios, an algorithm may never get the chance to interact with
the system at the training stage. A problematic control policy
can lead to disastrous consequences to system operation. Besides, most real-world industrial systems are overly complex
or partially monitored by sensors, which makes it impossible
to build a high-fidelity simulator.
Fortunately, industrial systems like TPGUs have long-term

Optimizing the combustion efficiency of a thermal power generating unit (TPGU) is a highly challenging and critical task in
the energy industry. We develop a new data-driven AI system,
namely DeepThermal, to optimize the combustion control
strategy for TPGUs. At its core, is a new model-based offline
reinforcement learning (RL) framework, called MORE, which
leverages historical operational data of a TGPU to solve a
highly complex constrained Markov decision process problem via purely offline training. In DeepThermal, we first learn
a data-driven combustion process simulator from the offline
dataset. The RL agent of MORE is then trained by combining real historical data as well as carefully filtered and processed simulation data through a novel restrictive exploration
scheme. DeepThermal has been successfully deployed in four
large coal-fired thermal power plants in China. Real-world
experiments show that DeepThermal effectively improves the
combustion efficiency of TPGUs. We also report the superior
performance of MORE by comparing with the state-of-the-art
algorithms on the standard offline RL benchmarks.

Introduction
Thermal power generation forms the backbone of the world’s
electricity supply and plays a dominant role in the energy
structure of many countries. For example, there are more than
2,000 coal-fired thermal power plants in China, contributing
to more than 60% of all electricity generated in the country.
Every year, thermal power plants across the world consume
an enormous amount of non-renewable coal and cause serious air pollution issues. How to improve the combustion
efficiency of a thermal power generating unit (TPGU) has
been a critical problem for the energy industry for decades.
Solving this problem has huge economic and environmental
impacts. For instance, by only improving 0.5% of combustion efficiency of a 600 megawatt (MW) TPGU, a power plant
can save more than 4000 tons of coal and reduce hundreds
of tons of emissions (e.g. carbon dioxides CO2 and nitrogen
oxides NOx ) a year.
After decades of development and technology advances,
most modern TPGUs can achieve a combustion efficiency
* Equal contribution. Xianyuan Zhan is the corresponding author.
This research was done at JD Technology.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4680

