The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Rethinking Influence Functions of Neural Networks
in the Over-Parameterized Regime
Rui Zhang,1,2 Shihua Zhang1,2 *
1

NCMIS, CEMS, RCSDS, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{rayzhang, zsh}@amss.ac.cn

Abstract

Pope, and Feizi 2021) pointed out that IFs calculated via
IHVPs are often erroneous for neural networks. Furthermore, theoretical understanding for why these phenomena
happened still lacks in the neural network regime.
To theoretically understand the IF for neural networks, we
need to overcome the non-linearity and over-parameterized
properties in neural networks. Fortunately, recent advances
of NTK (Jacot, Gabriel, and Hongler 2018; Lee et al. 2019)
shed light on the theory of over-parameterized neural networks. The key idea of NTK is that an infinitely wide neural network trained by gradient descent is equivalent to kernel regression with NTK. Remarkably, the theory of NTK
builds a bridge between the over-parameterized neural networks and the kernel regression method, which dramatically reduces the difficulty of analyzing the neural networks theoretically. With the help of NTK, the theory for
over-parameterized neural networks has achieved rapid progresses (Arora et al. 2019a; Du et al. 2019a; Hu, Li, and Yu
2020; Zhang et al. 2021), which encourage us to deal with
the puzzle of calculating and understanding the IFs for neural networks in the NTK regime.
In this work, we utilize the NTK theory to calculate
IFs and analyze the behavior theoretically for the overparameterized neural networks. In summary, we make the
following contributions:
• We utilize the NTK theory to calculate IFs for overparameterized neural networks trained with regularized
mean-square loss, and prove that the approximation error can be arbitrarily small when the width is sufficiently large for two-layer ReLU networks. Remarkably,
we prove the first rigorous result to build the equivalence
between the fully-trained neural network and the kernel
predictor in the regularized situation. Numerical experiments confirm that IFs calculated in the NTK regime can
approximate the actual IFs with high accuracy.
• We analyze the error bound for the classic IHVP method
in the over-parameterized regime to understand when and
why it fails or not. On the one hand, our bounds reveal
that the accuracy of IHVP depends on the regularization
term which was only characterized before by numerical experiments in (Basu, Pope, and Feizi 2021). On the
other hand, we theoretically prove that the accuracy of
IHVP has a significant correlation with the probability
density of corresponding training points, which has not

Understanding the black-box prediction for neural networks
is challenging. To achieve this, early studies have designed
influence function (IF) to measure the effect of removing a
single training point on neural networks. However, the classic implicit Hessian-vector product (IHVP) method for calculating IF is fragile, and theoretical analysis of IF in the
context of neural networks is still lacking. To this end, we
utilize the neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory to calculate IF
for the neural network trained with regularized mean-square
loss, and prove that the approximation error can be arbitrarily
small when the width is sufficiently large for two-layer ReLU
networks. We analyze the error bound for the classic IHVP
method in the over-parameterized regime to understand when
and why it fails or not. In detail, our theoretical analysis reveals that (1) the accuracy of IHVP depends on the regularization term, and is pretty low under weak regularization; (2)
the accuracy of IHVP has a significant correlation with the
probability density of corresponding training points. We further borrow the theory from NTK to understand the IFs better,
including quantifying the complexity for influential samples
and depicting the variation of IFs during the training dynamics. Numerical experiments on real-world data confirm our
theoretical results and demonstrate our findings.

Introduction
Influence function (Hampel 1974) is a classic technique
from robust statistics, which measures the effect of changing
a single sample point on an estimator. Koh and Liang (2017)
transferred the concept of IFs to understanding why neural
networks make corresponding predictions. IF is one of the
most common approaches in explainable AI and is widely
used for boosting model performance (Wang, Huan, and Li
2018), measuring group effects (Koh et al. 2019), investigating model bias (Wang, Ustun, and Calmon 2019), understanding generative models (Kong and Chaudhuri 2021) and
so on. Specifically, IF reflects the effect of removing one
training point on a neural network’s prediction, thus can be
used to discover the most influential training points for a
given prediction. In their work, the implicit Hessian-vector
product (IHVP) was utilized to estimate the IF for neural
networks. However, the numerical experiments in (Basu,
* Shihua Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9082

