The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transferring the Contamination Factor between Anomaly Detection Domains by
Shape Similarity
Lorenzo Perini, Vincent Vercruyssen, Jesse Davis
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, DTAI & Leuven.AI, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
lorenzo.perini@kuleuven.be, vincent.vercruyssen@kuleuven.be, jesse.davis@kuleuven.be

Abstract

encountering an anomaly) among other reasons. Hence, classic approaches (Breunig et al. 2000; Goldstein and Dengel
2012; He, Xu, and Deng 2003; Kriegel et al. 2009; Li et al.
2020; Liu, Ting, and Zhou 2008; Pevnỳ 2016; Ramaswamy,
Rastogi, and Shim 2000; Zhao et al. 2019) treat anomaly
detection as an unsupervised problem. They exploit heuristic intuitions that the anomalies in a dataset are both rare
and somehow different from the normal examples in order
to assign a real-valued score to each example denoting how
anomalous it is. This enables ranking the examples from
most to least anomalous. The practical question is deciding
how many and which anomalies to flag to a user by converting such a ranking into discrete predictions. While this
is a complicated issue, the common approach would be to
use a dataset’s contamination factor, that is the expected
proportion of anomalies in the dataset (Perini, Vercruyssen,
and Davis 2020b), to set a threshold on the anomaly scores
such that the proportion of examples with an anomaly score
greater than the chosen threshold equals the contamination
factor (Bandaragoda et al. 2018; Bergman and Hoshen 2020;
Vikram et al. 2020). Examples with an anomaly score below the threshold are considered normal, those with a score
larger than the threshold are the anomalies. The contamination factor is usually assumed to be known (e.g., from domain
knowledge). The alternative is to estimate it by sampling and
labeling some data (Perini, Vercruyssen, and Davis 2020a).

Anomaly detection attempts to find examples in a dataset
that do not conform to the expected behavior. Algorithms for
this task assign an anomaly score to each example representing its degree of anomalousness. Setting a threshold on the
anomaly scores enables converting these scores into a discrete
prediction for each example. Setting an appropriate threshold
is challenging in practice since anomaly detection is often
treated as an unsupervised problem. A common approach is to
set the threshold based on the dataset’s contamination factor,
i.e., the proportion of anomalous examples in the data. While
the contamination factor may be known based on domain
knowledge, it is often necessary to estimate it by labeling data.
However, many anomaly detection problems involve monitoring multiple related, yet slightly different entities (e.g., a fleet
of machines). Then, estimating the contamination factor for
each dataset separately by labeling data would be extremely
time-consuming. Therefore, this paper introduces a method
for transferring the known contamination factor from one
dataset (the source domain) to a related dataset where it is
unknown (the target domain). Our approach does not require
labeled target data and is based on modeling the shape of the
distribution of the anomaly scores in both domains. We theoretically analyze how our method behaves when the (biased)
target domain anomaly score distribution converges to its true
one. Empirically, our method outperforms several baselines
on real-world datasets.

However, real-world anomaly detection tasks often involve
monitoring a fleet of related entities such as machines (Randall 2011), windmill farms (Zhao et al. 2018) or retail
stores (Vercruyssen et al. 2018). While the entities’ behaviors
are related in such cases, there are important differences that
will affect the collected data. For example, windmill-specific
properties (e.g., orientation, size, location) or store-specific
properties (e.g, size, services, or opening hours) will affect
the observed data. Consequently, how many anomalies are
present will vary from entity to entity. Given that such tasks
may involve monitoring 100s of entities, estimating the contamination factor for each one separately by labeling data
would be too onerous. Thus, an interesting avenue to explore
is whether it is possible to transfer a known contamination
factor from data about one entity (the source domain) to data
collected from another similar entity (the target domain). If
this were possible, it would significantly decrease the labeling burden, as one would no longer need to collect labels for

Introduction
Anomaly detection (Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar 2009) is
a data mining task that aims to automatically identify examples in a dataset that do not correspond to typical or expected
behavior. This is a significant and important problem because
anomalies often represent unwanted behaviors such as excess
water usage (Vercruyssen et al. 2018), abnormal web traffic (Robberechts et al. 2018), or malfunctions in unmanned
aerial vehicles (Khan et al. 2019) that have an associated cost.
Anomaly detection is particularly challenging as one often
lacks labeled examples, especially for the anomalies, because
collecting them may be infeasible (e.g., intentionally break
equipment to observe anomalies) or because anomalies are
scarce (e.g., one often has to inspect 100s of examples before
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4128

