The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Making Adversarial Examples More Transferable and Indistinguishable
Junhua Zou1 , Yexin Duan1 , Boyu Li2 , Wu Zhang1 , Yu Pan1 , Zhisong Pan1∗ ,
1

2

Command and Control Engineering College, Army Engineering University, Nanjing 210007, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
278287847@qq.com, hotpzs@hotmail.com

Abstract

categorizes attack methods into three types: the gradientbased methods (Dong et al. 2018; Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017b),
the score-based methods (Narodytska and Kasiviswanathan
2017), and the decision-based methods (Brendel, Rauber,
and Bethge 2018; Chen, Jordan, and Wainwright 2020).
In this paper, we focus on the gradient-based methods.
Although the adversarial examples crafted by using the
gradient-based methods satisfy the Lp bound and continually achieve higher black-box success rates, these examples
can be identified easily. In addition, the adversarial examples
generated by the approaches based on the basic sign structure are limited. Taking TI-MI-FGSM (the combination of
translation-invariant method (Dong et al. 2019) and momentum iterative fast gradient sign method (Dong et al. 2018))
as an example, the gradient processing steps, such as Gaussian blur, the gradient normalization, and the sign function,
severely damage the gradient information. Additionally, the
sign function also increases the perturbation size.
In this paper, we propose a method, called Adam Iterative Fast Gradient Tanh Method (AI-FGTM), which improves the indistinguishability and transferability of adversarial examples. It is known that the fast gradient sign attack
series iteratively process gradient information with transformation, normalization, and the sign function. To preserve
the gradient information as much as possible, AI-FGTM
modifies the major gradient processing steps. Still take TIMI-FGSM as an example, to avoid the loss of gradient information and generate imperceptible perturbations, we replace the momentum algorithm and the sign function with
Adam (Kingma and Ba 2015) and the tanh function, respectively. Then, we employ dynamic step size and smaller filters in Gaussian blur. The overview of AI-FGTM is shown
in Fig. 1, and the detailed process will be given in Methodology. Furthermore, combining the existing attack methods
with AI-FGTM can get much smaller perturbations and deliver state-of-the-art success rates. Fig. 2 shows the comparison of different examples, where the adversarial examples
are crafted by three combined attacks, namely, DIM (Xie
et al. 2019), TI-DIM (Dong et al. 2019) and TI-DI-AITM
(the combination of TI-DIM and our method).
In summary, we make the following contributions:

Fast gradient sign attack series are popular methods that are
used to generate adversarial examples. However, most of the
approaches based on fast gradient sign attack series cannot
balance the indistinguishability and transferability due to the
limitations of the basic sign structure. To address this problem, we propose a method, called Adam Iterative Fast Gradient Tanh Method (AI-FGTM), to generate indistinguishable adversarial examples with high transferability. Besides,
smaller kernels and dynamic step size are also applied to
generate adversarial examples for further increasing the attack success rates. Extensive experiments on an ImageNetcompatible dataset show that our method generates more indistinguishable adversarial examples and achieves higher attack success rates without extra running time and resource.
Our best transfer-based attack NI-TI-DI-AITM can fool six
classic defense models with an average success rate of 89.3%
and three advanced defense models with an average success rate of 82.7%, which are higher than the state-of-theart gradient-based attacks. Additionally, our method can also
reduce nearly 20% mean perturbation. We expect that our
method will serve as a new baseline for generating adversarial
examples with better transferability and indistinguishability.

Introduction
Despite the great success on many tasks, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown that they are vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Szegedy et al. 2014), i.e., the inputs with imperceptible perturbations can cause the incorrect results of DNNs.
Moreover, a tougher problem terms transferability (Liu et al.
2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017) that the adversarial examples crafted by a known DNN can also fool other unknown DNNs. Consequently, adversarial examples present
severe threats to the real-world applications (Athalye et al.
2018; Eykholt et al. 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio
2017a) and have motivated extensive research on defense
methods (Madry et al. 2018; Liao et al. 2018; Guo et al.
2018; Raghunathan, Steinhardt, and Liang 2018; Wong and
Kolter 2018; Pang, Du, and Zhu 2018; Samangouei, Kabkab,
and Chellappa 2018). Foolbox (Rauber et al. 2020) roughly
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. Inspired by the limitations of the fast gradient sign series,
we propose AI-FGTM in which the major gradient pro3662

