The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Same State, Different Task:
Continual Reinforcement Learning without Interference
Samuel Kessler, Jack Parker-Holder, Philip Ball, Stefan Zohren, Stephen J. Roberts
University of Oxford
{skessler, jackph, ball, zohren, sjrob}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) considers the problem of training
an agent sequentially on a set of tasks while seeking to retain
performance on all previous tasks. A key challenge in CL is
catastrophic forgetting, which arises when performance on a
previously mastered task is reduced when learning a new task.
While a variety of methods exist to combat forgetting, in some
cases tasks are fundamentally incompatible with each other
and thus cannot be learnt by a single policy. This can occur, in
reinforcement learning (RL) when an agent may be rewarded
for achieving different goals from the same observation. In
this paper we formalize this “interference” as distinct from
the problem of forgetting. We show that existing CL methods
based on single neural network predictors with shared replay
buffers fail in the presence of interference. Instead, we propose
a simple method, OWL, to address this challenge. OWL learns
a factorized policy, using shared feature extraction layers, but
separate heads, each specializing on a new task. The separate
heads in OWL are used to prevent interference. At test time,
we formulate policy selection as a multi-armed bandit problem,
and show it is possible to select the best policy for an unknown
task using feedback from the environment. The use of bandit
algorithms allows the OWL agent to constructively re-use
different continually learnt policies at different times during
an episode. We show in multiple RL environments that existing
replay based CL methods fail, while OWL is able to achieve
close to optimal performance when training sequentially.

1

A

B

C

D

Figure 1: A and B a simple four rooms environment task
where the goal (the green square) is located at the bottom
right. C and D a different four rooms task where the goal is
at a different location, the optimal Q-function should give
different values for the same action for the same starting
state. The symbol ↑ denotes a high Q-value and ↓ a low Qvalue. Task agnostic, single predictor continual RL methods
will be sub-optimal compared to methods which use the task
identifier to condition their policies like OWL.

Khetarpal et al. 2020), a paradigm where agents train on
tasks sequentially, while seeking to maintain performance on
previously mastered tasks (Kirkpatrick et al. 2016; Schwarz
et al. 2018; Rolnick et al. 2019). A key issue when training
on sequential tasks is catastrophic forgetting, a consequence
of gradient based learning, as training on a new task overwrites parameters which were important for previous tasks
(Robert M. French 1999). While existing methods address
this, they typically only consider the setup where each “task”
is an entirely different RL environment, for example different
games from the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare
et al. 2012) or different simulated robotics environments
(Ahn et al. 2019).
In this paper, we focus on a more challenging problem. Instead of distinct environments as different tasks, we consider
learning to solve different tasks with the same state space.
Since these tasks may not only have different but even opposite optimal actions for the same observation, training on
them sequentially causes what we call “interference” which
can in turn induce forgetting, as the agent directly optimizes
for an opposing policy. Interference can also lead to reduced
performance for future tasks, as the agent cannot fully learn

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL (Sutton, Barto et al. 1998))
considers the problem of an agent taking sequential actions
in an environment to maximize some notion of reward. In
recent times there has been tremendous success in RL, with
impressive results in Games (Silver et al. 2016) and Robotics
(OpenAI et al. 2018), and even real-world settings (Bellemare
et al. 2020). However, these successes have predominantly
focused on learning a single task, with agents often brittle
to changes in the dynamics or rewards (or even the seed
(Henderson et al. 2018)).
One of the most appealing qualities of RL agents is their
ability to continue to learn and thus improve throughout their
lifetime. As such, there has recently been an increase in interest in Continual Reinforcement Learning (CRL), (Ring 1994;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7143

