The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Debiasing DNN Models from Spurious Feature Influence
Mengnan Du1 , Ruixiang Tang2 , Weijie Fu3 , Xia Hu2
1

Texas A&M University
2
Rice University
3
Hefei University of Technology
dumengnan@tamu.edu, {rt39,xia.hu}@rice.edu, fwj.edu@gmail.com

Abstract

reduce the algorithmic bias of DNN models has attracted increasing attention recently (Mehrabi et al. 2022; Wu et al.
2021; Tang et al. 2021).
Our work is motivated by the observation that the bias
behavior of standard DNN models is a direct result of their
high reliance on fairness sensitive features in inputs. Here
fairness sensitive features denote features (e.g., ZIP code
and surname) that are highly predictive of certain protected
attribute (e.g., race). As a result, the underlying prediction
task (e.g., mortgage application) would highly rely on the
protected attributes (e.g., race) for prediction and introduce
discrimination for certain groups (e.g., African Americans).
Based on this observation, we propose to mitigate bias by
suppressing the model from capturing superficial correlations of fairness sensitive features with the prediction task,
while forcing it to concentrate on task-relevant features.
Decorrelating fairness sensitive features with class labels for DNN models is a technically challenging problem.
Firstly, one challenge lies in how to locate fairness sensitive features in input. One straightforward idea is to label the
whole training set by domain experts or crowd workers. This
would lead to suboptimal results. On one hand, crowd sourcing labelling is too time consuming and the labelling quality is not guaranteed (McDonnell et al. 2016). On the other
hand, many seemingly innocuous features may be highly
correlated with protected attributes and cause model bias.
This makes it extremely hard to annotate an exhaustive list of
sensitive features. Secondly, it is also challenging to utilize
the sensitive features even if we could obtain such labels. A
straightforward way is to delete these features, which however is impractical in many applications.
To address these challenges, we propose a general framework, called DeFI (Decorrelating Feature Influence), to discorrelate the main prediction task and fairness sensitive features for bias mitigation. We introduce a bias-only teacher
network that primarily leverages sensitive features in the input to make predictions. Fairness sensitive features can be
automatically localized by the biased teacher network. This
teacher network then counter-teaches a debiased student network, so that the interpretation of the student model is orthogonal to the interpretation of the teacher model. The key
idea is that since the teacher model relies explicitly on fairness sensitive features for prediction, the orthogonal interpretation loss enforces the student network to focus more

Recent studies indicate that deep neural networks (DNNs) are
prone to show discrimination towards certain demographic
groups. We observe that algorithmic discrimination can be
explained by the high reliance of the models on fairness sensitive features. Motivated by this observation, we propose to
achieve fairness by suppressing the DNN models from capturing the spurious correlation between those fairness sensitive features with the underlying task. Specifically, we first
train a bias-only teacher model which is explicitly encouraged to maximally employ fairness sensitive features for prediction. The teacher model then counter-teaches a debiased
student model so that the interpretation of the student model
is orthogonal to the interpretation of the teacher model. The
key idea is that since the teacher model relies explicitly on
fairness sensitive features for prediction, the orthogonal interpretation loss enforces the student network to reduce its
reliance on sensitive features and instead capture more taskrelevant features for prediction. Experimental analysis indicates that our framework substantially reduces the model’s
attention on fairness sensitive features. Experimental results
on four datasets further validate that our framework has consistently improved model fairness with respect to group fairness metrics, with a comparable or even better accuracy.

Introduction
DNN models are increasingly being used in high-stake decision making applications that affect individuals. However,
these models might exhibit algorithmic bias behaviors (Nagpal et al. 2019; Du et al. 2020; Kiritchenko and Mohammad
2018; Wan et al. 2021). Specifically, DNN models place certain privileged groups at a systematic advantage and exhibit
discrimination with respect to certain unprivileged groups.
For example, a recruiting tool believes that males are more
qualified and gives much lower ratings to females (Kiritchenko and Mohammad 2018), loan eligibility system negatively rates African Americans, and the recidivism prediction system predicts that African American inmates are three
times more likely to be classified as ‘high risk’ than European American inmates (Angwin et al. 2016), to name a
few. Many algorithmic discriminations are not justified, and
the bias problem might cause adverse impacts on individuals and society. Therefore, designing mitigation methods to
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9521

