The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Human-Object Interaction Detection via
Phrase Learning and Label Composition
Zhimin Li1 * , Cheng Zou2∗† , Yu Zhao2 , Boxun Li2 , Sheng Zhong1†
1

National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Megvii Technology
{lizm, zhongsheng}@hust.edu.cn, {zoucheng, zhaoyu03, liboxun}@megvii.com
(a) Human Object Interaction

Abstract

person

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a fundamental task in high-level human-centric scene understanding. We
propose PhraseHOI, containing a HOI branch and a novel
phrase branch, to leverage language prior and improve relation expression. Specifically, the phrase branch is supervised by semantic embeddings, whose ground truths are automatically converted from the original HOI annotations without extra human efforts. Meanwhile, a novel label composition method is proposed to deal with the long-tailed problem in HOI, which composites novel phrase labels by semantic neighbors. Further, to optimize the phrase branch, a
loss composed of a distilling loss and a balanced triplet loss
is proposed. Extensive experiments are conducted to prove
the effectiveness of the proposed PhraseHOI, which achieves
significant improvement over the baseline and surpasses previous state-of-the-art methods on Full and NonRare on the
challenging HICO-DET benchmark.

ride

person

(c) PhraseHOI

walk

person

walk

person

horse

(b) Relational Phrase Learning
Covert
Label

Distill
Knowledge

ride

walk

horse

Phrase
embedding

‘person ride horse’
‘person walk horse’

‘person-straddling-horse’
‘person-ride-racehorse’
‘person-walk-steed’

Figure 1: (a) HOI task, which inputs an image and outputs
human bounding boxes, object bounding boxes and the interactions between them. (b) Relational phrase learning task,
which inputs an image and outputs several natural language
phrases to describe the interactions between humans and objects. (c) Proposed PhraseHOI, which inputs an image and
outputs all of the above.

Introduction
Human is the main focus in visual world(Gupta, Hoffman,
and Malik 2016). Figuring out the relationships between human and its context is of great importance. Human-Object
Interaction (HOI) is to detect interactive relation between
human and the surroundings. HOI detection plays an important role in high-level human-centric scene understanding, and has attracted considerable research interest recently (Ulutan, Iftekhar, and Manjunath 2020; Kim et al.
2020; Liao et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2020;
Liu, Chen, and Zisserman 2020; Bansal et al. 2020; Gao,
Zou, and Huang 2018), resulting in significant improvement (Gao et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Zou
et al. 2021).
The task of HOI detection aims at localizing and recognizing relationships between humans and objects. Fig. 1(a)
illustrates an example of HOI, which inputs an image and
outputs human bounding boxes, object bounding boxes and
the interaction categories between them.
It’s hard to obtain labeled data for HOI due to the various
interactions between humans and objects in reality. So it’s

natural to think about using data from other sources as an alternative way to improve the performance of HOI detection.
In this paper, we propose a novel relational phrase learning task derived from HOI to utilize language knowledge.
Fig. 1(b) illustrates an example of relational phrase learning. It inputs an image and outputs several natural language
phrases to describe the interactions between humans and objects. Here we call these phrases ‘relational phrases’, and the
ground truths for them are automatically converted from the
original HOI annotations without extra human efforts.
Once staring at Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b) together, we find
that these two tasks both model the interactions between humans and objects, although one is from visual modality and
the other is from language modality. We hypothesize that
these two tasks share a common part in there knowledge
space, and joint optimization may help to distill knowledge
from the relational phrase learning task to HOI task, which
will improve the performance of HOI detection. Specifically, influenced by the task of cross-modal knowledge distillation (Gupta, Hoffman, and Malik 2016), our knowledge
comes from the teacher, a pretraind word2vec model, then

* Equal contribution. This work was done when Zhimin Li was

an intern at Megvii.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1509

