The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Diverse, Global and Amortised
Counterfactual Explanations for Uncertainty Estimates
Dan Ley1 , Umang Bhatt1,2 , Adrian Weller1,2
1

University of Cambridge, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, UK
dwl36@cantab.ac.uk, {usb20, aw665}@cam.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Depeweg et al. (2017) introduce decomposition of uncertainty estimates, though recent work (Antorán et al. 2021)
has demonstrated further leaps, proposing to find an explanation of a model’s predictive uncertainty for a given input
by searching in the latent space of an auxiliary deep generative model (DGM): they identify a single possible change
to the input such that the model becomes more certain in
its prediction. Termed CLUE (Counterfactual Latent Uncertainty Explanations), this method aims to generate counterfactual explanations (CEs) on-manifold that reduce the uncertainty of an uncertain input x0 . These changes are distinct
from adversarial examples, which find nearby points that
change the label (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015).
CLUE introduces a latent variable DGM with decoder
µθ (x|z) and encoder µϕ (z|x). H refers to any differentiable uncertainty estimate of a prediction y. The pairwise
distance metric takes the form d(x, x0 ) = λx dx (x, x0 ) +
λy dy (f (x), f (x0 )), where f (x) = y is the model’s mapping from an input x to a label, thus encouraging similarity
in input space and/or prediction space. CLUE minimises:

To interpret uncertainty estimates from differentiable probabilistic models, recent work has proposed generating a single
Counterfactual Latent Uncertainty Explanation (CLUE) for a
given data point where the model is uncertain, identifying a
single, on-manifold change to the input such that the model
becomes more certain in its prediction. We broaden the exploration to examine δ-CLUE, the set of potential CLUEs within
a δ ball of the original input in latent space. We study the
diversity of such sets and find that many CLUEs are redundant; as such, we propose DIVerse CLUE (∇-CLUE), a set of
CLUEs which each propose a distinct explanation as to how
one can decrease the uncertainty associated with an input.
We then further propose GLobal AMortised CLUE (GLAMCLUE), a distinct and novel method which learns amortised
mappings on specific groups of uncertain inputs, taking them
and efficiently transforming them in a single function call into
inputs for which a model will be certain. Our experiments
show that δ-CLUE, ∇-CLUE, and GLAM-CLUE all address
shortcomings of CLUE and provide beneficial explanations
of uncertainty estimates to practitioners.

L(z) = H (y|µθ (x|z)) + d (µθ (x|z), x0 )

Introduction

(1)

to yield xCLUE = µθ (x|zCLUE ) where zCLUE =
arg minz L(z). There are however limitations to CLUE, including the lack of a framework to deal with a diverse set
of possible explanations and the lack of computational efficiency. Although finding multiple explanations was suggested, we find the proposed technique to be incomplete.
We start by discussing the multiplicity of CLUEs. Providing practitioners with many explanations for why their
input was uncertain can be helpful if, for instance, they are
not in control of the recourse suggestions proposed by the
algorithm; advising someone to change their age is less actionable than advising them to change a mutable characteristic (Poyiadzi et al. 2020). Specifically, we develop a method
to generate a set of possible CLUEs within a δ ball of the
original point in the latent space of the DGM used: we term
this δ-CLUE. We then introduce metrics to measure the diversity in sets of generated CLUEs such that we can optimise directly for it: we term this ∇-CLUE. After dealing
with CLUE’s multiplicity issue, we consider how to make
computational improvements. As such, we propose a distinct
method, GLAM-CLUE (GLobal AMortised CLUE), which
serves as a summary of CLUE for practitioners to audit their

For models that provide uncertainty estimates alongside
their predictions, explaining the source of this uncertainty
reveals important information. For instance, determining the
features responsible for predictive uncertainty can help to
identify in which regions the training data is sparse, which
may in turn implicate under-represented sub-groups (by age,
gender, race etc). In sensitive settings, domain experts can
use uncertainty explanations to appropriately direct their attention to the specific features the model finds anomalous.
In prior work, Adebayo et al. (2020) touch on the unreliability of saliency maps for uncertain inputs, and Tsirtsis,
De, and Gomez-Rodriguez (2021) observe that high uncertainty can result in vast possibilities for counterfactuals. Additionally, when models are uncertain, their predictions may
be incorrect. We thus consider uncertainty explanations an
important precedent for model explanations; only once uncertainty has been explained can state-of-the-art methods be
deployed to explain the model’s prediction. However, there
has been little work in explaining predictive uncertainty.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7390

