The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Text Revision by On-the-Fly Representation Optimization
Jingjing Li1 , Zichao Li2 , Tao Ge3 , Irwin King1 , Michael R. Lyu1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Mila/McGill University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
llee.jingjing@gmail.com, zichao.li@mail.mcgill.ca
tage@microsoft.com {king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

et al. 2018), to learn sufficient distributed representation of
natural language, which is universally transferable to a wide
range of downstream tasks even without labeled data (Tenney, Das, and Pavlick 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020). In this paper, we ask the question, can we borrow the
power of a pre-trained Transformer for text revision without
any parallel data?
There exist some efforts on developing unsupervised text
generation methods with only non-parallel data, such as using reinforcement learning (RL) (Yu et al. 2017) and variational auto-encoders (Hu et al. 2017a). However, these methods suffer from issues of unstable (Bowman et al. 2016) and
computationally expensive training. It is even more challenging to apply them with large pre-trained models. For
instance, to fine-tune a GPT-3 summarization model with
RL, it takes thousands of labeler hours for learning a reliable reward function and 320 GPU-days to train the policy
and value nets (Stiennon et al. 2020).
In this work, we propose OREO, a method of On-thefly REpresentation Optimization for text revision. Instead of
generating an entire sequence of tokens from scratch, OREO
first detects partial text span to be edited, then conducts inplace span revision, which is realized by iterative mask-andinfill editing on the input sentence. As shown in Figure 1, at
each iteration, a fine-tuned RoBERTa encodes the input sentence into a distributed representation, then optimizes it informed by an attribute head of the same pretrained RoBERTa
model. After that, OREO masks a span and infills a new one
conditioned on the updated representation. As for the training, our model, OREO fine-tunes RoBERTa with two simple tasks, masked language modeling and attribute classification.
The contribution of this work is three-fold:

Text revision refers to a family of natural language generation
tasks, where the source and target sequences share moderate resemblance in surface form but differentiate in attributes,
such as text formality and simplicity. Current state-of-theart methods formulate these tasks as sequence-to-sequence
learning problems, which rely on large-scale parallel training
corpus. In this paper, we present an iterative in-place editing
approach for text revision, which requires no parallel data.
In this approach, we simply fine-tune a pre-trained Transformer with masked language modeling and attribute classification. During inference, the editing at each iteration is
realized by two-step span replacement. At the first step, the
distributed representation of the text optimizes on the fly towards an attribute function. At the second step, a text span
is masked and another new one is proposed conditioned on
the optimized representation. The empirical experiments on
two typical and important text revision tasks, text formalization and text simplification, show the effectiveness of our approach. It achieves competitive and even better performance
than state-of-the-art supervised methods on text simplification, and gains better performance than strong unsupervised
methods on text formalization. Our code and model are released at https://github.com/jingjingli01/OREO.

Introduction
Text revision refers to an important series of text generation
tasks, including but not limited to text style transfer (Shen
et al. 2017), text simplification (Xu et al. 2016), counterfactual debiasing (Zmigrod et al. 2019), grammar error correction (Sun et al. 2022), sentence fusion (Malmi et al. 2019)
and argument reframing (Chakrabarty, Hidey, and Muresan 2021), which revises an input sentence into another one
with the desired attribute (e.g., formality or simplicity). As
the most popular solution, sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
learning achieves state-of-the-art results on many text revision tasks today. However, it becomes less applicable when
there is no large-scale annotated parallel data for training.
On the other hand, recent breakthroughs in selfsupervised learning have enabled the pre-trained Transformer models (Vaswani et al. 2017), such as BERT (Devlin
et al. 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) and GPT (Radford

1. We propose an efficient mask-and-infill method with onthe-fly optimized representation for text revision. In this
work, we tackle two important tasks: text simplification
and text formalization. Additionally, this framework can
be directly adapted to other text revision tasks.
2. To enable on-the-fly representation optimization, we design simple fine-tuning methods that balance efficiency
and efficacy. The fine-tuning can be finished within 8
GPU-hours at most in our experiments.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. Our proposed OREO has strong performance on text for10956

