The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

OA-FSUI2IT: A Novel Few-Shot Cross Domain Object Detection Framework with
Object-Aware Few-Shot Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Lifan Zhao∗ , Yunlong Meng∗ , Lin Xu†
AI Institute, Shanghai Em-Data Technology Co., Ltd., China
{zlf.charlie, yunlong.cuhk, lin.xu5470}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image (UI2I) translation methods
aim to learn a mapping between different visual domains
with well-preserved content and consistent structure. It has
been proven that the generated images are quite useful for
enhancing the performance of computer vision tasks like object detection in a different domain with distribution discrepancies. Current methods require large amounts of images in
both source and target domains for successful translation.
However, data collection and annotations in many scenarios
are infeasible or even impossible. In this paper, we propose
an Object-Aware Few-Shot UI2I Translation (OA-FSUI2IT)
framework to address the few-shot cross domain (FSCD) object detection task with limited unlabeled images in the target domain. To this end, we first introduce a discriminator
augmentation (DA) module into the OA-FSUI2IT framework
for successful few-shot UI2I translation. Then, we present a
patch pyramid contrastive learning (PPCL) strategy to further improve the quality of the generated images. Last, we
propose a self-supervised content-consistency (SSCC) loss to
enforce the content-consistency in the translation. We implement extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our OA-FSUI2IT framework for FSCD object detection
and achieve state-of-the-art performance on the benchmarks
of Normal-to-Foggy, Day-to-Night, and Cross-scene adaptation. The source code of our proposed method is also available at https://github.com/emdata-ailab/FSCD-Det.

Figure 1: Few-shot UI2I translation and FSCD object detection results with Normal-to-Foggy and Day-to-Night.

ject appearance, viewpoints, backgrounds, illumination, and
weather conditions, etc. In addition, collecting large-scale
and diverse datasets with accurate bounding boxes annotations is difficult or even impossible since the labeling process is not only expensive but also time-consuming, and data
collection processes in some scenarios are infeasible (Yu
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Zhuang et al. 2020). Serving as an effective solution to bridge the gap of the data
distributions between different domains, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Ganin
et al. 2016; Wilson and Cook 2020) is proposed to learn
invariant representations explicitly. The learned knowledge
is transferred from the train data domain (source domain)
to the test data domain (target domain). Usually, the unsupervised domain adaptation can be classified into three
main categories: i) statistics matching; ii) adversarial pixel
and feature level adaptation; iii) content-preserving imageto-image translation based data augmentation. In the first
category, distributional variations across different domains
are mitigated via high-order statistics matching of source
and target features with well-designed distribution divergence metrics, i.e., maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
(Tzeng et al. 2014; Long et al. 2015), second-order moment
(Sun and Saenko 2016), central moment discrepancy (CMD)
(Zellinger et al. 2017). Methods belonged to the second category integrate domain adversarial training into the de facto
detector, e.g. Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015), YOLO (Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017, 2018), SSD
(Liu et al. 2016), Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017). Typically,
they attempt to minimize the domain disparity and reach appealing transferability via feature-level and pixel-level alignment (Chen et al. 2018). Methods of third class are built on
a common sense that recently emerged conditional genera-

Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task. Recent advances of deep learning (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016)
and large amounts of the annotated data (Cordts et al. 2016;
Sakaridis, Dai, and Van Gool 2018; Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012; Yu et al. 2020) propel the fast development of
object detection and reach remarkable achievements. However, detection models trained on the source domain may
degenerate the performance in a new target domain, due to
the domain shift problem (Gopalan, Li, and Chellappa 2011;
Patel et al. 2015; Tzeng et al. 2017; Ganin et al. 2016; Doersch and Zisserman 2017) caused by the variances of ob∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3426

