The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Less is More: Pay Less Attention in Vision Transformers
Zizheng Pan, Bohan Zhuang* , Haoyu He, Jing Liu, Jianfei Cai
Data Science & AI, Monash University, Australia
{zizheng.pan, bohan.zhuang, haoyu.he, jing.liu1, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

Abstract

FLOPs. Such a huge computing cost makes it difficult to
apply Transformers into broad computer vision tasks.
Several emerging efforts have been made to reduce the
computational cost in the early stages of HVTs. For example, some works (Wu et al. 2021; Vaswani et al. 2021) reduce
the number of self-attention heads in an MSA layer or further decreasing the number of Transformer blocks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). Another line of works proposes to trade-off
accuracy and efficiency for MSA via heuristic approximation, such as spatial reduction attention (SRA) (Wang et al.
2021) and shifted window based multi-head self-attention
(SW-MSA) (Liu et al. 2021). There are also studies simply
employ convolutional layers (Srinivas et al. 2021; Graham
et al. 2021) when the resolution of feature maps are considerably large. However, how much the early adoption of selfattention layers really contributes to the final performance
remains unclear.
In this paper, we present a Less attention vIsion
Transformer (LIT) to address the aforementioned problem
for HVTs. Specifically, we propose to exclusively use MLP
layers to capture local patterns in the early stages while introducing MSA layers with sufficient number of heads to
handle long range dependencies in the later stages. The motivation comes from two aspects. First, previous studies in
both CNNs and Transformers have shown that shallow layers focus on local patterns and deeper layers tend to capture high-level semantics or global relationships (Wu, Su,
and Huang 2019; Hou et al. 2019; Tenney, Das, and Pavlick
2019), arising the question of whether using self-attention
at the early stages is necessary. Second, from the theoretical perspective, a self-attention layer with sufficient heads
applied to images can express any convolutional layer (Cordonnier, Loukas, and Jaggi 2020). However, fewer heads in
an MSA layer theoretically hinder the ability of approximating a convolutional layer with a large kernel size, where the
extreme case is as expressive as a 1 × 1 convolution that
can be viewed as a standard FC layer applied to each pixel
independently. While recent HVTs adopt very few heads at
the early stages to deliver pyramid representations, we argue that this is not optimal as such setting introduces high
computational and memory cost but brings minor benefits.
To be emphasized, by exploiting MLP blocks in the
early stages, the model avoids the huge computational cost
and memory footprint arising from self-attention on high-

Transformers have become one of the dominant architectures
in deep learning, particularly as a powerful alternative to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in computer vision. However, Transformer training and inference in previous works
can be prohibitively expensive due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention over a long sequence of representations,
especially for high-resolution dense prediction tasks. To this
end, we present a novel Less attention vIsion Transformer
(LIT), building upon the fact that the early self-attention layers in Transformers still focus on local patterns and bring
minor benefits in recent hierarchical vision Transformers.
Specifically, we propose a hierarchical Transformer where we
use pure multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to encode rich local
patterns in the early stages while applying self-attention modules to capture longer dependencies in deeper layers. Moreover, we further propose a learned deformable token merging module to adaptively fuse informative patches in a nonuniform manner. The proposed LIT achieves promising performance on image recognition tasks, including image classification, object detection and instance segmentation, serving
as a strong backbone for many vision tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/zip-group/LIT.

Introduction
Transformers have made substantial strides in natural language processing (NLP) (e.g., (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin
et al. 2019)) and recently in the computer vision (CV) field
(e.g., (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Touvron et al. 2021a)). Inspired by the pyramid design (Lin et al. 2017a) in CNNs, recent hierarchical vision Transformers (HVTs) (Wang et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2021)
divide transformer blocks into several stages and progressively shrink feature maps as the network goes deeper. However, high-resolution feature maps in the early stages result
in long token sequences, which brings huge computational
cost and memory consumption due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention. For instance, a feature map of size
56 × 56 × 96 costs 2.0G FLOPs in one Multi-head SelfAttention (MSA) (Vaswani et al. 2017), while the entire
model of ResNet-18 (He et al. 2016) only requires 1.8G
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2035

