The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Explore Inter-contrast between Videos via Composition for Weakly Supervised
Temporal Sentence Grounding
Jiaming Chen,* 1 Weixin Luo,* 2 Wei Zhang,†1 Lin Ma†2
1

School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University
2
Meituan
{ppjmchen, forest.linma}@gmail.com, luowx@shanghaitech.edu.cn, davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

Query1: A person awakens in a closet snuggling their pillow.
Query2: Person close the door behind them.

Weakly supervised temporal sentence grounding aims to temporally localize the target segment corresponding to a given
natural language query, where it provides video-query pairs
without temporal annotations during training. Most existing methods use the fused visual-linguistic feature to reconstruct the query, where the least reconstruction error determines the target segment. This work introduces a novel
approach that explores the inter-contrast between videos in
a composed video by selecting components from two different videos and fusing them into a single video. Such a
straightforward yet effective composition strategy provides
the temporal annotations at multiple composed positions, resulting in numerous videos with temporal ground-truths for
training the temporal sentence grounding task. A transformer
framework is introduced with multi-tasks training to learn
a compact but efficient visual-linguistic space. The experimental results on the public Charades-STA and ActivityNetCaption dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, where our approach achieves comparable performance over the state-of-the-art weakly-supervised baselines. The code is available at https://github.com/PPjmchen/
Composition WSTG.

0.0s

18.6s

7.8s

25.0s

(a)

Query1: A person takes clothes out of a dryer.
Query2: A laughing person is drinking a soda in the bathroom.
0.0s

Video1 clip

10.0s

Video2 clip

21.0s

Video1 clip 27.0s

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Temporal sentence grounding in videos. Camera movements and scene transitions cause intra-contrast
inside the same video. (b) Composing clips from different videos produces numerous artificial video samples and
pseudo temporal labels.

Introduction
that are expensive and time-consuming. This inevitable limitation prevents the temporal sentence grounding from being
applied at a large scale.
The limitations come from the precise but labor-intensive
boundary annotations, while the text query annotations are
much easier to collect (Lin et al. 2020). To this end, the
weakly supervised temporal sentence grounding setting is
introduced, where coarse text-video pair annotations are
provided only during training. Without boundary annotations of the target segments, recent methods (Lin et al. 2020;
Song et al. 2020) fuse the visual and linguistic features and
reconstruct either themselves or the masked query. The target segment accompanied by the text query is expected to
yield the least reconstruction error during testing. These
methods, however, cannot guarantee that the target segments
always correspond to the best reconstruction due to the powerful representation of deep neural networks that can even
well reconstruct the irrelevant clips.
Videos describe a sequence of actions accompanied by
various participants and complex backgrounds, leading to a

Temporal sentence grounding (Gao et al. 2017) is regarded
as a crucial vision-language task that aims at localizing the
temporal boundary of the target segment in an untrimmed
video when given a natural language query. As a fundamental problem in video analysis and understanding, it has attracted increasing research interest over the last few years.
Many fully supervised methods (Anne Hendricks et al.
2017; Mithun, Paul, and Roy-Chowdhury 2019; Yuan, Mei,
and Zhu 2019; Yuan et al. 2020; Wang, Ma, and Jiang 2020;
Zhang et al. 2020a, 2021) has been developed, which directly learn from the videos, the text queries, and the temporal boundaries. Such methods rely on a variety of multimodal information fusion and supervision from accuracy
timestamp labels to model the boundary and content information of the target segments. However, the fully supervised setting needs precise temporal boundary annotations
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

267

