The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MMA: Multi-Camera Based Global Motion Averaging
Hainan Cui1,3* , Shuhan Shen1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CASIA-SenseTime Research Group, China
hncui@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, shshen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

addition. With the operation of incremental system, the error accumulates gradually, which often leads to significant
scene drift (Cornelis, Verbiest, and Gool 2004; Holynski
et al. 2020). To mitigate these error, the non-linear bundle
adjustments (BA) is performed repeatedly. While accurate,
the computational cost increases dramatically. Global SfM
has become more popular in recent years, which aims to estimate all camera poses at the same time through motion averaging. Formally, a global SfM method takes a view-graph
as input G = {V, E}, where each node Vi in V denotes
an image and each edge Eij in E denotes the connection between image i and j. The relative pose (Rij , tij ) is estimated
for each edge, where Rij ∈ R3×3 denotes a relative rotation
matrix, tij ∈ R3×1 represents a unit vector of the relative
translation direction. Ignoring the measurement noise, the
following two equations are hold:

In order to fully perceive the surrounding environment, many
intelligent robots and self-driving cars are equipped with a
multi-camera system. Based on this system, the structurefrom-motion (SfM) technology is used to realize scene reconstruction, but the fixed relative poses between cameras in
the multi-camera system are usually not considered. This paper presents a tailor-made multi-camera based motion averaging system, where the fixed relative poses are utilized to
improve the accuracy and robustness of SfM. Our approach
starts by dividing the images into reference images and nonreference images, and edges in view-graph are divided into
four categories accordingly. Then, a multi-camera based rotating averaging problem is formulated and solved in two
stages, where an iterative re-weighted least squares scheme
is used to deal with outliers. Finally, a multi-camera based
translation averaging problem is formulated and a l1 -norm
based optimization scheme is proposed to compute the relative translations of multi-camera system and reference camera positions simultaneously. Experiments demonstrate that
our algorithm achieves superior accuracy and robustness on
various data sets compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

Rij = Rj RTi , λij tij = Rj (ti − tj ).

(1)

where λij is a scale factor. The motion averaging is to find
the camera rotation Ri via global rotation averaging and
camera position ti via global translation averaging, such
that the observed pairwise relative poses are best explained.
The global SfM does not need to carefully select camera
seeds and the reconstruction error is uniformly spread to the
whole model, avoiding the error accumulation. Moreover,
the global BA is only run once, which is more efficient than
the incremental system.
Although many global SfM systems (Wilson and Snavely
2014; Dong et al. 2022) have success in reconstructing internet images, they are not suitable to reconstruct the images collected by the multi-camera platform. The reason
has three folds. Firstly, the internet images usually cover a
single scenic spot, hence the nodes in the view-graph are
densely connected. However, the multi-camera platform collects data from the city-scale scene, such as the self-driving
car collects images around city blocks. As a consequence,
the nodes connection in the view-graph is sparse, which is
more challenging for the global motion averaging system.
Secondly, the distribution of internet image positions is random, while the multi-camera platform usually moves along
straight routes, such as a self-driving car moves along the
street, hence many relative translations are collinear, which
may ruin the global SfM system (Jiang, Cui, and Tan 2013).
Finally, since the cameras in the multi-camera system are

Introduction
Fully perceive and reconstruct the surrounding environment
is a crucial ability for intelligent systems, such as various
kinds of robots (Strisciuglio et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021)
and self-driving cars (Heng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020).
To achieve this goal, multi-camera system is typically used
as the sensor platform since it is cheap to maintain, easy
to handle and provides 360◦ high-resolution image data.
These data make the reconstruction become more complete
and facilitate better camera re-localization (Colledanchise,
Malafronte, and Natale 2020) and navigation (Chen et al.
2019). The SfM technology is typically used to realize the
reconstruction task and based on the manner of camera poses
estimation, its pipeline is divided into two classes: incremental and global.
Incremental SfM selects camera seeds first and then adds
cameras one by one as the size of scene model grows up.
The quality of incremental scene reconstruction is depending on the selection of camera seeds and the order of camera
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

490

