The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Constrained Prescriptive Trees via Column Generation
Shivaram Subramanian* , Wei Sun* , Youssef Drissi, Markus Ettl
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10591, USA
subshiva, sunw, youssefd, mettl@us.ibm.com

Abstract

of widespread adoption of prescriptive analytics in practice. Firstly, prescriptive analytics often works in conjunction with predictive models, whose output may be nonlinear,
non-convex and/or discontinuous (and therefore not differentiable), resulting in intractable downstream optimization
problems. To generate meaningful policies, it is critical to
embed the myriad of business requirements into the decision optimization problem, exacerbating the computational
challenge at hand. Secondly, powerful black-box predictive
models inevitably obscure the downstream decision-making
process, making it difficult for enterprises to understand and
trust the prescribed policies. Meanwhile, recommendations
based on these models tend to be highly complex, making
implementation and maintenance of these policies challenging and cumbersome.
There have been some recent works studying the problem of generating interpretable prescriptive policy. A common theme is to construct variants of decision trees which
represent the prescribed policies, as trees provide “humanfriendly” explanations (Frosst and Hinton 2017; Miller
2019). Each path in a tree from the root node to a leaf
node corresponds to a policy, and all samples in a leaf are
prescribed with a same action. The procedure of generating such a tree-based policy may vary - the prediction step
can be either embedded in the policy generation step (Kallus
2017; Bertsimas, Dunn, and Mundru 2019), or explicitly
separated from prescription (Zhou, Athey, and Wager 2018;
Amram, Dunn, and Zhuo 2020; Biggs, Sun, and Ettl 2021).
Meanwhile, the prescriptive tree can be constructed either
greedily (Zhou, Athey, and Wager 2018; Biggs, Sun, and Ettl
2021) or optimally (Kallus 2017; Amram, Dunn, and Zhuo
2020). However, none of the existing methods are capable
of handling operational constraints which are paramount for
successful enterprise adoption of prescriptive analytics - this
is the gap which we intend to fill with this work.
In this paper, we propose a scalable method to solve the
constrained prescriptive policy generation problem. We consider the predictive teacher and prescriptive student framework (Zhou, Athey, and Wager 2018; Amram, Dunn, and
Zhuo 2020; Biggs, Sun, and Ettl 2021), where a predictive model (teacher) is first trained to produce counterfactual
outcomes associated with different actions for every sample in the dataset. Based on the counterfactual estimations,
the downstream prescriptive model (student) determines the

With the abundance of available data, many enterprises seek
to implement data-driven prescriptive analytics to help them
make informed decisions. These prescriptive policies need to
satisfy operational constraints, and proactively eliminate rule
conflicts, both of which are ubiquitous in practice. It is also
desirable for them to be simple and interpretable, so they can
be easily verified and implemented. Existing approaches from
the literature center around constructing variants of prescriptive decision trees to generate interpretable policies. However, none of the existing methods are able to handle constraints. In this paper, we propose a scalable method that
solves the constrained prescriptive policy generation problem. We introduce a novel path-based mixed-integer program
(MIP) formulation which identifies a (near) optimal policy
efficiently via column generation. The policy generated can
be represented as a multiway-split tree which is more interpretable and informative than a binary-split tree due to its
shorter rules. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method with
extensive experiments on both synthetic and real datasets.

Introduction
With the abundance of available data, many enterprises seek
to implement data-driven prescriptive analytics to help them
make better decisions. Unlike predictive analytics, which applies mathematical models to forecast potential outcomes,
prescriptive analytics determines the best course of action for the future, frequently utilizing the outcome of a
predictive model (Lepenioti et al. 2020). For instance, in
revenue management, pricing decisions are based on estimated demand learnt from historical sales data; in healthcare, personalized medicine is prescribed based on past patients’ responses towards different treatment options. A key
characteristic of prescriptive analytics is the presence of
constraints, which is largely missing from predictive analytics. Constraints are ubiquitous in practice: a revenuemaximization problem may limit prices such that the resulting demand does not exceed production capacity; similarly,
a patient’s available treatment options may be limited by his
or her pre-existing conditions.
Despite machine learning (ML) making huge strides in
recent years, there are several obstacles standing in the way
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4602

