The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bridging LTLf Inference to GNN Inference for Learning LTLf Formulae
Weilin Luo1 , Pingjia Liang1 , Jianfeng Du3,4∗ , Hai Wan1,2∗ , Bo Peng1 , Delong Zhang1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Multilingual Intelligent Processing,
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
{luowlin3,liangpj3,pengb8,zhangdlong3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn
Abstract

rather than syntactic constraints. Secondly, noisy data tend
to bring wrong search bias deviated from the target formula.

Learning linear temporal logic on finite traces (LTLf ) formulae aims to learn a target formula that characterizes the highlevel behavior of a system from observation traces in planning. Existing approaches to learning LTLf formulae, however, can hardly learn accurate LTLf formulae from noisy
data. It is challenging to design an efficient search mechanism in the large search space in form of arbitrary LTLf formulae while alleviating the wrong search bias resulting from
noisy data. In this paper, we tackle this problem by bridging
LTLf inference to GNN inference. Our key theoretical contribution is showing that GNN inference can simulate LTLf
inference to distinguish traces. Based on our theoretical result, we design a GNN-based approach, GLTLf, which combines GNN inference and parameter interpretation to seek
the target formula in the large search space. Thanks to the
non-deterministic learning process of GNNs, GLTLf is able
to cope with noise. We evaluate GLTLf on various datasets
with noise. Our experimental results confirm the effectiveness
of GNN inference in learning LTLf formulae and show that
GLTLf is superior to the state-of-the-art approaches.

There have been some approaches attempting to address
the above challenge. Some approaches, e.g., (Neider and
Gavran 2018; Camacho and McIlraith 2019), assume a
noise-free environment. Other approaches, e.g., (Lemieux,
Park, and Beschastnikh 2015; Shah et al. 2018; Kim et al.
2019), restrict the hypothesis space by LTLf templates. Recently, Gaglione et al. (2021) proposed a MaxSAT-based
approach to learn arbitrary LTLf formulae while dealing
with noisy data. Their approaches, however, are subject to
the high complexity of MaxSAT.
In this paper, we propose a novel way to tackle the above
challenge, by bridging LTLf inference to Graph Neural Network (GNN) inference. Intuitively, an LTLf formula distinguishes positive traces (i.e., the trace satisfies the formula)
from negative traces (i.e., the trace does not satisfy the formula), based on the satisfaction relations between traces
and formulae. We discover that GNNs can capture the satisfaction relations. In more details, we show in Theorem 1
that GNN inference can simulate LTLf inference to distinguish traces. It provides an intuition for exploiting learning
a GNN classifier to search for approximate LTLf formulae,
i.e., modeling the search problem in discrete space to the
parameter learning problem in continuous space.

Introduction
We examine the problem of learning target formulae that
characterize the high-level behavior of a system from observation traces in planning. We focus on the linear temporal logic on finite traces (LTLf ) formula because it facilitates human interpretation and manipulation (Camacho and
McIlraith 2019). Learning LTLf formulae has wide applications, e.g., verification of system properties (Kasenberg and
Scheutz 2017), behavior classification (Camacho and McIlraith 2019), and explainable models (Kim et al. 2019), etc.
It is valuable to learn arbitrary LTLf formulae from noisy
data. In theory, arbitrary LTLf formulae are of more perfect characterization and expressive ability than the formula restricted by LTLf templates. Besides, in practice, the
traces, e.g., from sensors or unintended user behavior, usually contain noise (Kim et al. 2019). It is challenging to
learn arbitrary LTLf formulae from noisy data. Firstly, the
search space of the target formula is huge because the target
formula with arbitrary form only has semantic constraints

Based on this theoretical result, we design a GNN-based
approach, named as GLTLf, which combines GNN inference and parameter interpretation to seek the target formula
in the large search space. Specifically, GLTLf first learns a
GNN classifier to distinguish traces. It then extracts an LTLf
formula by interpreting the parameters of the learned GNN
classifier. Thanks to the non-deterministic learning process
of GNN, GLTLf is good at handling noisy data.
Following the assessment methods of the state-of-theart approaches (Camacho and McIlraith 2019; Kim et al.
2019), we evaluate GLTLf on traces with some noise across
benchmarks. Experimental results confirm the highlights
of GLTLf. Compared with other approaches, GLTLf is
demonstrated stronger robustness for noisy data and better
scalability in data size.

∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9849

