The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Calculus for Computing Structured Justifications for Election Outcomes
Arthur Boixel, Ulle Endriss, Ronald de Haan
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC), University of Amsterdam
{a.boixel, u.endriss, r.dehaan}@uva.nl

Abstract

For the case where you all vote, suppose {E} is not the outcome.

In the context of social choice theory, we develop a tableaubased calculus for reasoning about voting rules. This calculus
can be used to obtain structured explanations for why a given
set of axioms justifies a given election outcome for a given profile of voter preferences. We then show how to operationalise
this calculus, using a combination of SAT solving and Answer
Set Programming, to arrive at a flexible framework for presenting human-readable justifications to users.

By FAITHFULNESS, if only Abb votes, {E} should be the outcome.

1

If only Bah and Cus vote, we can distinguish two cases:
The outcome is {K} or {E, K}.

The outcome is {E}.

If we swapp the planets’ names,
then by N EUTRALITY the
outcome is {E} or {E, K}.

By R EINFORCEMENT, {E}
should be the outcome when
you all vote. Contradiction!

Introduction
We can undo this change by swapping the ballots. By A NONYMITY,
the set of possible outcomes doesn’t change.

When a group needs to take a decision and its members have
diverging preferences about how to rank the available options,
we might use a voting rule to make that choice. But, as is
well known, there are many different voting rules one could
pick; and different rules will sometimes produce different
election outcomes (Brams and Fishburn 2002). Agreeing
on a specific rule can be difficult, and any one rule might
look arbitrary to nonexperts.1 A possible response to this
dilemma, recently advocated by several authors (Cailloux
and Endriss 2016; Procaccia 2019; Boixel and Endriss 2020;
Peters et al. 2020), would be to attempt to justify election
outcomes directly from first principles, which in the realm
of social choice theory means to justify them in terms of
axioms. Examples for axioms include anonymity and the
Pareto principle (Zwicker 2016). The basic idea is that if, for
a given profile of preferences, choosing a given outcome is
the only way in which to be consistent with a given set of
basic normative principles (i.e., axioms) that everyone can
agree with, then this is the outcome we should choose.
Such justifications amount to complex arguments, and
more research is required to make them understandable to
users. In this paper, we take steps in this direction by developing an approach to automatically generate structured
explanations for why a given set of axioms logically entails
the acceptance of a given outcome for a given profile. To
clarify what we mean by this, let’s look at an example.

So when only Bas and Cus vote, the outcome must in fact be {E, K}.
By R EINFORCEMENT, {E} should be the outcome when you all
vote. Contradiction!

Figure 1: Informal argument for choosing E.
Example 1. Abb, Bah, and Cus, the members of the organising committee of the 42nd Galactic Singing Contest, need
to decide where to hold it. (E)arth and (K)epler-452b have
been shortlisted. Each member has their own preferences:
Abb : E Abb K

Bah : E Bah K

Cus : K Cus E

Intuitively, it seems that picking Earth, supported by a simple
majority, would be a reasonable decision. But because they
will be held accountable for the decision, the committee
members instead want to justify their decision in terms of the
normative principles enshrined in the Voting Section of the
Galactic Constitution. There are four such principles:
• FAITHFULNESS: Should there be just a single voter, their
most preferred alternative shall win.
• A NONYMITY: All voters shall be treated equally.
• N EUTRALITY: All alternatives shall be treated equally.
• R EINFORCEMENT: If the choices made by two disjoint
groups of voters overlap, then this overlap shall be the
outcome when the members of both groups vote together.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For example, (a nonexpert might wonder) why should we assign
scores exactly as prescribed by the famous Borda rule? Or why
should we trust the majority rule to choose between two alternatives
when it is not even well-defined for three alternatives?

Equipped with the latest technology, the committee relies on
their supercomputer to find a justification. After setting up the
4859

