The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Optical Flow with Adaptive Graph Reasoning
Ao Luo1 , Fan Yang2 , Kunming Luo1 , Xin Li2 , Haoqiang Fan1 , Shuaicheng Liu3,1 *
1

Megvii Technology
2
Group 42
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{luoao02, luokunming, fhq}@megvii.com, {fanyang uestc, xinli uestc}@hotmail.com, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating per-pixel motion between video frames, known as
optical flow, is a long-standing problem in video understanding and analysis. Most contemporary optical flow techniques
largely focus on addressing the cross-image matching with
feature similarity, with few methods considering how to explicitly reason over the given scene for achieving a holistic
motion understanding. In this work, taking a fresh perspective, we introduce a novel graph-based approach, called adaptive graph reasoning for optical flow (AGFlow), to emphasize the value of scene/context information in optical flow.
Our key idea is to decouple the context reasoning from the
matching procedure, and exploit scene information to effectively assist motion estimation by learning to reason over the
adaptive graph. The proposed AGFlow can effectively exploit
the context information and incorporate it within the matching procedure, producing more robust and accurate results.
On both Sintel clean and final passes, our AGFlow achieves
the best accuracy with EPE of 1.43 and 2.47 pixels, outperforming state-of-the-art approaches by 11.2% and 13.6%, respectively. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/
megvii-research/AGFlow.

(a) Frame 1

(b) Frame 2

(c) GT

(d) RAFT

(e) SCV

(f) Ours

Figure 1: A challenging image pair with heavy motion blur
from the final pass of Sintel test set. Unlike previous
state-of-the-art methods (RAFT (Teed and Deng 2020) and
SCV (Jiang et al. 2021b)) suffering from ambiguous matching, our AGFlow is able to perform global reasoning conditioned on scene context for achieving a holistic motion understanding.

Introduction
Optical flow is a fundamental task in video understanding
and analysis, aiming to estimate the pixel-wise correspondence between two video frames. It has drawn continuous
attention from both academia and industry due to its wide
applications, e.g., person-identification (Chen et al. 2020),
visual tracking (Vihlman and Visala 2020) and video inpainting (Xu et al. 2019). Recent years have witnessed significant breakthroughs made to push its performance frontier (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Ilg et al. 2017; Teed and Deng
2020; Jiang et al. 2021b), but it remains challenging due to
inherent ambiguity in textures, large displacements, occlusions, motion blur, and non-Lambertian effects.
Traditional optical flow algorithms formulate the dense
matching as an energy minimization problem based on feature constancy and spatial smoothness (Horn and Schunck
1981; Brox et al. 2004; Bruhn, Weickert, and Schnörr 2005).
However, because the hand-designing features and optimization objectives are difficult to cover all scenarios, these

approaches are not robust enough to deal with complex motions. As a powerful alternative to traditional methods, deep
learning based approaches take the research of optical flow
into a new level. Current optical flow methods have made
great advances in: i) developing powerful data-driven, endto-end learning paradigms (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Ilg et al.
2017); ii) designing multiple refinement strategies (Sun et al.
2018; Hur and Roth 2019; Zhao et al. 2020b); iii) exploiting
auxiliary information from related tasks (Zhao et al. 2020a);
and iv) modeling pixel-wise relations for all pairs (Teed and
Deng 2020; Jiang et al. 2021b). Although these deep learning based approaches have shown the strong capability of
matching across frames, they are subject to a significant
limitation: current methods largely focus on addressing the
matching similarity between features, lacking a holistic motion understanding of the given scene. Thus, the ambiguities (local variations) caused by motion blur, occlusion and
large motions severely degrade the accuracy of current mod-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1890

