The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SJDL-Vehicle: Semi-supervised Joint Defogging Learning for Foggy Vehicle
Re-identification
Wei-Ting Chen1,3∗ , I-Hsiang Chen2∗ , Chih-Yuan Yeh2 , Hao-Hsiang Yang2 , Jian-Jiun Ding2 , and
Sy-Yen Kuo2
1

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
3
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{f05943089, f09921058, f09921063, r05921014, jjding, sykuo}@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract

Vehicle re-identification (ReID) has attracted considerable attention in computer vision. Although several methods have
been proposed to achieve state-of-the-art performance on
this topic, re-identifying vehicle in foggy scenes remains
a great challenge due to the degradation of visibility. To
our knowledge, this problem is still not well-addressed so
far. In this paper, to address this problem, we propose a
novel training framework called Semi-supervised Joint Defogging Learning (SJDL) framework. First, the fog removal
branch and the re-identification branch are integrated to perform simultaneous training. With the collaborative training
scheme, defogged features generated by the defogging branch
from input images can be shared to learn better representation for the re-identification branch. However, since the fogfree image of real-world data is intractable, this architecture can only be trained on the synthetic data, which may
cause the domain gap problem between real-world and synthetic scenarios. To solve this problem, we design a semisupervised defogging training scheme that can train two
kinds of data alternatively in each iteration. Due to the
lack of a dataset specialized for vehicle ReID in the foggy
weather, we construct a dataset called FVRID which consists of real-world and synthetic foggy images to train and
evaluate the performance. Experimental results show that the
proposed method is effective and outperforms other existing
vehicle ReID methods in the foggy weather. The code and
dataset are available in https://github.com/Cihsaing/SJDLFoggy-Vehicle-Re-Identification--AAAI2022.

(a) Applying existing ReID method.

(b) Two-stage method (Defogging+ReID).

(c) Proposed Method.

Figure 1: Comparison of different strategies for vehicle
ReID in the foggy weather in terms of the mean average precision (mAP) and CMC@1. We adopt (Meng et al. 2020) as
the existing ReID method and MPR-Net (Zamir et al. 2021)
as the defogging method. One can notice that the proposed
method can achieve superior performance on this task compared to other methods. In this figure, we evaluate the realworld ReID dataset in the foggy weather.
images, they usually fail to perform vehicle ReID tasks under the foggy scenario, which is one of the most common
weather types that appeared in the real world. This is because these methods are designed for clear images. Fog is
an atmospheric phenomenon that consists of smoke, dust,
and other floating particles, which may lead to poor visibility and degrade the features extracted from these images for
the purpose of vehicle ReID.
A straightforward way to resolve this problem is to improve the visibility of input images via existing defogging
strategies (e.g., the MPR-Net (Zamir et al. 2021) or the MSBDN (Dong et al. 2020)) and then conduct the ReID afterward. However, this two-stage solution is not effective for
the following reasons. First, the conventional image defogging methods are not trained for the purpose of ReID but

Introduction
With the prosperity of the deep convolutional neural network
(DCNN) and comprehensive construction of dataset, vehicle re-identification (ReID) has attained great success in the
past decade (Lou et al. 2019; He et al. 2019; Meng et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020; He et al. 2021). Vehicle ReID is indispensable for building intelligent transportation and public
security systems. Its goal is to find images of the same vehicle in a large gallery set based on a query image under
multiple cameras and various viewpoints. Though several
methods have shown superior performance on the normal
* Equally-contributed first authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

347

