The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ASP-Based Declarative Process Mining
Francesco Chiariello1 , Fabrizio Maria Maggi2 , Fabio Patrizi1
1

DIAG - Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
KRDB - Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
chiariello@diag.uniroma1.it, maggi@inf.unibz.it, patrizi@diag.uniroma1.it
2

Abstract

In Declarative PM, the de-facto standard for expressing
process properties is D ECLARE (van der Aalst, Pesic, and
Schonenberg 2009), a temporal logic consisting in a set
of template formulas of the Linear-time Temporal Logic
over finite traces (LTLf ) (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013);
here, we use a strictly more expressive extension, which
we call local LTLf , i.e., L - LTLf . This logic features a simple automata-based machinery that facilitates its manipulation, while retaining the ability to express virtually all the
properties of interest in declarative PM. Specifically, L - LTLf
subsumes D ECLARE and even its multi-perspective variant
MP-D ECLARE (Burattin, Maggi, and Sperduti 2016) without timestamps and correlation conditions (i.e., conditions
that relate the attributes of some event to those of other
events), but does not subsume full MP-D ECLARE. Observe
that since MP-D ECLARE does not subsume L - LTLf either,
the two logics are incomparable.
Our goal is to devise techniques for three classical
problems in Declarative PM: Event Log Generation (Skydanienko et al. 2018), i.e., generating an event log consistent with a declarative model; Query Checking (Räim et al.
2014), i.e., discovering hidden temporal properties in an
event log; and Conformance Checking (Burattin, Maggi, and
Sperduti 2016), i.e., checking whether the traces of an event
log conform to a process model. The main challenge is dealing with data: in the data-aware framework, Query Checking
is still open, while existing tools for the other two problems
do not scale well.
We put forward Answer Set Programming (ASP (Niemelä
1999)) as an effective solution approach. ASP natively provides data-manipulation functionalities which allow for formalizing data-aware constraints and has experienced over
the last years a dramatic improvement in solution performance, thus results in a natural and promising candidate approach for addressing the problems of our interest. We show
how such problems can be conveniently modeled as ASP
programs, thus solved with any solver. Using the state-ofthe-art solver Clingo1 (Gebser et al. 2019), we experimentally compare our approach against existing ones for Log
Generation and Conformance Checking, and show effectiveness of the approach for Query Checking in a data-aware setting. Besides providing an actual solution technique, ASP fa-

We put forward Answer Set Programming (ASP) as a solution approach for three classical problems in Declarative
Process Mining: Log Generation, Query Checking, and Conformance Checking. These problems correspond to different
ways of analyzing business processes under execution, starting from sequences of recorded events, a.k.a. event logs. We
tackle them in their data-aware variant, i.e., by considering
events that carry a payload (set of attribute-value pairs), in addition to the performed activity, specifying processes declaratively with an extension of linear-time temporal logic over
finite traces (LTLf ). The data-aware setting is significantly
more challenging than the control-flow one: Query Checking
is still open, while the existing approaches for the other two
problems do not scale well. The contributions of the work include an ASP encoding schema for the three problems, their
solution, and experiments showing the feasibility of the approach.

Introduction
Process Mining (PM) for Business Process Management
(BPM) is a research area aimed at discovering common
patters in Business Processes (BP) (van der Aalst 2016).
The analysis starts from event logs, i.e., sets of traces that
record the events associated with process instance executions, and typically assumes a process model, which may
be taken as input, manipulated as an intermediate structure,
or produced in output. Events describe process activities at
different levels of details. In the simplest perspective, here
referred to as control-flow-only, events model atomic activity performed by a process instance at some time point; in
the most complex scenario, typically referred to as multiperspective, events also carry a payload including a timestamp and activity data.
Processes can be specified prescriptively, i.e., as models,
such as Petri Nets, that generate traces, or declaratively, i.e.,
through logical formulas representing the constraints that
traces must satisfy in order to comply with the process. This
is the approach we adopt here. Specifically, we take a (untimed) data-aware perspective where events include the activity and set of attribute-value pairs, the payload.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5539

potassco.org

