The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TransFG: A Transformer Architecture for Fine-Grained Recognition
Ju He1 , Jie-Neng Chen1 , Shuai Liu3 ,
Adam Kortylewski2 , Cheng Yang3 , Yutong Bai1 , Changhu Wang3
1

2

Johns Hopkins University
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
ByteDance Inc.

Abstract
Fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) which aims at recognizing objects from subcategories is a very challenging task
due to the inherently subtle inter-class differences. Most existing works mainly tackle this problem by reusing the backbone network to extract features of detected discriminative
regions. However, this strategy inevitably complicates the
pipeline and pushes the proposed regions to contain most
parts of the objects thus fails to locate the really important
parts. Recently, vision transformer (ViT) shows its strong
performance in the traditional classification task. The selfattention mechanism of the transformer links every patch token to the classification token. In this work, we first evaluate the effectiveness of the ViT framework in the fine-grained
recognition setting. Then motivated by the strength of the attention link can be intuitively considered as an indicator of the
importance of tokens, we further propose a novel Part Selection Module that can be applied to most of the transformer architectures where we integrate all raw attention weights of the
transformer into an attention map for guiding the network to
effectively and accurately select discriminative image patches
and compute their relations. A contrastive loss is applied to
enlarge the distance between feature representations of confusing classes. We name the augmented transformer-based
model TransFG and demonstrate the value of it by conducting
experiments on five popular fine-grained benchmarks where
we achieve state-of-the-art performance. Qualitative results
are presented for better understanding of our model.

Figure 1: An overview of performance comparison of ViT
and TransFG with state-of-the-art methods CNNs on five
datasets. We achieve state-of-the-art performance on most
datasets while performing a little bit worse on Stanford Cars
possibly due to the more regular and simpler car shapes.

only image-level labels. Methods now can be roughly classified into two categories, i.e., localization methods and
feature-encoding methods. Compared to feature-encoding
methods, the localization methods have the advantage that
they explicitly capture the subtle differences among subclasses which is more interpretable and yields better results.
Early works in localization methods rely on the annotations of parts to locate discriminative regions while recent
works (Ge, Lin, and Yu 2019a; Liu et al. 2020; Ding et al.
2019) mainly adopt region proposal networks (RPN) to propose bounding boxes which contain the discriminative regions. After obtaining the selected image regions, they are
resized into a predefined size and forwarded through the
backbone network again to acquire informative local features. A typical strategy is to use these local features for
classification individually and adopt a rank loss (Chen et al.
2009) to maintain consistency between the quality of bounding boxes and their final probability output. However, this
mechanism ignores the relation between selected regions
and thus inevitably encourages the RPN to propose large
bounding boxes that contain most parts of the objects which
fails to locate the really important regions. Sometimes these
bounding boxes can even contain large areas of background

Introduction
Fine-grained visual classification aims at classifying subclasses of a given object category, e.g., subcategories of
birds (Wah et al. 2011; Van Horn et al. 2015), cars (Krause
et al. 2013), aircrafts (Maji et al. 2013). It has long been
considered as a very challenging task due to the small interclass variations and large intra-class variations along with
the deficiency of annotated data, especially for the longtailed classes. Benefiting from the progress of deep neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016), the performance of FGVC has obtained a steady progress in recent
years. To avoid labor-intensive part annotation, the community currently focuses on weakly-supervised FGVC with
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

852

