The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Uncertainty-Driven Dehazing Network
Ming Hong1, * , Jianzhuang Liu2 , Cuihua Li1 , Yanyun Qu 1,

†

1
Xiamen University,
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
mingh@stu.xmu.edu.cn, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com, chli@xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep learning has made remarkable achievements for single image haze removal. However, existing deep dehazing
models only give deterministic results without discussing
their uncertainty. There exist two types of uncertainty in
the dehazing models: aleatoric uncertainty that comes from
noise inherent in the observations and epistemic uncertainty
that accounts for uncertainty in the model. In this paper, we
propose a novel uncertainty-driven dehazing network (UDN)
that improves the dehazing results by exploiting the relationship between the uncertain and confident representations.
We first introduce an Uncertainty Estimation Block (UEB)
to predict the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty together.
Then, we propose an Uncertainty-aware Feature Modulation
(UFM) block to adaptively enhance the learned features.
UFM predicts a convolution kernel and channel-wise modulation coefficients conditioned on the uncertainty weighted
representation. Moreover, we develop an uncertainty-driven
self-distillation loss to improve the uncertain representation
by transferring the knowledge from the confident one. Extensive experimental results on synthetic datasets and real-world
images show that UDN achieves significant quantitative and
qualitative improvements, outperforming state-of-the-arts.

(a) Input

(b) FFA-Net

(c) Uncertainty

(d) GT

(e) Our result

(f) Error map

Figure 1: Dehazing results on a dense haze photo from
[Ancuti et al. 2018]. (a) Input hazy image. (b) Result of
FFA-Net [Qin et al. 2020]. (d) Ground Truth. (e) Result of
our model. (c) and (f) are the uncertainty map and absolute
reconstruction error map obtained by our model. The more
uncertain (less confident) are the dehazing results, the larger
the reconstruction errors.

Introduction
Hazy images often suffer from the degradation of visual
quality such as limited visibility and low contrast [Tan
2008], leading to the failure of subsequent high-level visual
tasks such as object detection [Liu et al. 2018], semantic
segmentation [Ren et al. 2018] and so on. Hence image
dehazing is highly demanded by vision-based applications.
Traditional dehazing methods [He, Sun, and Tang 2009],
[Berman, Treibitz, and Avidan 2016], [Zhu, Mai, and Shao
2015] assume various image priors based on the observation
and statistic analysis of natural hazy images, which are
susceptible to violation in the wild world. Recently, deep
learning has made great success in single image dehazing.
The existing deep dehazing models can be roughly divided
into physical-model dependent methods and physical-model
free methods. The former firstly estimate the transmission

map and global atmospheric light, and then restore the
clear image by inversely transforming the physical scattering
model [Ren et al. 2016], [Cai et al. 2016]. The latter
directly explore an end-to-end mapping from hazy images
to their haze-free counterparts [Qu et al. 2019], [Qin et al.
2020], [Liu et al. 2019]. Although these methods achieved
significant improvement, they only give dehazing results
without knowing how uncertain the results are.
Uncertainty is important for an agent to make a decision
for action. When given a real-world hazy image, how much
can we trust the results obtained by these models? The
probabilistic interpretation would be the desired tool to
evaluate the uncertainty of dehazing models. In the MRI
reconstruction [Zhang et al. 2019b] and image segmentation
[Zheng et al. 2021], with the help of the uncertainty estima-

* Part of this work was done during an internship in Huawei

Noah’s Ark Lab.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

906

