The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PrivateSNN: Privacy-Preserving Spiking Neural Networks
Youngeun Kim, Yeshwanth Venkatesha, Priyadarshini Panda
Department of Electrical Engineering
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA
{youngeun.kim, yeshwanth.venkatesha, priya.panda}@yale.edu

Abstract

Reconversion

Training
Data

How can we bring both privacy and energy-efficiency to a neural system? In this paper, we propose PrivateSNN, which aims
to build low-power Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) from a
pre-trained ANN model without leaking sensitive information
contained in a dataset. Here, we tackle two types of leakage
problems: 1) Data leakage is caused when the networks access
real training data during an ANN-SNN conversion process.
2) Class leakage is caused when class-related features can be
reconstructed from network parameters. In order to address
the data leakage issue, we generate synthetic images from the
pre-trained ANNs and convert ANNs to SNNs using the generated images. However, converted SNNs remain vulnerable
to class leakage since the weight parameters have the same
(or scaled) value with respect to ANN parameters. Therefore,
we encrypt SNN weights by training SNNs with a temporal
spike-based learning rule. Updating weight parameters with
temporal data makes SNNs difficult to be interpreted in the
spatial domain. We observe that the encrypted PrivateSNN
eliminates data and class leakage issues with a slight performance drop (less than ∼2%) and significant energy-efficiency
gain (about 55×) compared to the standard ANN. We conduct
extensive experiments on various datasets including CIFAR10,
CIFAR100, and TinyImageNet, highlighting the importance
of privacy-preserving SNN training.

SNN model

Data Leakage

ANN model

Class Leakage
Class information

ANN model

SNN model

(a) During Conversion

(b) After Deployment

Figure 1: Illustration of data leakage and class leakage problems. (a) The data leakage problem is likely to happen when
an ANN model accesses real data during conversion process.
(b) The malicious attacker can obtain class information by
reconverting the SNN model to the ANN model.
for power constrained edge applications (Venkatesha et al.
2021).
Among various SNN training algorithms, ANN-SNN conversion is well-established and achieves high performance on
complex datasets. Here, pre-trained ANNs are converted to
SNNs using weight or threshold balancing in order to replace
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation with a spiking LeakIntegrate-and-Fire (LIF) activation (Sengupta et al. 2019;
Han et al. 2020; Diehl et al. 2015; Rueckauer et al. 2017;
Deng et al. 2022; Li et al. 2021; Kim and Panda 2021a). Existing conversion algorithms are based on the assumption that
the model can access the entire training data. Specifically,
training samples are passed through a network and maximum
activation value is used to calculate the layer-wise threshold
or weight scaling constant. However, this may not always be
feasible. Enterprises would not allow proprietary information
to be shared publicly with other companies and individuals.
Importantly, the training set may contain sensitive information, such as biometrics. Overall, such concerns motivates
a line of research on privacy-preserving algorithms (Kundu
et al. 2020; Nayak et al. 2019; Haroush et al. 2020; Liang, Hu,
and Feng 2020). We refer to this problem as data leakage
(Fig. 1(a)).
In addition, we tackle the class leakage problem after
deployment (i.e., inference), as shown in Fig. 1(b). It is a
well-known fact that one can obtain a representative class
image from model parameters by using simple gradient backpropagation (see Fig. 2) (Mopuri, Uppala, and Babu 2018;

Introduction
Neuromorphic computing has gained considerable attention
as an energy-efficient alternative to conventional Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs) (He et al. 2016; Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014; Christensen et al. 2022; Roy, Jaiswal, and
Panda 2019). Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) process binary spikes through time like the human brain, and have been
shown to yield 1-2 orders of magnitude energy efficiency over
ANNs on emerging neuromorphic hardware (Roy, Jaiswal,
and Panda 2019; Furber et al. 2014; Akopyan et al. 2015;
Davies et al. 2018). Due to the energy advantages and neuroscientific interest, SNNs have made great strides on various applications such as image recognition (Lee, Delbruck,
and Pfeiffer 2016; Kim and Panda 2020; Diehl and Cook
2015), optimization (Fang et al. 2019; Frady et al. 2020), object detection (Kim et al. 2019), and visualization (Kim and
Panda 2021b). Going forward, SNNs offer a huge potential
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1192

