The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TEACh: Task-Driven Embodied Agents That Chat
Aishwarya Padmakumar* 1 , Jesse Thomason* 1 2 , Ayush Shrivastava3 , Patrick Lange1 , Anjali
Narayan-Chen1 , Spandana Gella1 , Robinson Piramuthu1 , Gokhan Tur1 , Dilek-Hakkani Tur1
1
Amazon Alexa AI
USC Viterbi Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
3
Department of Electrical Engineering And Computer Science, University of Michigan
padmakua@amazon.com, jessedt@amazon.com, ayshrv@umich.edu, patlange@amazon.com, naraanja@amazon.com,
sgella@amazon.com, robinpir@amazon.com, gokhatur@amazon.com, hakkanit@amazon.com
2

Abstract
Robots operating in human spaces must be able to engage in
natural language interaction, both understanding and executing instructions, and using conversation to resolve ambiguity and correct mistakes. To study this, we introduce TEACh,
a dataset of over 3,000 human–human, interactive dialogues
to complete household tasks in simulation. A Commander
with access to oracle information about a task communicates
in natural language with a Follower. The Follower navigates
through and interacts with the environment to complete tasks
varying in complexity from M AKE C OFFEE to P REPARE
B REAKFAST, asking questions and getting additional information from the Commander. We propose three benchmarks
using TEACh to study embodied intelligence challenges, and
we evaluate initial models’ abilities in dialogue understanding, language grounding, and task execution.

1

Introduction

Many benchmarks for translating visual observations and
an initial language instruction to actions assume no further
language communication (Anderson et al. 2018; Shridhar
et al. 2020). However, obtaining clarification via simulated
interactions (Chi et al. 2020; Nguyen and Daumé III 2019)
or learning from human-human dialogue (Thomason et al.
2019; Suhr et al. 2019) can improve embodied navigation.
We hypothesize that dialogue has even more to offer for
object-centric, hierarchical tasks.
We introduce Task-driven Embodied Agents that Chat
(TEACh) to study how agents can learn to ground natural
language (Harnad 1990; Bisk et al. 2020) to the visual world
and actions, while considering long-term and intermediate
goals, and using dialogue to communicate. TEACh contains
over 3,000 human–human sessions interleaving utterances
and environment actions where a Commander with oracle
task and world knowledge and a Follower with the ability to
interact with the world communicate in written English to
complete household chores (Figure 1).
TEACh dialogues are unconstrained, not turn-based,
yielding variation in instruction granularity, completeness,
relevance, and overlap. Utterances include coreference with

Figure 1: The Commander has oracle task details (a), object locations (b), a map (c), and egocentric views from both
agents. The Follower carries out the task and asks questions
(d). The agents can only communicate via language.
previously mentioned entities, past actions, and locations.
Because TEACh sessions are human, rather than plannerbased (Ghallab et al. 1998), Follower trajectories include
mistakes and corresponding, language-guided correction.
We propose three benchmarks based on TEACh sessions
to study the ability of learned models to achieve aspects
of embodied intelligence: Execution from Dialog History
(EDH), Trajectory from Dialog (TfD) and Two-Agent Task
Completion (TATC)1 . We evaluate a baseline Follower agent
for the EDH and TfD benchmarks based on the Episodic

* Authors contributed equally
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2017

https://github.com/alexa/teach

