The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Semi-supervised Learning Approach with Two Teachers
to Improve Breakdown Identification in Dialogues
Qian Lin, Hwee Tou Ng
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
qlin@u.nus.edu, nght@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Identifying breakdowns in ongoing dialogues helps to improve
communication effectiveness. Most prior work on this topic
relies on human annotated data and data augmentation to learn
a classification model. While quality labeled dialogue data requires human annotation and is usually expensive to obtain, unlabeled data is easier to collect from various sources. In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised teacher-student learning framework to tackle this task. We introduce two teachers
which are trained on labeled data and perturbed labeled data
respectively. We leverage unlabeled data to improve classification in student training where we employ two teachers to refine
the labeling of unlabeled data through teacher-student learning in a bootstrapping manner. Through our proposed training
approach, the student can achieve improvements over singleteacher performance. Experimental results on the Dialogue
Breakdown Detection Challenge dataset DBDC5 and Learning
to Identify Follow-Up Questions dataset LIF show that our approach outperforms all previous published approaches as well
as other supervised and semi-supervised baseline methods.

Introduction
In recent years, interactive virtual conversational agents have
been developed rapidly and used widely in daily lives. The
information exchange between a user and an agent is done
via a conversational dialogue. To achieve effective communication, the agent is expected to generate a proper and rational
response based on not only the last turn but also all previous
utterances in the dialogue history to continue the dialogue.
The user’s trust in the agent is damaged when the agent fails
to identify the user’s intent and generates an inappropriate
response, which confuses the user and causes a breakdown in
the dialogue. Therefore, identifying breakdowns in dialogues
is essential for improving the effectiveness of conversational
agents, so that the agent is able to avoid generating responses
which cause the breakdowns.
Much prior work on breakdown identification in dialogues
has focused on supervised learning on human annotated
data. One line of work relies on feature-engineered machine learning methods including decision trees and random forests (Wang, Kato, and Sakai 2019). Another line
of work utilizes non-Transformer based neural networks

such as LSTM (Hendriksen, Leeuwenberg, and Moens 2019;
Wang, Kato, and Sakai 2019; Shin, Dirafzoon, and Anshu
2019). Transformer-based methods involve pre-trained language models which are pre-trained on large corpora (Devlin
et al. 2019; Conneau et al. 2020). Sugiyama (2019) and utilize
BERT with input consisting of the text and textual features
from the dialogue. Lin, Kundu, and Ng (2020) introduce multilingual transfer learning through a cross-lingual pre-trained
language model and co-attention modules to reason between
the dialogue history and the last utterance.
A recent work (Ng et al. 2020) proposes to perform pretraining on BERT with conversational data and apply selfsupervised data augmentation on labeled data. Although good
performance has been reported, we observe that the gain of
either continued pre-training or data augmentation on labeled
data is marginal over the conventional BERT classification
scheme. Moreover, pre-training of a pre-trained language
model on large corpora is resource-intensive.
We believe that training with dialogue data from other
sources introduces diversity and enables the trained model to
generalize better. Since annotated dialogue data is expensive
to obtain, we propose using unlabeled data through semisupervised learning and self-training, such that the training
data is enriched and more diverse.
In this work1 , we propose a novel semi-supervised teacherstudent learning framework to improve the performance of
pre-trained language models with unlabeled data. We leverage unlabeled data from other sources to enrich the training
set through self-training, which is a general case of domain
adaptation where source data and target data are sampled
from different data sources. Self-training uses a trained classifier to assign label score vectors on unlabeled data instances.
However, such labeling process tends to generate labels under
the assumption that a similar distribution is shared by labeled
data and unlabeled data. Since the distribution of unlabeled
data is difficult to estimate, we introduce two teachers to
improve the labeling of unlabeled data. The student model is
encouraged to integrate the knowledge from two teachers in
a bootstrapping manner.
We leverage a data augmentation method (Yavuz et al.
2020) incorporating [MASK] tokens derived from a Masked
1
The source code and trained models of this paper are available
at https://github.com/nusnlp/S2T2.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11011

