The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Distributed Randomized Sketching Kernel Learning
∗

Rong Yin,1,2 Yong Liu,3,4 Dan Meng1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
yinrong@iie.ac.cn, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn, mengdan@iie.ac.cn
2

Abstract

2019; Guo, Lin, and Shi 2019; Chang, Lin, and Zhou 2017;
Lin, Guo, and Zhou 2017; Zhang, Duchi, and Wainwright
2015, 2013) which divides the training data into some subsets for processing on local processors and carry out necessary communications, and randomized sketching (Lin and
Cevher 2020; Lian, Liu, and Fan 2021; Liu, Shang, and
Cheng 2019; Yang, Pilanci, and Wainwright 2017) which
projects the kernel matrix into a small one based on the
sketch matrix. The above studies show that randomized
sketching and distributed learning have outstanding effects
in kernel methods. Recently, combinations of those accelerated algorithms benefit a lot and attract much attention, of
which learning properties have been explored including the
combination of Nyström and iterative optimization (Rudi,
Carratino, and Rosasco 2017), randomized sketching and iterative optimization (Lin and Cevher 2020), and divide-andconquer and multi-pass SGD (Lin and Cevher 2018). However, the computational requirements of the existing approximate KRR estimates are still high, and it still remains unclear for complexity reduction and statistical analysis to the
combination of randomized sketching and distributed learning in kernel learning.

We investigate the statistical and computational requirements for distributed kernel ridge regression with randomized
sketching (DKRR-RS) and successfully achieve the optimal
learning rates with only a fraction of computations. More precisely, the proposed DKRR-RS combines sparse randomized
sketching, divide-and-conquer and KRR to scale up kernel
methods and successfully derives the same learning rate as
the exact KRR with greatly reducing computational costs in
expectation, at the basic setting, which outperforms previous
state of the art solutions. Then, for the sake of the gap between theory and experiments, we derive the optimal learning
rate in probability for DKRR-RS to reflect its generalization
performance. Finally, to further improve the learning performance, we construct an efficient communication strategy for
DKRR-RS and demonstrate the power of communications via
theoretical assessment. An extensive experiment validates the
effectiveness of DKRR-RS and the communication strategy
on real datasets.

Introduction
Kernel methods have been widely used in data mining, machine learning, and other fields (Yin et al. 2020c; Saunders,
Gammerman, and Vovk 1998; Liu 2021; Li and Liu 2021b;
Yin et al. 2020b; Li and Liu 2021a; Wang et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2018). However, they are unfeasible to deal with largescale scenarios due to the high computational requirements,
typically at least quadratic in the number of data.
To address these issues, a variety of approximate kernel
ridge regression (KRR) are proposed. The main principle
is to characterize statistical and computational trade-offs,
that is, to sacrifice statistical accuracy to gain computational
benefits. The representative methods include Nyström (Yin
et al. 2021, 2020a; Rudi, Carratino, and Rosasco 2017; Li,
Kwok, and Lu 2010) which constructs the approximate kernel matrix with a few anchor points, random features (Liu,
Liu, and Wang 2021; Li, Liu, and Wang 2019; Rudi, Camoriano, and Rosasco 2016; Rahimi and Recht 2007), iterative optimization (Lin and Cevher 2020; Lin, Lei, and Zhou
2019; Shalev Shwartz et al. 2011), distributed learning (Liu,
Liu, and Wang 2021; Lin, Wang, and Zhou 2020; Wang

To further overcome the computational bottlenecks, we
propose the method, called DKRR-RS, of combining divideand-conquer learning and a sparse randomized sketching
method for KRR, which keeps the optimal learning rate.
This paper makes the following main contributions. 1) The
proposed DKRR-RS improves the existing state-of-the-art
results of the distributed learning and randomized sketching. In particular, at the basic setting (2ζ + γ = 2) and the
basic assumptions (see section for details), DKRR-RS requires only O(N 0.5+γ ) time and O(N ) space in expectation to guarantee the same learning rate as the exact KRR,
where N is the number of data, ζ ∈ [1/2, 1], and γ ∈ [0, 1].
We take a substantial step in provably reducing the computational requirements by combining randomized sketching
with distributed learning; 2) The theoretical performance in
expectation reflects the average results of enough trials, but
may fail to capture the learning performance for a single
trial. To essentially reflect the generalization performance,
we obtain the optimal learning rate of DKRR-RS in probability and numerically verify its effectiveness; 3) We propose a communication strategy to further improve the learning performance of DKRR-RS, called DKRR-RS-CM, and

∗

Corresponding author: Yong Liu
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8883

