The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

HNO: High-Order Numerical Architecture for ODE-Inspired
Deep Unfolding Networks
Lin Kong1∗ , Wei Sun1∗ , Fanhua Shang1,2† , Yuanyuan Liu1 , Hongying Liu1,2†
1

Key Lab. of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University; 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
xdkonglin0511@163.com, sunwei9915@outlook.com, {fhshang, yyliu, hyliu}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

De Mol 2004; Blumensath and Davies 2008) and approcimate message passing (AMP) (Donoho, Maleki, and Montanari 2009).
With the development of deep learning, a class of networks called deep unfolding networks (DUNs) (Hershey,
Roux, and Weninger 2014) or differentiable programming
networks (Amos 2019) has gradually become a powerful
candidate of traditional iterative algorithms (Gregor and LeCun 2010; Borgerding, Schniter, and Rangan 2017; Sun
et al. 2016; Xie et al. 2019). These networks combines the
prior information of the model-based algorithms and the
learning ability of deep learning, thus greatly improves the
convergence speed of original iterative algorithms, and also
greatly reduces the number of parameters in deep networks.
Moreover, since DUNs are obtained by expanding traditional iterative algorithms, they can also provide certain interpretability for deep neural networks (DNNs) (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015).

Recently, deep unfolding networks (DUNs) based on optimization algorithms have received increasing attention, and
their high efficiency has been confirmed by many experimental and theoretical results. Since this type of networks combines model-based traditional optimization algorithms, they
have high interpretability. In addition, ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are often used to explain deep neural networks, and provide some inspiration for designing innovative network models. In this paper, we transform DUNs into
first-order ODE forms, and propose a high-order numerical
architecture for ODE-inspired deep unfolding networks. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to establish the
relationship between DUNs and ODEs. Moreover, we take two representative DUNs as examples, apply our architecture
to them and design novel DUNs. In theory, we prove the existence, uniqueness of the solution and convergence of the
proposed network, and also prove that our network obtains a
fast linear convergence rate. Extensive experiments verify the
effectiveness and advantages of our architecture.

Algorithms and Theories of Deep Unfolding

Introduction

Gregor and LeCun (2010) first proposed the idea of DUN.
They presented a deep unfolding network called LISTA by
unfolding ISTA into a network by iterations, and set some
parameters obtained by training the network. Many empircal
and theoretical results (Giryes et al. 2018; Aberdam, Golts,
and Elad 2020) show that LISTA can provide a more accurate solution than ISTA. Compared with ISTA, the number
of iterations required by LISTA is greatly reduced, even one
to two orders of magnitude less.
Since LISTA was proposed, plenty of related work appears in a spurt. On the one hand, after (Gregor and LeCun
2010), many DUNs have been proposed and successfully applied to different fields such as compressive sensing (Zhang
and Ghanem 2018; Xiang, Dong, and Yang 2021), computer vision (Zheng et al. 2015; Peng et al. 2018), computational imaging (Mardani et al. 2018), signal processing (Ito,
Takabe, and Wadayama 2019) and wireless communication
(Cowen, Saridena, and Choromanska 2019; BalatsoukasStimming and Studer 2019).
On the other hand, the empirical success has also inspired
theoretical research on deeper understanding of DUNs. For
instance, Xin et al. (2016) discussed the LIHT (Wang, Ling,
and Huang 2016) network, which is obtained by expanding
IHT (Blumensath and Davies 2009) into a network, from

This paper mainly considers the following problem:
1
(1)
min ky − Φxk22 + λkDxk1 ,
x∈Rn 2
where λ is the regularization parameter. There are many applications of this model. When D is a sparse basis matrix,
(1) is a compressive sensing (CS) model, while (1) degenerates to the classic Lasso model (Tibshirani 1996) for solving
sparse coding (SC) when D = I. For CS, Φ is a measurement matrix, and the purpose of CS is to recover the original
signal x ∈ Rn from an observation signal y ∈ Rm , and
m  n. Therefore, (1) is an ill-posed problem, and usually
hard to get a numerical solution. We need to combine prior
information, such as sparsity prior.
For Problem (1) which is difficult to attain the closedform solutions, the iterative algorithms have gradually become the mainstream algorithms, such as least angle regression (LARS) (Efron et al. 2004), iterative shrinkage threshold algorithm (ISTA) (Daubechies, Defrise, and
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7220

