The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Detail-Preserving Transformer for Light Field Image Super-resolution
Shunzhou Wang1∗ , Tianfei Zhou2∗ , Yao Lu1† , Huijun Di1
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{shunzhouwang, vis yl, ajon}@bit.edu.cn, tianfei.zhou@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

thesize new views) or the spatial dimension (i.e., to increase
the spatial resolution). Our work focuses on the latter one.
In comparison with the traditional 2D photograph that
only records the spatial intensity of light rays, a light field
additionally collects the radiance of light rays along with
different directions, offering a multi-view description of
the scene. A naive solution of light field super-resolution
(LFSR) is to super-resolve each view independently using single image super-resolution (SISR) techniques. However, despite the recent progress of SISR, the solution is
sub-optimal mainly because it neglects the intrinsic relations (i.e., angular redundancy) of different light field
views, possibly resulting in angularly inconsistent reconstructions. To address this, many studies exploit complementary information captured by different sub-aperture images for high-quality reconstruction. The seminal learningbased method, i.e., (Yoon et al. 2015), directly stacks 4tuples of sub-aperture images together as an input of a SISR
model. Subsequent efforts develop more advanced techniques, e.g., to explore the geometric property of a light field
in multiple network branches (Zhang, Lin, and Sheng 2019),
to align the features of the center view and its surrounding
views with deformable convolutions (Wang et al. 2021c), to
encourage interactions between spatial and angular features
for more informative feature extraction (Wang et al. 2020),
to combinatorially learn correlations between an arbitrary
pair of views for super-resolution (Jin et al. 2020), or to gain
an efficient low-rank light field representation for restoration (Farrugia and Guillemot 2019).
Despite the encouraging results of these approaches, they
are all based on convolutional network architectures, thus
inherently lack strong capabilities to model global relations
among different views of light field images. In light of the
ill-posed nature of the super-resolution problem, we believe
that an ideal solution should take into account as much informative knowledge in the LR input as possible.
Motivated by the above analysis, we propose, to the best
of our knowledge, the first Transformer-based model to address LFSR from a holistic perspective. In stark contrast to
existing approaches, our model treats each light field as a
collection of sub-aperture image (SAI) sequences (captured
along horizontal or vertical directions), and exploits selfattention to reveal the intrinsic geometric structure of each
sequence. Despite the advantages of Transformers in long-

Recently, numerous algorithms have been developed to tackle
the problem of light field super-resolution (LFSR), i.e., superresolving low-resolution light fields to gain high-resolution
views. Despite delivering encouraging results, these approaches are all convolution-based, and are naturally weak in
global relation modeling of sub-aperture images necessarily
to characterize the inherent structure of light fields. In this
paper, we put forth a novel formulation built upon Transformers, by treating LFSR as a sequence-to-sequence reconstruction task. In particular, our model regards sub-aperture
images of each vertical or horizontal angular view as a sequence, and establishes long-range geometric dependencies
within each sequence via a spatial-angular locally-enhanced
self-attention layer, which maintains the locality of each subaperture image as well. Additionally, to better recover image
details, we propose a detail-preserving Transformer (termed
as DPT), by leveraging gradient maps of light field to guide
the sequence learning. DPT consists of two branches, with
each associated with a Transformer for learning from an original or gradient image sequence. The two branches are finally
fused to obtain comprehensive feature representations for reconstruction. Evaluations are conducted on a number of light
field datasets, including real-world scenes and synthetic data.
The proposed method achieves superior performance comparing with other state-of-the-art schemes. Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/BITszwang/DPT.

Introduction
Light field (LF) imaging systems offer powerful capabilities
to capture the 3D information of a scene, and thus enable
a variety of applications going from photo-realistic imagebased rendering to vision applications such as depth sensing, refocusing, or saliency detection. However, current light
field cameras naturally face a trade-off between the angular
and spatial resolution, that is, a camera capturing views with
a high angular sampling typically at the expense of a limited
spatial resolution, and vice versa. This limits the practical
applications of LF, and also motivates many efforts to study
super-resolution along the angular dimension (i.e., to syn∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2522

