The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fixation Maximization in the Positional Moran Process
Joachim Brendborg,1 Panagiotis Karras,1 Andreas Pavlogiannis,1
Asger Ullersted Rasmussen,1 Josef Tkadlec2
1
Aarhus University, Aabogade 34, Aarhus, Denmark
Harvard University, 1 Oxford Street, Cambridge, USA
{panos, pavlogiannis}@cs.au.dk, tkadlec@math.harvard.edu
2

Abstract

propagation (Demers et al. 1987), the goal is to minimize the
number of rounds until a rumor spreads to the whole population (Fountoulakis, Panagiotou, and Sauerwald 2012).
A related propagation model is that of the Moran process, introduced as a model of genetic evolution (Moran
1958), and the variants thereof, such as the discrete Voter
model (Clifford and Sudbury 1973; Liggett 1985; Antal,
Redner, and Sood 2006; Talamali et al. 2021). A single
mutant (e.g., a new opinion, strain, social trait, etc.) invades a population of residents scattered across the nodes of
the graph. Contrariwise to influence and rumor propagation
models, the Moran process accounts for active resistance to
the invasion: a node carrying the mutant trait may not only
forward it to its neighbors, but also lose it by receiving the
resident trait from its neighbors. This model exemplifies settings in which individuals may switch opinions several times
or sub-species competing in a gene pool. A key parameter
in this process is the mutant fitness advantage, a real number δ ≥ 0 that expresses the intensity by which mutants
propagate to their neighbors compared to residents. Large δ
favors mutants, while δ = 0 renders mutants and residents
indistinguishable.
Success in the Moran process is quantified in terms of the
fixation probability, i.e., the probability that a randomly occurring mutation takes over the whole population. As the focal model in evolutionary graph theory (Lieberman, Hauert,
and Nowak 2005), the process has spawned extensive work
on identifying amplifiers, i.e., graph structures that enhance
the fixation probability (Monk, Green, and Paulin 2014; Giakkoupis 2016; Galanis et al. 2017; Pavlogiannis et al. 2018;
Tkadlec et al. 2021). Still, in the real world, the probability
that a mutation spreads to its neighborhood is often affected
by its position: the ability to metabolise a certain sugar is
advantageous to bacteria only when that sugar is present in
their surroundings; likewise, people are likely to spread a
viewpoint more enthusiastically if it is supported by experience from their local environment (country, city, neighborhood). By default, the Moran process does not account for
such positional effects. While optimization questions have
been studied in the Moran and related models (Even-Dar
and Shapira 2007), the natural setting of positional advantage remains unexplored. In this setting, the question arises:
to which positions (i.e., nodes) should we confer an advantage so as to maximize the fixation probability?

The Moran process is a classic stochastic process that models
spread dynamics on graphs. A single “mutant” (e.g., a new
opinion, strain, social trait etc.) invades a population of “residents” scattered over the nodes of a graph. The mutant fitness
advantage δ ≥ 0 determines how aggressively mutants propagate to their neighbors. The quantity of interest is the fixation
probability, i.e., the probability that the initial mutant eventually takes over the whole population. However, in realistic
settings, the invading mutant has an advantage only in certain
locations. E.g., the ability to metabolize a certain sugar is an
advantageous trait to bacteria only when the sugar is actually
present in their surroundings. In this paper, we introduce the
positional Moran process, a natural generalization in which
the mutant fitness advantage is only realized on specific nodes
called active nodes, and study the problem of fixation maximization: given a budget k, choose a set of k active nodes
that maximize the fixation probability of the invading mutant.
We show that the problem is NP-hard, while the optimization function is not submodular, indicating strong computational hardness. We then focus on two natural limits: at the
limit of δ → ∞ (strong selection), although the problem remains NP-hard, the optimization function becomes submodular and thus admits a constant-factor greedy approximation;
at the limit of δ → 0 (weak selection), we show that we can
obtain a tight approximation in O(n2ω ) time, where ω is the
matrix-multiplication exponent. An experimental evaluation
of the new algorithms along with some proposed heuristics
corroborates our results.

Introduction
Several real-world phenomena are described in terms of an
invasion process that occurs in a network and follows some
propagation model. The problems considered in such settings aim to optimize the success of the invasion, quantified by some metric. For example, social media campaigns
serving purposes of marketing, political advocacy, and social
welfare are modeled in terms of influence spread, whereby
the goal is to maximize the expected influence spread of a
message as a function of a set of initial adopters (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014;
Borgs et al. 2014; Tang, Shi, and Xiao 2015; Zhang et al.
2020); see (Li et al. 2018) for a survey. Similarly, in rumor
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9304

