The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Unifying Theory of Thompson Sampling
for Continuous Risk-Averse Bandits
Joel Q. L. Chang1 , Vincent Y. F. Tan1, 2
1

2

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
joel.chang@u.nus.edu, vtan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Tamkin et al. 2019; Khajonchotpanya, Xue, and Rujeerapaiboon 2021; Baudry et al.
2021; Chang, Zhu, and Tan 2021). In particular, CVaR is an
instance of a general class of risk functionals, called coherent risk functionals (Artzner et al. 1999). Huang et al. (2021)
observed that for nonnegative rewards, coherent risk functionals are subsumed in broader class of functionals called
distorted risk fuctionals. Common distorted risk functionals,
such as the expected value and CVaR, satisfy theoretically
convenient continuity properties.
However, not much work has been done to unify these
various risk-averse algorithms to elucidate the common machinery that underlie them. In this paper, we provide one
way to unify these risk-averse Thompson sampling algorithms through continuous and dominant risk functionals,
which we denote by ρ. We design two Thompson samplingbased algorithms—ρ-MTS and ρ-NPTS—to solve the modified MABs, provably achieving asymptotic optimality for ρMTS under a variety of risk functionals and empirically doing so for ρ-NPTS. Therefore, we unify much of the progress
made in analysing Thompson sampling-based solutions to
risk-averse MABs.

This paper unifies the design and the analysis of risk-averse
Thompson sampling algorithms for the multi-armed bandit
problem for a class of risk functionals ρ that are continuous
and dominant. We prove generalised concentration bounds
for these continuous and dominant risk functionals and show
that a wide class of popular risk functionals belong to this
class. Using our newly developed analytical toolkits, we analyse the algorithm ρ-MTS (for multinomial distributions) and
prove that they admit asymptotically optimal regret bounds
of risk-averse algorithms under the CVaR, proportional hazard, and other ubiquitous risk measures. More generally, we
prove the asymptotic optimality of ρ-MTS for Bernoulli distributions for a class of risk measures known as empirical distribution performance measures (EDPMs); this includes the
well-known mean-variance. Numerical simulations show that
the regret bounds incurred by our algorithms are reasonably
tight vis-à-vis algorithm-independent lower bounds.

Introduction
Consider a K-armed multi-armed bandit (MAB) with unknown distributions ν = (νk )k∈[K] called arms and a time
horizon n. At each time step t ∈ [n], a learner chooses an
arm At ∈ [K] and obtains a random reward XAt from the
corresponding distribution νAt . In the vanilla MAB setting,
the learner aims to maximise their expected total reward after n selections, requiring a strategic balance of exploration
and exploitation of the arms. Much work has been developed in this field for L/UCB-based algorithms, and in recent developments, more Thompson sampling-based algorithms have been designed and proven to attain the theoretical asymptotic lower bounds that outperform their L/UCBbased counterparts. However, many real-world settings include the presence of risk, which precludes the adoption of
the mean-maximisation objective. Risk-averse bandits address this issue for bandit models by replacing the expected
value by some measure of risk.
Recent work has incorporated risk into the analysis, with
different works working with different risk measures that
satisfy various properties. In the existing literature, the more
popular risk measures being considered are mean-variance
(Sani, Lazaric, and Munos 2012; Zhu and Tan 2020) and

Related Work
Thompson (1933) proposed the first Bayesian algorithm for
MABs known as Thompson sampling. Lai and Robbins
(1985) proved a lower bound on the regret for any instancedependent bandit algorithm for the vanilla MAB. Kaufmann,
Korda, and Munos (2012); Agrawal and Goyal (2012) analysed the Thompson sampling algorithm to solve the Karmed MAB for Bernoulli and Gaussian reward distributions respectively, and proved the asymptotic optimality in
the Bernoulli setting relative to the lower bound given by Lai
and Robbins (1985). Granmo (2008) proposed the Bayesian
learning automaton that is self-correcting and converges to
only pulling the optimal arm with probability 1. Riou and
Honda (2020) designed and proved the asymptotic optimality of Thompson sampling on bandits which firstly follow
multinomial distributions, followed by general bandits that
are bounded in [0, 1] by discretising [0, 1] and using suitable
approximations on each sub-interval.
Many variants of the MAB which factor risk have been
considered. One popular risk measure is mean-variance.
Sani, Lazaric, and Munos (2012) proposed the first U/LCB-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org) All rights reserved.

6159

