The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reference-Based Speech Enhancement via Feature Alignment and Fusion
Network
Huanjing Yue1 , Wenxin Duo1 , Xiulian Peng2 , Jingyu Yang1 *
1

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
2
Individual
{huanjing.yue, hiedean, yjy}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Speech enhancement aims at recovering a clean speech from
a noisy input, which can be classified into single speech enhancement and personalized speech enhancement. Personalized speech enhancement usually utilizes the speaker identity extracted from the noisy speech itself (or a clean reference speech) as a global embedding to guide the enhancement
process. Different from them, we observe that the speeches
of the same speaker are correlated in terms of frame-level
short-time Fourier Transform (STFT) spectrogram. Therefore, we propose reference-based speech enhancement via
a feature alignment and fusion network (FAF-Net). Given a
noisy speech and a clean reference speech spoken by the same
speaker, we first propose a feature-level alignment strategy
to warp the clean reference with the noisy speech in frame
level. Then, we fuse the reference feature with the noisy feature via a similarity-based fusion strategy. Finally, the fused
features are skipped connected to the decoder, which generates the enhanced results. Experimental results demonstrate
that the performance of the proposed FAF-Net is close to the
state-of-the-art speech enhancement methods on both DNS
and Voice Bank+DEMAND datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/HieDean/FAF-Net.

(a) Reference Speech

(b) Noisy Speech

(c) Clean Speech

(d) Aligned Speech

Figure 1: STFTs Visualization of reference speech (a), noisy
speech (b), clean speech (c), and aligned speech (d) using
the log-spectra. The aligned speech is reconstructed by aggregating the matched frames from (a) using the matching
index obtained by MFCC patch matching. However, there is
obvious time discontinuity of the aligned speech, which is
highlighted by a green circle.
Serra 2018; Koyama et al. 2020). Due to the lack of apparent geometric structure for the 1D signal, the time domain based methods are inferior to the T-F domain based
methods, which operate in the 2D T-F spectrogram. The T-F
domain based methods usually predict a mask to filter the
noisy T-F spectrogram, generating a clean T-F spectrogram
(Hu and Wang 2001; Srinivasan, Roman, and Wang 2006;
Williamson, Wang, and Wang 2015). Although these methods have greatly improved the speech quality, the recovered
speech still suffers from information lost.
To further improve the enhancement results, some methods introduce semantic information to assist speech enhancement (Ephrat et al. 2018; Hou et al. 2018). For example, the speaker identity (ID) is used in speech enhancement
(Chuang et al. 2019; Giri et al. 2021; Shon, Tang, and Glass
2019) and separation tasks (Wang et al. 2018; Mun et al.
2020; Giri et al. 2021), proving that speaker prior derived
from the noisy speech or another clean speech spoken by
the same ID (i.e., reference speech) is beneficial for the personalized speech enhancement and separation. However, the
speaker ID is generally embedded into a global vector, and
inserted into the reconstruction network for the enhancement

Introduction
Collected speeches in the wild usually contain much background noise, which severely degrades the perceptual quality and intelligibility of speech. Therefore, speech enhancement, which aims to recover clean speech from a noisecorrupted speech, has attracted much attention and achieved
promising results with the widely used deep-learning (DL)
strategy. In this work, we focus on single-channel speech enhancement. Without specification, all the speech mentioned
in this work is single-channel speech.
The DL based speech enhancement can be classified into
time domain and time-frequency (T-F) domain based methods. Time domain based methods usually utilize a neural
network to learn the mapping relationship between the onedimensional (1D) waveform of noisy and clean speeches
(Pascual, Bonafonte, and Serra 2017; Rethage, Pons, and
* This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62072331. Corresponding
author: Jingyu Yang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11648

