The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Neural Cross-Lingual Abstractive Summarization via Employing
Optimal Transport Distance for Knowledge Distillation
Thong Thanh Nguyen1 , Anh Tuan Luu2 *
1

2

VinAI Research, Vietnam
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract

settings are preferred, in reality it is difficult to attain a sufficient amount of data, especially for less prevalent languages.
Most previous works resolving the issue of little training data concentrate on multi-task learning framework by
utilizing the relationship of Cross-Lingual Summarization
(CLS) with Monolingual Summarization (MLS) or Neural
Machine Translation (NMT). Their approach can be further
divided into two groups. The first group equips their module with two independent decoders, one of them targets the
auxiliary task (MLS or NMT). Nevertheless, since two decoders do not share their parameters, this approach undermines the model’s ability to align between two tasks (Bai,
Gao, and Huang 2021), making the ancillary and the main
task less relied upon each other. Hence, the trained model
might produce output that does not match up the topic, or
miss important spans of text.
The second group decides to employ a single decoder
dealing with both CLS and MLS tasks. To this end, the
method concatenates the monolingual to cross-lingual summary and designate the model to sequentially generate
the monolingual summary, and then the cross-lingual one.
Unfortunately, notwithstanding lessening the computational
overhead during training by using solely one decoder, this
method is not efficacious in capturing the connection between two languages in the output, consequently producing
representations that do not take into account language relationships (Luo et al. 2021). In that case, the correlation of
cross-lingual representations will be tremendously impacted
by the structural and morphological similarity of those languages (Bjerva et al. 2019). As a result, in case of summarizing the document from one language to another that possesses distinct morphology and structure properties, such as
from Chinese to English, the decoder might be prone to underperformance, due to the dearth of language correlation
between two sets of hidden representations in the bilingual
vector space (Luo et al. 2021).
To solve the aforementioned problem, we propose a novel
Knowledge-Distillation framework for Cross-Lingual Summarization task. Particularly, our framework consists of a
teacher model targetting Monolingual Summarization, and
a student for Cross-Lingual Summarization. We initiate our
procedure by finetuning the teacher model on monolingual document/summary pairs. Subsequently, we continue
to distill summarization knowledge of the trained teacher

Current state-of-the-art cross-lingual summarization models
employ multi-task learning paradigm, which works on a
shared vocabulary module and relies on the self-attention
mechanism to attend among tokens in two languages. However, correlation learned by self-attention is often loose and
implicit, inefficient in capturing crucial cross-lingual representations between languages. The matter worsens when performing on languages with separate morphological or structural features, making the cross-lingual alignment more challenging, resulting in the performance drop. To overcome this
problem, we propose a novel Knowledge-Distillation-based
framework for Cross-Lingual Summarization, seeking to explicitly construct cross-lingual correlation by distilling the
knowledge of the monolingual summarization teacher into
the cross-lingual summarization student. Since the representations of the teacher and the student lie on two different vector spaces, we further propose a Knowledge Distillation loss
using Sinkhorn Divergence, an Optimal-Transport distance,
to estimate the discrepancy between those teacher and student representations. Due to the intuitively geometric nature
of Sinkhorn Divergence, the student model can productively
learn to align its produced cross-lingual hidden states with
monolingual hidden states, hence leading to a strong correlation between distant languages. Experiments on cross-lingual
summarization datasets in pairs of distant languages demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art models
under both high and low-resourced settings.

Introduction
Cross-Lingual Summarization (CLS) is the task of condensing a document of one language into its shorter form
in the target language. Most of contemporary works can
be classified into two categories, i.e. low-resourced and
high-resourced CLS approaches. In high-resourced scenarios, models are provided with an enormous number of document /summary pairs on which they can be trained (Zhu
et al. 2019; Cao, Liu, and Wan 2020; Zhu et al. 2020). On
the other hand, in low-resourced settings, those document/summary pairs are scarce, which restrains the amount of
information that a model can learn. While high-resourced
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11103

