The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Role of Adaptive Optimizers
for Honest Private Hyperparameter Selection*
Shubhankar Mohapatra1 , Sajin Sasy1 , Xi He1 , Gautam Kamath1 , Om Thakkar2
1

University of Waterloo
2
Google
{shubhankar.mohapatra, ssasy, xi.he, gckamath}@uwaterloo.ca, omthkkr@google.com

Abstract

grid search or random search, both of which incur a computational overhead scaling with the number of hyperparameters under consideration. In the private setting, this issue
is often magnified as most private training procedures introduce new hyperparameters. More importantly, hyperparameter tuning on a sensitive dataset also costs in terms of
privacy, naively incurring a multiplicative cost which scales
as the square root of the number of candidates (based on
composition properties of differential privacy).
Most prior works on private learning choose not to account for this cost (Abadi et al. 2016; Yu et al. 2019; Tramer
and Boneh 2021), focusing instead on demonstrating the accuracy achievable by private learning under idealized conditions; if the best hyperparameters were somehow known
ahead of time. Recent work (Papernot and Steinke 2021)
show that non-private hyperparameter tuning can expose
outliers of the dataset. Some assume the presence of supplementary public data resembling the sensitive dataset (Avent
et al. 2020; Ramaswamy et al. 2020), which may be freely
used for hyperparameter tuning. Such public data may be
scarce or nonexistent in settings where privacy is a concern,
leaving practitioners with little guidance on how to choose
hyperparameters. As explored in our paper, poor hyperparameter selection with standard private optimizers can have
catastrophic effects on model accuracy.
Hope is afforded by the success of adaptive optimizers in the non-private setting. The canonical example is
Adam (Kingma and Ba 2014), which exploits moments of
the gradients to adaptively determine the learning rate. It
often works out of the box, providing accuracy comparable with tuned SGD. However, Adam has been overlooked
in the private setting since previous works show that finetuned DPSGD tends to perform better than DPAdam (Papernot et al. 2020). This leads to several subsequent works (Yu
et al. 2021; Tramer and Boneh 2021) that limit themselves to
highlighting accuracy under ideal DPSGD hyperparameters.
We navigate the different options available to a practitioner
to solve the honest private hyperparameter tuning problem
and ask, are there optimizers that provide strong privacy,
require minimal hyperparameter tuning, and perform competitively with tuned counterparts?
Our Contributions 1) We investigate techniques for private hyperparameter tuning. We perform a comprehensive
empirical evaluation of the proposed theoretical method

Hyperparameter optimization is a ubiquitous challenge in
machine learning, and the performance of a trained model
depends crucially upon their effective selection. While a rich
set of tools exist for this purpose, there are currently no practical hyperparameter selection methods under the constraint
of differential privacy (DP). We study honest hyperparameter
selection for differentially private machine learning, in which
the process of hyperparameter tuning is accounted for in the
overall privacy budget. To this end, we i) show that standard
composition tools outperform more advanced techniques in
many settings, ii) empirically and theoretically demonstrate
an intrinsic connection between the learning rate and clipping
norm hyperparameters, iii) show that adaptive optimizers like
DPAdam enjoy a significant advantage in the process of honest hyperparameter tuning, and iv) draw upon novel limiting
behaviour of Adam in the DP setting to design a new and
more efficient optimizer.

Introduction
Over the last several decades, the field of machine learning
has flourished. However, training machine learning models
frequently involves personal data, which leaves data contributors susceptible to privacy attacks (Shokri et al. 2017;
Carlini et al. 2019; Nasr, Shokri, and Houmansadr 2019;
Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Song, Ristenpart,
and Shmatikov 2017). The leading approaches for privacypreserving machine learning are based on differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006). Informally, DP rigorously
limits and masks the contribution that an individual datapoint can have on an algorithm’s output. To address the
aforementioned issues, DP training procedures have been
developed (Williams and McSherry 2010; Bassily, Smith,
and Thakurta 2014; Song, Chaudhuri, and Sarwate 2013;
Abadi et al. 2016), which generally resemble non-private
gradient-based methods, but with the incorporation of gradient clipping and noise injection.
In both settings, hyperparameter selection is instrumental
to achieving high accuracy. The most common methods are
* Authors SM and SS have equal contribution and are listed in
alphabetical order. Authors XH, GK, OT have equal contribution
and are listed in alphabetical order
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7806

