The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Decision-Dependent Risk Minimization in Geometrically Decaying Dynamic
Environments
Mitas Ray, Lillian J. Ratliff, Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy, Maryam Fazel
University of Washington, Seattle
{mitasray, ratliffl, ddrusv, mfazel}@uw.edu

Abstract

(Brown, Hod, and Kalemaj 2020), this work has focused on
static environments.
In many of the aforementioned application domains, however, the underlying data distribution also may have memory
or even be changing dynamically in time. When a decisionmaking mechanism is announced it may take time to see the
full effect of the decision as the environment and strategic
data sources respond given their prior history or interactions.
For example, many municipalities announce quarterly a
new quasi-static set of prices for on-street parking. In this
setting, the institution may adjust parking rates for certain
blocks in order to to achieve a desired occupancy range to
reduce cruising phenomena and increase business district
vitality (Fiez et al. 2018; Dowling et al. 2017; Pierce and
Shoup 2013; Shoup 2006). For instance, in high traffic areas, the institution may announce increased parking rates to
free up parking spots and redistribute those drivers to less
populated blocks. However, upon announcing a new price,
the population may react slowly, whether it be from initially
being unaware of the price change, to facing natural inconveniences from changing one’s parking routine. This introduces dynamics into our setting; hence, the data distribution
takes time to equilibrate after the pricing change is made.
Motivated by such scenarios, we study the problem of
decision-dependent risk minimization (or, synonymously,
performative prediction) in dynamic settings wherein the underlying decision-dependent distribution evolves according
to a geometrically decaying process. Taking into account the
time it takes for a decision to have the full effect on the environment, we devise an algorithmic framework for finding
the optimal solution in settings where the decision maker has
access to different types of gradient information.
For both information settings (gradient access and loss
function access, via the appropriate oracle), the decisionmaker deploys the current decision repeatedly for the duration of an epoch, thereby allowing the dynamically evolving
distribution to approach the fixed point distribution for that
announced decision. At the end of the epoch, the decision is
updated using a first-order or zeroth-order oracle.
One interpretation of this procedure is that the environment is operating on a faster timescale compared to the update of the decision-maker’s action. For instance, consider
the dynamically changing distribution as the data distribution corresponding to a population of strategic data sources.

This paper studies the problem of expected loss minimization
given a data distribution that is dependent on the decisionmaker’s action and evolves dynamically in time according to
a geometric decay process. Novel algorithms for both the information setting in which the decision-maker has a first order gradient oracle and the setting in which they have simply a loss function oracle are are introduced. The algorithms
operate on the same underlying principle: the decision-maker
repeatedly deploys a fixed decision repeatedly over the length
of an epoch, thereby allowing the dynamically changing environment to sufficiently mix before updating the decision. The
iteration complexity in each of the settings is shown to match
existing rates for first and zero order stochastic gradient methods up to logarithmic factors. The algorithms are evaluated
on a “semi-synthetic” example using real world data from the
SFpark dynamic pricing pilot study; it is shown that the announced prices result in an improvement for the institution’s
objective (target occupancy), while achieving an overall reduction in parking rates.

Introduction
Traditionally, supervised machine learning algorithms are
trained based on past data under the assumption that the
past data is representative of the future. However, machine
learning algorithms are increasingly being used in settings
where the output of the algorithm changes the environment
and hence, the data distribution. Indeed, online labor markets (Anagnostopoulos et al. 2018; Horton 2010), predictive
policing (Lum and Isaac 2016), on-street parking (Pierce and
Shoup 2018; Dowling, Ratliff, and Zhang 2020), and vehicle
sharing markets (Banerjee, Riquelme, and Johari 2015) are
all examples of real-world settings in which the algorithm’s
decisions change the underlying data distribution due to the
fact that the algorithm interacts with strategic users.
To address this problem, the machine learning community
introduced the problem of performative prediction which
models the data distribution as being decision-dependent
thereby accounting for feedback induced distributional shift
(Perdomo et al. 2020; Miller, Perdomo, and Zrnic 2021;
Drusvyatskiy and Xiao 2020; Brown, Hod, and Kalemaj
2020; Mendler-Dünner et al. 2020). With the exception of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8081

