The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MDD-Eval: Self-Training on Augmented Data for Multi-Domain Dialogue
Evaluation
Chen Zhang1,2 , Luis Fernando D’Haro3 , Thomas Friedrichs2 , Haizhou Li1,4,5
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Robert Bosch (SEA), Singapore
3
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
4
Kriston AI Lab, China
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), China
{chen zhang,haizhou.li}@u.nus.edu, luisfernando.dharo@upm.es, thomas.friedrichs@sg.bosch.com
Abstract

Metric

DailyDialog-Eval

Topical-Eval

Chatbots are designed to carry out human-like conversations across different domains, such as general chit-chat,
knowledge exchange, and persona-grounded conversations.
To measure the quality of such conversational agents, a dialogue evaluator is expected to conduct assessment across
domains as well. However, most of the state-of-the-art automatic dialogue evaluation metrics (ADMs) are not designed
for multi-domain evaluation. We are motivated to design a
general and robust framework, MDD-Eval, to address the
problem. Specifically, we first train a teacher evaluator with
human-annotated data to acquire a rating skill to tell good dialogue responses from bad ones in a particular domain and
then, adopt a self-training strategy to train a new evaluator with teacher-annotated multi-domain data, that helps the
new evaluator to generalize across multiple domains. MDDEval is extensively assessed on six dialogue evaluation benchmarks. Empirical results show that the MDD-Eval framework
achieves a strong performance with an absolute improvement
of 7% over the state-of-the-art ADMs in terms of mean Spearman correlation scores across all the evaluation benchmarks.

DEB
GRADE
USR

0.486
0.533
0.367

0.116
0.217
0.423

Table 1: Spearman correlation scores of three state-of-theart model-based metrics on two dialogue evaluation benchmarks.

2004), are unsuitable for the multi-domain dialogue evaluation task as they are shown to correlate poorly with human
judgements (Liu et al. 2016) due to the one-to-many contextresponse mapping in dialogues (Zhao, Zhao, and Eskenazi
2017) as well as the multi-faceted nature of dialogue evaluation (Mehri and Eskenazi 2020b).
An alternative solution is to design model-based ADMs
that explicitly learn to discriminate dialogue responses of
varying quality. Lately, many model-based ADMs leveraging self-supervised learning are proposed to address the
weaknesses of the standard NLG metrics (Sai et al. 2020;
Ghazarian et al. 2019; Mehri and Eskenazi 2020b; Huang
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021c). While these ADMs have
demonstrated strong correlations with human judgements,
they lack a generalized skill to evaluate dialogues across
multiple domains. For example, in Table 1, DEB (Sai et al.
2020) and GRADE (Huang et al. 2020) are pretrained on
the DailyDialog dataset (Li et al. 2017). They perform
well on the DailyDialog-Eval (Zhao, Lala, and Kawahara
2020) benchmark that contains responses from dialogue systems trained on chit-chat content. However, their performance significantly drops when assessed on the TopicalEval (Mehri and Eskenazi 2020b) benchmark, which is close
in domain with TopicalChat (Gopalakrishnan et al. 2019)
and contains dialogue responses from knowledge-grounded
conversations. The reverse is true for USR (Mehri and Eskenazi 2020b), which is pretrained on the TopicalChat dataset.
To design robust ADMs for the multi-domain dialogue
evaluation task, we consider two research questions. (1)
How to equip the ADM with a rating skill to discriminate
responses of varying quality? In other words, the ability to
assign a high score to relevant responses and a low score otherwise. (2) How can an ADM learn the general knowledge

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed growing interests in opendomain dialogue systems (Adiwardana et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020; Roller et al. 2021). With the increasing availability of high-quality dialogue corpora (Li et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2018) and advancement of neural architectures (Devlin et al. 2019; Radford et al. 2019), learning-based dialogue systems are becoming possible. The applications
call for dialogue technology capable of generating appropriate responses to users’ prompts in a diverse range of scenarios, such as general chit-chat (Li et al. 2017), knowledge exchange (Gopalakrishnan et al. 2019), persona-based
chat (Zhang et al. 2018), and emotion disclosure (Rashkin
et al. 2019).
However, the dialogue research heavily relies on the ability to evaluate system performance with automatic dialogue
evaluation metrics (ADMs). Common natural language generation (NLG) metrics used in the dialogue system literature, such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) and ROUGE (Lin
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11657

