The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Spatio-Temporal Recurrent Networks for Event-Based Optical Flow Estimation
Ziluo Ding, Rui Zhao, Jiyuan Zhang, Tianxiao Gao, Ruiqin Xiong, Zhaofei Yu* , Tiejun Huang
Peking University
{ziluo, gtx, rqxiong, yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, {ruizhao, jyzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

making them a good fit for domains such as optical flow, object tracking, or dynamic scene understanding. Optical flow
estimation has a wide range of applications, especially in autonomous driving (Aufrère et al. 2003; Capito, Ozguner, and
Redmill 2020) and action recognition (Efros et al. 2003).
Although optical flow estimation has achieved remarkable
success in frame-based vision (Teed and Deng 2020; Wang,
Fan, and Liu 2020; Liu et al. 2020), it is unlikely to directly
apply traditional frame-based optical flow estimation algorithms to event data since the data formats in the two fields
are too different.
Recently, many research studies focus on training an endto-end neural network to estimate optical flow in a self or
unsupervised manner (Zhu et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2018; Lee
et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2018b). In most existing deep learning
works, a series of asynchronous events are first transformed
into alternative representations–event image that summarizes events into a 2D grid. Then, all the event images or feature maps are concatenated as one entity and fed into Convolutional Neural Network (ConvNet) at one time. Although
this practice contains spatial information about scene edges
that is familiar to conventional computer vision, it did not
address the importance of temporal information well from
the perspective of architectural design since ConvNet is originally designed to extract spatial hierarchies of features (Yamashita et al. 2018). In addition, event cameras bear severe
noise (Wang et al. 2020). Unfired events can be easily introduced especially in some complex textured and high-speed
scenarios, e.g. driving on the highway, due to bandwidth limitations (Hu, Liu, and Delbruck 2021). Thus, the problem
of event signal enhancement has a strong deviation from its
image-based counterpart and requires deliberate modifications when applying frame-based models.
In our work, we address the signal enhancement by
proposing a novel input representation that retrieves the
missing events in a high-speed period. Our input representation accumulates events based on the temporal distribution
of the event stream. Event signal is enhanced when the distribution is more concentrated since high-speed movement will
lead to more events in a short moment. In addition, we introduce a spatio-temporal recurrent encoding-decoding neural network architecture (STE-FlowNet) to capture spatiotemporal information effectively. More specifically, the feature encoder has a novel design, which is utilizing Convo-

Event camera has offered promising alternative for visual perception, especially in high speed and high dynamic range
scenes. Recently, many deep learning methods have shown
great success in providing promising solutions to many eventbased problems, such as optical flow estimation. However,
existing deep learning methods did not address the importance of temporal information well from the perspective
of architecture design and cannot effectively extract spatiotemporal features. Another line of research that utilizes Spiking Neural Network suffers from training issues for deeper
architecture. To address these points, a novel input representation is proposed that captures the events’ temporal distribution for signal enhancement. Moreover, we introduce a
spatio-temporal recurrent encoding-decoding neural network
architecture for event-based optical flow estimation, which
utilizes Convolutional Gated Recurrent Units to extract feature maps from a series of event images. Besides, our architecture allows some traditional frame-based core modules,
such as correlation layer and iterative residual refine scheme,
to be incorporated. The network is end-to-end trained with
self-supervised learning on the Multi-Vehicle Stereo Event
Camera dataset. We have shown that it outperforms all the
existing state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

Introduction
We have witnessed the prosperous development of neuromorphic cameras, which offer promising alternatives for visual perception. For example, one of the most popular neuromorphic vision sensors, the event camera (Lichtsteiner,
Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Brandli et al. 2014), has exhibited better potential in handling high-speed scenarios
and demonstrated superiority in robustness compared with
frame-based cameras. Biologically inspired by the retinal
periphery, each pixel responds independently to the change
of luminance by generating asynchronous events with microsecond accuracy in the event camera. Therefore, event
camera greatly reduces the amount of data needed to be
processed, and their distinct and novel working principles
provide some promising advantages such as extremely low
latency, high dynamic range, and low power consumption,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

525

