The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Local and Global Convergence of General Burer-Monteiro Tensor Optimizations
Shuang Li,1 Qiuwei Li 2
1

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
2
Alibaba Group (US), Damo Academy
shuangli@math.ucla.edu, liqiuweiss@gmail.com

Abstract

singular values. The latter is also equal to the smallest number
of rank-one factors that the matrix can be written as a sum of.
The tensor rank, however, has several non-equivalent variants,
among which the Tucker rank (Kolda and Bader 2009) and
the Canonical Polyadic (CP) rank (Grasedyck, Kressner, and
Tobler 2013) are most well-known. The CP tensor rank is
a more direct generalization from the matrix case and is
precisely equal to the minimal number of terms in a rankone tensor decomposition. It is also the preferred notion of
rank in applications. Unfortunately, while the Tucker rank
can be found by performing the higher-order singular value
decomposition (HOSVD) of the tensor, the CP rank is NPhard to compute (Hillar and Lim 2013). Even though some
recent works (Yuan and Zhang 2016; Barak and Moitra 2016;
Li et al. 2016; Li and Tang 2017; Li et al. 2015a; Tang and
Shah 2015) study the convex relaxation methods based on
the tensor nuclear norm, which is also NP-hard to compute
(Hillar and Lim 2013). Therefore, this work seeks alternative
ways to solve the CP rank-constrained tensor optimizations.

Tensor optimization is crucial to massive machine learning
and signal processing tasks. In this paper, we consider tensor
optimization with a convex and well-conditioned objective
function and reformulate it into a nonconvex optimization
using the Burer-Monteiro type parameterization. We analyze
the local convergence of applying vanilla gradient descent
to the factored formulation and establish a local regularity
condition under mild assumptions. We also provide a linear
convergence analysis of the gradient descent algorithm started
in a neighborhood of the true tensor factors. Complementary
to the local analysis, this work also characterizes the global
geometry of the best rank-one tensor approximation problem
and demonstrates that for orthogonally decomposable tensors
the problem has no spurious local minima and all saddle points
are strict except for the one at zero which is a third-order saddle
point.

1

Introduction

Tensors, a multi-dimensional generalization of vectors and
matrices, provide natural representations for multi-way
datasets and find numerous applications in machine learning and signal processing, including video processing (Liu
et al. 2012), hyperspectral imaging (Li et al. 2015b; Sun
et al. 2020), collaborative filtering (Hou and Qian 2017),
latent graphical model learning (Anandkumar, Ge, and Janzamin 2017), independent component analysis (ICA) (Cardoso
1989), dictionary learning (Barak, Kelner, and Steurer 2015),
neural networks compression (Phan et al. 2020; Bai et al.
2021), Gaussian mixture estimation (Sedghi, Janzamin, and
Anandkumar 2016), and psychometrics (Smilde, Bro, and
Geladi 2005). See (Sidiropoulos et al. 2017) for a review. All
these applications involve solving certain optimizations over
the space of low-rank tensors:
minimize f (T ) subject to rank(T ) ≤ r.
T

(1)

Here f (·) is a problem dependent objective function with
tensor argument and rank(·) calculates the tensor rank. The
rank of matrices is well-understood and has many equivalent
definitions, such as the dimension of the range space, or the
size of largest non-vanishing minor, or the number of nonzero

General Burer-Monteiro Tensor Optimizations
Throughout this paper, we focus on third-order, symmetric
tensors and assume that f : Rn×n×n → R is a general
convex function and has a unique global minimizer T ? that
admits the following (symmetric-)rank-revealing decomposition:
r
X
T? =
c?p b
up ⊗ b
up ⊗ b
up ∈ Rn×n×n ,
(2)
p=1

where b
up ’s are the normalized tensor factors living on the
unit spheres Sn−1 and c?p ’s are the decomposition coefficients.
Without loss of generality, we can always assume c?p > 0,
since otherwise we can absorb its sign into the normalized
tensor factors.
Note that the global optimal tensor in (2) can be rewritten
as
r
X 1/3
T? =
(c?p b
up ) ⊗ (c?p 1/3 b
up ) ⊗ (c?p 1/3 b
up )
p=1

.
= U ? ◦ U ? ◦ U ?,
(3)


.
where U ? = c?1 1/3 b
u1 c?2 1/3 b
u2 · · · c?r 1/3 b
ur can be viewed
?
as the “cubic root” of T . Noting that the “cubic-root” rep-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10266

