The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Search Strategies for Topological Network Optimization
Michael D. Moffitt
Google
moffitt@google.com

Abstract

In this paper, we consider a radically different algorithmic
foundation for the topological optimization of networks. Our
approach embraces the principles of advanced combinatorial search, where optimal solutions can be obtained without
resorting to brute-force enumeration. We argue that the optimization of networks in particular is a formidable problem
to tackle, due in part to how solutions are typically evaluated, and also due to the exponential explosion of candidate topologies. Our work focuses on a specific family of
series-parallel networks that commonly arise in electrical
and telecommunications systems. We propose a recursive
search over the space of decomposition trees, in which partial solutions are obtained by exploring k-way partitionings
of expandable nodes. We present two complementary pruning techniques that bound the value of intermediate solutions
from above and below, applying monotonic operations to the
contents of unresolved leaves. We also develop a means to
exploit the convexity of our objective function, so as to prevent the redundant recomputation of subcircuit configurations. Finally, we evaluate our approach on a new parameterized benchmark suite, demonstrating over an order of
magnitude improvement in performance as compared to a
baseline implementation.
Throughout this manuscript, key concepts are illustrated
using simple examples taken from the domain of electrical circuits. Our rationale for this is threefold; first, it is
one of the earliest applications of network theory, with relevant literature dating back more than a hundred years. Second, the subject matter tends to be more readily accessible
to non-specialists, avoiding the kinds of in-depth expertise
that complex industrial applications (e.g., supply chain networks, hydrogen transmission pipelines, etc.) might otherwise require. Third, we find that it encapsulates the essential
characteristics that make the topic of topological network
design a compelling case-study for practitioners in discrete
optimization.

We consider an application of combinatorial search to the optimization of topologies in series-parallel networks. We propose a recursive search over the space of decomposition trees,
in which partial solutions are obtained by exploring k-way
partitionings of expandable nodes. We present two complementary pruning techniques that bound the value of intermediate solutions from above and below, applying monotonic
operations to the contents of unresolved leaves. We also develop a means to exploit the convexity of our objective function, so as to prevent the redundant recomputation of subcircuit configurations. Finally, we evaluate our approach on a
parameterized benchmark suite of electrical circuits, demonstrating over an order of magnitude improvement in performance as compared to a baseline implementation.

Introduction
There exists a deep and widely-understood relationship between the subjects of combinatorial optimization and network theory. Their affinity is perhaps best exemplified by
constraint networks (Dechter 2003), in which the values
of a finite set of variables (the nodes) interact by way of
connections (the edges) that restrict their mutual assignments. Similar structures are employed in the neighboring
topics of boolean satisfiability (Zhang and Malik 2002) and
mixed integer-linear programming (Achterberg 2009). Despite subtle differences in how constraints and domains are
modeled, all of these formulations share a common trait: the
network serves as a static specification, its contents used by
search as a roadmap when exploring the space of solutions.
An entirely different perspective is taken in the lesserknown subject of topological network design (Abd-El-Barr
2009; Gupta and Könemann 2011), where the objective is
to construct – rather than consume – a network. Unlike traditional graph problems that can be easily solved in polynomial time (e.g., shortest paths, spanning trees, etc.), the
majority of network design problems are NP-hard. This has
led previous authors to adopt one of three methodologies:
exhaustive enumeration when optimally solving very small
problems, iterative refinement when (suboptimally) solving
problems of moderate size, and approximation algorithms
for some special cases (e.g., trees and acyclic graphs).

Background
The focus of this work lies at the intersection of multiple specialties, including graph theory, electronic design automation, network optimization, and combinatorial search.
Indeed, our approach builds upon a wealth of previous contributions to these areas, which we briefly cover in the following sections.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10299

