The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Style-Guided and Disentangled Representation for Robust Image-to-Image
Translation
Jaewoong Choi, Daeha Kim, Byung Cheol Song
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 22212, South Korea
chlwodnd500@naver.com, kdhht5022@gmail.com, bcsong@inha.ac.kr

Abstract

Recently, as an approach to mitigate mode collapse from
an information-theoretic perspective, (Chen et al. 2016) tried
to maximize the mutual information (MI) between the latent space and the generated image space. Also, mode seeking regularization (Mao et al. 2019) for encouraging minor
modes was introduced for the I2I task. Besides, many studies
to overcome mode collapse in generative models have been
reported (Anoosheh et al. 2019; Jolicoeur-Martineau 2018;
Choi et al. 2020).
However, the above-mentioned methods still have several
limitations. (Choi et al. 2020) newly proposed a loss function for the diversity of style information, but it could not be
a fundamental solution for mode collapse. Also, (Mao et al.
2019) relied solely on a regularization term, and discriminated generated images and real images based on a static
decision boundary that causes mode collapse. A single decision boundary causes a critical problem that generated images are stuck in a specific mode. In particular, the static
decision boundary in the I2I task makes diverse image attributes gather in a single basin (Sun, Fang, and Schwing
2020). The left side of Fig. 1 shows the limitations of the
previous works.
To overcome the mode collapse problem in the I2I
task, we allow a discriminator to produce a flexible decision boundary. (Jolicoeur-Martineau 2018) and (Sun, Fang,
and Schwing 2020) already reported that flexible decision
boundary could mitigate the phenomenon of being stuck in
a single basin when translating images of a few visual attributes. Thus, inspired by the previous studies, we present
a style-guided discriminator to consider diverse modes and
detailed styles. Also, we borrow an extrinsic regularization
term for disentanglement of encoded representations. In addition, we utilize use-specific weights based on information
theory for boosting generator performance.
Main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a novel style-guided discriminator loss function that attempts to mitigate mode collapse and also
disentangle style representation through flexible decision
boundary. As far as we know, this is the world-first explicit discriminator based on pairwise input for a multiple
domain I2I task.
• The discrimination plot on the right of Fig. 1 presents a
way to visually confirm the degree of mode collapse relaxation and reality of each generated image. This plot

Recently, various image-to-image translation (I2I) methods
have improved mode diversity and visual quality in terms
of neural networks or regularization terms. However, conventional I2I methods relies on a static decision boundary
and the encoded representations in those methods are entangled with each other, so they often face with ‘mode collapse’ phenomenon. To mitigate mode collapse, 1) we design
a so-called style-guided discriminator that guides an input image to the target image style based on the strategy of flexible decision boundary. 2) Also, we make the encoded representations include independent domain attributes. Based on
two ideas, this paper proposes Style-Guided and Disentangled Representation for Robust Image-to-Image Translation
(SRIT). SRIT showed outstanding FID by 8%, 22.8%, and
10.1% for CelebA-HQ, AFHQ, and Yosemite datasets, respectively. The translated images of SRIT reflect the styles
of target domain successfully. This indicates that SRIT shows
better mode diversity than previous works.

Introduction
Generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) capable of generating high-fidelity images from noise
is getting a lot of attention from image synthesis (Brock,
Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Lučić et al. 2019), superresolution (Ledig et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018), image-toimage translation (I2I)(Zhu et al. 2017; Isola et al. 2017;
Mao et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2018), and so on. Powerful image
generation ability of GAN is useful for the I2I task, whose
main goal is to learn the translation between different domains. The core of I2I is to translate an image via a latent
vector containing generalized information in the visual domain (Choi et al. 2020).
However, since GAN is like a two-player minmax game of
discriminator and generator, it cannot avoid mode collapse
(Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). Mode refers to a type
of generated images, and mode collapse happens when the
generated images follow only a single mode or very few
modes. Mode collapse in I2I is a phenomenon in which the
translated images are biased on a single mode when translating to a different domain (Kim et al. 2017).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

463

