The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Distributed Learning with Strategic Users: A Repeated Game Approach
Abdullah B Akbay, Junshan Zhang
Arizona State University
aakbay@asu.edu, junshan.zhang@asu.edu

Abstract

of an effective reward mechanism for the FC and to analyze how the strategic actions of the users impact the performance of the learning efforts.
There are a number of challenges in distributed learning
with strategic users. Firstly, the users are not obliged to dedicate their resources and they may not fulfill their roles in
the training of the algorithm if it is not in their own interest.
Secondly, the FC cannot directly validate data driven gradient updates due to their unknown stochastic nature. Furthermore, the interactions among users and the FC are repeated,
and each user is capable of devising intricate strategies based
on the past interactions. The quality of the updates may vary
over time and across the users. On the other hand, the FC’s
ability to reciprocate against non-cooperation is significantly
restricted since she cannot directly observe the user actions.
Finally, the FC is not allowed to impose penalties on the
users and positive rewards are the only options at her disposal to incentivize user participation. To the best of our
knowledge, our study is the first distributed learning framework to consider these challenges.
In this study, we model the interactions (in terms of gradient reporting and reward) between the FC and the users
as repeated games, which intertwine with the updates in distributed learning. We propose a reward mechanism for the
fusion center, based on adaptive zero-determinant strategies,
thereby generalizing the celebrated ZD strategies to the repeated games with time-varying stochastic errors. To tackle
the challenge that the FC cannot directly verify the received
reported gradients, we devise a gradient estimation and user
action classification. Our findings show that, by employing
adaptive ZD strategies, the FC can incentivize the strategic
users to cooperate and report informative gradient updates,
thus ensuing the convergence of distributed learning.

We consider a distributed learning setting where strategic
users are incentivized by a fusion center, to train a learning model based on local data. The users are not obliged to
provide their true gradient updates and the fusion center is
not capable of validating the authenticity of reported updates.
Thus motivated, we formulate the interactions between the
fusion center and the users as repeated games, manifesting
an under-explored interplay between machine learning and
game theory. We then develop an incentive mechanism for
the fusion center based on a joint gradient estimation and user
action classification scheme, and study its impact on the convergence performance of distributed learning. Further, we devise adaptive zero-determinant (ZD) strategies, thereby generalizing the classical ZD strategies to the repeated games
with time-varying stochastic errors. Theoretical and empirical analysis show that the fusion center can incentivize the
strategic users to cooperate and report informative gradient
updates, thus ensuring the convergence.

Introduction
Distributed machine learning is becoming increasingly important in large-scale problems with data-intensive applications (Jordan, Lee, and Yang 2019; Li et al. 2014; Low
et al. 2012; Xing et al. 2016). Notably, federated learning
has emerged as an attractive distributed computing paradigm
that aims to learn an accurate model without collecting data
from the owners and storing it in the cloud: The training
data is kept locally on the computing devices which participate in the model training and report gradient updates (or its
variants) based on local data (Konečný et al. 2016).
We study a distributed learning scheme in which privacyaware users train a global model with a fusion center. The
users to be rational, self-interested and risk-neutral. They are
not compelled to contribute their resources unconditionally
and the system may reach a non-cooperative Nash equilibrium where the users do not participate in training. This departs from conventional distributed learning schemes where
the agents directly follow the lead of the fusion center (FC)1
and send their gradients. Our main objectives are to design

Distributed Learning as Repeated Games
We consider a distributed learning setting with K strategic
users K = {1, . . . , K} and a fusion center (FC), and the
optimization problem is given as follows:


1 XK
min F (θ) :=
EZk ∼D L(θ; Zk ) ,
(1)
k=1
θ∈Rn
K
where L(·) is the loss function. In each iteration, each user
gets a mini-batch of s i.i.d. samples from an unknown distribution D, and computes the stochastic gradient signal as

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We refer to the fusion center as “she” and a user as “he”.

5976

