The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Well-Classified Examples are Underestimated in Classification with Deep Neural
Networks
Guangxiang Zhao 1, 2 , Wenkai Yang 3 , Xuancheng Ren 2 , Lei Li 2 , Yunfang Wu 2 , Xu Sun 2, 4 *
1

2

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{zhaoguangxiang, renxc, wuyf, xusun}@pku.edu.cn, {wkyang, lilei}@stu.pku.edu.cn
Abstract

The conventional wisdom behind learning deep classification
models is to focus on bad-classified examples and ignore wellclassified examples that are far from the decision boundary. For
instance, when training with cross-entropy loss, examples with
higher likelihoods (i.e., well-classified examples) contribute
smaller gradients in back-propagation. However, we theoretically show that this common practice hinders representation
learning, energy optimization, and margin growth. To counteract this deficiency, we propose to reward well-classified
examples with additive bonuses to revive their contribution
to the learning process. This counterexample theoretically addresses these three issues. We empirically support this claim
by directly verifying the theoretical results or significant performance improvement with our counterexample on diverse
tasks, including image classification, graph classification, and
machine translation. Furthermore, this paper shows that we can
deal with complex scenarios, such as imbalanced classification,
OOD detection, and applications under adversarial attacks, because our idea can solve these three issues. Code is available
at https://github.com/lancopku/well-classified-examples-areunderestimated.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of energy and margins of CE loss on
CIFAR-10. (Left): averaged conditional energy E(y|x) for
examples of class “dog”. (Right): margin distributions of
the trained classification models, there are some examples
that have negative margins, most examples are around the
decision boundary.

Therefore, CE loss shows better generalization ability due to
the enlarged steepness (Solla, Levin, and Fleisher 1988). During training with CE loss, well-classified examples contribute
less to the gradient as compared to bad-classified ones. The
wisdom behinds the operation of overlooking well-classified
examples is well-classified examples have relatively less information in the learning. The improved variants of CE loss
still comply with such wisdom (Liu et al. 2016; Szegedy et al.
2016; Lin et al. 2017).
We doubt the above practice with the following three facts:
(1) Recent studies in imbalanced learning indicate that downweighting the learning of relatively well-classified data-rich
classes severely impairs the representation learning (Kang
et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020). These studies inspire us to
reflect on whether this is also the case at the sample level,
and we validate that down-weighting the learning of wellclassified samples also decreases the performance (Table 3).
(2) As to Energy-Based Models (EBM) (LeCun et al. 2006), a
sharper energy surface is desired.1 However, we find that the
energy surface trained with CE loss is not sharp, as plotted
in Figure 1. The possible reason is that CE loss has insuffi-

Introduction

In common practice, classification with deep neural networks (DNNs) down-weights the contribution from wellclassified examples. DNNs have achieved leading performance in mainstream classification tasks (He et al. 2016;
Kipf and Welling 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al.
2019). Usually, the training of DNNs relies on optimizing
the designed metrics between the target and the prediction
through back-propagation (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams
1986). Mean-Square Error (MSE) calculates a quadratic distance between the target and the probabilistic prediction
of each example (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986).
Cross-Entropy (CE) loss measures the distance between the
target distribution and the probability distribution (Baum
and Wilczek 1988). CE loss is preferred as compared to
MSE since CE loss encourages accurate predictions by bringing steep gradients to well-classified examples (Baum and
Wilczek 1988; Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Refer to the talk “The Future is Self-Supervised Learning” by
Yann LeCun at ICLR 2020

9180

