The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Weakly Supervised Neural Symbolic Learning for Cognitive Tasks
Jidong Tian1, 2 , Yitian Li1, 2 , Wenqing Chen1, 2 , Liqiang Xiao1, 2 ,
Hao He * 1, 2 , Yaohui Jin1, 2
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
State Key Lab of Advanced Optical Communication System and Network,
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{frank92, yitian li, wenqingchen,xiaoliqiang, hehao, jinyh}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Context: Kristin and her son Justin went to visit her mother
Carol on a nice Sunday afternoon. They went out for a movie
together and had a good time.
Question: How is Carol related to Justin?
Answer: Grandmother.

Despite the recent success of end-to-end deep neural networks, there are growing concerns about their lack of logical reasoning abilities, especially on cognitive tasks with
perception and reasoning processes. A solution is the neural symbolic learning (NeSyL) method that can effectively
utilize pre-defined logic rules to constrain the neural architecture making it perform better on cognitive tasks. However, it is challenging to apply NeSyL to these cognitive tasks
because of the lack of supervision, the non-differentiable
manner of the symbolic system, and the difficulty to probabilistically constrain the neural network. In this paper, we
propose WS-NeSyL, a Weakly Supervised Neural Symbolic
Learning model for cognitive tasks with logical reasoning.
First, WS-NeSyL employs a novel back search algorithm to
sample the possible reasoning process through logic rules.
This sampled process can supervise the neural network as
the pseudo label. Based on this algorithm, we can backpropagate gradients to the neural network of WS-NeSyL in a
weakly supervised manner. Second, we introduce a probabilistic logic regularization into WS-NeSyL to help the neural network learn probabilistic logic. To evaluate WS-NeSyL,
we have conducted experiments on three cognitive datasets,
including temporal reasoning, handwritten formula recognition, and relational reasoning datasets. Experimental results
show that WS-NeSyL not only outperforms the end-to-end
neural model but also beats the state-of-the-art neural symbolic learning models.

Mother

Carol

Kristin

∧

Mother

Kristin

→

Justin

Grandmother

Carol

Justin

Figure 1: An example of a cognitive problem. To solve the
problem, we are required to perceive information (colorful
words) from the texts on the top of the figure and then reason
out the result based on the bottom logic.

et al. 2020). This is because DNNs can hardly master systematic knowledge without the supervision of the reasoning
process and apply symbolic rules to make logical reasoning. In response to the problem, an expected solution is neural symbolic learning (NeSyL), which introduces a symbolic
system to guide the neural network by cascading them. As
a result, NeSyL can combine the extraordinary perception
ability of the neural network and the stable logical reasoning ability of the symbolic system (Dai et al. 2019).
Previous studies of NeSyL (Si et al. 2019; Weber et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2020) focused more on solving the interaction between the neural network and the symbolic system. These studies solved the problem of gradient barriers to a certain extent. However, there are still three challenges that hinder the application of NeSyL to different cognitive tasks. Firstly, most cognitive tasks involve complex
reasoning processes, which lack the ground truth to supervise (Weber et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020). Secondly, due to
the non-differentiable nature of the symbolic system, available NeSyL methods usually use non-generalizable strategies to integrate neural networks and symbolic systems (Weber et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020), which hinders the reuse of
these methods on cognitive tasks with different logic rules.
Thirdly, even if the two modules can interact with each other,
the deterministic constraints of the logic rules cannot constrain the probabilistic reasoning process of the neural net-

Introduction
Like human cognition, cognitive tasks include two processes: information perception and logical reasoning. As
the example of a cognitive instance in Figure 1, to answer the question, we should first perceive subjects and kinships from the text and then make logical reasoning according to the logical rule of Mother(x, y) ∧ Mother(y, z) →
Grandmother(x, z). Although end-to-end deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success recently (Devlin et al. 2019), they cannot complete these cognitive tasks
in accordance with effective cognitive processes (Ribeiro,
Guestrin, and Singh 2019; Sen and Saffari 2020; Sugawara
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5888

