The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CLPA: Clean-Label Poisoning Availability Attacks
Using Generative Adversarial Nets
Bingyin Zhao,Yingjie Lao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Clemson University, SC, 29634, USA
{bingyiz, ylao}@clemson.edu

Abstract

learning classifiers by adding imperceptible perturbation to a
benign input. Evasion attacks occur at the inference phase and
require attackers to modify model inputs. Backdoor attacks induce models to make wrong predictions on inputs embedded
with backdoor triggers, for instance, a pair of glasses (Chen
et al. 2017), a colored pattern (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg
2017), or even invisible triggers (Nguyen and Tran 2021;
Doan et al. 2021; Doan, Lao, and Li 2021). However, it requires the attacker to access both training and inference phase
to inject and activate backdoor triggers. Poisoning attacks,
on the other hand, manipulate model behavior at the training phase by injecting deliberately crafted malicious data in
the training set. The adversarial goals of poisoning attack
target model availability or integrity. The availability attack
attempts to subvert the overall model accuracy while the integrity attack attempts to only affect the prediction results
of specific inputs. Detailed comparison of these attacks is
summarized in Table 1.

Poisoning attacks are emerging threats to deep neural networks
where the adversaries attempt to compromise the models by
injecting malicious data points in the clean training data. Poisoning attacks target either the availability or integrity of a
model. The availability attack aims to degrade the overall
accuracy while the integrity attack causes misclassification
only for specific instances without affecting the accuracy of
clean data. Although clean-label integrity attacks are proven
to be effective in recent studies, the feasibility of clean-label
availability attacks remains unclear. This paper, for the first
time, proposes a clean-label approach, CLPA, for the poisoning availability attack. We reveal that due to the intrinsic
imperfection of classifiers, naturally misclassified inputs can
be considered as a special type of poisoned data, which we
refer to as “natural poisoned data”. We then propose a twophase generative adversarial net (GAN) based poisoned data
generation framework along with a triplet loss function for synthesizing clean-label poisoned samples that locate in a similar
distribution as natural poisoned data. The generated poisoned
data are plausible to human perception and can also bypass
the singular vector decomposition (SVD) based defense. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on CIFAR-10
and ImageNet dataset over a variety type of models. Codes are
available at: https://github.com/bxz9200/CLPA.

Introduction
In the past years, machine learning, especially deep learning has achieved remarkable advancement in a wide range
of fields including computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016), natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2019; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015),
and game playing (Silver et al. 2017, 2016). Despite unprecedented progress, machine learning models are shown
to be susceptible to various types of adversarial attacks such
as evasion attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Clements et al. 2021; Clements and Lao 2022b), backdoor
attacks (Clements and Lao 2018b,a, 2019; Saha, Subramanya,
and Pirsiavash 2020), and poisoning attacks (Biggio, Nelson,
and Laskov 2012), which raises serious concern of the robustness and security for the real-world deployments (Clements
and Lao 2022a; Lao et al. 2022). A notable example of evasion attacks is the adversarial example which fools machine

Evasion
Attacks
Backdoor
Attacks
Poisoning
Attacks

Training

Inference

×

✓

✓

✓

✓

×

Adversarial Goals
Misclassify
Specific Inputs
Misclassify
Specific Inputs
Degrade Overall
Performance
Misclassify
Specific Inputs

Table 1: Comparison of adversarial goals and capability.
Poisoning attacks are critical threats to scenarios where attackers are able to find ways to supply new training data. For
instance, web-based repositories always provide such opportunities for attackers to inject poisoned training data through
malware. Benign models will be maliciously affected after
training with these data. With the rapid development of deep
learning, models become more complex and harder to train.
Thus, it is particularly worth studying poisoning availability
attacks since training with a poisoned dataset may lead to a
severe loss of time and computational resources and cause a
denial of service in real-world applications. Prior poisoning
availability attacks usually add large distortion to poisoned
samples in the pixel space (Yang et al. 2017) or assign incorrect labels (Muñoz-González et al. 2017, 2019; Xiao, Xiao,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9162

