The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Logic Programs Through Divide, Constrain, and Conquer
Andrew Cropper
University of Oxford
andrew.cropper@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

generalises the examples. Many modern systems can learn
optimal and recursive programs but struggle to learn large
programs. For instance, M ETAGOL (Muggleton, Lin, and
Tamaddoni-Nezhad 2015) struggles to learn programs with
more than six rules and ILASP3 (Law 2018) struggles to
learn rules with more than a few body literals.
To address these limitations, we introduce an approach
that combines classical D&C search with modern constraintdriven search. As with D&C approaches, we divide the examples into disjoint subsets and induce separate hypotheses
for them. Specifically, we first learn a hypothesis for each
positive example. Each hypothesis will likely be too specific.
We therefore search again for a hypothesis that generalises
pairs of examples. These new hypotheses will again likely be
too specific but should generalise better than previous ones.
We repeat this process each time increasing the partition size
until it matches or exceeds the number of positive examples.
The aforementioned approach on its own is pointless as
it simply involves repeated search. The key idea of our
approach is to reuse knowledge discovered when solving
smaller tasks to help solve larger tasks. For instance, when
searching for a hypothesis for a single positive example, if
we discover a hypothesis that incorrectly entails a negative
example then any more general hypothesis will also entail it.
We can therefore ignore all generalisations of the hypothesis
in subsequent iterations.
To realise our idea, we build on the constraint-driven learning from failures (LFF) (Cropper and Morel 2021a,b) ILP
approach. The goal of LFF is to accumulate constraints to
restrict the hypothesis space. In our approach, we accumulate
constraints during both the divide and conquer steps. In other
words, we reuse constraints learned during one iteration in
subsequent iterations. We call our approach divide, constrain,
and conquer (DCC).
To illustrate our approach, suppose we want to learn the
following program h1 to find odd elements in a list:

We introduce an inductive logic programming approach that
combines classical divide-and-conquer search with modern
constraint-driven search. Our anytime approach can learn optimal, recursive, and large programs and supports predicate
invention. Our experiments on three domains (classification,
inductive general game playing, and program synthesis) show
that our approach can increase predictive accuracies and reduce learning times.

1

Introduction

Inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1991) is a
form of machine learning. Given positive and negative examples and background knowledge (BK), the ILP problem is to
find a set of rules (a hypothesis) which with the BK entails
all the positive and none of the negative examples.
The fundamental challenge in ILP is to efficiently search
a large hypothesis space (the set of all hypotheses) for a solution (a hypothesis that correctly generalises the examples).
Divide-and-conquer (D&C) approaches, such as TILDE
(Blockeel and Raedt 1998), divide the examples into disjoint
sets and then search for a hypothesis for each set, similar to
decision tree learners (Quinlan 1986). Separate-and-conquer
(S&C) approaches, such as P ROGOL (Muggleton 1995) and
A LEPH (Srinivasan 2001), search for a hypothesis that generalises a subset of the examples, separate these examples,
and then search for more rules to add to the hypothesis to
generalise the remaining examples.
Although powerful, D&C and S&C approaches struggle to
perform predicate invention (Stahl 1995) and learn recursive
and optimal programs (Cropper et al. 2022), partly because
they only consider subsets of the examples. For instance,
P ROGOL and A LEPH need examples of both the base and
inductive cases (in that order) to learn a recursive program.
To overcome these limitations, many modern systems learn
from all examples simultaneously. Modern systems also use
powerful constraint solvers, such as answer set programming
(ASP) solvers (Gebser et al. 2014), to search for a hypothesis.
For instance, ASPAL (Corapi, Russo, and Lupu 2011) precomputes the set of all possible rules that may appear in
a hypothesis and uses an ASP solver to find a subset that

f(A,B) ← head(A,B), odd(B)
f(A,B) ← head(A,B), even(B), tail(A,C), f(C,B)
Suppose we have two positive examples e1 = f([4,3,4,6],3)
and e2 = f([2,2,9,4,8,10],9) which correspond to odd elements in the second and third positions of a list respectively.
Also assume we have suitable negative examples and that we
restrict hypotheses to definite programs (Lloyd 2012). Given

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6446

