The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Goal Recognition as Reinforcement Learning
Leonardo Amado1 , Reuth Mirsky, 2 , Felipe Meneguzzi 3,1
1
Pontifı́cia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
Bar Ilan University, Israel and The University of Texas at Austin, USA
3
University of Aberdeen, Scotland
leorosaamado@gmail.com, mirskyr@cs.biu.ac.il, felipe.meneguzzi@abdn.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Cost of Domain Description: Crafted domain theories require deliberate design and accurate specification of domain
dynamics, which is usually a process done manually by an
expert. In highly complex environments, manual elicitation
of such a model might even be impossible.
Noise Susceptibility: As specifying accurate domain dynamics is costly, many specifications are incomplete and
cannot inform the recognizer about unlikely observations
or partial observation sequences. This property makes many
goal recognizers susceptible to noise.
Online Costs: Some recognizers require costly online computations, such as multiple planner or parser executions.
These computations can hinder the recognizer’s real-time inference ability, especially when observations are processed
incrementally and the goal of the actor needs to be reevaluated many times throughout the plan execution.
We address these limitations by replacing manually
crafted representations and online executions with modelfree Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques. The resulting
framework performs efficient and noise-resistant GR without the need to craft a domain model and without any planner or parser executions during recognition.
The three key contributions of this paper are: (1) Revisiting the GR problem definition to accommodate RL-based
domains and developing a new framework that relies on policies or utility functions derived from any model-free RL
technique. This framework consists of two main stages: Offline learning for each potential goal, and an online inference stage that compares an observed trajectory to those
learned policies. (2) A first instance of the new framework
for tabular RL using an off-the-shelf implementation of a
Q-learning algorithm and three recognition measures: Accumulated utility, a modified KL-divergence, and Divergence
Point. (3) Evaluation of the new framework on domains with
partial and noisy observability. Experiments show that even
with a very short learning process, we can still accurately
and robustly perform GR on challenging problems. We show
this framework’s ability to perform comparably to a state-ofthe-art goal recognizer on standard evaluation domains, and
have superior performance in noisy environments.

Most approaches for goal recognition rely on specifications of
the possible dynamics of the actor in the environment when
pursuing a goal. These specifications suffer from two key
issues. First, encoding these dynamics requires careful design by a domain expert, which is often not robust to noise
at recognition time. Second, existing approaches often need
costly real-time computations to reason about the likelihood
of each potential goal. In this paper, we develop a framework that combines model-free reinforcement learning and
goal recognition to alleviate the need for careful, manual domain design, and the need for costly online executions. This
framework consists of two main stages: offline learning of
policies or utility functions for each potential goal, and online inference. We provide a first instance of this framework
using tabular Q-learning for the learning stage, as well as
three mechanisms for the inference stage. The resulting instantiation achieves state-of-the-art performance against goal
recognizers on standard evaluation domains and superior performance in noisy environments.

Introduction
Goal recognition (GR) is a key task in artificial intelligence,
where a recognizer infers the goal of an actor based on a sequence of observations. Consider a service robot that wishes
to assist a person in the kitchen by fetching appropriate utensils without interrupting the task execution or demanding attention for specifying instructions (Kautz and Allen 1986;
Monteiro et al. 2017; Granada et al. 2020; Bishop et al.
2020). A common approach to enable the robot to perceive
and infer the person’s goal in this situation consists of a
pipeline of activity recognition from raw images and translation into actions for a symbolic GR algorithm (Figure 1). After processing the raw images into observations, a goal recognizer further processes a sequence of these observations
into a goal or a distribution of goals. Most GR approaches
rely on arduously informing the recognizer about the feasibility and likelihood of the different actions that the actor
can execute. This process might include crafting elaborate
domain theories, multiple planner executions in real-time,
intricate domain optimizations, or any combination of these
tasks, leading to limitations:

Background
We begin by defining a GR problem in a way that is consistent with existing literature (Meneguzzi and Pereira 2021;

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9644

