The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contrastive Learning from Extremely Augmented Skeleton Sequences for
Self-Supervised Action Recognition
Tianyu Guo1 , Hong Liu1∗ , Zhan Chen1 , Mengyuan Liu2 , Tao Wang1 , Runwei Ding1
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School, China
2
The School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
{levigty, taowang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {hongliu, zhanchen cz, dingrunwei}@pku.edu.cn, nkliuyifang@gmail.com

Abstract

2017), RNN-based method (Du, Wang, and Wang 2015;
Song et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019), or GCN-based method
(Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Shi et al. 2019; Si et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2021), numerous labeled data is used to learn
the action representation. Fully supervised action recognition methods are inevitably data-driven, but the cost of labeling large-scale datasets is particularly high. Therefore, more
and more researchers intend to use unlabeled skeleton data
for learning human action representation.
Recently, several works (Zheng et al. 2018; Su, Liu, and
Shlizerman 2020; Lin et al. 2020) focus on designing pretext tasks for self-supervised methods to learn action representations from unlabeled skeleton data. With the development of contrastive self-supervised learning and its ability to
make feature representations have better discrimination, several works (Rao et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021) directly rely on
the contrastive learning framework, using normal augmentations to construct similar positive samples. However, those
carefully designed augmentations limit the model to further
explore the novel movement patterns exposed by other augmentations and there are still several significant motivations
that need to be carefully considered:
1) Stronger data augmentations could benefit representation learning. In SkeletonCLR (Li et al. 2021), it just
uses two data augmentations Shear and Crop. Nevertheless,
studies (Tian et al. 2020; Wang and Qi 2021) have shown
that data augmentation design is crucial, and the abundant semantic information introduced by stronger data augmentations can significantly improve the generalizability of
learned representations and eventually bridge the gap with
the fully supervised methods.
2) Directly using stronger augmentations could deteriorate the performance. Stronger data augmentations bring
novel movement patterns while the augmented skeleton sequence may not keep the identity of the original sequence.
Therefore, directly using extreme augmentations may not
necessarily be able to boost the performance due to the drastic changes in original identity. Thus, additional efforts are
needed to explore the role of stronger augmentations.
3) How to force the model to learn more features.
Simply relying on the contrastive learning framework can
not force the model to study more features well. Studies
(Pan et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2020) have shown that the
drop mechanism can be used for contrastive learning and

In recent years, self-supervised representation learning for
skeleton-based action recognition has been developed with
the advance of contrastive learning methods. The existing
contrastive learning methods use normal augmentations to
construct similar positive samples, which limits the ability to explore novel movement patterns. In this paper, to
make better use of the movement patterns introduced by extreme augmentations, a Contrastive Learning framework utilizing Abundant Information Mining for self-supervised action Representation (AimCLR) is proposed. First, the extreme augmentations and the Energy-based Attention-guided
Drop Module (EADM) are proposed to obtain diverse positive samples, which bring novel movement patterns to improve the universality of the learned representations. Second,
since directly using extreme augmentations may not be able
to boost the performance due to the drastic changes in original identity, the Dual Distributional Divergence Minimization
Loss (D3 M Loss) is proposed to minimize the distribution
divergence in a more gentle way. Third, the Nearest Neighbors Mining (NNM) is proposed to further expand positive
samples to make the abundant information mining process
more reasonable. Exhaustive experiments on NTU RGB+D
60, PKU-MMD, NTU RGB+D 120 datasets have verified
that our AimCLR can significantly perform favorably against
state-of-the-art methods under a variety of evaluation protocols with observed higher quality action representations. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Levigty/AimCLR.

Introduction
On account that action recognition has very broad application in many fields such as human-computer interaction,
video content analysis, and smart surveillance, it has always
been a popular research topic in the field of computer vision.
Due to the development of depth sensors (Zhang 2012) and
the human pose estimation algorithms (Cao et al. 2019; Fang
et al. 2017), skeleton-based action recognition has gradually
become a significant branch of action recognition.
In the past few years, most of the existing skeleton-based
action recognition methods are based on the supervised
learning framework. Whether it is a CNN-based method
(Du, Fu, and Wang 2015; Ke et al. 2017; Liu, Liu, and Chen
∗

Corresponding Author: hongliu@pku.edu.cn
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

762

