The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pose Adaptive Dual Mixup for Few-Shot Single-View 3D Reconstruction
Ta-Ying Cheng,1,3* Hsuan-Ru Yang, 1* Niki Trigoni, 3 Hwann-Tzong Chen, 2 Tyng-Luh Liu 1
1
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
ta-ying.cheng@cs.ox.ac.uk, frankyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw, niki.trigoni@cs.ox.ac.uk, htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw,
liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw
2

Abstract
We present a pose adaptive few-shot learning procedure and
a two-stage data interpolation regularization, termed Pose
Adaptive Dual Mixup (PADMix), for single-image 3D reconstruction. While augmentations via interpolating feature-label
pairs are effective in classification tasks, they fall short in
shape predictions potentially due to inconsistencies between
interpolated products of two images and volumes when rendering viewpoints are unknown. PADMix targets this issue
with two sets of mixup procedures performed sequentially.
We first perform an input mixup which, combined with a pose
adaptive learning procedure, is helpful in learning 2D feature
extraction and pose adaptive latent encoding. The stagewise
training allows us to build upon the pose invariant representations to perform a follow-up latent mixup under one-to-one
correspondences between features and ground-truth volumes.
PADMix significantly outperforms previous literature on fewshot settings over the ShapeNet dataset and sets new benchmarks on the more challenging real-world Pix3D dataset.

Introduction
Mixup, a feature-label interpolation scheme, has been well
explored and proven successful in enhancing 2D and 3D
classifications (Zhang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020), stabilizing generative networks, and enriching augmentations
under adversarial and few-shot settings (Mangla et al. 2020).
However, literature discussing the effectiveness of interpolation regularizations in reconstructing 3D shapes from singleview images is fairly limited. We speculate that the hindrance is mostly due to the ambiguity of defining a bijective mapping between mixed inputs and outputs. Specifically, without a given pose, an interpolation between views
of two objects may be inconsistent to the direct interpolation
of the two objects themselves.
Aiming at transferring the benefits of mixup on better generalizations to the reconstruction task under the challenge of
pose discrepancy, we first propose a pose adaptive learning
procedure on top of the effective prior-based autoencoders in
few-shot reconstruction tasks (Wallace and Hariharan 2019)
to promote latent representation pose invariance. With a near
pose invariant encoding space, we build a two-stage data

Figure 1: Overview. Top: We propose a two-stage mixup
routine named PADMix and a pose adaptive learning procedure to enhance a linear autoencoder for few-shot generalization on single-view reconstructions. Bottom: The mIoU
scores of current methods against the number of shots. Our
PADMix performs the best at 1-shot, with a slope of improvement steeper than all previous approaches.

augmentation strategy, termed Pose Adaptive Dual Mixup
(PADMix) (Figure 1), to enhance the generalization of object reconstruction in novel classes with minimal training
samples.
The first-stage mixup of PADMix is performed on the input images and ground-truth volumes. We generate a training sample from an interpolation of both the 2D and 3D
space of the input pairs (image and its corresponding prior),
which maps to an interpolation of their two corresponding
ground-truth volumes. We argue that the input mixup, while

* Denotes equal contribution.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

427

