The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Domain Collaborative Normalization via Structural Knowledge
Haifeng Xia, Zhengming Ding
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
hxia@tulane.edu, zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract

unlabeled target domain (Tang, Chen, and Jia 2020). The
primary challenge for UDA is to overcome domain shift
that multi-domains belong to various distributions (Xia and
Ding 2020; Sharma, Kalluri, and Chandraker 2021). Existing
mainstream solutions attempt to eliminate cross-domain discrepancy by learning domain-invariant representations with
DNN (Zhang et al. 2019; Du et al. 2021). Along this line, one
successful strategy adopts adversarial mechanism between
feature extractor and domain discriminator to perform domain confusion (Liu et al. 2019; Xiao and Zhang 2021). Other
efforts (Kang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020) focusing on the alignment of various distributions expect both domains to share
the identical statistics (e.g., mean value and co-variance). For
the convenient implementation, these works generally bind
the corresponding constraints with full-connection features
following convolutional operations. However, the effect of
objective function flowing in stacked network architecture
gradually becomes too weak to align source and target features specially on shallow layers during back propagation.

Batch Normalization (BN) as an important component assists
Deep Neural Networks in achieving promising performance
for extensive learning tasks by scaling distribution of feature
representations within mini-batches. However, the application
of BN suffers from performance degradation under the scenario of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA), since the
estimated statistics fail to concurrently describe two different domains. In this paper, we develop a novel normalization
technique, named Collaborative Normalization (CoN), for
eliminating domain discrepancy and accelerating the model
training of neural networks for UDA. Unlike typical strategies
only exploiting domain-specific statistics during normalization, our CoN excavates cross-domain knowledge and simultaneously scales features from various domains by mimicking
the merits of collaborative representation. Our CoN can be
easily plugged into popular neural network backbones for
cross-domain learning. On the one hand, theoretical analysis
guarantees that models with CoN promote discriminability of
feature representations and accelerate convergence rate; on
the other hand, empirical study verifies that replacing BN
with CoN in popular network backbones effectively improves
classification accuracy in most learning tasks across three
cross-domain visual benchmarks.

To overcome such a problem, the variants of BN linking adjacent layers attract massive attentions on domain adaptation.
Traditional methods typically adopt domain-specific BNs to
separately scale source and target features (Kang et al. 2019;
Tang, Chen, and Jia 2020), however, their major drawback
lies in the difficulty of capturing cross-domain association.
From statistical perspective, adaptive batch normalization
(AdaBN) (Li et al. 2018) thus exploits the same BN module
across various domains by training normalization component
on source domain and fixing parameters to identify target
samples for inference stage. However, significant domain discrepancy has negative influence on the direct application of
source statistics on target domain. To mitigate collision, the
automatic domain alignment layer (Cariucci et al. 2017) considers the linear combination of source and target statistics as
indicator of BN. The primary challenge is accurately to select
the combination coefficient as the key to succeed. Another
perspective delves into the learning of transferable feature
representations. Specifically, TransNorm (TN) claims that the
similar convolutional channels across both domains tend to
record similar patterns intensified in BN operation to promote
the transferability of features (Wang et al. 2019a). For visual
signals, theses attributions, however, are corresponding to the
same concepts such as blue sky, green grass et.al instead of
our interested objects. Therefore, the enhancement of them

Introduction
The hierarchical structure of Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
facilitates itself to achieve appealing performances with prolific semantic representations in most learning tasks (Xu et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021). As an indispensable
component in DNN, batch normalization (BN) aims to scale
internal features to promote modeling ability of DNN (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015). Concretely, typical BN preserves the
scale of distribution invariant among various network layers
by normalizing features, avoiding gradient vanishing and accelerating model convergence (Li et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2021).
To accurately estimate property of distribution, the training
of DNN thus requires abundant well-labeled instances, which
is unsuitable for real-life scenarios.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) casts a light on
such a barren condition and explores external source domain
with sufficient annotation to build a model generalized to
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2777

