The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Effect of Manifold Entanglement and Intrinsic Dimensionality on Learning
Daniel Kienitz, Ekaterina Komendantskaya, Michael Lones
Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK
{dk50, e.komendantskaya, m.lones}@hw.ac.uk

Abstract

To the best of the authors’ knowledge this is the first empirical study that factors in the entanglement when studying the
sample complexity and systematically compares the effects
of intrinsic dimensionality and entanglement. We define the
sample complexity ς := Σ + I + E as a result of the entanglement Σ, the intrinsic dimensionality I and the extrinsic
dimensionality E and estimate via regression analysis which
of these properties is statistically the most influential one for
supervised classification with deep ReLU (Fukushima 1969;
Fukushima and Miyake 1982; Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio
2011) networks. We show that the entanglement has a significantly larger effect on the sample complexity than the
intrinsic dimensionality and, more importantly, observe an
interdependence between these two factors. For low levels of
entanglement increasing the intrinsic dimensionality results
in equally low increases of the sample complexity while for
high levels of entanglement increases in the intrinsic dimensionality lead to larger increases of the sample complexity.
In other words, the effect of the intrinsic dimensionality on
the sample complexity depends on the given distribution’s
level of entanglement. Thus, intrinsic dimensionality and entanglement cannot be considered independently when studying the sample complexity but have to be considered jointly.
Our results do not contradict but complement the findings of Pope et al. (Pope et al. 2021). Pope et al.’s investigation of the intrinsic dimensionality’s impact on the sample complexity is limited to several complex datasets: ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, Hinton
et al. 2009) and FONTS (Stutz, Hein, and Schiele 2019).
Thus, their analysis only considers distributions with constant and high levels of entanglement. In our study, on the
other hand, we regard the entanglement as another variable
that influences the sample complexity and include it in our
analysis as well.
The work is structured as follows. In Sections and we
describe the notation and related work. Section introduces
two simple measures for the entanglement. In Section we
demonstrate the aforementioned results first for artificial
datasets and then in Section for real-world image benchmarks.

We empirically investigate the effect of class manifold entanglement and the intrinsic and extrinsic dimensionality of
the data distribution on the sample complexity of supervised
classification with deep ReLU networks. We separate the effect of entanglement and intrinsic dimensionality and show
statistically for artificial and real-world image datasets that
the intrinsic dimensionality and the entanglement have an interdependent effect on the sample complexity. Low levels of
entanglement lead to low increases of the sample complexity when the intrinsic dimensionality is increased, while for
high levels of entanglement the impact of the intrinsic dimensionality increases as well. Further, we show that in general
the sample complexity is primarily due to the entanglement
and only secondarily due to the intrinsic dimensionality of
the data distribution.

Introduction
It is a common assumption that distributions of natural data,
such as images, concentrate near or lie on low-dimensional
manifolds embedded in high-dimensional ambient spaces
(Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). The dimension
of this manifold is the intrinsic dimensionality of the distribution and the dimension of the ambient space is the extrinsic dimensionality. It has been shown theoretically that
the sample complexity of empirical risk minimization depends on the curvature of the data manifold and the decision
boundary, and on the number of intrinsic dimensions, but
not on the number of extrinsic dimensions (Narayanan and
Niyogi 2009; Narayanan and Mitter 2010). Recently, Pope
et al. (Pope et al. 2021) provided empirical evidence that
real-world image distributions indeed have low intrinsic dimensionality and that the sample complexity for deep classifiers is positively correlated with the intrinsic and almost
independent of the extrinsic dimensionality.
The goal of this work is to further study the effects on the
sample complexity of deep classifiers, however, this time under consideration of the entanglement of the class manifolds
(i.e. the curvature of the decision boundary). Intuitively, the
entanglement can be defined as the number of connected hyperplanes that are necessary to perfectly separate the classes.

Notation
Throughout this work we consider l ∈ N+ samples x ∈
R1×E arranged in the matrix X ∈ Rl×E with labels y ∈

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7160

