The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Delving into Sample Loss Curve to Embrace Noisy and Imbalanced Data
Shenwang Jiang1 , Jianan Li1* , Ying Wang1 , Bo Huang1 , Zhang Zhang 2 , Tingfa Xu 1 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
University of Massachusetts Lowell
{jiangwenj02, lijianan15, wangying7275}@gmail.com, a1039377853@163.com
Zhang Zhang@student.uml.edu, ciom xtf1@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Corrupted labels and class imbalance are commonly encountered in practically collected training data, which easily leads
to over-fitting of deep neural networks (DNNs). Existing
approaches alleviate these issues by adopting a sample reweighting strategy, which is to re-weight sample by designing
weighting function. However, it is only applicable for training data containing only either one type of data biases. In
practice, however, biased samples with corrupted labels and
of tailed classes commonly co-exist in training data. How
to handle them simultaneously is a key but under-explored
problem. In this paper, we find that these two types of biased samples, though have similar transient loss, have distinguishable trend and characteristics in loss curves, which
could provide valuable priors for sample weight assignment.
Motivated by this, we delve into the loss curves and propose
a novel probe-and-allocate training strategy: In the probing
stage, we train the network on the whole biased training data
without intervention, and record the loss curve of each sample
as an additional attribute; In the allocating stage, we feed the
resulting attribute to a newly designed curve-perception network, named CurveNet, to learn to identify the bias type of
each sample and assign proper weights through meta-learning
adaptively. Extensive synthetic and real experiments well validate the proposed method, which achieves state-of-the-art
performance on multiple challenging benchmarks.

Figure 1: Average training loss along with variance of clean
and noisy samples. Though noisy and clean samples become
indistinguishable from transient loss over training, the trend
of their loss curves are dramatically different in the long
run. Such difference could provide valuable priors to distinguish the two types of biased data and assign proper sample
weights accordingly through meta-learning, making it feasible to embrace biased training data with both corrupted
labels and class imbalance for model training.

handle training data with both corrupted labels and class imbalance, since there exist two entirely contradictive requirements for constructing the loss-weight mapping for the two
types of biased data. Specifically, for training data containing corrupted labels, samples with corrupted labels tend to
have large training loss, so the weighting function is supposed to map large loss to small sample weight to mitigate the effect of label noise. In contrast, for training data
with class imbalance, samples of tailed classes usually suffer large loss due to insufficient training, so the weighting
function ought to assign large weights to these hard positive
samples, making the network emphasize more on the tailed
classes to improve overall performance. Given the fact that
most practically collected data suffer both corrupted labels
and class imbalance, solving the two types of data bias simultaneously is a challenging and under-explored task (Cao
et al. 2021).
A key challenge is to distinguish clean samples of tail
class from those with corrupted labels, i.e., noisy samples,
and to assign different weights accordingly. Figure 1 illustrates training loss of samples of head and tail class. The
blue and the yellow curve represent the average training loss
along with variance for clean and noisy samples, respec-

Deep neural networks (DNNs) (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016) have made
tremendous progress thanks to the rapid growth of labeled
training data (Deng et al. 2009; Lin et al. 2014). However,
practically collected training samples always suffer from
corrupted labels (Zhang et al. 2021) and class imbalance (He
and Garcia 2009), which easily causes over-fitting of DNNs
and leads to poor generalization capability. This robust deep
learning issue has attracted increasing attention recently.
(Zhang et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2019; Shu
et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2020).
Sample re-weighting approach is a commonly adopted
strategy to mitigate the above robust learning issue, which
aims to learn a weighting function mapping training loss to
sample weight. However, such re-weighting strategy fails to
* Corresponding author
Code is available at https://github.com/jiangwenj02/CurveNet-V1
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7024

