The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MS-HGAT: Memory-Enhanced Sequential Hypergraph Attention Network for
Information Diffusion Prediction
Ling Sun, Yuan Rao∗ , Xiangbo Zhang, Yuqian Lan, Shuanghe Yu
Xi’an Key Laboratory of Social Intelligence and Complexity Data Processing,
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Shaanxi Joint Key Laboratory for Artifact Intelligence, China
{sunling, nick1001, Yuqian Lan xjtu, yushuanghe1997}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, raoyuan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

learning-based methods. Among them, feature engineeringbased methods usually extract representative features to predict the popularity of information propagation at the macro
level (Cheng et al. 2014; Gao, Ma, and Chen 2014). However, they can hardly model the dependencies between users,
nor can they capture the dynamic evolution of propagation structures. Probabilistic statistical generative models regarded information diffusion as event sequences in a time
domain (Zhao et al. 2015; Bao 2016). However, this kind
of approaches heavily depends on the predefined diffusion
mechanism, while the propagation in real world may not
strictly abide by the rule. In order to provide end-to-end solutions and improve the accuracy of information diffusion
prediction, methods based on representation learning have
been proposed. Prior works always focus on the structure
or sequence of cascades, but ignore social structures that
are not visible in cascades but have a significant impact
on users’ behaviour (Wang et al. 2017a,c; Li et al. 2017a),
leaving them unable to predict the inactive users. Therefore,
FOREST (Yang et al. 2019a) combines GRU and GCN to
jointly learn the cascading contexts and social network. As
the complete network structure is not always available, InfVAE (Sankar et al. 2020) embeds unobserved social connections by modeling homophily through variational autoencoder. Most recently, DyHGCN (Yuan et al. 2020) develops
heterogeneous graphs to capture the users’ interactions and
social relationships jointly.
Although these improvements can partly describe the
temporal influence and social homophily in cascades, they
still suffer from some limitations. First, to introduce global
dependencies of users, most of the existing methods take advantages of the friendship network, which is insufficient to
describe users’ interactive preferences and may even introduce noise. Second, user’s preference changes dynamically,
however, most of the existing methods ignore the dynamic
connections between users and cascades, limiting their performance on prediction.
To address the above problems, we propose a Memoryenhanced Sequential Hypergraph Attention Network (MSHGAT). Specifically, instead of learning the global dependencies of users from only the friendship network, we also
construct hypergraphs to depict their interaction dependencies. Compared with the traditional GNNs, our proposed
sequential HGATs can depict the dynamic interactions be-

Predicting the diffusion cascades is a critical task to understand information spread on social networks. Previous
methods usually focus on the order or structure of the infected users in a single cascade, thus ignoring the global
dependencies of users and cascades, limiting the performance of prediction. Current strategies to introduce social
networks only learn the social homogeneity among users,
which is not enough to describe their interaction preferences,
let alone the dynamic changes. To address the above issues, we propose a novel information diffusion prediction
model named Memory-enhanced Sequential Hypergraph Attention Networks (MS-HGAT). Specifically, to introduce the
global dependencies of users, we not only take advantages
of their friendships, but also consider their interactions at
the cascade level. Furthermore, to dynamically capture users’
preferences, we divide the diffusion hypergraph into several
sub graphs based on timestamps, develop Hypergraph Attention Networks to learn the sequential hypergraphs, and connect them with gated fusion strategy. In addition, a memoryenhanced embedding lookup module is proposed to capture the learned user representations into the cascade-specific
embedding space, thus highlighting the feature interaction
within the cascade. The experimental results over four realistic datasets demonstrate that MS-HGAT significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art diffusion prediction models in
both Hits@K and MAP@k metrics.

Introduction
New online social media allows people to access information in a cheap and handy way, thus facilitating rapid information sharing. Therefore, the information diffusion prediction technology, which aims to identify the potential users
of information sharing, is urgently needed for addressing
emerging scenarios in online social media, such as fake
news controlling (Vosoughi, Roy, and Aral 2018; Wu et al.
2020b,a), hotspot detection (Yang et al. 2018) and online advertising (Liu et al. 2021).
Generally, information diffusion prediction methods can
be divided into three categories: feature engineering-based
methods, generative-based methods and representation
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4156

