The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Search With Best-Price and Query-Based Predictions
Spyros Angelopoulos1 , Shahin Kamali2 , Dehou Zhang2
1

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
spyros.angelopoulos@lip6.fr, shahin.kamali@umanitoba.ca, zhangd37@myumanitoba.ca
2

Abstract

defined as the worst case ratio, over all price sequences, of
the maximum price in the sequence divided by the price accepted by the player. Thus, the competitive ratio provides
a worst-case guarantee that applies even to price sequences
that are adversarially generated. Since the problem formulates a basic, yet fundamental transaction setting, a player
that follows a competitively efficient algorithm has a safeguard against any amount of volatility with respect to prices.
(El-Yaniv et al. 2001) gave a simple, deterministic
p algorithm that achieves a competitive ratio equal to M/m,
where M, m are upper and lower bounds on the maximum
and minimum price in the sequence, respectively, and which
are assumed to be known to the algorithm. This bound is
tight for all deterministic algorithms. Randomization can
improve the competitive ratio to an asymptotically tight
bound equal to O(log(M/m)). See also the surveys (ElYaniv 1998; Mohr, Ahmad, and Schmidt 2014).
Online search is a basic paradigm in the class of online financial optimization problems. Several variants and settings
have been studied through the prism of competitive analysis; see, e.g., (Damaschke, Ha, and Tsigas 2009; Lorenz,
Panagiotou, and Steger 2009; Xu, Zhang, and Zheng 2011;
Clemente et al. 2016). The problem has also been studied as
a case study for evaluating several performance measures of
online algorithms, including measures alternative to competitive analysis (Boyar, Larsen, and Maiti 2014; Ahmad, Pirron, and Schmidt 2021). Extensions of online search such as
one-way trading and portfolio selection have also been studied extensively both within competitive analysis; e.g., (ElYaniv et al. 2001; Fujiwara, Iwama, and Sekiguchi 2011;
Borodin, El-Yaniv, and Gogan 2000), as well as from the
point of view of regret minimization; e.g., (Hazan and Kale
2015; Uziel and El-Yaniv 2020; Das, Johnson, and Banerjee
2014). We refer also to the survey (Li and Hoi 2014).
Previous work on competitive analysis of online financial
optimization problems, including online search, has largely
assumed a status of almost complete uncertainty in regards
to the input. Namely, the algorithm has either no knowledge,
or very limited knowledge concerning the input. This models a scenario that is overly pessimistic: indeed, in everyday
financial transactions, the players have some limited, albeit
potentially erroneous information on the market.
This observation illustrates the need for a study of online financial optimization problems using the framework

In the online (time-series) search problem, a player is presented with a sequence of prices which are revealed in an
online manner. In the standard definition of the problem,
for each revealed price, the player must decide irrevocably
whether to accept or reject it, without knowledge of future
prices (other than an upper and a lower bound on their extreme values), and the objective is to minimize the competitive ratio, namely the worst case ratio between the maximum
price in the sequence and the one selected by the player. The
problem formulates several applications of decision-making
in the face of uncertainty on the revealed samples.
Previous work on this problem has largely assumed extreme
scenarios in which either the player has almost no information
about the input, or the player is provided with some powerful, and error-free advice. In this work, we study learningaugmented algorithms, in which there is a potentially erroneous prediction concerning the input. Specifically, we consider two different settings: the setting in which the prediction is related to the maximum price in the sequence, as well
as well as the setting in which the prediction is obtained as
a response to a number of binary queries. For both settings,
we provide tight, or near-tight upper and lower bounds on the
worst-case performance of search algorithms as a function of
the prediction error. We also provide experimental results on
data obtained from stock exchange markets that confirm the
theoretical analysis, and explain how our techniques can be
applicable to other learning-augmented applications.

Introduction
The online (time series) search problem formulates a fundamental setting in decision-making under uncertainty. In
this problem, a player has an indivisible asset that wishes
to sell within a certain time horizon, e.g., within the next d
days, without knowledge of d. On each day i, a price pi is
revealed, and the player has two choices: either accept the
price, and accrue a profit equal to pi , or reject the price, in
which case the game repeats on day i + 1. If the player has
not sold by day d (i.e., has rejected all prices p1 , . . . , pd−1 ),
then the last price pd is accepted by default.
This problem was introduced and studied in (El-Yaniv
et al. 2001) by means of competitive analysis. Namely, the
competitive ratio of the player’s strategy (or algorithm) is
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9652

