The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Flex Distribution for Bounded-Suboptimal Multi-Agent Path Finding
Shao-Hung Chan,1 Jiaoyang Li,1 Graeme Gange,2
Daniel Harabor,2 Peter J. Stuckey,2 Sven Koenig1
1

University of Southern California
2
Monash University, Australia
{shaohung,jiaoyanl}@usc.edu, {graeme.gange,daniel.harabor,peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, skoenig@usc.edu

Abstract

branch forces one of the two agents to find a new path in order to avoid the found collision. Although several techniques
have been proposed to speed up CBS significantly (Boyarski
et al. 2015a,b, 2020b,a; Felner et al. 2018; Gange, Harabor, and Stuckey 2019; Li et al. 2019a,b,c, 2020a), the fact
that finding optimal solutions of MAPF is NP-hard (Yu and
LaValle 2013) motivates researchers to develop algorithms
that find bounded-suboptimal solutions in order to speed up
the search.
Explicit Estimation CBS (EECBS) (Li, Ruml, and Koenig
2021) is a variant of CBS that solves MAPF boundedsuboptimally by replacing A* search with Explicit Estimation Search (EES) (Thayer and Ruml 2011) on the high level
of CBS and A* search with focal search (Pearl and Kim
1982) on the low level of CBS. Focal search maintains a
lower bound on the minimum path cost of each agent. It
finds a bounded-suboptimal path for an agent by finding a
path whose path cost is at most w times the lower bound on
the minimum path cost of that agent. EES maintains a lower
bound LB on the sum of path costs of an optimal solution,
which it calculates using the lower bounds on the minimum
path costs for all agents maintained by the low-level focal
search. It finds a bounded-suboptimal solution by finding a
solution whose sum of path costs is at most w times LB.
We call the difference between w times the sum of the
lower bounds on the minimum path costs for all agents
and the sum of the path costs of the current (perhaps not
collision-free) paths for all agents the flex. The flex is thus
the largest amount by which the sum of path costs of the current paths for all agents can increase when resolving collisions to guarantee that a bounded-optimal solution is found.
EECBS distributes the flex in an inflexible way by requiring
every current path of an agent to be bounded-suboptimal. In
this paper, we propose Flexible EECBS (FEECBS) to distribute the flex among agents in a flexible way by allowing
some current paths of agents not to be bounded-suboptimal
as long as the set of paths is bounded-suboptimal. This allows FEECBS to resolve collisions and thus find boundedsuboptimal solutions faster than EECBS.
To ensure that the solution is bounded-suboptimal,
EECBS and FEECBS need to increase LB until the sum of
path costs of the solution is at most w times LB. When the
flex assigned to an agent is large, the low-level focal search
of FEECBS often finds a path for the agent with a suffi-

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of finding collision-free paths for multiple agents that minimize the
sum of path costs. EECBS is a leading two-level algorithm
that solves MAPF bounded-suboptimally, that is, within some
factor w of the minimum sum of path costs C ∗ . It uses focal search to find bounded-suboptimal paths on the low level
and Explicit Estimation Search (EES) to resolve collisions
on the high level. EES keeps track of a lower bound LB on
C ∗ to find paths whose sum of path costs is at most w · LB
in order to solve MAPF bounded-suboptimally. However, the
costs of many paths are often much smaller than w times their
minimum path costs, meaning that the sum of path costs is
much smaller than w · C ∗ . In this paper, we therefore propose
Flexible EECBS (FEECBS), which uses a flex(ible) distribution of the path costs (that relaxes the requirement to find
bounded-suboptimal paths on the low level) in order to reduce
the number of collisions that need to be resolved on the high
level while still guaranteeing to solve MAPF bounded suboptimally. We address the drawbacks of flex distribution via
techniques such as restrictions on the flex distribution, restarts
of the high-level search with EECBS, and low-level focal-A*
search. Our empirical evaluation shows that FEECBS substantially improves the efficiency of EECBS on MAPF instances with large maps and large numbers of agents.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of finding collision-free paths for multiple agents, the set of which
is called a solution. A solution of MAPF is optimal iff the
sum of path costs (that is, travel times) is minimum, and
bounded-suboptimal iff the sum of path costs is a userspecified suboptimality factor w ≥ 1 away from minimum.
MAPF has many applications, such as autonomous warehouses (Ma et al. 2017), airports (Li et al. 2019d), video
games (Li et al. 2020b), and UAVs (Ho et al. 2019).
Conflict-Based Search (CBS) (Sharon et al. 2015) is one
of the leading algorithms that solves MAPF optimally. It is
a two-level algorithm that finds paths for agents individually
on the low level and resolves collisions on the high level.
Once CBS finds a collision between the paths of two agents
on the high level, it generates two branches, where each
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9313

