The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Speeding Up the RUL− Dynamic-Controllability-Checking Algorithm for Simple
Temporal Networks with Uncertainty
Luke Hunsberger,1 Roberto Posenato2
1

Department of Computer Science, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY USA,
2
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Verona, Verona, Italy
hunsberger@vassar.edu, roberto.posenato@univr.it

simulating an edge S 0 X.) Such a d will be a solution to
the original STN. Otherwise, BF detects a negative cycle.
The algorithms in this paper use variants of Dijkstra’s
SSSP algorithm (Cormen et al. 2009), propagating either
forward from a source node or backward from a sink node.
Although Dijkstra typically applies only to STNs whose edgeweights are all non-negative, it may also be used for STNs
having some negative edges—if those negative edges either
all emanate from or all terminate in a single time-point (Morris 2014). As in Johnson’s algorithm (Cormen et al. 2009), a
potential function can be used to convert edge-weights in a
consistent STN to non-negative values, thereby enabling the
use of Dijkstra to guide the traversal of shortest paths.

Abstract
A Simple Temporal Network with Uncertainty (STNU) includes real-valued variables, called time-points; binary difference constraints on those time-points; and contingent links that
represent actions with uncertain durations. STNUs have been
used for robot control, web-service composition, and business
processes. The most important property of an STNU is called
dynamic controllability (DC); and algorithms for checking
this property are called DC-checking algorithms. The DCchecking algorithm for STNUs with the best worst-case timecomplexity is the RUL− algorithm due to Cairo, Hunsberger
and Rizzi. Its complexity is O(mn + k2 n + kn log n), where
n is the number of time-points, m is the number of constraints,
and k is the number of contingent links. It is expected that this
worst-case complexity cannot be improved upon. However,
this paper provides a new algorithm, called RUL2021, that
improves its performance in practice by an order of magnitude,
as demonstrated by a thorough empirical evaluation.

Simple Temporal Networks with Uncertainty
A Simple Temporal Network with Uncertainty (STNU) is an
STN augmented with contingent links that can be used to represent actions with uncertain durations (Morris, Muscettola,
and Vidal 2001). STNUs are used for robot control (Karpas
et al. 2015), web-service composition (Franceschetti and
Eder 2019), and business processes (Franceschetti and Eder
2020a,b). Faster algorithms for managing STNUs will make
them practical for a wider range of applications.
An STNU is a triple (T , C, L) where (T , C) is an STN
and L = {(Ai , xi , yi , Ci )}0≤i<k is a set of contingent links,
where for each i, 0 < xi < yi < ∞; Ai , Ci ∈ T ; and
Ci ≡ Cj iff i = j.1 The number of contingent links (CLs)
is denoted by k. For each (Ai , xi , yi , Ci ) ∈ L, Ai is its activation time-point (ATP), Ci its contingent time-point (CTP),
and ∆i = yi − xi the uncertainty in its duration. We also let
TC = {Ci | ∃(Ai , xi , yi , Ci ) ∈ L} denote the set of CTPs;
and TX = T \TC the set of executable time-points. A system using an STNU controls the execution of the executable
time-points (i.e., assigns values to them), but only observes
the execution of contingent time-points as they occur.
Each STNU S = (T , C, L) has a graph G = (T , E), where
the time-points in T serve as nodes, and the constraints in
C and contingent links in L together correspond to edges.
Specifically, E = Eo ∪ Eℓ ∪ Eu where:

Background
Simple Temporal Networks (STNs) were introduced by
Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl (1991) to facilitate reasoning about
time. An STN is a pair (T , C), where T is a set of real-valued
variables called time-points, and C is a set of binary difference
constraints on those time-points. Each constraint in an STN
has the form, Y − X ≤ δ, where X, Y ∈ T and δ ∈ R. Typically, the number of time-points is denoted by n = |T |, and
the number of constraints by m = |C|. Each STN has a corresponding graph G = (T , E), where the time-points serve as
nodes, and the constraints correspond to edges. Specifically,
for each constraint (Y − X ≤ δ) in C, there is a labeled
directed edge, called an ordinary edge, X δ Y in E.
An STN is consistent (i.e., has a solution as a constraint
satisfaction problem) if and only if its graph has no negative
cycles (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991). The consistency of
an STN can be determined, for example, by the Bellman-Ford
(BF) Single-Source Shortest-Paths (SSSP) algorithm (Cormen et al. 2009). This paper uses the version of BF in which
a new node S ̸∈ T is used as the source node. For consistent
networks, BF generates a distance function d, where for each
time-point X ∈ T , d(X) equals the length of the shortest
path from S to X. (Initially, for each X ∈ T , d(X) = 0,

• for each ordinary constraint (Y − X ≤ δ) in C, there is
an ordinary edge, X δ Y in Eo (as in an STN); and
1
The notation X ≡ Y represents that X and Y are the same
variable, not that their values are equal.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9776

