The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

RepBin: Constraint-Based Graph Representation Learning for
Metagenomic Binning
Hansheng Xue,1 Vijini Mallawaarachchi,1 Yujia Zhang,1 Vaibhav Rajan,2 Yu Lin1 *
1

School of Computing, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{hansheng.xue, vijini.mallawaarachchi, yujia.zhang, yu.lin}@anu.edu.au, vaibhav.rajan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Mixed communities of organisms are found in many environments – from the human gut to marine ecosystems – and
can have profound impact on human health and the environment. Metagenomics studies the genomic material of such
communities through high-throughput sequencing that yields
DNA subsequences for subsequent analysis. A fundamental
problem in the standard workflow, called binning, is to discover clusters, of genomic subsequences, associated with the
unknown constituent organisms. Inherent noise in the subsequences, various biological constraints that need to be imposed on them and the skewed cluster size distribution exacerbate the difficulty of this unsupervised learning problem. In
this paper, we present a new formulation using a graph where
the nodes are subsequences and edges represent homophily
information. In addition, we model biological constraints providing heterophilous signal about nodes that cannot be clustered together. We solve the binning problem by developing
new algorithms for (i) graph representation learning that preserves both homophily relations and heterophily constraints
(ii) constraint-based graph clustering method that addresses
the problems of skewed cluster size distribution. Extensive
experiments, on real and synthetic datasets, demonstrate that
our approach, called RepBin, outperforms a wide variety of
competing methods. Our constraint-based graph representation learning and clustering methods, that may be useful in
other domains as well, advance the state-of-the-art in both
metagenomics binning and graph representation learning.

Figure 1: The pipeline of traditional metagenomic contigs
binning and our proposed method, RepBin.

metabolism (Pasolli et al. 2020; Asnicar et al. 2021) and disease association of microbial species found in the human
gut (Nayfach et al. 2019).
In a typical metagenomics workflow, genetic material
from a microbial community is collected and first sequenced
using high-throughput sequencing (HTS) platforms. The
output at this stage contains short sequences of DNA called
reads of all the constituent microorganisms. Note that since
the genetic material of all the microorganisms are mixed to
begin with, it is unknown which species each read belongs
to; further, it is possible that multiple species may contain
the same DNA sequence in their reads. A fundamental problem, for any subsequent downstream analysis, is to identify
the species involved in the input sample.
Popular metagenomics approaches assemble these short
reads into longer non-overlapping DNA sequences called
contigs using assembly graphs, where each vertex represents
a contig and each edge represents the homophily information between two contigs (Nurk et al. 2017). Then, these assembled contigs are clustered into specific bins corresponding to the constituent genomes in the microbial communities (referred as metagenomic binning). Contigs connected
to each other in the assembly graph are more likely to belong
to the same species (Barnum et al. 2018). Additional biological information can be used to incorporate constraints on
contigs that are likely to be in different bins. For instance,
single-copy marker genes are those that appear just once in
each species and so, if two contigs contain the same singlecopy marker gene, they are most likely to belong to different
species. Such constraints can provide heterophilous information and could be utilized to improve binning.
Most metagenomics binning tools ignore the homophily

Introduction
The field of metagenomics has paved the way to study
entire microbial communities obtained from natural environments (Kaeberlein, Lewis, and Epstein 2002). Large
scale studies such as the Human Microbiome Project (Turnbaugh et al. 2007) have leveraged metagenomics analyses to gain valuable insights about the complex microbial
communities found in the human body, and study the relationships of these microbial communities with health conditions and diseases such as pregnancy and preterm birth
(PTB), inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), stressors affecting prediabetes (Integrative et al. 2019), influence of diet on
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4637

