The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cooperative Multi-Agent Fairness and Equivariant Policies
Niko A. Grupen1 , Bart Selman1 , Daniel D. Lee2
1

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
Cornell Tech, New York, NY
{nag83, bs54m, ddl46}@cornell.edu
2

Abstract

that understanding the range of team behavior that emerges
from single-objective utility maximization is crucial for the
development of fair multi-agent systems. For this reason,
we study fairness in the context of cooperative multi-agent
settings. Cooperative multi-agent fairness differs from traditional game-theoretic interpretations of fairness (e.g. resource allocation (Elzayn et al. 2019; Zhang and Shah 2014),
social dilemmas (Leibo et al. 2017)) in that it seeks to understand the fairness implications of emergent coordination
learned by multi-agent teams that are bound by a shared reward. Cooperative multi-agent fairness therefore reframes
the question—“Will agents cooperate or defect, given the
choice between local and team interests?”—to a related but
novel question—“Given the incentive to work together, do
agents learn to coordinate effectively and fairly?”
Experimentally, we target pursuit-evasion (i.e. predatorprey) as a test-bed for cooperative multi-agent fairness.
Pursuit-evasion allows us to simulate a number of important components of socio-economic systems, including:
(i) Shared objectives: the overarching goal of pursuers is to
capture an evader; (ii) Agent skill: the speed of the pursuers
relative the evader serves as a proxy for skill; (iii) Coordination: success requires sophisticated cooperation by the
pursuers. Using pursuit-evasion, we study the fairness implications of behavior that emerges under variations of these
“socio-economic” parameters. Similar to prior work (Lowe
et al. 2017; Mordatch and Abbeel 2018; Grupen, Lee, and
Selman 2020), we cast pursuit-evasion as a multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL) problem.
Our first result highlights the importance of shared objectives to cooperation. In particular, we compare policies
learned when pursuers share in team success (mutual reward) to those learned when pursuers do not share reward
(individual reward). We find that sophisticated coordination
only emerges when pursuers are bound by mutual reward.
Given individual reward, pursuers are not properly incentivized to work together. However, though mutual reward
aides coordination, it does not specify how to coordinate
fairly. In our experiments, we find that naive, unconstrained
maximization of mutual reward yields unfair individual outcomes for cooperative teammates. In the context of pursuitevasion, the optimal strategy is a form of role assignment—
the majority of pursuers act as supporting agents, shepherding the evader to one designated “capturer” agent. Solving

We study fairness through the lens of cooperative multi-agent
learning. Our work is motivated by empirical evidence that
naive maximization of team reward yields unfair outcomes
for individual team members. To address fairness in multiagent contexts, we introduce team fairness, a group-based
fairness measure for multi-agent learning. We then prove that
it is possible to enforce team fairness during policy optimization by transforming the team’s joint policy into an equivariant map. We refer to our multi-agent learning strategy as
Fairness through Equivariance (Fair-E) and demonstrate its
effectiveness empirically. We then introduce Fairness through
Equivariance Regularization (Fair-ER) as a soft-constraint
version of Fair-E and show that it reaches higher levels of utility than Fair-E and fairer outcomes than non-equivariant policies. Finally, we present novel findings regarding the fairnessutility trade-off in multi-agent settings; showing that the magnitude of the trade-off is dependent on agent skill.

Introduction
Algorithmic fairness is an increasingly important subdomain of AI. As statistical learning algorithms continue to
automate decision-making in crucial areas such as lending
(Fuster et al. 2020), healthcare (Potash et al. 2015), and education (Dorans and Cook 2016), it is imperative that the
performance of such algorithms does not rely upon sensitive information pertaining to the individuals for which decisions are made (e.g. race, gender). Despite its growing importance, fairness research has largely targeted predictionbased problems, where decisions are made for one individual at one time (Mitchell et al. 2018). Though recent studies
have extended fairness to the multi-agent case (Jiang and
Lu 2019), such work primarily considers social dilemmas in
which team utility is in obvious conflict with the local interests of each team member (Leibo et al. 2017; Rapoport
1974; Van Lange et al. 2013).
Many real-world problems, however, must weigh the fairness implications of team behavior in the presence of a single overarching goal. In-line with recent work that has highlighted the importance of leveraging multi-agent learning
to study socio-economic challenges such as taxation, social
planning, and economic policy (Zheng et al. 2020), we posit
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9350

