The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Coordinating Followers to Reach Better Equilibria:
End-to-End Gradient Descent for Stackelberg Games
Kai Wang1 , Lily Xu1 , Andrew Perrault* 2 , Michael K. Reiter3 , Milind Tambe1
1

Harvard University
The Ohio State University
3
Duke University
{kaiwang,lily xu}@g.harvard.edu, perrault.17@osu.edu, michael.reiter@duke.edu, milind tambe@harvard.edu
2

Abstract

plementarity constraints in the leader’s optimization (Shi,
Zhang, and Lu 2005; Basilico et al. 2020; Basilico, Coniglio,
and Gatti 2017; Coniglio, Gatti, and Marchesi 2020; Calvete
and Galé 2007), casting the entire Stackelberg problem as a
single optimization problem. This reformulation approach
has achieved significant success in problems with linear or
quadratic objectives, assuming a unique equilibrium or a
specific equilibrium concept, e.g., followers’ optimistic or
pessimistic choice of equilibrium (Hu and Fukushima 2011;
Basilico et al. 2020; Basilico, Coniglio, and Gatti 2017). The
reformulation approach thoroughly exploits the structure of
objectives and equilibrium to conquer the computation challenge. However, when these conditions are not met, reformulation approach may get trapped in low-quality solutions.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end gradient descent
approach to solve multi-follower Stackelberg games. Specifically, we run gradient descent by back-propagating through
a sampled Nash equilibrium reached by followers to update the leader’s strategy. Our approach overcomes weaknesses of reformulation approaches as (i) we decouple the
leader’s optimization problem from the followers’, casting it
as a learning problem to be solved by end-to-end gradient
descent through the followers’ equilibrium; and (ii) backpropagating through a sampled Nash equilibrium enables us
to work with arbitrary equilibrium selection procedures and
multiple equilibria.
In short, we make several contributions. First, we provide
a procedure for differentiating through a Nash equilibrium
assuming uniqueness (later we relax the assumption). Because each follower must simultaneously best respond to
every other follower, the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions (Kuhn and Tucker 2014) for each follower must be
simultaneously satisfied. We can thus differentiate through
the system of KKT conditions and apply the implicit function theorem to obtain the gradient. Second, we relax the
uniqueness assumption and extend our approach to an arbitrary, potentially stochastic, equilibrium selection oracle. We
first show that given a stochastic equilibrium selection procedure, using optimistic or pessimistic assumptions to solve
Stackelberg games with stochastic equilibria can yield payoff to the leader that is arbitrarily worse than optimal. To
address the issue of multiple equilibria and stochastic equilibria, we formally characterize stochastic equilibria with a
concept we call equilibrium flow, defined by a partial differ-

A growing body of work in game theory extends the traditional Stackelberg game to settings with one leader and multiple followers who play a Nash equilibrium. Standard approaches for computing equilibria in these games reformulate the followers’ best response as constraints in the leader’s
optimization problem. These reformulation approaches can
sometimes be effective, but make limiting assumptions on
the followers’ objectives and the equilibrium reached by followers, e.g., uniqueness, optimism, or pessimism. To overcome these limitations, we run gradient descent to update
the leader’s strategy by differentiating through the equilibrium reached by followers. Our approach generalizes to any
stochastic equilibrium selection procedure that chooses from
multiple equilibria, where we compute the stochastic gradient
by back-propagating through a sampled Nash equilibrium using the solution to a partial differential equation to establish
the unbiasedness of the stochastic gradient. Using the unbiased gradient estimate, we implement the gradient-based approach to solve three Stackelberg problems with multiple followers. Our approach consistently outperforms existing baselines to achieve higher utility for the leader.

Introduction
Stackelberg games are commonly adopted in many realworld applications, including security (Jiang et al. 2013;
Gan et al. 2020), wildlife conservation (Fang et al. 2016),
and commercial decisions made by firms (Naghizadeh and
Liu 2014; Aussel et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2016). Moreover,
many realistic settings involve a single leader with multiple self-interested followers such as wildlife conservation
efforts with a central coordinator and a team of defenders (Gan, Elkind, and Wooldridge 2018; Gan et al. 2020); resource management in energy (Aussel et al. 2020) with suppliers, aggregators, and end users; or security problems with
a central insurer and a set of vulnerable agents (Naghizadeh
and Liu 2014; Johnson, Böhme, and Grossklags 2011). Solving Stackelberg games with multiple followers is challenging in general (Basilico, Coniglio, and Gatti 2017; Coniglio,
Gatti, and Marchesi 2020). Previous work often reformulates the followers’ best response as stationary and com* Work done at Harvard Center for Research on Computation
and Society.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5219

