The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unit Selection with Causal Diagram
Ang Li,1 Judea Pearl1
1

Cognitive Systems Laboratory, Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, USA.
{angli, judea}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

specific characteristics. However, Li-Pearl’s derivation does
not leverage information from auxiliary covariates, if such is
available. Mueller, Li, and Pearl (Mueller, Li, and Pearl 2021)
recently proposed using covariate information and the causal
structure to narrow the bounds of probability of necessity and
sufficiency. Dawid et al. (Dawid, Musio, and Murtas 2017)
also proposed using covariates information to narrow the
bounds of probability of necessity. A similar approach might
be used for the benefit function. Most crucially, the information provided by covariates and their causal structure may
result in a reversal of decision (relative to not considering
such covariates).
Consider the following motivating scenario: a carwash
company wants to offer a discount to employees of company
A. The offer can only be presented to the entire company
A; the carwash company will not be able to provide a discount to a specific group inside the company A. The carwash
company’s manager seeks to maximize total profit, including nonimmediate profit. The management estimates that
the benefit of selecting a complier (i.e., offer the discount
to a customer who would use the carwash service if they
received the discount, but would not otherwise) is $100 as
the profit is $140 but the discount is $40, that of selecting
an always-taker (i.e., offer the discount to a customer who
would use the carwash service regardless of whether they
received the discount) is −$60 as the customer would use
the service anyway (so the company loses the value of the
discount and an extra cost of $20 because the always-taker
may require additional discounts in the future), that of selecting a never-taker (i.e., offer the discount to a customer who
would never use the carwash service regardless of whether
they received the discount) is $0 as the cost of issuing the
discount is negligible, and that of selecting a defier (i.e., offer
the discount to a customer who would not use the carwash
service if they received the discount, but would use the carwash service otherwise) is −$140 as the customer is lost due
to the discount. The manager of carwash company has both
experimental and observational data related to customer age
collected from the company A. If the entire company A’s
employees are given the discount, the manager of carwash
wants to know what the average profit will be.
Based on Li-Pearl’s model, it is easy to see that
the benefit vector for the aforementioned example is
(100, −60, 0, −140), and a corresponding benefit function

The unit selection problem aims to identify a set of individuals
who are most likely to exhibit a desired mode of behavior,
for example, selecting individuals who would respond one
way if encouraged and a different way if not encouraged. Using a combination of experimental and observational data, Li
and Pearl derived tight bounds on the “benefit function” - the
payoff/cost associated with selecting an individual with given
characteristics. This paper shows that these bounds can be
narrowed significantly (enough to change decisions) when
structural information is available in the form of a causal
model. We address the problem of estimating the benefit function using observational and experimental data when specific
graphical criteria are assumed to hold.

Introduction
In many areas of industry, marketing, and health science, the
unit selection dilemma arises. For example, in customer relationship management (Berson, Smith, and Thearling 1999;
Lejeune 2001; Hung, Yen, and Wang 2006; Tsai and Lu
2009), it is useful to know which customers are going to
churn but might reconsider if encouraged to stay. Due to the
high expense of such initiatives, management is forced to
limit inducement to customers who are most likely to exhibit
the behavior of interest. As another example, companies are
interested in identifying users who would click on an advertisement if and only if it is highlighted in online advertising
(Yan et al. 2009; Bottou et al. 2013; Li et al. 2014; Sun et al.
2015). The challenge in identifying these users stems from
the fact that the desired response pattern is not observed directly but rather is defined counterfactually in terms of what
the individual would do under hypothetical unrealized conditions. For example, when we observe that a user has clicked
on a highlighted advertisement, we do not know whether
they would click on that same advertisement if it were not
highlighted.
The benefit function for the unit selection problem was
defined by Li and Pearl (Li and Pearl 2019), and it properly
captures the nature of the desired behavior. Using a combination of experimental and observational data, Li and Pearl
derived tight bounds of the benefit function. The only assumption is that the treatment has no effect on the population
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5765

