The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Suppressing Static Visual Cues via Normalizing Flows for Self-Supervised Video
Representation Learning
Manlin Zhang1 * , Jinpeng Wang2 * , Andy J. Ma1,3 * †
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{zhangmlin3, wangjp23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, majh8@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Despite the great progress in video understanding made by
deep convolutional neural networks, feature representation
learned by existing methods may be biased to static visual
cues. To address this issue, we propose a novel method to
suppress static visual cues (S2 VC) based on probabilistic
analysis for self-supervised video representation learning. In
our method, video frames are first encoded to obtain latent
variables under standard normal distribution via normalizing
flows. By modelling static factors in a video as a random
variable, the conditional distribution of each latent variable
becomes shifted and scaled normal. Then, the less-varying
latent variables along time are selected as static cues and suppressed to generate motion-preserved videos. Finally, positive pairs are constructed by motion-preserved videos for
contrastive learning to alleviate the problem of representation bias to static cues. The less-biased video representation
can be better generalized to various downstream tasks. Extensive experiments on publicly available benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the state of the
art when only single RGB modality is used for pre-training.

Figure 1: Verifying the importance of motion cues. (a): Natural videos (top row) and shuffled videos (bottom row). (b):
With a fixed-weight 3D CNN, a linear classifier is trained
to distinguish natural videos from the shuffled ones. We
pre-train the R3D as feature extractor on the UCF101 by
two different methods, i.e., supervised learning and our selfsupervised learning method w/o and w/ suppressing static
visual cues, respectively. The performance of classifying
natural/shuffled videos on HMDB51 is 73.5% by using the
former and 79.1% (5.6↑) by using the latter. Notice that both
the test dataset and downstream task are different from those
used for training, which implies better generalization ability
of the learned representations by suppressing static cues.

Introduction
Recent top-performing approaches to solving video understanding tasks are based on supervised learning with a large
amount of labeled data for training. Due to the strong data
fitting capacity of deep convolutional neural networks, competitive performance can be achieved for recognizing actions
in videos (Carreira et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2016). One of
the key factors for the success may owe to the strong correlation between action class and object/background known
as representation bias in (Li et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2019).
For example, the action Riding Bike could be recognized by
the presence of the object Bike and the action Swimming is
recognized by the scene water. Such representation bias in
action datasets may provide shortcuts to solve the data-label
fitting problem. Nevertheless, the learned feature representation without proper motion modelling may be biased to
static visual cues, which limits the generalization ability to
recognize or detect actions requiring temporal reasoning.

To verify this issue, we first pre-trained the R3D network (Hara et al. 2018) for feature extraction in two different
ways. The first one is supervised learning by using manual
annotations on the UCF101 dataset (Soomro et al. 2012),
while the second one is our self-supervised method trained
on the same dataset by mitigating the representation bias.
Then, the learned feature representations are evaluated on
the HMDB51 dataset (Kuehne et al. 2011). The downstream
task is defined as simple temporal-order (natural/shuffled)
classification as illustrated in Fig. 1 to assess the generalization ability of the learned features. Fig. 1(a) shows that
motion information is suppressed while static visual cues
are maintained by video shuffling. Without dealing with
the problem of representation bias, the supervised method
performs worse than ours (73.5% v.s. 79.1% (5.6↑)) in the

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3300

