The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Block Modeling-Guided Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
Dongxiao He1 , Chundong Liang1 , Huixin Liu1 , Mingxiang Wen1 , Pengfei Jiao2, * , Zhiyong Feng1,∗
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
{hedongxiao, liangchundong, liuhuixin, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn, ynwmx@qq.com, cspjiao@gmail.com

Abstract

satisfied in many real-world heterophilic datasets, e.g., fraud
detection networks or the protein structure graphs, where
nodes from different classes tend to make connections due
to opposites attract. Some recent studies show that the performance of GCN can be severely restricted in this type of
datasets, due to the fact that GCN’s aggregating mechanism
is not designed for heterophily settings.
Recently some methods aiming to solve the GCN homophily problems have been proposed. Based on the designing methodologies, these algorithms can be mainly divided
into two types. 1) Aggregating higher-order neighborhoods,
such as H2GCN (Zhu et al. 2020) and MixHop (Abu-ElHaija et al. 2019). These algorithms are based on the idea
that direct neighborhoods may be heterophily-dominant, but
the higher-order neighborhoods are homophily-dominant
and thereby provide more valuable information. Therefore,
by explicitly aggregating information from higher-order
neighborhood, the heterophily problem of GCN brought
by aggregating information from immediate neighborhoods
can be alleviated. 2) Passing signed messages between heterophilic neighbors, such as GGCN (Yan et al. 2021) and
GPR-GNN (Chien et al. 2021). These algorithms normally
assign a weight to every connected node based on the similarity between them. As the nodes aggregate information
from neighbors, they get positive messages from neighbors
with the same class while negative messages from neighbors
with different classes. In this way, positive messages allow
neighbors of similar class to intensify their impact, while
negative messages prevent dissimilar neighbors from bringing irrelevant information which may harm performance.
However, existing algorithms for heterophily have two
main drawbacks. The first is the damage of network topology. Existing methods typically expand high-order nodes
as neighbors and try to find more homophilic information,
which will change the original topology of networks. But in
network science, network topology, even having heterophilic
connecting pattern, possess vital information which can be
preserved and fully utilized. The second is the limitation of
aggregating mechanism. Methods like MixHop and GPRGNN extend the same treatment to all neighbors in different
classes which is not satisfactory, while methods like GGCN
is an opposite extreme that gives every neighbor a weight
parameter which is highly computational expensive.
Then, an intuitive solution may be that we allow neigh-

Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) has shown remarkable potential of exploring graph representation. However,
the GCN aggregating mechanism fails to generalize to networks with heterophily where most nodes have neighbors
from different classes, which commonly exists in real-world
networks. In order to make the propagation and aggregation
mechanism of GCN suitable for both homophily and heterophily (or even their mixture), we introduce block modeling into the framework of GCN so that it can realize “blockguided classified aggregation”, and automatically learn the
corresponding aggregation rules for neighbors of different
classes. By incorporating block modeling into the aggregation process, GCN is able to aggregate information from homophilic and heterophilic neighbors discriminately according to their homophily degree. We compared our algorithm
with state-of-art methods which deal with the heterophily
problem. Empirical results demonstrate the superiority of our
new approach over existing methods in heterophilic datasets
while maintaining a competitive performance in homophilic
datasets.

Introduction
In recent years, graph-based information exploration has
been extensively studied in deep learning (Wu et al. 2021;
Scarselli et al. 2009; Cai, Zheng, and Chang 2018; Cui
et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2021b). Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017), which is famous for its
effectiveness in graph representation learning, follows the
principal learning mechanism where adjacency nodes attain similar representations through aggregating their neighboring information. The representations support subsequent
downstream tasks such as node classification (Duvenaud
et al. 2015; Jin et al. 2021a; He et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2019)
and link prediction (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Zhang and
Chen 2018; Kipf and Welling 2016; Cao et al. 2021).
Despite its wide application, GCN and its variants (Wu
et al. 2019; Chen, Ma, and Xiao 2018) are typically limited
by the implicit homophily assumption where nodes within
the proximity have similar representations, that is, birds of a
feather flock together (Miller and Cook 2001). But this is not
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4022

