The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Correlation Field for Boosting 3D Object Detection in Structured Scenes
Jianhua Sun, Hao-Shu Fang, Xianghui Zhu, Jiefeng Li, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{gothic, hg1216, ljf likit, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, fhaoshu@gmail.com

Abstract

Mao, and Li 2018; Lang et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li
2019). They first crop the objects according to ground truth
bounding boxes and then paste them into a 3D scene after a
collision test. However, such process does not take the functional relationships between objects into consideration when
finding a position to paste. This omission may often result
in functional inconsistency in a highly structured scene, between objects that are newly pasted in and other objects that
originally exist in the scene. (e.g. a bathtub may be pasted
next to a bed according to (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018).)
In this paper, we aim to explore highly probable locations
where a given object will naturally appear in a structured
3D scene by investigating the functional relationship between objects. We look back to the area of scene interactions
modeling, from which we get inspiration for a better-refined
positioning strategy. Previous works (Helbing and Molnar
1998; Dan, Todorovic, and Zhu 2013) abstract a force to
model the degree of attraction or repulsion between functional objects in order to calculate reasonable relative positions for them. Similarly, we assume the functional relationship between a pair of objects can be represented by a kind
of force, and thus an energy field will be implied between an
object pair, which we call Correlation Field. Further, these
fields can be superimposed together to reflect relationships
between multiple objects (see Fig. 1). In this aspect, a functionally consistent scene is equivalent to the situation that all
the objects achieve a stable state in the Correlation Field and
the energy of the field is minimal.
With the guidance of Correlation Field, we propose a
crop-and-paste augmentation pipeline called CorrelaBoost
to explore positions that a designated object may be pasted
to coherently, including two strategies. 1) Category Consistent Exchanging: Observing that objects of the same category often share similar functional relationships and interactions with others, we generate various training samples
by exchanging objects in the same category without compromising the stability of the Correlation Field. 2) Energy
Optimized Transformation: we define a probability map
for the cropped object on a given 3D scene and link this
to its Correlation Field, where a lower energy refers to a
higher probability to paste. To this end, by sampling locations with high probabilities, we can find proper pasting positions through the whole scene with little time consumption.
To sum up, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

Data augmentation is an efficient way to elevate 3D object
detection performance. In this paper, we propose a simple but
effective online crop-and-paste data augmentation pipeline
for structured 3D point cloud scenes, named CorrelaBoost.
Observing that 3D objects should have reasonable relative positions in a structured scene because of the objects’ functionalities and natural relationships, we express this correlation as
a kind of interactive force. An energy field called Correlation
Field can be calculated correspondingly across the whole 3D
space. According to the Correlation Field, we propose two
data augmentation strategies to explore highly congruent positions that a designated object may be pasted to: 1) Category
Consistent Exchanging and 2) Energy Optimized Transformation. We conduct exhaustive experiments on various popular benchmarks with different detection frameworks and the
results illustrate that our method brings huge free-lunch improvement and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in terms of data augmentation. It is worth noting that
the performance of VoteNet with mAP@0.5 is improved by
7.7 on ScanNetV2 dataset and 5.0 on SUN RGB-D dataset.
Our method is simple to implement and increases few computational overhead.

Introduction
3D object detection (Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Qi et al. 2019;
Lang et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; You
et al. 2020) exploits the position and recognizes the category of objects in a 3D scene, and has numerous applications in downstream tasks (Li et al. 2021b,a; Fang et al.
2020; Mahler et al. 2017). Although they show promising
detection results, a large amount of training data is needed to
cover volatile cases in the test set and guarantee the performance. However, high-quality 3D data is difficult to obtain.
To tackle this problem, traditional methods such as global
transformation and noise addition are widely used by researchers for better training performance (Yan, Mao, and
Li 2018; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Lang et al. 2019). In
recent years, instance-level crop-and-paste data augmentation methods (Fang et al. 2019; Dwibedi, Misra, and Hebert
2017) are adopted for 3D object detection gradually (Yan,
* Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2298

