The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Complexity of Inductively Learning Guarded Clauses
Andrei Draghici, Georg Gottlob, Matthias Lanzinger
University of Oxford
andrei.draghici@stcatz.ox.ac.uk, georg.gottlob@cs.ox.ac.uk, matthias.lanzinger@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

not subsuming any of the negative examples. We are particularly interested in the computational complexity of the problem and therefore consider the associated decision problem,
also referred to as the ILP consistency problem, whether any
solution exists for the given sets of examples.
The complexity of the ILP consistency problem depends
critically on the logical languages that are used for examples and the hypothesis. In line with our motivation of learning rules, particular historical attention has been given to
the case where examples and hypotheses are Horn clauses,
for which the ILP consistency problem was shown to be
ΣP
2 -complete (Gottlob, Leone, and Scarcello 1997). While
some problems in NP can now be solved efficiently in practical settings, the second level of the polynomial hierarchy is
still generally out of reach for even moderately sized problems. In the context of mining rules from large datasets, ΣP
2completeness is therefore clearly prohibitive and limits potential applications to only small and simple scenarios.
To address this challenge we consider the learning of
guarded clauses, i.e., we restrict the language of the hypothesis to only guarded clauses. Informally, a clause is
said to be guarded if there exists one literal in the clause
that covers all variables that occur in the clause. Our interest in guarded clauses is motivated from two sides. First,
as discussed below, we see that learning guarded clauses
can reduce the complexity of the problem. Second, in common rule-based languages, e.g., Datalog or Datalog± (Calı̀,
Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2009), programs consisting only
of guarded rules also enjoy various desirable computational
properties (Gottlob, Grädel, and Veith 2002; Calı̀, Gottlob,
and Lukasiewicz 2009)1 . While guarded rules are of particular interest in practice, we present our results for the more
general problem of learning guarded clauses, i.e., disjunctive
rules. However, all results hold also for Horn clauses.
Importantly, guarded clauses and corresponding rulebased languages are still highly expressive. The guarded
fragment of Datalog± captures popular logical languages,
such as the description logics DL-LiteR and EL which form
the theoretical foundation of the OWL 2 QL and EL profiles,

We investigate the computational complexity of mining
guarded clauses from clausal datasets through the framework
of inductive logic programming (ILP). We show that learning
guarded clauses is NP-complete and thus one step below the
ΣP
2 -complete task of learning Horn clauses on the polynomial hierarchy. Motivated by practical applications on large
datasets we identify a natural tractable fragment of the problem. Finally, we also generalise all of our results to k-guarded
clauses for constant k.

Introduction
Finding complex relationships in large datasets with current
data analysis methods primarily relies on the computation
of statistical measures or simple aggregations over numerical data. Especially when relationships between some parts
of the data are conditional on other data elements, standard methods such as correlation analysis reach their limits.
To better identify conditional relationships, one can alternatively approach the problem by trying to learn logical relationships in the data, i.e., searching for non-trivial logical
formulas that hold true over the data set.
Learned logical formulas should ideally be intuitively interpretable as well as usable in automated reasoning. A natural fit for these requirements are logical rules (i.e., Horn
clauses) as used in Datalog (Ullman 1989) and the associated task of finding rules that are satisfied in a dataset is often called rule mining (Fürnkranz, Gamberger, and Lavrac
2012). Not only are modern rule-based languages highly expressive and theoretically well understood, but there also exist real-world systems that are capable of efficient reasoning
over large amounts of data, e.g. (Bellomarini, Sallinger, and
Gottlob 2018). In combination with such reasoning systems,
learned rules can also be used for data synthesis, anomaly
detection, and similar tasks.
This paper investigates the underlying theoretical problems when viewing the rule mining problem through the lens
of inductive logic programming (ILP). Recall, in the ILP setting we are given a set of positive examples and a set of negative examples and wish to find some logical formula (the
hypothesis) that subsumes all of the positive examples while

Guarded rules in the context of Datalog± and guarded clauses
have slight technical differences. These differences are inconsequential to our results which all also apply to learning guarded rules
in way the term is used in Datalog± , see the discussion after Algorithm 1.
1

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5600

