The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neural Interferometry: Image Reconstruction from Astronomical Interferometers
using Transformer-Conditioned Neural Fields
Benjamin Wu1,2 * , Chao Liu2 , Benjamin Eckart2 , Jan Kautz2
1

National Astronomical Observatory of Japan
2
NVIDIA
benwu.astro@gmail.com, chaoliu@nvidia.com, beckart@nvidia.com, jkautz@nvidia.com

Abstract

to the source. Given this pairwise distance relationship to
effective angular resolution, B can be maximized on Earth
by utilizing a global network of telescopes, a class of interferometry referred to as very-long-baseline interferometry
(VLBI). One such example is the Event Horizon Telescope
(EHT), which observed the M87 supermassive black hole
with 25 µarcsec resolution at 1.3 mm wavelength achieved
through VLBI baselines up to 10,700 km (Event Horizon
Telescope Collaboration 2019).
However, as longer baselines are added to an interferometric array, the relative sparsity of the spatial frequency
domain samples also increases. Recovering the original celestial image based only on these sparse measurements is a
highly ill-posed problem which depends strongly on appropriate priors to constrain an infinite solution space of valid
images. This is the primary challenge of interferometric image reconstruction.
Astronomical interferometry falls into a broader class of
inverse problems, which generally involve the reconstruction of an unknown signal based on limited observations
from a typically non-invertible forward process. Many computational imaging tasks, such as deblurring, deconvolution, and inpainting, also fit under this framework and have
achieved success through neural networks.
The work presented in this paper incorporates recent advancements in the computer vision and deep learning communities into a novel method for interferometric image reconstruction. Our main contributions are outlined as follows:

Astronomical interferometry enables a collection of telescopes to achieve angular resolutions comparable to that of
a single, much larger telescope. This is achieved by combining simultaneous observations from pairs of telescopes
such that the signal is mathematically equivalent to sampling the Fourier domain of the object. However, reconstructing images from such sparse sampling is a challenging and
ill-posed problem, with current methods requiring precise
tuning of parameters and manual, iterative cleaning by experts. We present a novel deep learning approach in which
the representation in the Fourier domain of an astronomical
source is learned implicitly using a neural field representation. Data-driven priors can be added through a transformer
encoder. Results on synthetically observed galaxies show that
transformer-conditioned neural fields can successfully reconstruct astronomical observations even when the number of
visibilities is very sparse.

Introduction
Improvements in astronomical imaging have continuously
transformed humanity’s understanding of physics and the
universe. Currently, the highest angular resolutions are
achieved using the technique of astronomical interferometry, which combines measurements from multiple telescopes
to approximate that of a single telescope with a much larger
aperture. Astronomical observations using radio interferometry have generated numerous scientific discoveries, including the first resolved images of protoplanetary disks (ALMA
Partnership et al. 2015), circumplanetary disks (Benisty
et al. 2021), and the event horizon of a supermassive black
hole (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration 2019).
A single telescope’s angular resolution θ relates to its diλ
, where λ is the observed wavelength and
ameter as θ ∝ D
D is the diameter of the aperture. Interferometers, on the
other hand, employ many telescopes at many different locations, and do not image an object directly. Instead, each pair
of telescopes in the array measures a point in the spatial frequency domain of the celestial object. The effective angular
λ
resolution of a pair of telescopes is θ ∝ B
, where B is the
projected pairwise distance orthogonal to the line of sight

• We introduce a “neural interferometry” approach based
on coordinate-based neural fields to perform sparse-todense inpainting in the spectral domain
• We show that learned priors can be incorporated through
conditioning via a transformer encoder in a data-driven
fashion
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a
large dataset of astronomical images. We hope this work further inspires additional cross-pollination between the astrophysics and computer vision communities.

Interferometry Background
A cornerstone of astronomical interferometry is the Van
Cittert-Zernike theorem, which states that the Fourier transform of the spatial intensity distribution I(l, m) of a distant,

* The author contributed this work while at NVIDIA.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2685

