The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ADD: Frequency Attention and Multi-View Based Knowledge Distillation to
Detect Low-Quality Compressed Deepfake Images
Le Minh Binh,1 Simon Woo, 2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
2
Department of Applied Data Science, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
bmle@g.skku.edu, swoo@g.skku.edu

Abstract

tive deepfake detectors (Dzanic, Shah, and Witherden 2019;
Rossler et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Li and Lyu 2018;
Khayatkhoei and Elgammal 2020; Zhang, Karaman, and
Chang 2019). Most approaches utilize the deep learningbased approaches, where generally they perform well if
there are a large amount of high-resolution training data.
However, the performances of these approaches drop dramatically (by up to 18% (Dzanic, Shah, and Witherden
2019; Rossler et al. 2019)) for compressed low-resolution
images due to lack of available pixel information to sufficiently distinguish fake images from real ones. In other
words, because of the compression, subtle differences and
artifacts such as sharp edges in hairs and lips that can be
possibly leveraged for differentiating deepfakes can also be
removed. Therefore, there still remains an important challenge to effectively detect low-quality compressed deepfakes, which frequently occur on social media and mobile
platforms in bandwidth-challenging and storage-limited environments.
In this work, we propose the Attention-based Deepfake
detection Distiller (ADD). Our primary goal is to detect lowquality (LQ) deepfakes, which are less explored in most previous studies but plays a pivotal role in real-world scenarios. First, we assume there are high-quality (HQ) images
are readily available, similar to the settings in other studies (Rossler et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Li and Lyu 2018;
Khayatkhoei and Elgammal 2020; Zhang, Karaman, and
Chang 2019; Dzanic, Shah, and Witherden 2019). And, we
use knowledge distillation (KD) as an overarching backbone
architecture to detect low-quality deepfakes. While most of
the existing knowledge distillation methods aim to reduce
the student size for model compression applications or improve the performance of lightweight deep learning models
(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Tian, Krishnan, and Isola
2019; Huang and Wang 2017; Passalis and Tefas 2018), we
hypothesize that a student can learn lost distinctive features
of low-quality compressed images from a teacher that is pretrained on high-quality images for deepfake detection. We
first lay out the following two major challenges associated
with detecting the LQ compressed deepfakes, and provide
the intuitions of our approaches to overcome these issues:
1) Loss of high-frequency information. As discussed,
while lossy image compression algorithms make changes visually unnoticeable to humans, they can significantly reduce

Despite significant advancements of deep learning-based
forgery detectors for distinguishing manipulated deepfake
images, most detection approaches suffer from moderate to
significant performance degradation with low-quality compressed deepfake images. Because of the limited information in low-quality images, detecting low-quality deepfake
remains an important challenge. In this work, we apply
frequency domain learning and optimal transport theory in
knowledge distillation (KD) to specifically improve the detection of low-quality compressed deepfake images. We explore transfer learning capability in KD to enable a student
network to learn discriminative features from low-quality images effectively. In particular, we propose the Attention-based
Deepfake detection Distiller (ADD), which consists of two
novel distillations: 1) frequency attention distillation that effectively retrieves the removed high-frequency components
in the student network, and 2) multi-view attention distillation that creates multiple attention vectors by slicing the
teacher’s and student’s tensors under different views to transfer the teacher tensor’s distribution to the student more efficiently. Our extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in detecting low-quality compressed deepfake images.

Introduction
Recently, facial manipulation techniques using deep learning methods such as deepfakes have drawn considerable
attention (Rossler et al. 2019; Pidhorskyi, Adjeroh, and
Doretto 2020; Richardson et al. 2020; Nitzan et al. 2020).
Moreover, deepfakes have become more realistic and sophisticated, making it difficult to be distinguished by human
eyes (Siarohin et al. 2020). And it has become much easier to generate such realistic deepfakes than before. Hence,
such advancements and convenience enable even novices to
easily create highly realistic fake faces for simple entertainment. However, these fake images raise serious security, privacy, and social concerns, as they can be abused for malicious purposes, such as impersonation (Catherine 2019),
revenge pornography (Cole 2018) , and fake news propagation (Quandt et al. 2019).
To address such problems arising from deepfakes, there
have been immense research efforts in developing effecCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

122

