The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Representation for Semantic Segmentation by Implicit
Cycle-Attention Contrastive Learning
Bo Pang1 , Yizhuo Li1 , Yifan Zhang1 , Gao Peng1 ,
Jiajun Tang1 , Kaiwen Zha2 , Jiefeng Li1 , Cewu Lu1∗
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{pangbo, liyizhuo, zhangyf sjtu, penggao, yelantingfeng, ljf likit, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
kzha@mit.edu
2

Frame a

Frame b
Hard positives

Pixel Contrastive
Learning

Abstract
We study the unsupervised representation learning for the semantic segmentation task. Different from previous works that
aim at providing unsupervised pre-trained backbones for segmentation models which need further supervised fine-tune,
here, we focus on providing representation that is only trained
by unsupervised methods. This means models need to directly generate pixel-level, linearly separable semantic results. We first explore and present two factors that have significant effects on segmentation under the contrastive learning framework: 1) the difficulty and diversity of the positive
contrastive pairs, 2) the balance of global and local features.
With the intention of optimizing these factors, we propose the
cycle-attention contrastive learning (CACL). CACL makes
use of semantic continuity of video frames, adopting unsupervised cycle-consistent attention mechanism to implicitly conduct contrastive learning with difficult, global-local-balanced
positive pixel pairs. Compared with baseline model MoCo-v2
and other unsupervised methods, CACL demonstrates consistently superior performance on PASCAL VOC (+4.5 mIoU)
and Cityscapes (+4.5 mIoU) datasets.

Cycle Attention
Mechanism

Frame a

Frame b

Frame a

Soft positives

Push away
Cycle-back pair

Pull in
Pairs not forming a cycle

Figure 1: Illustration of the cycle-attention scheme. Different from the conventional contrastive method that assigns
positive and negative pairs, the cycle-attention scheme implicitly pulls in and pushes out the samples by maximizing the probability of “cycle back”. Compared to the hard
positive pairs adopted by conventional contrastive methods, cycle-attention scheme forms soft positive relationships. Best viewed in color.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation which densely assigns semantic labels for every pixel in an image is a fundamental and important visual task with wide range of application scenarios. Deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015) under
the framework of supervised learning together with large
annotated datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Lin et al. 2014) has
taken computer vision to new heights of accuracy in the last
decade and semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and
Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2019; Fang et al.
2019; Zhang, Pang, and Lu 2022) has been ready for commercial usage in the supervised setting. Nevertheless, obtaining annotations required by supervised methods is expensive and costs significant amounts of time (Asano et al.
2020; Fabbri et al. 2018). Different scenarios need annotating different specific data, making the application of models
very expensive. To this end, here, we study the unsupervised
method to train deep semantic segmentation models.
Inspired by contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020a; He
et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020) that makes great progress in

image-level classification task, we choose the unsupervised
contrastive representation learning framework to solve semantic segmentation task which is essentially a pixel-level
classification task. Some of the previous works tried to advance the contrastive method from image-level to pixel-level
and their solution can be summarised into two main directions. One is to design better pre-training methods which are
more suitable for dense tasks (Wang et al. 2021a; Xie et al.
2021). This strategy needs to fine-tune models with supervision on downstream tasks (semantic segmentation) after
the pre-training progress. The other one adopts a two-stage
scheme (Xiong et al. 2021; Van Gansbeke et al. 2021). It
takes advantage of optical flow (Sun et al. 2018; Teed and
Deng 2020) or saliency estimation (Qin et al. 2019; Nguyen
et al. 2019) methods to generate preliminary intermediate
results. This strategy adopts complicated and ad-hoc techniques from other fields to get the intermediate results, some
of which are trained by synthesized data in a supervised
manner (Teed and Deng 2020).
In this paper, to this end, we aim at designing an end-toend unsupervised representation learning method for the se-

∗

Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2044

