The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ISEEQ: Information Seeking Question Generation Using Dynamic
Meta-Information Retrieval and Knowledge Graphs
Manas Gaur* 1 , Kalpa Gunaratna2 , Vijay Srinivasan2 , Hongxia Jin2
1

AI Institute, University of South Carolina, SC, USA
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA, USA
mgaur@email.sc.edu, {k.gunaratna, v.srinivasan, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com
2

Abstract

health condition (a short initial IS query). Conversational Information Seeking (CIS) is an emerging research area within
conversational AI that aims to emulate the provider by automatically asking ISQs, keeping track of seeker responses,
and ultimately responding to the seeker’s needs based on
responses to ISQs. CIS has broadened the research scope
of various virtual assistants (e.g., Alexa, Bixby) (Zamani
and Craswell 2020; Radlinski and Craswell 2017). Existing
work in the area of CIS has primarily focused on aspects
such as retrieving relevant passages to respond to seeker
queries and generating answers (Vakulenko, Kanoulas, and
de Rijke 2021; Kumar and Callan 2020).

Conversational Information Seeking (CIS) is a relatively new
research area within conversational AI that attempts to seek
information from end-users in order to understand and satisfy users’ needs. If realized, such a system has far-reaching
benefits in the real world; for example, a CIS system can assist clinicians in pre-screening or triaging patients in healthcare. A key open sub-problem in CIS that remains unaddressed in the literature is generating Information Seeking
Questions (ISQs) based on a short initial query from the enduser. To address this open problem, we propose Information
SEEking Question generator (ISEEQ), a novel approach for
generating ISQs from just a short user query, given a large
text corpus relevant to the user query. Firstly, ISEEQ uses a
knowledge graph to enrich the user query. Secondly, ISEEQ
uses the knowledge-enriched query to retrieve relevant context passages to ask coherent ISQs adhering to a conceptual flow. Thirdly, ISEEQ introduces a new deep generativeadversarial reinforcement learning-based approach for generating ISQs. We show that ISEEQ can generate high-quality
ISQs to promote the development of CIS agents. ISEEQ significantly outperforms comparable baselines on five ISQ evaluation metrics across four datasets having user queries from
diverse domains. Further, we argue that ISEEQ is transferable across domains for generating ISQs, as it shows the
acceptable performance when trained and tested on different pairs of domains. The qualitative human evaluation confirms ISEEQ-generated ISQs are comparable in quality to
human-generated questions and outperform the best comparable baseline.

To the best of our knowledge, the problem of generating ISQs given an initial IS query from the user has not
been addressed in the literature so far. Figure 1A shows example ISQs generated for the user IS query “Bothered by
feeling down or depressed”. For example, user responses to
ISQs such as “How often do you feel depressed or hopeless?” and “How long have you struggled with depression?”
can be used either by the CIS or the healthcare provider to
generate an appropriate response to the user’s needs. ISQs
differ from other question types (e.g., Clarifying questions,
Follow-up questions (Rao and Daumé III 2018) (Zamani
et al. 2020) (Pothirattanachaikul et al. 2020)) by having a
structure, covering objective details, and expanding on the
breadth of the topic. For such a structure between ISQs,
there are semantic relations and logical coherence (together
termed as conceptual flow). From (Aliannejadi et al. 2019),
clarifying questions are simple questions of facts, good to
clarify the dilemma, and confined to the entities in the query.
In contrast, ISQs go a step further with expanding the query
context by exploring relationships between entities in the
query and linked entities in a knowledge graph. Thus retrieving a diverse set of passages that would provide a proper
solution to a user query.

Introduction
Information Seeking (IS) is a complex and structured process in human learning that demands lengthy discourse between seekers and providers to meet the information needs
of the seekers. The provider can ask the seeker informationseeking questions to understand the seeker’s needs better and respond appropriately. For instance, clinicians use
their experience or medical knowledge to ask patients
information-seeking questions (ISQs), who describe their

Firstly, a key challenge in generating ISQs is that the initial IS query is short and has limited context. Without explicit integration of external knowledge for enriching the
IS query, CIS cannot achieve the curiosity-driven generation of ISQs (Gaur et al. 2020). Secondly, training an ISQ
generation system requires annotated datasets containing IS
queries, ISQs, and many passages. Creating such datasets re-

* Research work was done while author was interning at Samsung Research America.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10672

