The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FInfer: Frame Inference-Based Deepfake Detection for High-Visual-Quality
Videos
Juan Hu1 , Xin Liao1∗ , Jinwen Liang1 , Wenbo Zhou2 , and Zheng Qin1
1
2

The College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.
CAS Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information, University of Science and Technology of China.

Abstract

Low-Visual-Quality Generated Frame

Deepfake has ignited hot research interests in both academia and industry due to its potential security threats. Many
countermeasures have been proposed to mitigate such risks.
Current Deepfake detection methods achieve superior performances in dealing with low-visual-quality Deepfake media
which can be distinguished by the obvious visual artifacts. However, with the development of deep generative models, the realism of Deepfake media has been significantly
improved and becomes tough challenging to current detection models. In this paper, we propose a frame inferencebased detection framework (FInfer) to solve the problem of
high-visual-quality Deepfake detection. Specifically, we first
learn the referenced representations of the current and future
frames’ faces. Then, the current frames’ facial representations
are utilized to predict the future frames’ facial representations
by using an autoregressive model. Finally, a representationprediction loss is devised to maximize the discriminability of
real videos and fake videos. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our FInfer framework through information theory analyses. The entropy and mutual information analyses indicate
the correlation between the predicted representations and referenced representations in real videos is higher than that of
high-visual-quality Deepfake videos. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the performance of our method is promising in
terms of in-dataset detection performance, detection efficiency, and cross-dataset detection performance in high-visualquality Deepfake videos.

High-Visual-Quality Generated Frame

Visible Artifacts

Invisible Artifacts

Mismatching Colors

Matching Colors

Figure 1: Comparisons of the Deepfake frames with different visual quality. The low-visual-quality frame (left) generated by the DeepFakes (DeepFakes 2018) leaves visible artifacts and color mismatches. The high-visual-quality frame
(right) generated by the NeuralTextures (Thies, Zollhöfer,
and Nießner 2019) reduces the artifacts and color mismatch.
Limited by technology and hardware resources, most of
the fake videos in some inchoate datasets are with lowvisual-quality, which have perceptible distortions, such as
jitter, blur, and strange artifacts (Zi et al. 2020). Those
low-visual-quality Deepfake videos can be easily distinguished by current detection models. However, with the
rapid progress of deep generative models, the visual quality
of fake videos has been improved from many aspects, such
as frame resolution, color correction, smoothness mask,
invisible tampered artifacts, and temporal correlations (Li
et al. 2020). As shown in Fig. 1, the artifacts and color mismatches are occurred in fake video with low-visual-quality
but are relieved in that with high-visual-quality. These significant improvements bring challenges to current detection
models. Therefore, it is desirable to spend more effort developing a well-designed method for high-visual-quality Deepfake detection.
Related Work and Challenges. Recent Deepfake video
detection methods can be broadly divided into three categories, i.e., cue-inspired methods, data-driven methods, and
multi-domain fusion methods. Cue-inspired methods (Li,
Chang, and Lyu 2018; Ciftci, Demir, and Yin 2020; Yang,
Li, and Lyu 2019; Koopman, Rodriguez, and Geradts 2018;
Li and Lyu 2019) expose observable features such as blinking inconsistencies, biological signals, and unrealistic de-

Introduction
Motivations. The proliferation of artificial intelligence has
given rise to various human portrait video tampering technologies, such as DeepFakes (DeepFakes 2018), Face2Face
(Thies et al. 2018), FaceSwap (FaceSwap 2018), and NeuralTextures (Thies, Zollhöfer, and Nießner 2019). Although
these technologies facilitate entertainment and cultural exchanges, abusing Deepfake technologies also brings potential threats and concerns to everyone. For example, illegal
information such as fake news and manipulated pornographic videos may cause a profound distrust in society, threaten
national and political security, and violate individual rights
and interests. (Whittaker et al. 2020).
∗

Corresponding author: Xin Liao (xinliao@hnu.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

951

