The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Text Gestalt: Stroke-Aware Scene Text Image Super-resolution
Jingye Chen1 , Haiyang Yu1 , Jianqi Ma2 , Bin Li* 1 , Xiangyang Xue∗1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{jingyechen19, hyyu20, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn, jianqi.ma@connect.polyu.hk

Abstract
In the last decade, the blossom of deep learning has witnessed
the rapid development of scene text recognition. However,
the recognition of low-resolution scene text images remains a
challenge. Even though some super-resolution methods have
been proposed to tackle this problem, they usually treat text
images as general images while ignoring the fact that the visual quality of strokes (the atomic unit of text) plays an essential role for text recognition. According to Gestalt Psychology, humans are capable of composing parts of details into
the most similar objects guided by prior knowledge. Likewise, when humans observe a low-resolution text image, they
will inherently use partial stroke-level details to recover the
appearance of holistic characters. Inspired by Gestalt Psychology, we put forward a Stroke-Aware Scene Text Image
Super-Resolution method containing a Stroke-Focused Module (SFM) to concentrate on stroke-level internal structures of
characters in text images. Specifically, we attempt to design
rules for decomposing English characters and digits at strokelevel, then pre-train a text recognizer to provide stroke-level
attention maps as positional clues with the purpose of controlling the consistency between the generated super-resolution
image and high-resolution ground truth. The extensive experimental results validate that the proposed method can indeed
generate more distinguishable images on TextZoom and manually constructed Chinese character dataset Degraded-IC13.
Furthermore, since the proposed SFM is only used to provide stroke-level guidance when training, it will not bring
any time overhead during the test phase. Code is available
at https://github.com/FudanVI/FudanOCR.

Figure 1: For incomplete or blurred images, detailed information (e.g., spots or strokes) play a significant role during
recovery. Our method can generate recognizable English and
Chinese text images with the guidance of stroke details.

The previous super-resolution methods usually try to
learn degradation patterns through HR-LR pairs with global
loss functions (e.g., L1 or L2 loss) to recover every pixel in
text images (Xu et al. 2017; Pandey et al. 2018). These methods, however, usually view text images as general images regardless of text-specific properties. Recently, a few methods
attempt to take several text-specific properties into account,
which achieve better performance in terms of both image quality and recognition accuracy. For example, PlugNet
(Yan and Huang 2020) employs a multi-task framework with
the purpose of jointly optimizing super-resolution and text
recognition tasks in one model. In (Wang et al. 2020), the authors introduced a Text Super-Resolution Network (TSRN)
via appending two recurrent layers in the backbone to capture sequential information of text images. The recently
proposed Scene Text Telescope (STT) (Chen, Li, and Xue
2021a) introduces text priors into the model by proposing
a position-aware module and a content-aware module. The
concurrent work TPGSR (Ma, Guo, and Zhang 2021) incorporates text-specific semantic features to each block in the
backbone and exerts an iterative way to enhance text images.
Through observations, the text priors used in these works
usually regard character as the smallest unit of text lines,
whereas ignoring the significance of more detailed internal
structures. In this paper, we take a step further to answer the
critical question: Can text priors at a more fine-grained level
(e.g., stroke) benefit the super-resolution procedure?

Introduction
In recent years, scene text recognition has achieved tremendous progress owing to the rapid development of deep learning. It has been widely used in many real-world applications
such as auto-driving (Zhang et al. 2020a), ID card recognition (Satyawan et al. 2019), signature identification (Ren
et al. 2020), etc. Although the recently proposed recognizers
become stronger as reported, we observe that low-resolution
(LR) text images still pose great challenges for them. In
this context, a super-resolution module is required as a preprocessor to recover the missing details of LR images.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

285

