The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Federated Dynamic Sparse Training:
Computing Less, Communicating Less, Yet Learning Better
Sameer Bibikar, Haris Vikalo, Zhangyang Wang, Xiaohan Chen*
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
{bibikar,hvikalo,atlaswang,xiaohan.chen}@utexas.edu

Abstract

private. Classical methods (McMahan et al. 2017) in FL involve a number of synchronous rounds; in each round, FL
runs several local training epochs on a subset of devices using only data available locally on each device. After this local training, the clients’ model updates, rather than the local
data, are sent over to the central server which then aggregates them all to update a global model.
In FL systems, heavy computational workloads are dispatched from the cloud to resource-limited edge devices.
To enable usage at the edge, a FL system must optimize
both device-level local training efficiency and in-network
communication efficiency. Unfortunately, current ML models are typically too complex for inference at edge devices,
not to mention training. Besides model compactness, communication efficiency between the cloud and devices is also
desirable. Client devices, such as mobile phones, often have
severe upload bandwidth limitations due to asymmetric internet connections, so reducing the upload cost of federated
learning algorithms is of paramount importance. Much prior
work in communication-efficient FL has focused on structured and sketched sparsity in FL updates (Konečný et al.
2017), optimal client sampling (Ribero and Vikalo 2020),
and other classical methods.
With the goal of producing lightweight models for inference on edge devices, significant efforts have been made
towards optimizing sparse neural networks (NNs) (Gale,
Elsen, and Hooker 2019; Chen et al. 2020, 2021; Ma et al.
2021). These methods significantly reduce inference latency, but heavily impact compute and memory resources
needed for training. The lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle and Carbin 2018) demonstrated that dense NNs contain
sparse matching subnetworks that are capable of training in
isolation to full accuracy (Frankle et al. 2020). More works
show sparsity can emerge at initialization (Lee, Ajanthan,
and Torr 2019; Wang, Zhang, and Grosse 2020) or can be exploited in dynamic forms during training (Evci et al. 2020).
The overarching goal of this paper is to develop, implement, and experimentally validate a novel FL framework
termed Federated Dynamic Sparse Training (FedDST), by
which complex NNs can be deployed and trained with substantially improved efficiency of both on-device computation and in-network communication. At the core of FedDST is a judiciously designed federated approach to dynamic sparse training (Evci et al. 2020). FedDST transmits

Federated learning (FL) enables distribution of machine
learning workloads from the cloud to resource-limited edge
devices. Unfortunately, current deep networks remain not
only too compute-heavy for inference and training on edge
devices, but also too large for communicating updates over
bandwidth-constrained networks. In this paper, we develop,
implement, and experimentally validate a novel FL framework termed Federated Dynamic Sparse Training (FedDST)
by which complex neural networks can be deployed and
trained with substantially improved efficiency in both ondevice computation and in-network communication. At
the core of FedDST is a dynamic process that extracts and
trains sparse sub-networks from the target full network. With
this scheme, “two birds are killed with one stone:” instead
of full models, each client performs efficient training of its
own sparse networks, and only sparse networks are transmitted between devices and the cloud. Furthermore, our results reveal that the dynamic sparsity during FL training more
flexibly accommodates local heterogeneity in FL agents than
the fixed, shared sparse masks. Moreover, dynamic sparsity
naturally introduces an “in-time self-ensembling effect” into
the training dynamics, and improves the FL performance
even over dense training. In a realistic and challenging non
i.i.d. FL setting, FedDST consistently outperforms competing algorithms in our experiments: for instance, at any fixed
upload data cap on non-iid CIFAR-10, it gains an impressive accuracy advantage of 10% over FedAvgM when given
the same upload data cap; the accuracy gap remains 3%
even when FedAvgM is given 2× the upload data cap, further demonstrating efficacy of FedDST. Code is available at:
https://github.com/bibikar/feddst.

Introduction
Driven by the desire to protect the privacy of personal data
and enable machine learning (ML) at the edge, Federated
Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz et al. 2019)
has recently emerged as the de facto paradigm enabling distributed ML on a large number of client devices. In a FL
system, a central cloud server mediates information transfer
within a network of clients which must keep their local data
* Xiaohan Chen is the corresponding author, and one of the two
student authors who made major contributions in this work.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6080

