The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The King is Naked: on the Notion of Robustness for Natural Language Processing
Emanuele La Malfa, Marta Kwiatkowska
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{emanuele.lamalfa, marta.kwiatkowska}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

with some believing they are the ‘foundation’ for the entire discipline (Bommasani et al. 2021) and others arguing
that they mostly learn higher-order distributions of words
frequency (Sinha et al. 2021).
In this work, we first review the classical notions of robustness adopted in NLP and identify their weaknesses, in
terms of the lack of expressiveness and over-reliance on the
neural model text representation. Next, to better align the
perception of human robustness to that implemented by a
neural model, we formalise (local) semantic robustness of
NLP as a notion that generalizes local discrete robustness
through measuring robustness to linguistic rules, rather than
to word substitution or deletion. This allows us to define
(global) semantic robustness for a linguistic task such as
sentiment analysis, which can be extended to higher-order
tasks. We contribute to the debate in the NLP community by
performing a systematic comparison, complemented by an
evaluation of different architectures, of the classical notions
of robustness in NLP. We further show that with semantic
robustness we can evaluate the performance of a model on
cogent linguistic phenomena, which are of interest for both
the NLP and the linguistics community. We achieve this by
proposing an assessment framework and a simple, yet effective, test bed based on data augmentation. Last but not least,
we wish to highlight the issue of NLP robustness, which
for the last few years has over-focused on trivial and often
machine-centric symbol manipulation. Using the terminology drawn from cyber-security, this work is a ‘purple-team’
effort to align the key performance indicators of the ‘redteam’ – whose role is to exploit NLP models with any kind
of vulnerability – with those of the ‘blue-team’, a.k.a. the
defenders, who aim to adopt a semantic notion of robustness
that implies robustness to linguistic phenomena.

There is growing evidence that the classical notion of adversarial robustness originally introduced for images has been
adopted as a de facto standard by a large part of the NLP research community. We show that this notion is problematic
in the context of NLP as it considers a narrow spectrum of
linguistic phenomena. In this paper, we argue for semantic
robustness, which is better aligned with the human concept
of linguistic fidelity. We characterize semantic robustness in
terms of biases that it is expected to induce in a model. We
study semantic robustness of a range of vanilla and robustly
trained architectures using a template-based generative test
bed. We complement the analysis with empirical evidence
that, despite being harder to implement, semantic robustness
can improve performance on complex linguistic phenomena
where models robust in the classical sense fail.

Introduction
In the last decade, deep learning has become the gold standard method to solve complex problems in Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Brown et al. 2020). The range of
NLP applications encompasses text classification (Liu et al.
2019), language translation (Liu et al. 2020), and now also
ranking systems and large-scale search engines (Wang et al.
2021). With models whose complexity – and consequently,
size – has become ‘gargantuan’1 , there is an increasing concern about reproducibility (Liu et al. 2021b) and reliability
of those models (Song et al. 2020), as it is known that, even
for smaller networks, it is possible to exploit their brittleness with techniques of adversarial machine learning (Zhang
et al. 2020). Consequently, concepts of robustness have been
transferred from adversarial learning to NLP, resulting in
techniques and tools (Li et al. 2020a) that typically check
that the network’s decision is invariant to a simple bounded
perturbation (word substitution or deletion) for a given input
(local robustness), working in the (continuous) embedding
space or the (discrete) word neighbourhood. However, NLP
still lacks a definition of robustness that properly captures
linguistic phenomena and is aligned with human common
sense (Xu et al. 2020). There is currently a debate in the NLP
community about the internal working of language models,

Related Work
Brittleness of neural network models is a serious concern, both theoretically (Biggio et al. 2013; Szegedy et al.
2014) and practically, including Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Belinkov and Bisk 2018; Ettinger et al. 2017;
Gao et al. 2018; Jia and Liang 2017; Liang et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2020) and more recently complex Masked Language Models (MLM) (Li et al. 2020b; Sun et al. 2020).
In NLP, attacks are usually conducted either at character or
word level (Ebrahimi et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2018), or

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
GPT-3’s full version has 175 billion learning parameters.

11047

