The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Fusing Pre-trained Models into Neural Machine Translation
Rongxiang Weng1,2 , Heng Yu2 , Weihua Luo2 , Min Zhang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
2
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
wengrongxiang@gmail.com, yuheng.yh@alibaba-inc.com, weihua.luowh@alibaba-inc.com,minzhang@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training and fine-tuning have become the de facto
paradigm in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks.
However, compared to other NLP tasks, neural machine translation (NMT) aims to generate target language sentences
through the contextual representation from the source language counterparts. This characteristic means the optimization
objective of NMT is far from that of the universal pre-trained
models (PTMs), leading to the standard procedure of pretraining and fine-tuning does not work well in NMT. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework to deep fuse the pretrained representation into NMT, fully exploring the potential of PTMs in NMT. Specifically, we directly replace the
randomly initialized Transformer encoder with a pre-trained
encoder and propose a layer-wise coordination structure to coordinate PTM and NMT decoder learning. Then, we introduce
a partitioned multi-task learning method to fine-tune the pretrained parameter, reducing the gap between PTM and NMT
by progressively learning the task-specific representation. Experimental results show that our approach achieves considerable improvements on WMT14 En2De, WMT14 En2Fr,
and WMT16 Ro2En translation benchmarks and outperforms
previous work in both autoregressive and non-autoregressive
NMT models.

Introduction
Pre-trained models (PTMs), such as GPT (Radford et al.
2018, 2019), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), XLM (Lample and
Conneau 2019), have obtained large success in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks, from understanding
(NLU) (Devlin et al. 2019; Lample and Conneau 2019) to
generation (NLG) (Song et al. 2019; Lewis et al. 2019). Generally, training a PTM requires a large amount of unlabeled
data and well-designed self-supervised training objectives
(e.g., masked language model (MLM) (Devlin et al. 2019)
or auto-regressive language model (Radford et al. 2018)).
Various downstream tasks then directly utilize the pre-trained
knowledge by fine-tuning the parameters of PTMs with the
task-specific training data (Qiu et al. 2020).
However, neural machine translation (NMT) does not get
promising results in this transformation, especially for the
rich-resource language pairs (Yang et al. 2019; Zhu et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11468

2020; Weng et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021).
Unlike most NLP tasks, as a bilingual generation task (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Cho et al. 2014; Vaswani et al.
2017), the goal of NMT is to generate target language sentences through the contextual information from the source
language counterparts. Both of pre-trained encoders (Radford
et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Lample and Conneau 2019)
and sequence to sequence models (Song et al. 2019; Lewis
et al. 2019) cannot fit this goal, i.e., these models only learn
representations in the same language. This phenomenon leads
to that simply fine-tuning the parameters of PTMs suffering
from the catastrophic forgetting problem (Goodfellow et al.
2013; Yang et al. 2019). Thus, how to explore the potential
of PTMs in NMT is still an issue worthy of study.
Recently, some studies have noticed the aforementioned
problem and proposed several effective fusion-based methods.
Zhu et al. (2020) proposed a BERT-fused NMT to fuse representations of BERT into NMT. Yang et al. (2019) proposed
asymptotic distillation and dynamic switch methods for further utilizing pre-trained knowledge. Meanwhile, Weng et al.
(2020a) proposed a dynamic fusion mechanism to choose the
pre-trained representations dynamically. Their primary motivation is to extract pre-trained representations from PTMs
and feed them into the NMT model. The pre-trained representation acts as a supplement to the NMT (i.e., shallow fusion),
which is not sufficient to make use of PTMs and renders the
scale of NMT becomes very large. In addition, another shortcoming is that they completely abandon the fine-tuning and
treat PTMs as a static knowledge base. However, a proper
fine-tuning strategy is helpful to reduce the gap between
PTMs and NMT, prompting the pre-trained representation to
be more suitable for translation (Gururangan et al. 2020).
In this paper, towards making more effective use of PTMs
in NMT, we propose a deep fusion framework, taking the
previous fusion-based approach a step further. On the one
hand, we propose a layer-wise coordination structure to coordinate the learning of the PTM and the NMT decoder, rather
than regarding the PTM as a plug-in module of NMT. In our
structure, the PTM replaces the randomly initialized Transformer encoder, and the decoder generates target sentences
just relying on the contextual representation of the PTM. Different from the traditional coordination structure (He et al.
2018), each decoder layer only captures the representation
from the corresponding encoder layer. We adopt a coordina-

