The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Topology-Aware Convolutional Neural Network for Efficient Skeleton-Based
Action Recognition
Kailin Xu1 * † , Fanfan Ye 2† , Qiaoyong Zhong 2 , Di Xie 2‡ ,
1

Zhejiang University 2 Hikvision Research Institute
kailinxu@zju.edu.cn, {yefanfan, zhongqiaoyong, xiedi}@hikvision.com

90

Abstract
In the context of skeleton-based action recognition, graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) have been rapidly developed, whereas convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
received less attention. One reason is that CNNs are considered poor in modeling the irregular skeleton topology. To alleviate this limitation, we propose a pure CNN architecture
named Topology-aware CNN (Ta-CNN) in this paper. In particular, we develop a novel cross-channel feature augmentation module, which is a combo of map-attend-group-map operations. By applying the module to the coordinate level and
the joint level subsequently, the topology feature is effectively
enhanced. Notably, we theoretically prove that graph convolution is a special case of normal convolution when the joint
dimension is treated as channels. This confirms that the topology modeling power of GCNs can also be implemented by
using a CNN. Moreover, we creatively design a SkeletonMix
strategy which mixes two persons in a unique manner and
further boosts the performance. Extensive experiments are
conducted on four widely used datasets, i.e. N-UCLA, SBU,
NTU RGB+D and NTU RGB+D 120 to verify the effectiveness of Ta-CNN. We surpass existing CNN-based methods
significantly. Compared with leading GCN-based methods,
we achieve comparable performance with much less complexity in terms of the required GFLOPs and parameters.

1

GCN-Based
Shift-GCN++
Shift-GCN
SGCN-1
AdaSGN
AdaSGN-Fuse
MS-G3D

89

88
CCN-Based
HCN
VA-RN18
VA-RN50
ST+RN101
Ta-CNN(ours)
Ta-CNN+(ours)

87

86

0

1

2

3

10

30

50

70

Figure 1: Comparison of various methods on NTU RGB+D
with the cross-subject benchmark in terms of accuracy
and number of parameters. The proposed Ta-CNN achieves
state-of-the-art performance with a tiny model size.

topological information in skeleton data properly, which has
been verified in many previous works (Yan, Xiong, and Lin
2018; Ye et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021a). One obvious limitation is that most of these pure GCN-based methods rely
on heavy models (Liu et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2021). To attack
the weakness, some works combine CNN and GCN into a
compact model and get decent performance while balancing the model size (Zhang et al. 2020). However, few pure
CNN-based methods (Zhang et al. 2019) were proposed to
address the task and achieve competitive performance with
GCN-based methods. It is widely recognized that CNN can
not exploit the skeleton topology sufficiently. Inspired by
this factor, a question came to our mind. Can we enhance the
topology feature of a CNN model by borrowing the topology
modeling insights from GCN-based methods?
Previous CNN-based methods mostly treat each dimension of the coordinate feature equally in convolutional layers. Also, none of them focuses on explicit modeling of
the interaction among joints due to lack of a valid tool as
the adjacency matrix for GCN. We argue that enhancing
the coordinate and joint features is the key to effectively
model the skeleton topology using CNN. To this end, we
propose a novel Topology-aware CNN (Ta-CNN), which
can fully mine the topological information of skeleton data
and achieve remarkable performance. Based on CNN, it is

Introduction

Skeleton-based action recognition has received widespread
attention from the community, and many significant advances have been made in recent years. Unlike RGB-based
image and video data, skeleton data are much more abstract and compact, reducing the parameters and computation resources required in the model design (Zhang et al.
2020). Looking back at the development of this field, methods that focus on hand-crafted features (Vemulapalli, Arrate, and Chellappa 2014; Zhang et al. 2019) have been surpassed by deep learning-based methods. With the emergence
of graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Yan, Xiong, and
Lin 2018), the recognition performance is being improved
rapidly. GCN is considered to be able to handle the irregular
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Internship at Hikvision Research Institute.
†
Both authors contributed equally to this work.
‡
Di Xie is the corresponding author.

2866

