The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimizing Binary Decision Diagrams with MaxSAT for Classification
Hao Hu, Marie-José Huguet, Mohamed Siala
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INSA, Toulouse, France
{hhu, huguet, siala}@laas.fr

Abstract

Hebrard, and O’Sullivan 2009; Narodytska et al. 2018; Avellaneda 2020; Hu et al. 2020; Janota and Morgado 2020;
Yu et al. 2020) have been successfully used to learn interpretable models. These declarative approaches are particularly interesting since they offer certain flexibility to handle
additional requirements when learning a model.
By providing compact representations for Boolean functions, Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) (Akers 1978;
Moret 1982; Bryant 1986; Knuth 2009) are widely studied
for hardware design, model checking, and knowledge representation. In the context of ML, BDD could be viewed as
an intrepretable model for binary classification. In addition,
they were extended for multi-classification, known as decision graphs and heuristic methods were proposed in (Oliver
1992; Kohavi 1994; Kohavi and Li 1995; Mues et al. 2004).
Moreover, (Ignatov and Ignatov 2017) proposed decision
stream, a similar topology to BDD based on merging similar
subtrees in each split made in decision trees to improve the
generalization. (Oliver 1992; Kohavi 1994) showed that decision graphs could avoid the replication problem and fragmentation problem of decision trees effectively, which BDDs
also could avoid in binary classification. This fact indicates
that generally in the practice of ML, a BDD have a smaller
size than the corresponding decision tree.
In this paper, we introduce a SAT-based model for learning optimal BDDs with the smallest number of features classifying all examples correctly, and a lifted MaxSAT-based
model to learn optimal BDDs minimizing the classification
error. We assume that all BDDs are ordered and reduced1 , the
limitation on the depth for a BDD, corresponds to the number
of features to be selected by our model. To the best of our
knowledge, (Cabodi et al. 2021) is the only exact method
of learning optimal BDDs in the context of ML. The authors proposed a SAT model to learn optimal BDDs with the
smallest sizes that correctly classify all examples. In their
approach, the depth of the BDD is not restrained. In fact, it
is possible that the constructed BDD is small in size (number
of nodes) and high in depth. As the BDD is ordered, this approach could not limit the number of features used, making
it not quite comparable with our proposition. Another related work is in (Hu et al. 2020) where the authors consider
a MaxSAT model to learn optimal decision trees minimizing

The growing interest in explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) for critical decision making motivates the need for interpretable machine learning (ML) models. In fact, due to
their structure (especially with small sizes), these models are
inherently understandable by humans. Recently, several exact
methods for computing such models are proposed to overcome weaknesses of traditional heuristic methods by providing more compact models or better prediction quality.
Despite their compressed representation of Boolean functions, Binary decision diagrams (BDDs) did not gain enough
interest as other interpretable ML models. In this paper, we
first propose SAT-based models for learning optimal BDDs (in
terms of the number of features) that classify all input examples. Then, we lift the encoding to a MaxSAT model to learn
optimal BDDs in limited depths, that maximize the number of
examples correctly classified. Finally, we tackle the fragmentation problem by introducing a method to merge compatible
subtrees for the BDDs found via the MaxSAT model. Our empirical study shows clear benefits of the proposed approach
in terms of prediction quality and interpretability (i.e., lighter
size) compared to the state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Due to the increasing concerns in understanding the reasoning behind AI decisions for critical applications, interpretable Machine Learning (ML) models gained a lot of attention. Examples of such ML applications include job recruitment, bank credit applications, and justice (Voigt and
Bussche 2017). Most of traditional approaches for building interpretable models are greedy, for example, decision trees (Breiman et al. 1984; Quinlan 1986, 1993), rule
lists (Cohen 1995; Clark and Boswell 1991), and decision
sets (Lakkaraju, Bach, and Leskovec 2016). Compared to
traditional approaches, exact methods offer guarantee of
optimality, such as model size and accuracy. In this context, combinatorial optimisation methods, such as Constraint
Programming (Bonfietti, Lombardi, and Milano 2015; Verhaeghe et al. 2020), Mixed Integer Programming (Angelino
et al. 2018; Verwer and Zhang 2019; Aglin, Nijssen, and
Schaus 2020), or Boolean Satisfiablility (SAT) (Bessiere,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3767

The two notions are defined in the background

