The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimize What You Evaluate With: Search Result Diversification Based on Metric
Optimization
Hai-Tao Yu
Information Intelligence Lab
Faculty of Library, Information and Media Science, University of Tsukuba
yuhaitao@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract

classify SRD methods into unsupervised methods and supervised methods. The key difference is that unsupervised
methods mainly rely on some heuristic criteria for generating the diversified ranking and no machine learning algorithms is used. Noteworthy, finding a group of subtopic
strings that covers well all the possible information needs
behind the query is a challenging task. In most realistic scenarios explicit subtopics are not available (Kim and Lee
2015). In this paper, we focus on how to perform implicit
SRD in a supervised manner. The information retrieval community has experienced a flourishing development of SRD
methods, such as the methods (Santos, Macdonald, and Ounis 2010; Dang and Croft 2012; Yu and Ren 2014; Dang and
Croft 2013; Hu et al. 2015; Sarwar et al. 2020) for explicit
SRD and the methods (Carbonell and Goldstein 1998; Sanner et al. 2011; Gollapudi and Sharma 2009; Zuccon et al.
2012; Raiber and Kurland 2013; Yu et al. 2018, 2017) for
implicit SRD. Later on, due to the breakthrough successes of
neural network based models, significant efforts (Zhu et al.
2014; Xu et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a; Yigit-Sert et al. 2020;
Xia et al. 2015, 2017, 2016; Xu et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2017;
Feng et al. 2018) have been made in exploring how to deploy
machine learning methods, especially neural network based
models, to solve SRD problems.
Despite the successes achieved by the aforementioned
studies, fundamental research questions remain open. First,
most studies appeal to formulate diversified document ranking as a sequential process, where the locally optimal choice
is made at each round. The key drawback is that the commonly used greedy strategy works well on the premise that
the preceding choices are optimal or close to the optimal
solution. However, in most cases, this strategy fails to guarantee the optimal solution. What is more, this one-by-one
selection process is rather time-consuming with the increase
of the number of candidate documents, which poses an additional challenge. Second, in order to overcome the aforementioned shortcoming, Qin, Dou, and Wen (2020) explored how to generate diversified ranking in a score-andsort manner. Unfortunately, the mismatch between the objective function used in training and the final evaluation
measure used in testing has not been taken into account.
Third, the recent work by Yan et al. (2021) showed significantly improved performance by directly optimizing the
smooth approximation of a specific diversity metric. How-

Most of the existing methods for search result diversification
(SRD) appeal to the greedy strategy for generating diversified
results, which is formulated as a sequential process of selecting documents one-by-one, and the locally optimal choice is
made at each round. Unfortunately, this strategy suffers from
the following shortcomings: (1) Such a one-by-one selection
process is rather time-consuming for both training and inference. (2) It works well on the premise that the preceding
choices are optimal or close to the optimal solution. (3) The
mismatch between the objective function used in training and
the final evaluation measure used in testing has not been taken
into account. We propose a novel framework through direct
metric optimization for SRD (referred to as MO4SRD) based
on the score-and-sort strategy. Specifically, we represent the
diversity score of each document that determines its rank position based on a probability distribution. These distributions
over scores naturally give rise to expectations over rank positions. Armed with this advantage, we can get the differentiable variants of the widely used diversity metrics. Thanks
to this, we are able to directly optimize the evaluation measure used in testing. Moreover, we have devised a novel probabilistic neural scoring function. It jointly scores candidate
documents by taking into account both cross-document interaction and permutation equivariance, which makes it possible to generate a diversified ranking via a simple sorting.
The experimental results on benchmark collections show that
the proposed method achieves significantly improved performance over the state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
To cope with ambiguous and/or underspecified queries,
search result diversification (SRD) has been regarded as the
key solution and has shown significantly increasing values
in a wide range of domains, such as web search (Ma, Lyu,
and King 2010; Liu et al. 2014; Liang 2019) and recommender systems (Liu et al. 2020b; Ding et al. 2021). According to whether the subtopics (i.e., different information
needs) underlying a query are given beforehand or not, the
task of SRD can be distinguished into implicit SRD and explicit SRD. The distinguishing characteristic of the implicit
SRD is that the possible subtopics underlying a query are
unknown. From a machine learning perspective, we can also
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10399

