The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semantically Contrastive Learning for Low-Light Image Enhancement
Dong Liang1 , Ling Li1 , Mingqiang Wei1 * , Shuo Yang2 , Liyan Zhang1 , Wenhan Yang3 , Yun Du1 ,
Huiyu Zhou4
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
2
vivo Mobile Communication 3 Nanyang Technological University 4 University of Leicester
{liangdong, liling, zhangliyan, muyun}@nuaa.edu.cn, mingqiang.wei@gmail.com, shuo.yang@vivo.com,
wenhan.yang@ntu.edu.sg, hz143@leicester.ac.uk
Abstract

Low-light image enhancement (LLE) remains challenging
due to the unfavorable prevailing low-contrast and weakvisibility problems of single RGB images. In this paper, we
respond to the intriguing learning-related question – if leveraging both accessible unpaired over/underexposed images
and high-level semantic guidance, can improve the performance of cutting-edge LLE models? Here, we propose an effective semantically contrastive learning paradigm for LLE
(namely SCL-LLE). Beyond the existing LLE wisdom, it
casts the image enhancement task as multi-task joint learning,
where LLE is converted into three constraints of contrastive
learning, semantic brightness consistency, and feature preservation for simultaneously ensuring the exposure, texture, and
color consistency. SCL-LLE allows the LLE model to learn
from unpaired positives (normal-light)/negatives (over/underexposed), and enables it to interact with the scene semantics to regularize the image enhancement network, yet the
interaction of high-level semantic knowledge and the lowlevel signal prior is seldom investigated in previous methods. Training on readily available open data, extensive experiments demonstrate that our method surpasses the state-of-thearts LLE models over six independent cross-scenes datasets.
Moreover, SCL-LLE’s potential to benefit the downstream semantic segmentation under extremely dark conditions is discussed. Source Code: https://github.com/LingLIx/SCL-LLE.

(a) Input

(b) w/o Neg. samples

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Impact of training data. (b) no negative samples
are involved in training.

as negative samples. On the one hand, high-quality positive
samples without brightness and color defects are challenging
to acquire in practice. For example, Ignatov et al. propose
a scheme to acquire them from a DSLR camera to refine
the imaging of a mobile phone camera (Ignatov et al. 2017).
It brings complicated registration and pixel-by-pixel calibration to image pairs. On the other hand, negative samples with
error exposures are readily available. As shown in Fig. 1, our
method yields visually better results, as the negative samples
also provide supervisory information to generate more discriminative visual mapping.
Another drawback of current methods is the ignorance of
the important semantic information. As shown in Fig. 3, the
enhancement strategies for the background and foreground
should be different. Scene semantics can help to distinguish
different areas for further enhancement. In addition, there
is natural brightness consistency inside a semantic category.
Employing such consistency can help to avoid local uneven
exposure. Although methods (Fan et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2020) apply semantic information as guidance to improve
image enhancement, they ignore the consistency between
pixels of the same semantic category.
The motivation of this paper can be summarized as follows: 1) to release from the strict pixel correspondence of
training image pairs and to leverage over/underexposed images as negative samples for building a more flexible and

Introduction
Capturing images with underexposures remains a significant
source of errors in camera imaging. Such degenerated images severely hinder some downstream tasks from operating
smoothly, such as semantic segmentation or object detection
in vision-based driving assistance systems.
Data-driven methods have been proposed to formulate the
LLE problem by learning strict pixel correspondence of image pairs via strong supervisions, e.g., (Lore, Akintayo, and
Sarkar 2017; Wei et al. 2018; Zhang, Zhang, and Guo 2019;
Xu et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2019). Although having achieved
remarkable successes in LLE, they only adopt the normalillumination images as positive samples to guide the training
while neglecting to exploit the over/underexposed images
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1555

