The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast Payoff Matrix Sparsification Techniques for Structured Extensive-Form
Games
Gabriele Farina1 , Tuomas Sandholm1,2,3,4
1

Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
2
Strategy Robot, Inc.
3
Optimized Markets, Inc.
4
Strategic Machine, Inc.
{gfarina,sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu
game theory to develop specialized (as opposed to applicable to any linear program) algorithms—usually first-order
methods—that avoid the need for representing the payoff
matrix explicitly. Among these, the most successful examples include the CFR algorithm (Zinkevich et al. 2007) and
its modern variants (Tammelin 2014; Moravčík et al. 2017;
Brown and Sandholm 2017b,a, 2019a,b; Davis, Waugh, and
Bowling 2019; Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm 2021b; Morrill et al. 2021), and methods based on accelerated firstorder methods such as EGT (Nesterov 2005; Hoda et al.
2010; Kroer, Farina, and Sandholm 2018; Farina, Kroer, and
Sandholm 2021a) and Mirror Prox (Nemirovski 2004; Kroer
2019; Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm 2021a), which are able
to scale to large two-player extensive-form games and compute approximate Nash equilibria for moderate approximation gaps. However, there exist certain applications where
currently only LP and linear integer programming technology provide suitable guarantees. For example, the only scalable method for computing sequentially-rational equilibria
depends on the ability to find high-precision Nash equilibria,
a task that can currently only be achieved using LP technology. Another example is computation of strategies subject
to constraints such as support size, sparsity, or amount of
randomization, an optimization problem that can easily be
expressed via integer linear programming.

Abstract
The practical scalability of many optimization algorithms for
large extensive-form games is often limited by the games’
huge payoff matrices. To ameliorate the issue, Zhang and
Sandholm recently proposed a sparsification technique that
factorizes the payoff matrix A into a sparser object A =
Â + U V > , where the total combined number of nonzeros of Â, U , and V is significantly smaller. Such a factorization can be used in place of the original payoff matrix in many optimization algorithm, such as interior-point
and second-order methods, thus increasing the size of games
that can be handled. Their technique significantly sparsifies
poker (end)games, standard benchmarks used in computational game theory, AI, and more broadly. We show that the
existence of extremely sparse factorizations in poker games
can be tied to their particular Kronecker-product structure.
We clarify how such structure arises and introduce the connection between that structure and sparsification. By leveraging such structure, we give two ways of computing strong
sparsifications of poker games (as well as any other game
with a similar structure) that are i) orders of magnitude faster
to compute, ii) more numerically stable, and iii) produce a
dramatically smaller number of nonzeros than the prior technique. Our techniques enable—for the first time—effective
computation of high-precision Nash equilibria and strategies subject to constraints on the amount of allowed randomization. Furthermore, they significantly speed up parallel
first-order game-solving algorithms; we show state-of-the-art
speed on a GPU.

1

In a recent paper, Zhang and Sandholm (2020) propose a
technique to factorize the payoff matrix of any two-player
extensive-form game into a low-rank decomposition (called
a sparsification) such that the number of nonzeros required
in the decomposition is significantly smaller than the number of nonzeros in the original payoff matrix. They show
that such a factorization can then be used in place of the
original payoff matrix in certain LPs, thereby increasing the
game size that LP technology is able to handle. While their
sparsification technique is able to typically reduce the number of nonzeros by a factor of 2–3, a notable empirical finding in their evaluation is the dramatic reduction in the number of nonzeros—close to two orders of magnitude—that
their heuristic achieves in two-player poker endgames. That
is important due to the central role of poker in imperfectinformation game solving. Poker variants have been the
standard canonical benchmarks in game theory since the
introduction of the most seminal solution concept, Nash
equilibrium, in 1950 (Nash 1950a; Kuhn 1950). Poker cap-

Introduction

Certain important quantities of interest in computational
game theory can be expressed as the solution to a linear program (LP) and therefore—in principle—solved for by any
algorithm for linear optimization. The practice is more nuanced. The size of the LP is usually dominated by the payoff
matrix of the game, that is, the matrix of payoffs for each
of the possible terminal states of the game. Correspondingly, in large extensive-form games, most out-of-the-box
algorithms for linear programming—such as interior point
methods and the simplex method—are unviable. This has
historically led the research community in computational
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4999

