The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Vision Transformers are Robust Learners
Sayak Paul,1 * Pin-Yu Chen 2 *
1

Carted 2 IBM Research
sayak@carted.com, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract

til 2020, the performance of Transformers were on par with
the SOTA CNNs on standard image recognition tasks (Carion
et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2020; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). Attention has been shown to be an important element for vision
networks to achieve better empirical robustness (Hendrycks
et al. 2021). Since attention is a core component of ViTs (and
Transformers in general), a question that naturally gets raised
here is – could ViTs be inherently more robust? If so, why
are ViTs more robust learners? In this work, we provide an
affirmative answer to the first question and provide empirical
evidence to reason about the improved robustness of ViTs.
Various recent works have opened up the investigation on
evaluating the robustness of ViTs (Bhojanapalli et al. 2021;
Shao et al. 2021; Mahmood, Mahmood, and Van Dijk 2021)
but with a relatively limited scope. We build on top of these
and provide further and more comprehensive analyses to
understand why ViTs provide better robustness for semantic shifts, common corruptions and perturbations, and natural adversarial examples to input images in comparison to
SOTA CNNs like Big Transfer (BiT) (Kolesnikov et al. 2020).
Through a set of carefully designed experiments, we first
verify the enhanced robustness of ViTs to common robustness benchmark datasets (Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019;
Hendrycks et al. 2020, 2021; Xiao et al. 2021). We then provide quantitative and qualitative analyses to help understand
the reasons behind this enhancement. In summary, we make
the following contributions:
• We use 6 diverse ImageNet datasets concerning different types of robustness evaluation and conclude that ViTs
achieve significantly better performance than BiTs.
• We design 6 experiments, including robustness to masking, energy/loss landscape analysis, and sensitivity to highfrequency artifacts to study ViT’s improved robustness.
• Our analysis provides novel insights for robustness attribution of ViT. Moreover, our robustness evaluation and
analysis tools are generic and can be used to benchmark
and study future image classification models.

Transformers, composed of multiple self-attention layers, hold
strong promises toward a generic learning primitive applicable
to different data modalities, including the recent breakthroughs
in computer vision achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) standard
accuracy. What remains largely unexplored is their robustness evaluation and attribution. In this work, we study the
robustness of the Vision Transformer (ViT) against common
corruptions and perturbations, distribution shifts, and natural
adversarial examples. We use six different diverse ImageNet
datasets concerning robust classification to conduct a comprehensive performance comparison of ViT models and SOTA
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), Big-Transfer. Through
a series of six systematically designed experiments, we then
present analyses that provide both quantitative and qualitative
indications to explain why ViTs are indeed more robust learners. For example, with fewer parameters and similar dataset
and pre-training combinations, ViT gives a top-1 accuracy of
28.10% on ImageNet-A which is 4.3x higher than a comparable variant of BiT. Our analyses on image masking, Fourier
spectrum sensitivity, and spread on discrete cosine energy
spectrum reveal intriguing properties of ViT attributing to improved robustness. Code for reproducing our experiments is
available at https://git.io/J3VO0.

1

Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) are becoming a preferred
architecture for various data modalities. This is primarily because they help reduce inductive biases that go into designing
network architectures. Moreover, Transformers have been
shown to achieve tremendous parameter efficiency without
sacrificing predictive performance over architectures that are
often dedicated to specific types of data modalities. Attention,
in particular, self-attention is one of the foundational blocks
of Transformers. It is a computational primitive that allows
us to quantify pairwise entity interactions thereby helping a
network learn the hierarchies and alignments present inside
the input data (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani
et al. 2017). These are desirable properties to eliminate the
need for carefully designed inductive biases to a great extent.
Although Transformers have been used in prior works
(Trinh, Luong, and Le 2019; Chen et al. 2020) it was only un-

2

Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, (Parmar et al. 2018) first explored the use of Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) for the
task of image super-resolution which essentially belongs to
the category of image generation. Image-GPT (Chen et al.
2020) used Transformers for unsupervised pre-training from

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2071

