The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Evidential Neighborhood Contrastive Learning for Universal Domain Adaptation
Liang Chen1 , Yihang Lou2 * , Jianzhong He2 , Tao Bai2 , Minghua Deng1†
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Intelligent Vision Dept, Huawei Technologies
{clandzyy, dengmh}@pku.edu.cn, {louyihang1, jianzhong.he, baitao13}@huawei.com

A

Abstract
Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) aims to transfer the
knowledge learned from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain without any constraints on the label
sets. However, domain shift and category shift make UniDA
extremely challenging, mainly attributed to the requirement
of identifying both shared “known” samples and private “unknown” samples. Previous methods barely exploit the intrinsic manifold structure relationship between two domains
for feature alignment, and they rely on the softmax-based
scores with class competition nature to detect underlying “unknown” samples. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel
evidenTial Neighborhood conTrastive learning framework
called TNT to address these issues. Specifically, TNT first
proposes a new domain alignment principle: semantically
consistent samples should be geometrically adjacent to each
other, whether within or across domains. From this criterion,
a cross domain multi-sample contrastive loss based on mutual
nearest neighbors is designed to achieve common category
matching and private category separation. Second, toward accurate “unknown” sample detection, TNT introduces a class
competition-free uncertainty score from the perspective of evidential deep learning. Instead of setting a single threshold,
TNT learns a category-aware heterogeneous threshold vector
to reject diverse “unknown” samples. Extensive experiments
on three benchmarks demonstrate that TNT significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art UniDA methods.

B
α= (12, 1.5, 1.5)
c= 0.8
u= 0.2

α= (1.8, 1.1, 1.1)
c= 0.45
u= 0.75

α= (12, 12, 12)
c= 0.33
u= 0.08

α= (1.1, 1.1, 1.1)
c= 0.33
u= 0.91

source
target

Figure 1: (A) Probability simplex with confidence (c) and
uncertainty (u). The area of red indicates the uncertainty of
prediction. Competition nature can produce high c but high
u, or low c but low u. (B) Intra- and inter-domain mutual
nearest neighbor principle (k = 1) for feature alignment.

however, this assumption may not be easily satisfied. Commonly, we may encounter Lt ⊂ Ls , i.e., partial DA (PDA)
(Cao et al. 2018), or Ls ⊂ Lt , i.e., open-set DA (ODA)
(Panareda and Gall 2017), or Ls ∩ Lt ̸= ∅, Ls ∪ Lt ̸=
Ls or Lt , i.e., open partial DA (OPDA) (You et al. 2019).
These variants have attracted the attention of the community
in recent years and were resolved independently. However,
negative aspect tends to confound this evolutionary process.
Specifically, a method that is applicable to one variant may
not be applicable to another variant. More realistically, we
may not know in advance which of these variants will occur.
Universal DA (UniDA) was proposed to account for both
domain shift and category shift. It assumes that the two label spaces can be different and that their relationship is unknown in advance. In UniDA, we need to classify target
samples into either one of the “known” labels or the “unknown” label. Here, however, UniDA poses two technical
challenges. First, the removal of domain discrepancy should
be constrained on the common categories between two domains, and we need to separate the respective private categories simultaneously. Second, in the absence of target label
supervision, estimating the label distribution on the target
domain and detecting potential target “unknown” samples is
another main technical difficulty.
For the first challenge, UAN (You et al. 2019) and CMU
(Fu et al. 2020) employ weighted adversarial network to discover shared label sets and promote common class adapta-

Introduction
Deep neural network is data-hungry since it performs impressively on domains with abundant data labels, but it does
not generalize well on new unlabeled domains. Task-related
performance is significantly reduced owing to domain bias.
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to solve this issue by eliminating feature discrepancy and transferring knowledge from
the label-rich source domain to the label-scarce target domain (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015). Suppose Ls and Lt are
the label sets in two domains, respectively. Traditional unsupervised DA usually assumes Ls = Lt , i.e., closed DA
(CDA) (Tzeng et al. 2017). In complex real-world scenarios,
* This work is completed in Huawei Technologies.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6258

