The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Flow-Based Unconstrained Lip to Speech Generation
Jinzheng He1 , Zhou Zhao* 1 , Yi Ren1
Jinglin Liu1 , Baoxing Huai2 , Nicholas Yuan2 ,
1

Zhejiang University, China
2
Huawei Cloud
{3170106086,zhaozhou,rayeren,jinglinliu}@zju.edu.cn,
{huaibaoxing,nicholas.yuan}@huawei.com
Abstract

…

Unconstrained lip-to-speech aims to generate corresponding
speeches based on silent facial videos with no restriction to
head pose or vocabulary. It is desirable to generate intelligible and natural speech with a fast speed in unconstrained settings. Currently, to handle the more complicated scenarios,
most existing methods adopt the autoregressive architecture,
which is optimized with the MSE loss. Although these methods have achieved promising performance, they are prone
to bring issues including high inference latency and melspectrogram over-smoothness. To tackle these problems, we
propose a novel flow-based non-autoregressive lip-to-speech
model (GlowLTS) to break autoregressive constraints and
achieve faster inference. Concretely, we adopt a flow-based
decoder which is optimized by maximizing the likelihood
of the training data and is capable of more natural and fast
speech generation. Moreover, we devise a condition module to improve the intelligibility of generated speech. We
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method through
objective and subjective evaluation on Lip2Wav-ChemistryLectures and Lip2Wav-Chess-Analysis datasets. Our demo
video can be found at https://glowlts.github.io/.

…

…

…

Figure 1: An example of video and audio in unconstrained
datasets. In the blue box, the audio pronounces ”process”,
while in the red box, the audio pronounces ”hybrid”. Large
head movements exist in unconstrained settings.

for the modeling power of the lip-to-speech model: previous
work (Prajwal et al. 2020) investigates the problem using
the autoregressive sequence-to-sequence architecture, and
demonstrates that such architecture can generate more intelligible speech compared with other previous lip-to-speech
methods.
In unconstrained lip-to-speech, naturalness and intelligibility are the crucial parts of speech quality. Moreover,
the inference speed is also worthy of consideration (e.g.,
in some applications like online video conferencing, the
speech generation latency can greatly affect the user experience). Current method (Prajwal et al. 2020) designed for
unconstrained lip-to-speech faces several challenges. 1) Big
gap in naturalness between generated speech and realistic
speech: the existing method in unconstrained lip-to-speech
adopts the MSE criterion in predicting each spectrogram
frame. Such design can not capture the correlation among
frequency bins in a frame, which leads to over-smoothness
in spectrogram (Sheng and Pavlovskiy 2019). 2) High inference latency: the existing method utilizes the autoregressive
architecture, generating current frames conditioned on previous ones. Such architecture suffers from a low inference
speed (Gu et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019).

Introduction
Given a silent facial video, lip-to-speech aims to generate
corresponding speech. This technology can be widely used
in a variety of applications such as video conferencing in
silent or noisy environments (Vougioukas et al. 2019), longrange listening for surveillance (Ephrat, Halperin, and Peleg
2017) and artificial voice aid for people suffering from aphonia (Mira et al. 2021).
Currently, most existing lip-to-speech methods (Ephrat
and Peleg 2017; Kumar et al. 2019b; Akbari et al. 2018;
Vougioukas et al. 2019) are proposed to explore constrained
lip-to-speech, where videos are collected in an artificially
constrained environment with nearly no head motion and
speeches contain a narrow vocabulary, for example, only 56
tokens in GRID corpus (Cooke et al. 2006). Unconstrained
lip-to-speech, however, uses real lecture videos, which contain observable head motion (see Figure 1) and nearly 100x
larger vocabulary, which puts forward higher requirements
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

843

