The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

No Task Left Behind: Multi-Task Learning of
Knowledge Tracing and Option Tracing for Better Student Assessment
Suyeong An* , Junghoon Kim* , Minsam Kim* , Juneyoung Park†
Riiid AI Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{suyeong.an, junghoon.kim, minsam.kim, juneyoung.park}@riiid.co

Abstract

(Choi et al. 2020a; Piech et al. 2015). However, for educational contents that involve multiple choice (polytomous)
questions, KT only considers the binary (dichotomous) label
of correctness, and does not consider the student’s option of
choice. KT thus fails to distinguish between students who
answered a given question incorrectly, when in reality, one
student’s answer might have been closer to the correct one
than the other student’s.
Option Tracing (OT) (Ghosh, Raspat, and Lan 2021;
Thissen and Steinberg 1984) is an approach that explicitly
models the student’s response, i.e., option choice, to a multiple choice question. While OT takes into account the student’s option choice information, it does not consider the
student’s correctness. As a result, OT may fail to trace the
student’s knowledge state properly. This motivates a multitask learning scheme that leverages both correctness labels
and option labels.
In this paper, we propose Dichotomous-Polytomous
Multi-Task Learning (DP-MTL), where the model learns to
predict both the student’s correctness and option choice for
a given question. This way, DP-MTL can track the student’s
knowledge state at a more granular level. In our experiments,
we demonstrate that DP-MTL indeed improves KT, OT, and
SP performances. We expect that DP-MTL will enable a
more accurate student representation learning, which would,
in turn, benefit many other downstream educational tasks.
The main contributions of our paper are as follows:
• We introduce DP-MTL and show that, in this framework,
the KT objective acts as a regularization term for OT.

Student assessment is one of the most fundamental tasks in
the field of AI Education (AIEd). One of the most common
approach to student assessment is Knowledge Tracing (KT),
which evaluates a student’s knowledge state by predicting
whether the student will answer a given question correctly
or not. However, in the context of multiple choice (polytomous) questions, conventional KT approaches are limited in
that they only consider the binary (dichotomous) correctness
label (i.e., correct or incorrect), and disregard the specific option chosen by the student. Meanwhile, Option Tracing (OT)
attempts to model a student by predicting which option they
will choose for a given question, but overlooks the correctness information. In this paper, we propose DichotomousPolytomous Multi-Task Learning (DP-MTL), a multi-task
learning framework that combines KT and OT for more precise student assessment. In particular, we show that the KT
objective acts as a regularization term for OT in the DP-MTL
framework, and propose an appropriate architecture for applying our method on top of existing deep learning-based
KT models. We experimentally confirm that DP-MTL significantly improves both KT and OT performances, and also
benefits downstream tasks such as Score Prediction (SP).

Introduction
The field of AI Education (AIEd) is concerned with developing AI systems that facilitate human learning, and has the
potential to provide personalized education to a wider audience at an affordable cost. Student assessment, the process
of evaluating a student’s knowledge level, is one of the most
fundamental tasks in AIEd. Proper student assessment can
then be used for many downstream educational tasks, such
as score prediction (SP) (Su et al. 2018; Yin et al. 2019;
Choi et al. 2021) and personalized content recommendation
(Chen, Lee, and Chen 2005; Wang 2008; Wang et al. 2016;
Ai et al. 2019).
Knowledge Tracing (KT) (Corbett and Anderson 1994)
models a student’s knowledge state by predicting whether
the student will answer a given question correctly or not.
Due to the method’s simplicity and domain-agnosticity, KT
has been extensively used for student assessment in AIEd

• Additionally, we propose an architecture design for combining KT and OT on top of existing KT models.
• We experimentally confirm that our method significantly
improves KT, OT, and SP performances when applied on
top of three popular KT models, based on two different
datasets.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
combines KT and OT for better student assessment.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

This author is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4424

