The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Programmatic Reward Design by Example
Weichao Zhou and Wenchao Li
Boston University
{zwc662,wenchao}@bu.edu

Abstract

Levine 2018; Finn, Levine, and Abbeel 2016; Finn et al.
2016). However, due to the lack of interpretability of the
approximated reward functions, it is difficult to enforce specific correctness constraints in the reward learning process.
Recent works proposed logic-based reward functions (Li,
Vasile, and Belta 2017; Camacho et al. 2019) to endow an
RL agent with high-level knowledge of the task via logical specifications. The logic-constrained reward (Hasanbeig,
Abate, and Kroening 2019) and reward machines (Icarte
et al. 2018) explicitly represents reward functions as automata. However, it is still cumbersome to design the automata and they can be difficult to understand when the
size of the automata are large. In this paper, we propose
programmatic reward functions, i.e. reward functions represented as programs expressed in human-readable domain
specific language (DSL). There are several benefits of using
programmatic reward functions for RL policy training. First,
programs allow human engineers to express sub-goals, complex task scenarios in a structural and interpretable way. The
inclusion of such domain knowledge forms inductive biases
that help improve the sample efficiency and performance of
RL agents. Second, engineers can take advantage of the rich
semantics of DSLs to explicitly memorize, manipulate and
leverage hindsight experiences of the RL agent. Lastly, programs are amenable to the specification of symbolic constraints over the holes. In a typical design routine of a programmatic reward function, we assume that an engineer can
provide human insights in the form of a partial program,
or a sketch (Solar-Lezama 2008), analogous to human providing feature functions in IRL and logical specifications in
logic-based reward designs, to express the high-level structures of the task specification or reward function. The sketch
in essence defines the set of events and certain interactions
among them that the human engineer deem relevant to the
task. The low-level details, such as the right amount of reward for a specific event or sub-task, are left as holes.
Similar to Programming by Example (PBE) (Menon et al.
2013), we propose to infer the holes in a programmatic reward sketch from expert demonstrated trajectories. A key
difference of our approach from PBE is that the demonstrated trajectories do not directly correspond to inputs or
(intermediate) outputs of the program, but instead are assumed to be generated by an unknown expert policy that is
optimal under some realization of the programmatic reward

Reward design is a fundamental problem in reinforcement
learning (RL). A misspecified or poorly designed reward can
result in low sample efficiency and undesired behaviors. In
this paper, we propose the idea of programmatic reward design, i.e. using programs to specify the reward functions in
RL environments. Programs allow human engineers to express sub-goals and complex task scenarios in a structured
and interpretable way. The challenge of programmatic reward design, however, is that while humans can provide
the high-level structures, properly setting the low-level details, such as the right amount of reward for a specific subtask, remains difficult. A major contribution of this paper
is a probabilistic framework that can infer the best candidate programmatic reward function from expert demonstrations. Inspired by recent generative-adversarial approaches,
our framework searches for the most likely programmatic reward function under which the optimally generated trajectories cannot be differentiated from the demonstrated trajectories. Experimental results show that programmatic reward
functions learned using this framework can significantly outperform those learned using existing reward learning algorithms, and enable RL agents to achieve state-of-the-art performance on highly complex tasks.

Introduction
Reward signals are an integral part of reinforcement learning
(RL). Most conventional reward functions are goal-driven –
they reward the agent only at the end of each episode. The
sparsity of such reward signals, however, can make RL algorithms highly inefficient. As the complexity of the task
increases, it becomes difficult for the agent to grasp the intricacies of the task solely from a goal-driven reward (Amodei
et al. 2016).
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is a general
paradigm that aims at recovering the intrinsic reward function of human experts from their demonstrations (Ng and
Russell 2000; Ziebart et al. 2008). Earlier works of IRL require the provision of multiple feature functions to construct
the reward function. More recent attempts use function approximation by means of deep neural networks to alleviate
this limitation and have considerable success (Fu, Luo, and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9233

