The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast Approximations for Job Shop Scheduling:
A Lagrangian Dual Deep Learning Method
James Kotary1 , Ferdinando Fioretto1 , Pascal Van Hentenryck2
1

Syracuse University
Georgia Institute of Technology
jkotary@syr.edu, ffiorett@syr.edu, pvh@isye.gatech.edu
2

Abstract

must be produced under stringent time constraints. For example, when a malfunction occurs or when operating conditions
require a new schedule, replanning needs to be executed
promptly as machine idle time can be extremely costly. (e.g.,
on the order of $10,000 per minute for some applications
(Gombolay et al. 2018)). To address this issue, system operators typically seek approximate solutions to the original
scheduling problems. However, while more efficient computationally, their sub-optimality may induce substantial economical and societal losses, or they may even fail to satisfy
important constraints.
Fortunately, in many practical settings, one is interested in
solving many instances sharing similar patterns. Therefore,
the application of deep learning methods to aid the resolution of these optimization problems is gaining traction in
the nascent area at the intersection between constrained optimization and machine learning (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost
2020; Kotary et al. 2021; Vesselinova et al. 2020). In particular, supervised learning frameworks can train a model using
pre-solved optimization instances and their solutions. However, while much of the recent progress at the intersection of
constrained optimization and machine learning has focused
on learning good approximations by jointly training prediction and optimization models (Balcan et al. 2018; Khalil
et al. 2016; Nair et al. 2020; Nowak et al. 2018; Vinyals,
Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015a) and incorporating optimization algorithms into differentiable systems (Amos and Kolter
2017a; Pogančić et al. 2020; Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe
2019a; Mandi et al. 2020), learning the combinatorial structure of complex optimization problems remains a difficult
task. In this context, the JSP is particularly challenging due to
the presence of disjunctive constraints, which present some
unique challenges for machine learning. Ignoring these constraints produce unreliable and unusable approximations, as
illustrated in Section 5.
JSP instances typically vary along two main sets of parameters: (1) the continuous task durations and (2) the combinatorial machine assignments associated with each task. This
work focuses on the former aspect, addressing the problem
of learning to map JSP instances from a distribution over task
durations to solution schedules which are close to optimal.
Within this scope, the desired mapping is combinatorial in
its structure: a marginal increase in one task duration can
have cascading effects on the scheduling system, leading to

The Jobs shop Scheduling Problem (JSP) is a canonical combinatorial optimization problem that is routinely solved for a
variety of industrial purposes. It models the optimal scheduling
of multiple sequences of tasks, each under a fixed order of operations, in which individual tasks require exclusive access to
a predetermined resource for a specified processing time. The
problem is NP-hard and computationally challenging even for
medium-sized instances. Motivated by the increased stochasticity in production chains, this paper explores a deep learning
approach to deliver efficient and accurate approximations to
the JSP. In particular, this paper proposes the design of a deep
neural network architecture to exploit the problem structure,
its integration with Lagrangian duality to capture the problem
constraints, and a post-processing optimization to guarantee
solution feasibility. The resulting method, called JSP-DNN,
is evaluated on hard JSP instances from the JSPLIB benchmark library. Computational results show that JSP-DNN can
produce JSP approximations of high quality at negligible computational costs.

1

Introduction

The Job shop Scheduling Problem (JSP) is defined in terms
of a set of jobs, each of which consists of a sequence of tasks.
Each task is processed on a predetermined resource and no
two tasks can overlap in time on these resources. The goal
of the JSP is to sequence the tasks in order to minimize the
total duration of the schedule. Although the problem is NPhard and computationally challenging even for medium-sized
instances, it constitutes a fundamental building block for the
optimization of many industrial processes and is key to the
stability of their operations. Its effects are profound in our
society, with applications ranging from supply chains and
logistics, to employees rostering, marketing campaigns, and
manufacturing to name just a few (Kan 2012).
While the Artificial Intelligence and Operations Research
communities have contributed fundamental advances in optimization in recent decades, the complexity of these problems
often prevents them from being effectively adopted in contexts where many instances must be solved over a long-term
horizon (e.g., multi-year planning studies) or when solutions
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7239

