The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MeTeoR: Practical Reasoning in Datalog with Metric Temporal Operators
Dingmin Wang1 , Pan Hu1,2 , Przemysław Andrzej Wał ˛ega1 , Bernardo Cuenca Grau1
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2 School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

{dingmin.wang, przemyslaw.walega, bernardo.cuenca.grau}@cs.ox.ac.uk, pan.hu@sjtu.edu.cn

Reasoning in DatalogMTL is, however, of high complexity, namely ExpSpace-complete (Brandt et al. 2018) and
PSpace-complete with respect to data size (Wał ˛ega et al.
2019), which makes reasoning in practice challenging. Thus,
research has recently focused on establishing a suitable tradeoff between expressive power and complexity of reasoning,
by identifying lower complexity fragments of DatalogMTL
(Wał ˛ega et al. 2020b; Wał ˛ega, Zawidzki, and Cuenca Grau
2021) as well as studying alternative semantics with more
favourable computational behaviour (Wał ˛ega et al. 2020a;
Ryzhikov, Wał ˛ega, and Zakharyaschev 2019).
The design and implementation of practical reasoning algorithms for the full DatalogMTL language, however, remains a largely unexplored area—something that has prevented its widespread adoption in applications. In particular,
the only implementation we are aware of is the prototype
by Brandt et al. (2018), which is limited to non-recursive
DatalogMTL programs. This is in stark contrast with plain
Datalog, for which a plethora of systems have been developed and successfully deployed in practice (Motik et al. 2014;
Carral et al. 2019; Bellomarini, Sallinger, and Gottlob 2018).
In this paper, we present the first practical reasoning algorithm for the full DatalogMTL language, which combines
materialisation (a.k.a. forward chaining) and automata-based
reasoning. On the one hand, materialisation is the reasoning
paradigm adopted in most Datalog systems (Bry et al. 2007);
to check fact entailment in this setting, one first computes
in a forward chaining manner all facts logically entailed by
the input program and dataset, and then verifies whether
the input fact is included amongst the entailed facts. A direct implementation of materialisation-based reasoning in
DatalogMTL is, however, problematic since forward chaining may require infinitely many rounds of rule applications
(Wał ˛ega, Zawidzki, and Cuenca Grau 2021). On the other
hand, Wał ˛ega et al. (2019) introduced a decision procedure
for DatalogMTL which relies on constructing Büchi automata and checking non-emptiness of their languages. This
procedure has been introduced for obtaining tight complexity bounds, and not with efficient implementation in mind; in
particular, the constructed automata are of exponential size,
which makes direct implementations impractical.
Our new algorithm deals with these difficulties by providing an effective way of combining the scalability of
materialisation-based reasoning and the completeness guar-

Abstract
DatalogMTL is an extension of Datalog with operators from
metric temporal logic which has received significant attention
in recent years. It is a highly expressive knowledge representation language that is well-suited for applications in temporal
ontology-based query answering and stream processing. Reasoning in DatalogMTL is, however, of high computational
complexity, making implementation challenging and hindering its adoption in applications. In this paper, we present
a novel approach for practical reasoning in DatalogMTL
which combines materialisation (a.k.a. forward chaining) with
automata-based techniques. We have implemented this approach in a reasoner called MeTeoR and evaluated its performance using a temporal extension of the Lehigh University
Benchmark and a benchmark based on real-world meteorological data. Our experiments show that MeTeoR is a scalable
system which enables reasoning over complex temporal rules
and datasets involving tens of millions of temporal facts.

Introduction
Temporal data is ubiquitous in many application scenarios,
such as stock trading (Nuti et al. 2011), network flow anomaly
detection (Munz and Carle 2007), and equipment malfunction monitoring (Doherty, Kvarnström, and Heintz 2009).
In order to represent knowledge and subsequently reason
in the presence of such temporal data, Brandt et al. (2018)
proposed DatalogMTL—an extension of Datalog (Ceri, Gottlob, and Tanca 1989) with operators from metric temporal
logic (Koymans 1990) interpreted over the rational timeline.
DatalogMTL is a powerful KR language, which has found applications in ontology-based query answering (Brandt et al.
2018; Kikot et al. 2018; Kalaycı et al. 2018; Koopmann 2019)
and stream reasoning (Wał ˛ega, Kaminski, and Cuenca Grau
2019). For example, the following DatalogMTL rule can be
used to analyse equipment data:
[0,1] ExcHeat(𝑥) ←

[0,1] Temp24(𝑥) ∧ x [0,1] Temp41(𝑥).

The rule states that a device 𝑥 has been under excessive heat
continuously within a past interval of length 1 ( [0,1] ) if the
temperature recorded in this interval was always above 24
degrees (Temp24) and also, at some point in this interval
(x [0,1] ), the temperature was above 41 degrees (Temp41).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5906

