The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards an Effective Orthogonal Dictionary Convolution Strategy
Yishi Li1,2 , Kunran Xu1,2 , Rui Lai1,2∗ , Lin Gu3,4 *
2

1
School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
Chongqing Innovation Research Institute of Integrated Cirtuits, Xidian University, Chongqing 400031, China
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
4
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
yshlee1994@outlook.com, aazzttcc@gmail.com, rlai@mail.xidian.edu.cn, lin.gu@riken.jp

Abstract

Among these methods, orthogonality regularization (Xie,
Xiong, and Pu 2017) is a commonly used training technique
to be applied on the linear transformations on hidden layers
of CNNs. By forcing filters in convolution (Conv) kernel to
be orthogonal from each other, orthogonality regularization
stabilizes the distribution of each hidden layer’s activation,
reduces the phenomenon of gradient vanishing or exploding
and accelerates the convergence speed (Zhou, Do, and Kovacevic 2006). More recently, a lot of variations (Wang et al.
2020; Yang et al. 2020; Sarhan et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019)
that further reduce the correlation of each kernel are successively presented, thus improving the feature expressiveness,
robustness, and the performances in tasks.
Inspired by the success of sparse dictionary learning (Mailhé et al. 2008; Yaghoobi, Blumensath, and Davies
2008; Mairal et al. 2009; Ramı́rez, Sprechmann, and Sapiro
2010), we take notice of the similarity between Conv block
and sparse coding methods. We observe that Convs play a
similar role as dictionaries that save large prior information. Since reducing correlation between filters in kernel has
proven to be benefit for performance (Rabouy, Paris, and
Glotin 2015), we further speculate that it is better to impose
orthogonality regularization on dictionary layers than on all
of them to maximize the effect of orthogonality. Therefore,
we propose our Orthogonal Dictionary Convolution Strategy (ODCS) that enhances the effect of orthogonality by
optimizing the structure of CNNs. As shown in Figure 1,
given a typical Conv block structure, our ODCS has three
main steps: (1) Create or locate the specific structure of
“Conv(BN) + Nonlinear + Pointwise Conv(BN)” in networks. (2) Remove nonlinear layer between Convs. (3) Only
regularize the kernel of front Conv by orthogonality regularization without constraint on norm of kernels, forming the
pair of dictionary and encoding matrix kernel, to improve
the CNNs’ performance.
Our proposed strategy enhances the ability of extracting
various features, and thereby fully utilizing the model capacity. Due to the removal of nonlinear function, two Convs
can be fused as an extensive linear transformer or a stronger
Conv. In terms of sparse dictionary learning, the former is
a dictionary matrix and the latter is actually an encoding
matrix. Imposing orthogonality regularization on dictionary
Conv can reduce redundancy of kernels in whole structure,
thus producing gain in fusion of models with orthogonal rep-

Orthogonality regularization has proven effective in improving the precision, convergence speed and the training stability of CNNs. Here, we propose a novel Orthogonal Dictionary Convolution Strategy (ODCS) on CNNs to improve
orthogonality effect by optimizing the network architecture
and changing the regularized object. Specifically, we remove
the nonlinear layer in typical convolution block “Conv(BN)
+ Nonlinear + Pointwise Conv(BN)”, and only impose orthogonal regularization on the front Conv. The structure,
“Conv(BN) + Pointwise Conv(BN)”, is then equivalent to a
pair of dictionary and encoding, defined in sparse dictionary
learning. Thanks to the exact and efficient representation of
signal with dictionaries in low-dimensional projections, our
strategy could reduce the superfluous information in dictionary Conv kernels. Meanwhile, the proposed strategy relieves
the too strict orthogonality regularization in training, which
makes hyper-parameters tuning of model to be more flexible. In addition, our ODCS can modify the state-of-the-art
models easily without any extra consumption in inference
phase. We evaluate it on a variety of CNNs in small-scale (CIFAR), large-scale (ImageNet) and fine-grained (CUB-2002011) image classification tasks, respectively. The experimental results show that our method achieve a stable and superior improvement.

Introduction
With the development of deep learning research, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al.
2016) have been increasingly demonstrated to offer efficient feature extraction capabilities. However, the booming parameters and complex structures make it easy to
incur vanishing/exploding gradients (Bengio, Simard, and
Frasconi 1994; Glorot and Bengio 2010), especially for
ultra-deep models. To constrain these huge parameters in
high-dimension spaces, many solutions have been invented,
including parameter initialization (Saxe, McClelland, and
Ganguli 2014), normalization of internal activation (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015), second-order optimization (Dauphin
et al. 2014), et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1473

