The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dual Attention Networks for Few-Shot Fine-Grained Recognition
Shu-Lin Xu1,2 , Faen Zhang3 , Xiu-Shen Wei1,2,4∗ , Jianhua Wang3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
3
AInnovation Technology Group Co., Ltd
4
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{xusl, weixs}@njust.edu.cn, {zhangfaen, wangjianhua}@ainnovation.com

Abstract

system can quickly learn novel concepts and features from
a few examples, and then recognize similar objects in new
coming images. To mimic this human ability, in this work,
our goal is to learn to classify novel fine-grained categories
from a few examples with only category labels, which is a
practical but more challenging task.

The task of few-shot fine-grained recognition is to classify
images belonging to subordinate categories merely depending
on few examples. Due to the fine-grained nature, it is desirable
to capture subtle but discriminative part-level patterns from
limited training data, which makes it a challenging problem. In
this paper, to generate fine-grained tailored representations for
few-shot recognition, we propose a Dual Attention Network
(D UAL ATT-N ET) consisting of two dual branches of both
hard- and soft-attentions. Specifically, by producing attention
guidance from deep activations of input images, our hardattention is realized by keeping a few useful deep descriptors
and forming them as a bag of multi-instance learning. Since
these deep descriptors could correspond to objects’ parts, the
advantage of modeling as a multi-instance bag is able to exploit inherent correlation of these fine-grained parts. On the
other side, a soft attended activation representation can be
obtained by applying attention guidance upon original activations, which brings comprehensive attention information as
the counterpart of hard-attention. After that, both outputs of
dual branches are aggregated as a holistic image embedding
w.r.t. input images. By performing meta-learning, we can learn
a powerful image embedding in such a metric space to generalize to novel classes. Experiments on three popular fine-grained
benchmark datasets show that our D UAL ATT-N ET obviously
outperforms other existing state-of-the-art methods.

In general, the generic few-shot learning methods do not
achieve satisfactory results in fine-grained image recognition because it might not distinguish the subtle differences
between samples well. Existing methods (Huang et al. 2020,
2021; Zhu, Liu, and Jiang 2020; Li et al. 2020) for few-shot
fine-grained recognition attempt to train a strong end-to-end
network to obtain good feature representations, such as obtaining second-order feature interactions (Huang et al. 2020,
2021), ensembling two metrics (Li et al. 2020), and so on.
Different from them, our model is designed to learn a powerful feature embedding in a metric space by performing the
proposed dual attention approach in a meta learning fashion.
In this paper, we propose D UAL ATT-N ET consisting both
hard- and soft-attention to capture comprehensive attention
information to further generate fine-grained tailored image
embedding for few-shot recognition. Specifically, after extracting deep activations from a CNN backbone, the attention
guidance can be generated, which is then employed upon the
proposed dual attention processes. For the hard-attention, the
attention guidance equipped with a threshold will keep a few
useful deep descriptors corresponding to fine-grained objects’
parts from these activations and also discard noisy descriptors corresponding to noises. We form these remained deep
descriptors as a multi-instance bag from the multi-instance
learning (MIL) perspective. The motivation of such a procedure is that, MIL can better exploit inherent structure information of instances (i.e., descriptors w.r.t. fine-grained parts)
than traditional single-instance learning. It is also noted that,
regarding fine-grained objects, their discriminative parts, especially the correlation of these parts, are crucial for distinguishing sub-ordinate categories in fine-grained recognition.
In details, we develop a graph-based MIL bag aggregation
strategy to model the relation of fine-grained parts. After that,
the outputs of hard-attention explicitly enrich part-level cues,
as well as more important part correlation. On the other side,
regarding the soft-attention, it performs as the counterpart of
hard-attention by conducting attention guidance on the ob-

Introduction
Fine-grained visual recognition is a longstanding and fundamental problem in computer vision (Wei et al. 2021), which
aims to distinguish each subordinate class that belong to a
specific basic class (e.g., birds, dogs, or cars). It is a challenging task due to the small inter-class variance and the large
intra-class variance. With the development of deep learning, many works have achieved good results. However, these
results always rely on a large number of labeled samples,
and even stronger supervision information such as bounding
boxes and part annotations. In contrast, the human visual
∗

Corresponding author. S.-L. Xu and X.-S. Wei are also with
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for HighDimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key
Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2911

