The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Orthogonal Projection for Batch and Online Continual Learning
Yiduo Guo1 , Wenpeng Hu2 , Dongyan Zhao1,* , Bing Liu3, *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
yiduo@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wenpeng.hu, zhaody}@pku.edu.cn, liub@uic.edu

Abstract

This ensures no interference with the parameters learned for
previous tasks and thus will cause no CF for previous tasks.
OWM performs very well compared to other state-of-theart approaches. It does especially well in the scenario where
each task consists of a single class. In most CL papers, each
task consists of multiple classes to be learned. However, learning one class (which is equivalent to one class per task) incrementally perhaps occurs most frequently in applications
because in an application whenever a new object/class appears, one would want to learn it immediately to make the
system up to date rather than waiting for many objects (or
classes) to appear and then learn them together. For example,
in the chatbot context, when a new skill is identified and data
prepared, the company naturally would want the chatbot to
learn the new skill immediately so that the new service can be
provided to the users without waiting and accumulating a few
of skills and learn them together. For us humans, whenever
we encounter a new object, we learn to recognize it right
away and we never wait to see a number of new objects to
appear and then learn to recognize them together. Learning
tasks with one class per task is also the most difficult CL
scenario as it has the maximum number of tasks. It is well
known that when the number of tasks increases, CF becomes
more severe, which results in lower classification accuracy.
We should also note that incrementally learning one class at
a time (or one class per task) is the most general case of CL
because incrementally learning n classes as a task together
can be reduced to learning n classes one by one incrementally. Needless to say that both OWM and our method can
learn with any number of classes per task.
This paper identifies an issue in the mathematical derivation of the OWM method, which deals with CF by storing an
orthogonal projector computed based on the training inputs
of old tasks to ensure that the weight updates in learning
each new task occur only in the direction orthogonal to the
subspace representing the inputs of all old tasks. In order
to deal with the matrix invertibility problem, it introduces a
small constant α in computing the projector. However, α is
irrelevant to the inputs of the old tasks, which gives an inaccurate estimation of the old task input space and causes weak
performance. OWM treats α as a hyperparameter, which we
will show it is inappropriate. We then propose an Adaptive
Orthogonal Projection (AOP) method to resolve this problem of OWM, which computes an α value for each training

Catastrophic forgetting is a key obstacle to continual learning.
One of the state-of-the-art approaches is orthogonal projection.
The idea of this approach is to learn each task by updating the
network parameters or weights only in the direction orthogonal
to the subspace spanned by all previous task inputs. This
ensures no interference with tasks that have been learned. The
system OWM that uses the idea performs very well against
other state-of-the-art systems. In this paper, we first discuss
an issue that we discovered in the mathematical derivation of
this approach and then propose a novel method, called AOP
(Adaptive Orthogonal Projection), to resolve it, which results
in significant accuracy gains in empirical evaluations in both
the batch and online continual learning settings without saving
any previous training data as in replay-based methods.

Introduction
Many techniques have been proposed to solve the problem
of catastrophic forgetting (CF) in continual learning (CL),
which aims to incrementally learn a sequence of tasks (Chen
and Liu 2018). Each task i consists of ki (≥ 1) classes to be
learned. Once a task is learned, its training data is often no
longer accessible. CF means that in learning a new task, the
parameters learned for previous tasks need to be modified,
which may cause significant accuracy drop for the previous
tasks (McCloskey and Cohen 1989). A literature survey will
be given in the next section.
This paper focuses on a particular setting of CL, class
incremental learning (Class-IL). In Class-IL, the system incrementally learns more and more classes from a sequence
of tasks. At the test time, the learned model can classify a
test case to any class without the task-id provided. Another
main paradigm of CL is task incremental learning (Task-IL),
where a model is constructed for each task in training. In
testing, the task id is supplied for each test case so that the
model for the task can be applied to classify the test case.
This paper further focuses on the recent orthogonal projection approach to Class-IL in the OWM system (Zeng et al.
2019). OWM works as follows: In learning each task, the
network parameters are updated only in the direction orthogonal to the subspace spanned by inputs of all previous tasks.
* Corresponding authors.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6783

