The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DMN4: Few-Shot Learning via Discriminative Mutual Nearest Neighbor Neural
Network
Yang Liu1 , Tu Zheng1,2 , Jie Song3 , Deng Cai1,2 , Xiaofei He1,2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
3
Zhejiang University
{lyng 95, sjie}@zju.edu.cn, zhengtuzju@gmail.com, dengcai@cad.zju.edu.cn, xiaofeihe@fabu.ai
a. DN4

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to classify images under lowdata regimes, where the conventional pooled global feature
is likely to lose useful local characteristics. Recent work has
achieved promising performances by using deep descriptors.
They generally take all deep descriptors from neural networks
into consideration while ignoring that some of them are useless in classification due to their limited receptive field, e.g.,
task-irrelevant descriptors could be misleading and multiple
aggregative descriptors from background clutter could even
overwhelm the object’s presence. In this paper, we argue that
a Mutual Nearest Neighbor (MNN) relation should be established to explicitly select the query descriptors that are most
relevant to each task and discard less relevant ones from aggregative clutters in FSL. Specifically, we propose Discriminative Mutual Nearest Neighbor Neural Network (DMN4)
for FSL. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms the existing state-of-the-arts on both fine-grained
and generalized datasets.

ground truth

NBNN

b. (D)MN4

𝒬

𝑓!

𝒬

MNN
NN

(D)MNN

𝒮

NBNN

Figure 1: DN4 (Li et al. 2019) accumulates all query descriptors where multiple ”sky” descriptors are taken as strong
evidence against birds’ presence. (D)MN4 selects discriminative task-relevant query descriptors (grids connected by
double-ended red lines) by introducing MNN where less relevant query descriptors (the shaded grids) nearest neighboring to the same support descriptor would be ignored if they
were not the mutual nearest one.

Introduction
With the availability of large-scale training data, deep neural networks have achieved great success in recent years (He
et al. 2016; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015). However, collecting and labeling training data are still laboriously painful. In terms of
low-data scenarios, such as medical images and endangered
species, deep neural networks can easily collapse. Few-shot
learning (FSL), whose goal is to construct a model that can
be readily adapted to novel classes given just a small number
of labeled instances, has emerged as a promising paradigm
to alleviate this problem.
Few-shot learning methods can be roughly categorized
into two schools, i.e., optimization based (Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017; Rusu et al. 2018) and metric learning based
(Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Sung
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019). Optimization based methods
aim to learn a good parameter initialization for the classifier,
whose weights can be quickly adapted to novel classes using gradient-based optimization on only a few labeled samples. Metric learning methods mainly focus on concept representation or relation measures by learning a deep embed-

ding space to transfer knowledge. They generally treat deep
pooled features from the global average pooling layer as
an image-level representation, which is a common practice
for large-scale image classification. Considering the unique
characteristic of FSL (i.e., the scarcity of examples for each
class), however, the cluttered background and large intraclass variations would drive these pooled global features
from the same category far apart in a given metric space
under low-data regimes, where useful local characteristics
could be overwhelmed and lost.
To fully exploit the local characteristics, Li et al. revisited
Naive-Bayes Nearest Neighbor (NBNN) (Boiman, Shechtman, and Irani 2008) to retain all reference deep descriptors
in their original form. They remove the last global average
pooling layer to achieve a dense image representation and
treat the output feature map as a set of deep local descriptors. For each descriptor from a query image, they calculate
its similarity scores to the nearest neighbor descriptors in
each support class. Finally, similarity scores from all query
descriptors are accumulated as an image-to-class similarity.
However, in our perspective, there is a notable differ-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1828

