The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Rethinking Pseudo Labels for Semi-supervised Object Detection
Hengduo Li1 , Zuxuan Wu2 * , Abhinav Shrivastava1 , Larry S. Davis1
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Fudan University
{hdli,abhinav,lsd}@cs.umd.edu, zxwu@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Most recent semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) approaches (Sohn et al. 2020b; Liu et al. 2021; Jeong et al.
2019; Zhou et al. 2021) are direct extensions of SSL methods designed for image classification using a teacher-student
training paradigm (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Sohn et al.
2020a; Berthelot et al. 2019). In particular, the teacher model
is first trained in a supervised manner with a limited number of labeled samples. Then, given an unlabeled image,
the teacher model produces pseudo bounding boxes together
with their corresponding class predictions, which are further
used as ground-truth labels for the student model. To ensure effective distillation, the teacher and the student models
typically operate on two augmented views of the same image (Sohn et al. 2020a,b; Liu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021).
The use of a teacher-student model at its core aims to produce reliable pseudo labels in lieu of human annotations.
While effective, we argue that pseudo labels, in the form of
bounding boxes associated with class predictions, are suboptimal for SSOD. The reasons are twofold: (1) In image
classification, prediction scores naturally represent the likelihood of an object appearing in an image, and thus setting
a threshold to select highly confident predictions is reasonable. However, as detection requires localizing and classifying objects using two separate branches through regression and classification, the resulting classification scores of
pseudo boxes are unaware of the localization quality. Therefore, while widely adopted, filtering out boxes based on class
predictions on top of non-maximum suppression is not appropriate; (2) Pseudo labels produced by the teacher model
amplifies class imbalance which results from the long-tailed
nature in detection tasks. For example, there are only 9 toasters but 12,343 persons in 5% of the COCO (Lin et al. 2014)
training set even though they are both common1 classes! As a
result, lower-confidence predictions from underrepresented
classes are oftentimes filtered out with a threshold that works
well for top-performing classes.
To mitigate these issues, we propose certainty-aware
pseudo labels together with dynamic thresholding and
reweighting mechanisms tailored for SSOD. In particular,
the certainty-aware pseudo labels are designed to reflect localization quality and classification confidence at the same
time. Conditioned on these certainty measurements, we dy-

Recent advances in semi-supervised object detection (SSOD)
are largely driven by consistency-based pseudo-labeling
methods for image classification tasks, producing pseudo labels as supervisory signals. However, when using pseudo labels, there is a lack of consideration in localization precision
and amplified class imbalance, both of which are critical for
detection tasks. In this paper, we introduce certainty-aware
pseudo labels tailored for object detection, which can effectively estimate the classification and localization quality of
derived pseudo labels. This is achieved by converting conventional localization as a classification task followed by refinement. Conditioned on classification and localization quality
scores, we dynamically adjust the thresholds used to generate
pseudo labels and reweight loss functions for each category
to alleviate the class imbalance problem. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method improves state-of-the-art
SSOD performance by 1-2% AP on COCO and PASCAL
VOC while being orthogonal and complementary to most
existing methods. In the limited-annotation regime, our approach improves supervised baselines by up to 10% AP using
only 1–10% labeled data from COCO.

Introduction
The astounding performance of deep neural networks on
various computer vision tasks can be largely attributed to the
availability of large-scale datasets that are manually labeled.
However, collecting human annotations is labor-intensive
and time-consuming, particularly for visual understanding
tasks, like object detection (Lin et al. 2014; Kuznetsova et al.
2020) and semantic segmentation (Everingham et al. 2010;
Cordts et al. 2016). To remedy this, there is an ever-growing
interest in semi-supervised learning (SSL), which learns feature representations with limited supervision by exploring
the massive amount of unlabeled images that are readily
available. While extensive studies have been conducted on
SSL for image classification tasks (Berthelot et al. 2019;
Xie et al. 2020a; Sohn et al. 2020a; Berthelot et al. 2019;
Xie et al. 2020b; Laine and Aila 2017; Miyato et al. 2018;
Bachman, Alsharif, and Precup 2014), relatively limited effort has been made to address object detection, for which
annotations are more expensive to obtain.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1314

COCO: Common Objects in Context.

