The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neural Networks Classify through the Class-Wise Means of Their Representations
Mohamed El Amine Seddik1 , Mohamed Tamaazousti2
1

Huawei Paris Research Center, 92012 Boulogne-Billancourt, France
2
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120 Palaiseau, France
mohamed.seddik@huawei.com, mohamed.tamaazousti@cea.fr

Abstract

Ginsca et al. 2015; Azizpour et al. 2015; Kornblith, Shlens,
and Le 2019; Tamaazousti et al. 2019) in the rest of the document. In principle, TL consists in learning a neural network
on a source domain for which we have a large amount of
data and then using this network on a target domain (generally with few available data) by updating only the last layer
(very often with Softmax activation) of weight associated
with the task to be solved (e.g., classification task). Therefore, TL plays a key role in this context by reducing drastically the hyper-parameters space and replacing the neural
architecture search by the best available source model/representation search.
Unfortunately, a scale up of Deep Learning based on this
TL methodology will be with a huge computational consequences. Indeed, the TL approach implies to duplicate the
search for the best hyper-parameters, generally obtained by
a very costly grid search, as many times as there are available source models. To the best of our knowledge, there is
no clear solution to an a priori (i.e., without training the last
layer) choice of the best source model from the data associated to the target domain.
To tackle this issue, our (1) first contribution consists in
analyzing theoretically the behavior of the Softmax layer in
neural networks classifiers (see section Asymptotic analysis of the Softmax classifier weights). Our (2) second contribution consists in showing that Softmax classifies through
the class-wise means of the data representations (see section Expression of the class-weights vectors for near-optimal
representations) for specific choices of the representation
activation. This second result is obtained under additional
hypotheses on the representations statistics of the data,
based on commonly accepted interpretations of the properties expected from the representations of DNNs (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013; Tamaazousti et al. 2019). Our
results are experimentally confirmed by showing that when
training neural networks for classification tasks, the weight
vectors corresponding to each class of the Softmax layer
tend to be similar to the class-wise means computed at the
representation layer.
Based on this finding, our (3) third contribution then consists in addressing the source model selection in the TL context for classification. In addition, this result provides a simple yet effective initialization procedure (through the classwise means of the representations computed on the target

In this paper, based on an asymptotic analysis of the Softmax
layer, we show that when training neural networks for classification tasks, the weight vectors corresponding to each class
of the Softmax layer tend to converge to the class-wise means
computed at the representation layer (for specific choices of
the representation activation). We further show some consequences of our findings to the context of transfer learning,
essentially by proposing a simple yet effective initialization
procedure that significantly accelerates the learning of the
Softmax layer weights as the target domain gets closer to
the source one. Experiments are notably performed on the
datasets: MNIST, Fashion MNIST, Cifar10, and Cifar100 and
using a standard CNN architecture.

Introduction
One of the big trends of the moment is opening up access
to the Deep Learning technology to non-experts. Therefore,
there is an emergent need to move from manual design of
neural networks models by experts to an automatic design
for non-experts. This methodological shift is known as AutoML (for Automatic Machine Learning). Technically, this
consists in designing automatically the architecture of a neural network as well as its hyperparameters, e.g, the Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) approach (Zoph and Le 2017;
Zoph et al. 2018; Cai, Zhu, and Han 2019; Liu, Simonyan,
and Yang 2019; Real et al. 2019).
Basically, this trend implies to handle more and more specific data domains with generally few data provided by the
user for each domain. In this context, the NAS approach,
which needs a lot of training data, is no longer relevant. Consequently, the practical solution generally adopted to overcome this problem is to “recycle”, as much as possible, the
networks already learned, with a minimum of adaptation.
This is facilitated by the fact that there are more and more
pretrained neural networks available online (open source
pretrained models1 ).
To this end, one of the most simple and widespread approach is the transfer of pre-trained representations referred
to as Transfer Learning (TL) (Kuzborskij, Orabona, and Caputo 2013; Sharif Razavian et al. 2014; Yosinski et al. 2014;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://modelzoo.co/

8204

