The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Anytime Multi-Agent Path Finding
via Machine Learning-Guided Large Neighborhood Search
Taoan Huang, Jiaoyang Li, Sven Koenig, Bistra Dilkina
University of Southern California
{taoanhua, jiaoyanl, skoenig, dilkina}@usc.edu

Abstract

include Push-and-Swap (Luna and Bekris 2011), ParallelPush-and-Swap (PPS) (Sajid, Luna, and Bekris 2012) and
Prioritized Planning (PP) (Silver 2005). These existing
solvers often either run too slowly or provide solutions of
bad quality, especially when solving large MAPF instances
with high agent or obstacle densities. Motivated by these issues, researchers have studied anytime MAPF solvers. The
appeal of an anytime MAPF solver is that it first finds an
initial solution quickly using any existing solver and, if
more runtime is available, then improves the solution quality to near-optimal over time. MAPF-LNS (Li et al. 2021b)
is a state-of-the-art anytime MAPF solver that uses Large
Neighborhood Search (LNS) (Ahuja et al. 2002). MAPFLNS first finds a solution quickly using an existing MAPF
solver. It then iteratively destroys the paths of a set of agents
generated by destroy heuristics and replans them using a repair operator while leaving the remaining paths unchanged.
The number of agent sets that could be generated by the (randomized) destroy heuristics can be exponential in the cardinality of the agent sets, and MAPF-LNS randomly selects
one of them (namely the one that is first randomly generated). However, some agent sets might not improve the solution as much as other agent sets and even result in no improvement at all, even if they are all generated by the same
destroy heuristic. Thus, we propose an agent set-selection
oracle that first samples a collection of candidate agents sets
using the randomized destroy heuristics and applies the repair operator for each sampled agent set to select the best
one, which obviously results in larger improvements than
MAPF-LNS but is much more computationally expensive.

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of finding
a set of collision-free paths for a team of agents in a common environment. MAPF is NP-hard to solve optimally and,
in some cases, also bounded-suboptimally. It is thus timeconsuming for (bounded-sub)optimal solvers to solve large
MAPF instanc¡es. Anytime algorithms find solutions quickly
for large instances and then improve them to close-to-optimal
ones over time. In this paper, we improve the current state-ofthe-art anytime solver MAPF-LNS, that first finds an initial
solution fast and then repeatedly replans the paths of subsets
of agents via Large Neighborhood Search (LNS). It generates
the subsets of agents for replanning by randomized destroy
heuristics, but not all of them increase the solution quality
substantially. We propose to use machine learning to learn
how to select a subset of agents from a collection of subsets,
such that replanning increases the solution quality more. We
show experimentally that our solver, MAPF-ML-LNS, significantly outperforms MAPF-LNS on the standard MAPF
benchmark set in terms of both the speed of improving the
solution and the final solution quality.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is an NP-hard problem
(Yu and LaValle 2013; Banfi, Basilico, and Amigoni 2017)
that consists of computing a set of collision-free paths for a
team of agents on a given graph that minimizes the sum of
path costs or the makespan. Significant research effort has
been devoted to MAPF due to its applications in distribution centers (Ma et al. 2017a; Hönig et al. 2019), computer
games (Ma et al. 2017b) and traffic management (Dresner
and Stone 2008).
One category of leading MAPF solvers is (boundedsub)optimal solvers (that provide optimality guarantees).
Examples include Conflict-Based Search (CBS) (Sharon
et al. 2015) and its variants, such as Bounded CBS (BCBS),
Enhanced CBS (ECBS) (Barer et al. 2014) and Explicit Estimation CBS (EECBS) (Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021), and
Branch-and-Cut-and-Price (BCP) solvers (Lam et al. 2019).
Another category of leading MAPF solvers is unboundedsuboptimal solvers (that can find solutions fast for large
instances but provide no optimality guarantees). Examples

In this paper, we propose MAPF-ML-LNS, which uses
machine learning (ML) to effectively select an agent set
from a collection of candidate agent sets generated by the
destroy heuristics. During training, we first record decisions
made by the oracle on a set of MAPF instances and collect features that characterize these agent sets. The agent sets
are labeled with the obtained improvement after replanning.
Then, we use supervised learning to learn a ranking function for agent sets that imitates the oracle but is faster to
compute. During testing, MAPF-ML-LNS uses the learned
ranking function to select agent sets. We test two variants of
MAPF-ML-LNS, namely ML-S, that is trained and tested on
the same grid map, and ML-O, that is trained on a set of grid
maps and tested on a different one. Both variants of MAPF-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9368

