The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Domain Few-Shot Graph Classification
Kaveh Hassani
Autodesk AI Lab, Toronto, Canada
kaveh.hassani@autodesk.com

Abstract

learning, this is referred as heterogeneous transfer learning where the feature/label spaces between the source and
target domains are nonequivalent and are generally nonoverlapping (Day and Khoshgoftaar 2017). It is observed
that when there is a large shift between source and target
domains, meta-learning algorithms are outperformed by pretraining/fine-tuning methods (Chen et al. 2019b).
A few work in computer vision addresses cross-domain
few-shot learning by meta-learning the statistics of normalization layers (Tseng et al. 2020; Du et al. 2021). These
methods are limited to natural images that still contain a high
degree of visual similarity (Guo et al. 2020). Cross-domain
learning is more crucial on variable-size order-invariant
graph-structured data. Labeling graphs is more challenging
compared to other common modalities because they usually represent concepts in specialized domains such as biology where labeling through wet-lab experiments is resourceintensive (Hu et al. 2020b) and labeling them procedurally
using domain knowledge is costly (Sun et al. 2020). Furthermore, nonequivalent and non-overlapping feature spaces
is common across graph datasets in addition to shifts on
marginal/conditional probability distributions. As an example, one may have access to small molecule datasets where
each dataset uses a different set of features to represent the
molecules (Day and Khoshgoftaar 2017).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work pertaining cross-domain few-shot learning on graphs. To address this problem, we design a task-conditioned encoder
that learns to attend to different representations of a task.
Our contributions are as follows:

We study the problem of few-shot graph classification across
domains with nonequivalent feature spaces by introducing
three new cross-domain benchmarks constructed from publicly available datasets. We also propose an attention-based
graph encoder that uses three congruent views of graphs,
one contextual and two topological views, to learn representations of task-specific information for fast adaptation, and
task-agnostic information for knowledge transfer. We run exhaustive experiments to evaluate the performance of contrastive and meta-learning strategies. We show that when coupled with metric-based meta-learning frameworks, the proposed encoder achieves the best average meta-test classification accuracy across all benchmarks.

Introduction
In Few-shot learning a model learns to adapt to novel categories from a few labeled samples. Common practices such
as using augmentation, regularization, and pretraining may
help in such a data-scarce regime, but cannot circumvent
the problem. Inspired by human learning (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015), meta-learning (Hospedales et al.
2020) leverages a distribution of similar tasks (Satorras and
Estrach 2018) to accumulate transferable knowledge from
prior experience which then can serve as a strong inductive
bias for fast adaptation to down-stream tasks (Sung et al.
2018). In meta-learning, rapid learning occurs within a task
whereas the knowledge about changes in task structure is
gradually learned across tasks (Huang and Zitnik 2020). Examples of such learned knowledge are embedding functions
(Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Satorras and Estrach 2018; Sung et al. 2018), initial parameters
(Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Raghu et al. 2020), optimization strategies (Li et al. 2017), or models that can directly map training samples to network weights (Garnelo
et al. 2018; Mishra et al. 2018).
A fundamental assumption in meta-learning is that tasks
in meta-training and meta-testing phases are sampled from
the same distribution, i.e., tasks are i.i.d. However, in many
real-world applications, collecting tasks from the same distribution is infeasible. Instead, there are datasets available
from the same modality but different domains. In transfer

• We introduce three benchmarks for cross-domain fewshot graph classification and perform exhaustive experiments to evaluate the performance of supervised, contrastive, and meta-learning strategies.
• We propose a graph encoder that learns to attend to three
congruent views of graphs, one contextual and two topological views, to learn representations of task-specific information for fast adaptation, and task-agnostic information for knowledge transfer.
• We show that when coupled with metric-based metalearning frameworks, the proposed encoder achieves the
best average meta-testing classification accuracy across
all three benchmarks.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6856

