The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Riemannian Meta-Optimization by Implicit Differentiation
Xiaomeng Fan,1 Yuwei Wu,1 * Zhi Gao,1 Yunde Jia,1 Mehrtash Harandi2
1
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, and Data61, Australia
{fanxiaomeng,gaozhi 2017,wuyuwei,jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

To solve optimization problems with nonlinear constrains, the
recently developed Riemannian meta-optimization methods
show promise, which train neural networks as an optimizer to
perform optimization on Riemannian manifolds. A key challenge is the heavy computational and memory burdens, because computing the meta-gradient with respect to the optimizer involves a series of time-consuming derivatives, and
stores large computation graphs in memory. In this paper, we
propose an efficient Riemannian meta-optimization method
that decouples the complex computation scheme from the
meta-gradient. We derive Riemannian implicit differentiation
to compute the meta-gradient by establishing a link between
Riemannian optimization and the implicit function theorem.
As a result, the updating our optimizer is only related to
the final two iterations, which in turn speeds up our method
and reduces the memory footprint significantly. We theoretically study the computational load and memory footprint of
our method for long optimization trajectories, and conduct
an empirical study to demonstrate the benefits of the proposed method. Evaluations of three optimization problems
on different Riemannian manifolds show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of the convergence speed and the quality of optima.

Our Method

Running Time

Gao et al. (2020)

Abstract

Unroll T Steps

Computational Graph

Legend

Unroll 2 Steps

GPU Memory

Iterative Steps of Inner Loop

Iterative Steps of Inner Loop

Riemannian Parameter

Optimizer

Computational Graph

Forward Pass

Backward Pass

Figure 1: We measure the time and memory consumption
of the Riemannian meta-optimization method (Gao et al.
2020) and our method. The method (Gao et al. 2020) has
heavy computational and memory burdens with the increase of the number of steps in the inner-loop. In contrast,
our method reduces computational cost and memory footprint significantly. This is because the method (Gao et al.
2020) differentiates through the whole inner-loop optimization to compute the meta-gradient, which involves a series
of time-consumption derivatives and stores a large computation graph, while our meta-gradient computation is only
related to the final two iterations.

Introduction
In science and engineering, many tasks are modeled as
optimization problems with nonlinear constraints (Absil,
Mahony, and Sepulchre 2009), including principal component analysis (Liu et al. 2017) and matrix completion
with orthogonality constraints (Dai, Milenkovic, and Kerman 2011), and similarity learning with positive definite
constraints (Harandi, Salzmann, and Hartley 2017). The primary way to address optimization problems with nonlinear constraints is to formulate them on Riemannian manifolds, and utilize Riemannian optimization algorithms to
maintain faithful to the geometry of constraints. Bonnabel
(Bonnabel 2013) proposed Riemannian stochastic gradient
descent algorithm, and Kasai et al. (Kasai, Jawanpuria, and
Mishra 2019) proposed Riemannian adaptive optimization
algorithms.

Recently, Riemannian meta-optimization methods (Gao
et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2021) have shown promise in solving
Riemannian optimization problems. In contrast to previous
hand-designed Riemannian optimizers, Riemannian metaoptimization methods utilize meta-learning to automatically
learn an optimizer in a data-driven fashion. Concretely, the
conventional Riemannian gradient descent is formulated as


X (t+1) = ΓX (t) −ξ · πX (t) (∇X (t) ) .

Here, X (t) represents the Riemannian parameter of interest
evaluated at time t, ∇X (t) is the gradient of the loss with
respect to X (t) , and ξ is the stepsize. ΓX (t) (·) and πX (t) (·)
are the Riemannian operations that are used to obtain the
update Riemannian parameter and search direction, respectively. Riemannian meta-optimization methods aim to improve the speed and quality of the solution by rewriting the

* Corresponding author:Yuwei Wu
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3733

