The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Differentially Private Regret Minimization in Episodic Markov Decision Processes
Sayak Ray Chowdhury1 * , Xingyu Zhou 2 *
1

2

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
ECE Department, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
sayak@iisc.ac.in, xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

Abstract

gorithms both in the full information (Jain, Kothari, and
Thakurta 2012) and partial or bandit information (Mishra
and Thakurta 2015; Tossou and Dimitrakakis 2016) settings.
Under DP, the learning agent collects users’ raw data to train
its algorithm while ensuring that its output will not reveal
users’ sensitive information. This notion of privacy protection is suitable for situations, where a user is willing to share
her own information to the agent in order to obtain a service specially tailored to her needs, but meanwhile she does
not like to allow any third party to infer her private information seeing the output of the learning algorithm (e.g., Google
GBoard). However, a recent body of work (Shariff and Sheffet 2018; Dubey 2021) show that the standard DP guarantee
is irreconcilable with sublinear regret in contextual bandits,
and thus, a variant of DP, called joint differential privacy
(JDP) (Kearns et al. 2014) is considered. Another variant of
DP, called local differential privacy (LDP) (Duchi, Jordan,
and Wainwright 2013) has recently gained increasing popularity in personalized services due to its stronger privacy
protection. It has been studied in various bandit settings recently (Ren et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2020; Zhou and Tan
2020). Under LDP, each user’s raw data is directly protected
before being sent to the learning agent. Thus, the learning
agent only has access to privatized data to train its algorithm,
which often leads to a worse regret guarantee compared to
DP or JDP.

We study regret minimization in finite horizon tabular
Markov decision processes (MDPs) under the constraints of
differential privacy (DP). This is motivated by the widespread
applications of reinforcement learning (RL) in real-world sequential decision making problems, where protecting users’
sensitive and private information is becoming paramount. We
consider two variants of DP – joint DP (JDP), where a centralized agent is responsible for protecting users’ sensitive data
and local DP (LDP), where information needs to be protected
directly on the user side. We first propose two general frameworks – one for policy optimization and another for value
iteration – for designing private, optimistic RL algorithms.
We then instantiate these frameworks with suitable privacy
mechanisms to satisfy JDP and LDP requirements, and simultaneously obtain sublinear regret guarantees. The regret
bounds show that under JDP, the cost of privacy is only a
lower order additive term, while for a stronger privacy protection under LDP, the cost suffered is multiplicative. Finally,
the regret bounds are obtained by a unified analysis, which,
we believe, can be extended beyond tabular MDPs.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a fundamental sequential decision making problem, where an agent learns to maximize
its reward in an unknown environment through trial and error. Recently, it is ubiquitous in various personalized services, including healthcare (Gottesman et al. 2019), virtual
assistants (Li et al. 2016), social robots (Gordon et al. 2016)
and online recommendations (Li et al. 2010). In these applications, the learning agent continuously improves its decision by learning from users’ personal data and feedback.
However, nowadays people are becoming increasingly concerned about potential privacy leakage in these interactions.
For example, in personalized healthcare, the private data of
a patient can be sensitive informations such as her age, gender, height, weight, medical history, state of the treatment,
etc. Therefore, developing RL algorithms which can protect
users’ private data are of paramount importance in these applications.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork 2008) has become a
standard in designing private sequential decision-making al-

In contrast to the vast amount of work in private bandit
algorithms, much less attention are given to address privacy
in RL problems. To the best of our knowledge, Vietri et al.
(2020) propose the first RL algorithm – PUCB – for regret
minimization with JDP guarantee in tabular finite state, finite action MDPs. On the other hand, Garcelon et al. (2020)
design the first private RL algorithm – LDP-OBI – with
regret and LDP guarantees. Recently, Chowdhury, Zhou,
and Shroff (2021) study linear quadratic regulators under
the JDP constraint. It is worth noting that all these prior
work consider only value-based RL algorithms, and a study
on policy-based private RL algorithms remains elusive. Recently, policy optimization (PO) has seen great success in
many real-world applications, especially when coupled with
deep neural networks (Silver et al. 2017; Duan et al. 2016;
Wang, Li, and He 2018), and a variety of PO based algorithms have been proposed (Williams 1992; Kakade 2001;
Schulman et al. 2015, 2017; Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000). The

* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6375

