The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Extended Goal Recognition Design with First-Order Computation Tree Logic
Tsz-Chiu Au
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
Ulsan, Republic of Korea
chiu@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Goal recognition design (GRD) is the task of modifying environments for aiding observers to recognize the objectives
of agents during online observations. The worst case distinctiveness (WCD), a widely used performance measure in GRD
research, can fail to provide useful guidance to the redesign
process when some goals are too hard to be distinguished.
Moreover, the existing WCD-based approaches do not work
when an agent aims for a sequence of goals instead of just
one goal. The paper presents a new GRD framework called
extended goal recognition design (EGRD) for goal recognition that involves multiple goals. The objective of EGRD is
to modify an environment to minimize the worst case distinctiveness of a goal condition that describes how an agent can
reach a set of goals. A goal condition can be formally expressed in first-order computation tree logic (FO-CTL) that
can be evaluated by model checking. We introduce a novel
graphical representation of FO-CTL sentences that is suitable
for extended goal recognition. Moreover, we present a search
algorithm for EGRD with a novel caching mechanism. Our
experimental results show that the caching mechanism can
greatly speed up our EGRD search algorithm by reusing the
previous evaluation of FO-CTL sentences.

5
4
3
2
1
A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 1: An example of EGRD that involves multiple goals.

However, there are situations in which WCD cannot provide helpful guidance for environmental design. Suppose
there are two long paths that share a long prefix but lead to
two different goals. It is difficult to redesign the environment
to reduce WCD even if other goals can be recognized easily.
Perhaps we should modify WCD to take the relative importance of goals into account. However, we pursue a different approach: instead of asking exactly which goal an agent
aims for, an observer asks whether the agent aims for a goal
condition, which describes conditions such as whether the
agent aims for one of two goals but not any other goals. It is
not always necessary for the observer to recognize a goal exactly. For example, if security guards have enough resources
to protect two locations simultaneously, it is sufficient to
know two possible locations an intruder plans to visit. More
generally, when WCD is too restrictive for GRD, recognizing weaker goal conditions can provide more opportunities
for the redesign process.
We propose using first-order computation tree logic (FOCTL) to express goal conditions (Bohn et al. 1998). Computation tree logic is a widely used language for the formal verification of properties by model checking (Clarke
and Emerson 1981). In this paper, we show that FO-CTL
can be used to express a wide variety of goal conditions
that are suitable for goal recognition. Specifically, FO-CTL
is expressive enough for specifying extended goals that in-

Introduction
In goal recognition, an observer infers the goal of an agent,
who is acting in an environment, from a sequence of observations (Kautz 1987; Carberry 2001; Ramirez and Geffner
2010; Sukthankar et al. 2014; Vered and Kaminka 2017;
Pereira, Oren, and Meneguzzi 2017). Goal recognition design (GRD) is the task of designing an environment such
that it becomes easier for an observer to recognize an agent’s
goal (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2020). In recent years, there is
a new line of research on GRD based on minimizing the
worst case distinctiveness (WCD), put forward by Keren,
Gal, and Karpas (2014). WCD is the highest number of observations that an observer needs before it can ascertain an
agent’s goal in the worst case. In some application domains
such as airport security, it is helpful to recognize inappropriate goals pursued by an agent as early as possible. This
early detection can be achieved by redesigning an environment such that WCD is minimized.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9661

