The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Behind the Curtain: Learning Occluded Shapes for 3D Object Detection
Qiangeng Xu, Yiqi Zhong, Ulrich Neumann
University of Southern California
qiangenx@usc.edu, yiqizhon@usc.edu, uneumann@usc.edu

Causes of Shape Miss

Abstract

To answer the first question, we study the objects in KITTI
(Geiger et al. 2013) and discover three causes of shape miss.
External-occlusion. As visualized in Figure 1(c), occluders
block the laser beams from reaching the red frustums behind them. In this situation, the external-occlusion is formed,
which causes the shape miss located at the red voxels.
Signal miss. As Figure 1(c) illustrates, certain materials and
reflection angles prevent laser beams from returning to the
sensor after hitting some regions of the car (blue voxels).
After projected to range view, the affected blue frustums in
Figure 1(c) appear as the empty pixels in Figure 1(a).
Self-occlusion. LiDAR data is 2.5D by nature. As shown in
Figure 1(d), for a same object, its parts on the far side (the
green voxels) are occluded by the parts on the near side. The
shape miss resulting from self-occlusion inevitably happens
to every object in LiDAR scans.

Advances in LiDAR sensors provide rich 3D data that supports 3D scene understanding. However, due to occlusion and
signal miss, LiDAR point clouds are in practice 2.5D as they
cover only partial underlying shapes, which poses a fundamental challenge to 3D perception. To tackle the challenge,
we present a novel LiDAR-based 3D object detection model,
dubbed Behind the Curtain Detector (BtcDet), which learns
the object shape priors and estimates the complete object
shapes that are partially occluded (curtained) in point clouds.
BtcDet first identifies the regions that are affected by occlusion and signal miss. In these regions, our model predicts the
probability of occupancy that indicates if a region contains
object shapes. Integrated with this probability map, BtcDet
can generate high-quality 3D proposals. Finally, the probability of occupancy is also integrated into a proposal refinement module to generate the final bounding boxes. Extensive experiments on the KITTI Dataset and the Waymo Open
Dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of BtcDet. Particularly,
for the 3D detection of both cars and cyclists on the KITTI
benchmark, BtcDet surpasses all of the published state-ofthe-art methods by remarkable margins. Code is released.

Impact of Shape Miss
To analyze the impact of shape miss on 3D object detection, we evaluate the car detection results of the scenarios
where we recover certain types of shape miss on each object
by borrowing points from similar objects (see the details of
finding similar objects and filling points in Sec. 3.1).
In each scenario, after resolving certain shape miss in both
the train and val split of KITTI (Geiger et al. 2013), we train
and evaluate a popular detector PV-RCNN (Shi et al. 2020).
The four scenarios are:
• NR: Using the original data without shape miss recovery.
• EO: Recovering the shape miss caused by externalocclusion (adding the red points in Figure 2(a)).
• EO+SM: Recovering the shape miss caused by externalocclusion and signal miss (adding the red and blue points
in Figure 2(a)).
• EO+SM+SO: Recovering all the shape miss (adding the
red, blue and green points in Figure 2(a)).

Introduction
With high-fidelity, the point clouds acquired by LiDAR sensors significantly improved autonomous agents’s ability to
understand 3D scenes. LiDAR-based models achieved stateof-the-art performance on 3D object classification (Xu et al.
2020), visual odometry (Pan et al. 2021), and 3D object detection (Shi et al. 2020). Despite being widely used in these
3D applications, LiDAR frames are technically 2.5D. After
hitting the first object, a laser beam will return and leave the
shapes behind the occluder missing from the point cloud.
To locate a severely occluded object (e.g., the car in Figure 1(b)), a detector has to recognize the underlying object
shapes even when most of its parts are missing. Since shape
miss inevitably affects object perception, it is important to
answer two questions:

We report detection results on cars with three occlusion levels (level labels are provided by the dataset). As shown in
Figure 2(b), without recovery (NR), it is more difficult to detect objects with higher occlusion levels. Recovering shapes
miss will reduce the performance gaps between objects with
different levels of occlusion . If all shape miss are resolved

• What are the causes of shape miss in point clouds?
• What is the impact of shape miss on 3D object detection?
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2893

