The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Approach for Efficient Client Selection in
Federated Learning
Sai Qian Zhang1 , Jieyu Lin2 , Qi Zhang3
1

Harvard University, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Microsoft

Abstract

Despite its advantages, training DNNs using FL still faces
several challenges. First, the underlying statistical heterogeneity leads to non-independent, identically distributed (non-IID)
training data, which can severely degrade FL convergence behavior (Zhao et al. 2018). Second, from the implementation
perspective, the heterogeneous computing and networking
resources on client devices can lead to the stragglers that will
significantly slow down the FL training process. This problem is further exacerbated by the uneven distribution of client
data size, as a client with more data generally incurs higher
training latency. Lastly, FL training process often causes high
communication cost due to the iterative model updates between client devices and the central server. From the practical
perspective, an efficient FL framework that can mitigate all
the three problems above is of paramount importance. While
numerous solutions have been proposed for accelerating the
FL convergence speed (Karimireddy et al. 2019; Li et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020a; Yang, Fang, and Liu 2021), minimizing the processing latency (Wang, Wei, and Zhou 2020;
Nishio and Yonetani 2019; Dhakal et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020b), or reducing the communication overhead (Konečnỳ
et al. 2016; Singh et al. 2019; Luping, Wei, and Bo 2019;
Sattler et al. 2019), these heuristic solutions do not tackle
these problems jointly. Worse still, optimizing one of the
objectives might deteriorate the others. For instance, Scaffold (Karimireddy et al. 2019) enables a better convergence
behavior by computing additional model gradients, resulting
in a large training latency.

Federated learning (FL) is a training technique that enables
client devices to jointly learn a shared model by aggregating locally computed models without exposing their raw data.
While most of the existing work focuses on improving the FL
model accuracy, in this paper, we focus on the improving the
training efficiency, which is often a hurdle for adopting FL in
real world applications. Specifically, we design an efficient FL
framework which jointly optimizes model accuracy, processing latency and communication efficiency, all of which are
primary design considerations for real implementation of FL.
Inspired by the recent success of Multi Agent Reinforcement
Learning (MARL) in solving complex control problems, we
present FedMarl, a federated learning framework that relies on
trained MARL agents to perform efficient client selection. Experiments show that FedMarl can significantly improve model
accuracy with much lower processing latency and communication cost.

Introduction
The rapid adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) in recent years
has resulted in tremendous growth of data (e.g., text, image,
audio) generated on client devices. With the success of deep
neural networks (DNNs), there is a growing demand for efficiently training DNN models using the massive volume of
data generated from client devices. The traditional centralized
approach of gathering and training with all data at a central location not only raises scalability challenges, but also exposes
data privacy concerns. To address these limitations, Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) has been recently
proposed to allow client devices to jointly learn a shared
model by aggregating their local DNN weight updates without exposing their raw data. At the beginning of each training
round, a central server selects a subset of client devices to
receive the current global model. Next, each client device
performs DNN training using its local dataset and sends its
weight update to the central server. The central server then
applies the weight updates received from client devices to the
global model, which will be used as the initial model for the
next training round. Unlike the centralized training scheme,
FL naturally addresses the scalability and privacy issues, and
hence is more applicable for real implementation.

To address this limitation, in this paper, we present a novel
FL framework which jointly alleviates the three problems
above, namely model accuracy, processing latency and communication overhead. Designing such an optimal client selection policy is challenging. This is due to the intractable
convergence behavior of the FL training with the non-IID
client data, the dynamic system performance on client devices and the complicated interaction between these objectives. More importantly, the significance of each optimization goal also varies across different scenarios. For example,
communication cost may be the primary target in scenarios
where network connection is costly, whereas minimizing total
processing time may become the key objective for a delaysensitive FL application. Therefore, the proposed solution
must balance and offset different design goals. Developing
such a hand-tuned heuristic solution for each combination of

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9091

