The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Bayesian Networks in the Presence of Structural Side Information
Ehsan Mokhtarian,1 Sina Akbari,1 Fateme Jamshidi,2 Jalal Etesami,1 Negar Kiyavash 1,2
1

Department of Computer and Communication Science, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
College of Management of Technology, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{ehsan.mokhtarian, sina.akbari, fateme.jamshidi, seyed.etesami, negar.kiyavash}@epfl.ch

Abstract

often require conditional independence (CI) tests with large
conditioning sets or a large number of CI tests which grows
exponentially as the number of variables increases1 . Often in
practice, we have side information about the network that can
improve learning accuracy or reduce complexity. We show in
this work that such side information can reduce the learning
complexity to polynomial in terms of the number of CI tests.
Our main contributions are as follows.

We study the problem of learning a Bayesian network (BN) of
a set of variables when structural side information about the
system is available. It is well known that learning the structure of a general BN is both computationally and statistically
challenging. However, often in many applications, side information about the underlying structure can potentially reduce
the learning complexity. In this paper, we develop a recursive
constraint-based algorithm that efficiently incorporates such
knowledge (i.e., side information) into the learning process. In
particular, we study two types of structural side information
about the underlying BN: (I) an upper bound on its clique
number is known, or (II) it is diamond-free. We provide theoretical guarantees for the learning algorithms, including the
worst-case number of tests required in each scenario. As a consequence of our work, we show that bounded treewidth BNs
can be learned with polynomial complexity. Furthermore, we
evaluate the performance and the scalability of our algorithms
in both synthetic and real-world structures and show that they
outperform the state-of-the-art structure learning algorithms.

• We propose a constraint-based Recursive Structure Learning (RSL) algorithm to recover BNs. In addition, we study
two types of structural side information: (I) an upper bound
on the clique number of the graph is known, or (II) the
graph is diamond-free. In each case, we provide a learning
algorithm. RSL follows a divide-and-conquer approach: it
breaks the learning problem into several sub-problems that
are similar to the original problem but smaller in size by
eliminating removable variables (see Definition 1). Thus,
in each recursion, both the size of the conditioning sets and
the number of CI tests decrease.
• Learning BNs with bounded treewidth has recently attracted attention. Works such as (Korhonen and Parviainen
2013; Nie et al. 2014; Ramaswamy and Szeider 2021) aim
to develop learning algorithms for BNs when an upper
bound on the treewidth of the graph is given as side information. Assuming bounded treewidth is more restrictive
than bounded clique number assumption, i.e., having a
bound on the treewidth implies an upper bound on the
clique number of the network. Hence, our proposed algorithm with structural side information of type (I) can
also learn bounded treewidth BNs. However, our algorithm
has polynomial complexity, while the state-of-the-art exact
learning algorithms have exponential complexity.

Introduction
Bayesian networks (BNs) are probabilistic graphical models
that represent conditional dependencies in a set of random
variables via directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Due to their
succinct representations and power to improve the prediction
and to remove systematic biases in inference (Pearl 2009;
Spirtes et al. 2000), BNs have been widely applied in various
areas including medicine (Flores et al. 2011), bioinformatics
(Friedman et al. 2000), ecology (Pollino et al. 2007), etc.
Learning a BN from data is in general NP-hard (Chickering,
Heckerman, and Meek 2004). However, any type of side
information about the network can potentially reduce the
complexity of the learning task.
BN structure learning algorithms are of three flavors:
constraint-based, e.g., parent-child (PC) algorithm (Spirtes
et al. 2000), score-based, e.g., (Chickering 2002; Solus,
Wang, and Uhler 2017; Zheng et al. 2018; Zhu, Ng, and
Chen 2020), and hybrid, e.g., MMHC algorithm (Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006).
Although constraint-based methods do not require any
assumptions about the underlying generative model, they

• We show that when the clique number of the underlying BN is upper bounded by m, i.e., ω(G) ≤ m (See
Table 1 for the graphical notations), our algorithm requires O(n2 + n∆m+1
in ) CI tests (Theorem 1). Furthermore, when the graph is diamond-free, our algorithm requires O(n2 + n∆3in ) CI tests (Theorem 2). These bounds
significantly improve over the state of the art.
1
See (Scutari 2014) for an overview on implementations of
constraint-based algorithms.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7814

