The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Bayesian Neural Networks by Adversarial Sampling
Jiaru Zhang,1 Yang Hua, 2 Tao Song, 1 Hao Wang, 3 Zhengui Xue, 1 Ruhui Ma, 1 Haibing Guan 1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Queen’s University Belfast
3
Louisiana State University
{jiaruzhang,songt333, zhenguixue, ruhuima, hbguan}@sjtu.edu.cn, Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk, haowang@lsu.edu

Abstract

posed multiple explanations and solutions for this phenomenon. Wenzel et al. revealed that the temperature of
parameters and the prior selection have a clear influence
on model generalization performance (Wenzel et al. 2020).
However, they did not provide a clear method to improve the
model performance. Initializing Bayesian neural networks
with the parameters from pretrained deterministic neural
networks has also been proposed to improve the performance (Krishnan, Subedar, and Tickoo 2020; Deng et al.
2020). Although their methods are effective in practice, it
is still unknown that why Bayesian neural networks cannot learn a suitable representation and perform well on their
own.
To address it in this paper, we first present an explanation for the phenomenon by examining the training and inference processes of Bayesian neural networks. We discover
that there are some errors in the updating of model parameters during training and some sampled models with poor
performance in testing because of the randomness of sampling. Further, we propose to train Bayesian neural networks
with Adversarial Distribution based on the discovery, where
the parameters are updated according to the likely sampled
model with the worst performance. As the accurate calculation of the Adversarial Distribution is usually difficult, we
propose the Adversarial Sampling method as an approximation and it is simple to implement in practice. We carry out
experiments to validate our motivation and the effectiveness
of the proposed Adversarial Sampling method on different
datasets.
In summary, the main contributions are listed as follows:

Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have drawn extensive interest due to the unique probabilistic representation framework. However, Bayesian neural networks have limited publicized deployments because of the relatively poor model performance in real-world applications. In this paper, we argue
that the randomness of sampling in Bayesian neural networks
causes errors in the updating of model parameters during
training and poor performance of some sampled models in
testing. To solve this, we propose to train Bayesian neural networks with Adversarial Distribution as a theoretical solution.
To avoid the difficulty of calculating Adversarial Distribution analytically, we further present the Adversarial Sampling
method as an approximation in practice. We conduct extensive experiments with multiple network structures on different datasets, e.g., CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. Experimental
results validate the correctness of the theoretical analysis and
the effectiveness of the Adversarial Sampling on improving
model performance. Additionally, models trained with Adversarial Sampling still keep their ability to model uncertainties and perform better when predictions are retained according to the uncertainties, which further verifies the generality
of the Adversarial Sampling approach.

Introduction
Bayesian neural networks (Neal 2012; Gal 2016) provide a
probabilistic view of deep learning frameworks. Variational
Inference (VI) (Blundell et al. 2015; Blei, Kucukelbir, and
McAuliffe 2017) is an effective method to train the Bayesian
neural networks, especially in large-scale practical tasks.
One of the primary advantages of Bayesian neural networks
is that they can model both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty due to the unique probabilistic representation of the
network parameters. It has shown considerable potential and
has been widely used in a variety of tasks, e.g., computer vision (Kendall and Gal 2017; Phan 2019; Gustafsson, Danelljan, and Schön 2020), natural language processing (Xiao and
Wang 2019), active learning (Hernández-Lobato and Adams
2015), and reinforcement learning (Depeweg et al. 2017).
Bayesian neural networks have indeed few publicized deployments in industrial practice despite the theoretical advancements (Wenzel et al. 2020). Researchers have pro-

• We argue that the randomness of sampling in Bayesian
neural networks causes errors in updating parameters
during training and models with poor performance during testing.
• We propose to train Bayesian neural networks with Adversarial Distribution. According to our theoretical analysis, it can improve the worst performance of the model
in multiple samplings and enhance its predictive performance.
• To use the adversarial distribution training in practice, we
further propose the Adversarial Sampling method as an
approximation. It can be implemented easily in current
Bayesian neural network frameworks.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10110

