The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Modal Perception Attention Network with Self-Supervised Learning for
Audio-Visual Speaker Tracking
Yidi Li1 , Hong Liu1 * , Hao Tang2
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School, China
2
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{yidili, hongliu}@pku.edu.cn, hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Multi-modal fusion is proven to be an effective method to
improve the accuracy and robustness of speaker tracking,
especially in complex scenarios. However, how to combine
the heterogeneous information and exploit the complementarity of multi-modal signals remains a challenging issue.
In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-modal Perception
Tracker (MPT) for speaker tracking using both audio and
visual modalities. Specifically, a novel acoustic map based
on spatial-temporal Global Coherence Field (stGCF) is first
constructed for heterogeneous signal fusion, which employs
a camera model to map audio cues to the localization space
consistent with the visual cues. Then a multi-modal perception attention network is introduced to derive the perception
weights that measure the reliability and effectiveness of intermittent audio and video streams disturbed by noise. Moreover, a unique cross-modal self-supervised learning method is
presented to model the confidence of audio and visual observations by leveraging the complementarity and consistency
between different modalities. Experimental results show that
the proposed MPT achieves 98.6% and 78.3% tracking accuracy on the standard and occluded datasets, respectively,
which demonstrates its robustness under adverse conditions
and outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Keyframes of the working process of the proposed
multi-modal perception attention network. (a)-(c) demonstrate the exploration of complementarity, consistency, and
supplementarity between audio-visual signals, respectively.
(Katsaggelos, Bahaadini, and Molina 2015). Furthermore,
multi-modal fusion shows distinct advantages when the information of one modality is missing, or neither modality is
able to provide a reliable observation. As a result, it is critical to develop a multi-modal tracking method that is capable
of fusing heterogeneous signals and dealing with intermittent noisy audio-visual data.
Current speaker tracking methods are generally based on
probabilistic generation models due to their ability to process multi-modal information. The representative method is
Particle Filter (PF), which can recursively approximate the
filtering distribution of tracking targets in nonlinear and nonGaussian systems. Based on PF implementation, the Direction of Arrival (DOA) angle of the audio source is projected
onto the image plane to reshape the typical Gaussian noise
distribution of particles and increase the weights of particles near DOA line (Kılıç et al. 2015). A two-layered PF is
proposed to implement feature fusion and decision fusion of
audio-visual sources through the hierarchical structure (Liu,
Li, and Yang 2019). Moreover, a face detector is employed
to geometrically estimate the 3D position of the target to assist in the calculation of the acoustic map (Qian et al. 2021).
However, these methods prefer to use the detection results
of the single modality to assist the other modality to obtain
more accurate observations, while neglecting to fully utilize
the complementarity and redundancy of audio-visual information. In addition, most of the existing audio-visual trackers use generation algorithms (Ban et al. 2019; Schymura

Introduction
Speaker tracking is the foundation task for intelligent systems to implement behavior analysis and human-computer
interaction. To enhance the accuracy of the tracker, multimodal sensors are utilized to capture richer information
(Kılıç and Wang 2017). Among them, auditory and visual
sensors have received extensive attention from researchers
as the main senses for human to understand the surrounding
environment and interact with others. Similar to the process
of human multi-modal perception, the advantage of integrating auditory and visual information is that they can provide
necessary supplementary cues (Xuan et al. 2020). Compared
with the single-modal case, the utilizing of the complementarity of audio-visual signals contributes to improving tracking accuracy and robustness, particularly when dealing with
complicated situations such as target occlusion, limited view
of cameras, illumination changes, and room reverberation
* Corresponding Author: hongliu@pku.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1456

