The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Out of Distribution Data Detection Using Dropout Bayesian Neural Networks
Andre T. Nguyen,1,2,3 Fred Lu,1,2,3 Gary Lopez Munoz,1,2 Edward Raff,1,2,3 Charles Nicholas,3
James Holt1
1

Laboratory for Physical Sciences
2
Booz Allen Hamilton
3
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
andre@lps.umd.edu, lu_fred@bah.com, dlmgary@lps.umd.edu, edraff@lps.umd.edu, nicholas@umbc.edu, holt@lps.umd.edu
Abstract

however allows us to expect the randomized intermediate
representation samples in a dropout BNN to be meaningfully
related as they are sampled from a local mode. In this paper,
we explore how to leverage additional information generated
at every layer of the network for the task of OOD data detection at test time. In particular, we interpret the intermediate
representation of a data point at a particular layer as a randomized embedding. The embedding is randomized due to
the use of dropout at test time.
The idea to use a randomized embedding induced by the
intermediate layers of a dropout BNN has been attempted previously, but can fail due to the underlying Euclidean distance
metric used in previous work. The use of Euclidean distance
does not account for the confounding variability caused by
changes in embedding magnitudes. We will theoretically justify and empirically show that by instead using a measure
based on cosine distance, this problem can be rectified. We
then leverage this improved uncertainty estimation to show
better OOD data identification across three highly different
tasks to demonstrate the robustness of our approach.
The objective of this paper is not to develop a state-of-theart approach to OOD data detection, but rather in the context
of dropout BNNs to: (1) show how to cheaply improve OOD
data detection in systems where a dropout BNN is already deployed, by using intermediate computational results that are
already being computed but not fully leveraged, and (2) provide theoretical and practical evidence to highlight why it is
valuable to deconflate angular information about embedding
dispersion from embedding norm information. Additionally,
previous works have evaluated OOD detection by assuming
access to a large OOD dataset of similar size to the in distribution dataset. This is an unrealistic assumption as in areas
like cyber security where OOD examples are limited and
expensive. So, we also examine the effect of small dataset
sizes for OOD detection in our experiments.

We explore the utility of information contained within a
dropout based Bayesian neural network (BNN) for the task
of detecting out of distribution (OOD) data. We first show
how previous attempts to leverage the randomized embeddings induced by the intermediate layers of a dropout BNN
can fail due to the distance metric used. We introduce an alternative approach to measuring embedding uncertainty, justify
its use theoretically, and demonstrate how incorporating embedding uncertainty improves OOD data identification across
three tasks: image classification, language classification, and
malware detection.

1

Introduction

Detecting out of distribution (OOD) data at test time is critical
in a variety of machine learning applications. For example,
in the context of malware classification (Raff and Nicholas
2020), OOD data could correspond to the emergence of a new
form of malicious attack. Gal and Ghahramani (2016b) developed an approach to variational inference in Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) that showed a neural network with dropout
(Hinton et al. 2012; Srivastava et al. 2014), a technique commonly used to reduce overfitting in neural networks (NNs) by
randomly dropping units during training, applied before every weight layer is equivalent to an approximation of a deep
Gaussian process (Damianou and Lawrence 2013). Training
with dropout effectively performs variational inference for
the deep Gaussian process model, and the posterior distribution can be sampled from by leaving dropout on at test time.
This approach to Bayesian deep learning has been popular in
practice as it is easy to implement and scales well.
Measures of uncertainty usually are a function of the sampled softmax outputs of such a BNN, for example predictive
entropy and mutual information. There is however useful information at every intermediate layer of a dropout BNN. The
dropout based approach to Bayesian deep learning suffers,
like most variational inference methods, from the tendency
to fit an approximation to a local mode instead of to the full
posterior because of a lack of representational capacity and
because of the directionality of the KL divergence (Smith
and Gal 2018; Wilson and Izmailov 2020). This behavior

2

Related Work

Two kinds of uncertainty can be distinguished (Kendall and
Gal 2017). Aleatoric uncertainty is caused by inherent noise
and stochasticity in the data. More training data will not help
to reduce this kind of uncertainty. Epistemic uncertainty on
the other hand is caused by a lack of similar training data.
In regions lacking training data, different model parameter
settings that produce diverse or potentially conflicting predic-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7877

