The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Non-autoregressive Translation with Layer-Wise Prediction and Deep Supervision
Chenyang Huang* 1,2 , Hao Zhou†2 , Osmar R. Zaı̈ane1 , Lili Mou†1 , Lei Li‡3
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta
2
ByteDance AI Lab
3
University of California, Santa Barbara
{chenyangh,zaiane}@ualberta.ca zhouhao.nlp@bytedance.com
doublepower.mou@gmail.com lilei@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
How do we perform efficient inference while retaining high
translation quality? Existing neural machine translation models, such as Transformer, achieve high performance, but
they decode words one by one, which is inefficient. Recent non-autoregressive translation models speed up the inference, but their quality is still inferior. In this work, we propose DSLP, a highly efficient and high-performance model
for machine translation. The key insight is to train a nonautoregressive Transformer with Deep Supervision and feed
additional Layer-wise Predictions. We conducted extensive
experiments on four translation tasks (both directions of
WMT’14 EN–DE and WMT’16 EN–RO). Results show that
our approach consistently improves the BLEU scores compared with respective base models. Specifically, our best variant outperforms the autoregressive model on three translation
tasks, while being 14.8 times more efficient in inference.

BLEU

26
25
24
23
22
21

AXtRUegUeVVLve 7UDnVIRUPeU
InVeUtLRn 1A7
26 D&5F
AXE
25 /evenVhteLn 1A7
24 G/A7
G/A7 w/ D6/3
23 9DnLllD 1A7
9DnLllD 1A7 w/ D6/3
22
9DnLllD 1A7 w/ D6/3 & 07
21 &7&
0 &7&
3 w/ 6
12 15
D6/3 9
15
6SeeGXS
&7& w/ D6/3
& 07

27

27

B/EU

1

0

3

6
9
12
6SeeduS

Figure 1: Quality–efficiency trade-off for state-of-the-art
NAT models and our DSLP on the WMT’14 EN–DE dataset.
A cross “×” represents our DSLP variants, and a star “⋆”
refers a DSLP model that is enhanced with our mixed training (MT) technique. Its base model is shown in the same
color, and the correspondence is represented by an arrow.

Introduction
Most state-of-the-art neural machine translation (NMT) systems are autoregressive, where they predict one word after
another to generate the target sequence (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017). However, autoregressive
NMT is slow in inference, which sometimes does not meet
the efficiency requirement from the industry.
Gu et al. (2018) propose non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT), which is 15.6 times faster than its
autoregressive counterpart. While NAT achieves fast inference by generating target tokens in parallel, it assumes that
the generated words are conditionally independent given the
input. Such an independence assumption, however, weakens
the power of sequence modeling, and results in worse performance than autoregressive translation.
In recent studies, researchers propose partially
(non-)autoregressive models by progressively generating several words at a time (Ghazvininejad et al. 2019) or
iteratively editing with the Levenshtein Transformer (Gu,
Wang, and Zhao 2019). However, their inference is significantly slower than a full NAT model. As shown by Kasai

et al. (2021), a comparable-sized autoregressive model with
a shallow decoder is able to outperform these approaches
with similar latency. Therefore, these approaches do not
achieve a desired quality–efficiency trade-off.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective approach
to non-autoregressive generation with a Deeply Supervised,
Layer-wise Prediction-aware (DSLP) Transformer. It is noticed that a traditional NAT Transformer (Vaswani et al.
2017) only makes predictions at the last layer, where all the
words are generated in parallel. Thus, the prediction of a
word is unaware of other time steps, which typically leads
to inconsistent sentences. For example, the English phrase
thank you has two translations in German: danke schön and
vielen dank. Instead of generating either of the phrases, a
non-autoregressive model may predict danke dank, which is
absurd. Therefore, we propose a layer-wise prediction-aware
Transformer that predicts the output at every decoding layer.
The prediction is fed to the next decoding layer for further
processing. Hence, our decoder model is aware of different
steps’ predictions and can calibrate the NAT output through
its decoding layers. We further introduce deep supervision
for training our prediction-aware decoder. This is essential
to our model, because otherwise the intermediate predictions are not grounded to the target output and the calibration

* Work partially done during an internship at ByteDance AI Lab.
†

Corresponding authors.
Work done while working at ByteDance AI Lab.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

10776

