The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Discriminant Analysis Classifiers Using Online Active Learning via
Myoelectric Interfaces
Andrés Jaramillo-Yánez1 , Marco E. Benalcázar2 , Sebastian Sardina1 and Fabio Zambetta1
1
School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
Artificial Intelligence and Computer Vision Research Lab, Escuela Politécnica Nacional, Quito, Ecuador
andres.jaramillo.yanez@student.rmit.edu.au,marco.benalcazar@epn.edu.ec, sebastian.sardina@rmit.edu.au,
fabio.zambetta@rmit.edu.au
2

Abstract

Not surprisingly, some works have reported covariate shift,
a phenomenon that occurs when the probability distribution
of the input variables (sEMG data) changes with time (Kaufmann, Englehart, and Platzner 2010) and across different
users (Castellini, Fiorilla, and Sandini 2009). This phenomenon, in turn, causes the performance of myoelectric interfaces to deteriorate significantly over time (Patricia, Tommasit, and Caputo 2014). To minimize the covariate shift,
myoelectric interfaces based on pattern recognition (called
from now on myoelectric interfaces) must be re-trained every time a user interacts with them (Sensinger, Lock, and
Kuiken 2009). For each training, a large set of examples
must be collected to achieve high performance, which is
a time-consuming and inconvenient task in terms of usability. This demanding and frequent training has, consequently, limited the adoption of myoelectric interfaces by
industry (Farina et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2014), even though
such interfaces have been investigated for several decades.
To reduce the training effort—both the training time
and the training set size—, we propose a DA classifier
(LDA/QDA) that is trained with a small set of examples
and expands its knowledge over time using online active
learning. Online active learning fits in streaming data applications as myoelectric interfaces, in which obtaining labeled data could be expensive. In this learning paradigm, a
learner (e.g., a classifier) interactively query a user or teacher
to label new data (Hoi et al. 2021). We use LDA, a classifier widely researched in myoelectric interfaces, and QDA
because both demand low data and computational requirements at training, in which few parameters are estimated
with respect to data-hungry classifiers (e.g., convolutional
neural networks) (Huang et al. 2017; Jaramillo-Yánez, Benalcázar, and Mena-Maldonado 2020).
Some works have proposed LDA for dimensionality reduction, both using online supervised (Pang, Ozawa, and
Kasabov 2005; Wang et al. 2017) and semi-supervised (Kim
et al. 2007, 2011; Nie et al. 2009; Dhamecha, Singh, and
Vatsa 2016; Wang et al. 2016) learning. These approaches
are based on Fisher’s linear discrimination rule (Fisher 1936;
Härdle and Simar 2019), in which the within-class, betweenclass, and total scatter matrices are updated to compute a
linear projection that maps a sample into a low dimension
space. In contrast, our proposal focuses on classification,
using the Bayesian decision rule and the Gaussian assump-

We propose a discriminant analysis (DA) classifier that uses
online active learning to address the need for the frequent
training of myoelectric interfaces due to covariate shift. This
online classifier is initially trained using a small set of examples, and then updated over time using streaming data that are
interactively labeled by a user or pseudo-labeled by a softlabeling technique. We prove, theoretically, that this yields
the same model as training a DA classifier via full batch learning. We then provide experimental evidence that our approach
improves the performance of DA classifiers and is robust to
mislabeled data, and that our soft-labeling technique has better performance than existing state-of-the-art methods. We argue that our proposal is suitable for real-time applications, as
its time complexity w.r.t. the streaming data remains constant.

1

Introduction

This work proposes a discriminant analysis (DA) classifier
(linear LDA or quadratic QDA) that uses online active learning applied to hand gesture recognition via myoelectric interfaces. By updating its parameters over time using streaming data that are interactively (pseudo-)labeled by a user or
soft-labeling technique, this classifier is able to better deal
with the frequent (and demanding) training effort inherent
in the domain arising from covariance shift.
Myoelectric interfaces use streaming data to develop
hand gesture recognition applications, for example, prosthesis control, sign language recognition, hand rehabilitation, and virtual reality (Jaramillo-Yánez, Benalcázar, and
Mena-Maldonado 2020). By using surface electromyography (sEMG) sensors, these interfaces provide a non-invasive
way to record the electrical activity from neurologically activated skeletal muscles. While sEMG sensors do not suffer from several common issues (e.g., measurement accumulated errors over time, movement constraints, occlusion, illumination, and focus problems) of vision, flex, and
inertial sensors (Jaramillo-Yánez, Benalcázar, and MenaMaldonado 2020), the data acquired through such sEMG
sensors are user-dependent and non-stationary (Shwedyk,
Balasubramanian, and Scott 1977), as they are affected by
traits such as subcutaneous fat, skin impedance, and pattern of muscle synergies (Matsubara and Morimoto 2013).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6996

