The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Ranking Info Noise Contrastive Estimation:
Boosting Contrastive Learning via Ranked Positives
David T. Hoffmann* ,1,2 , Nadine Behrmann* ,1 , Juergen Gall3 , Thomas Brox2 , Mehdi Noroozi1
1

2
3
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
University of Freiburg
University of Bonn
{david.hoffmann2, nadine.behrmann}@de.bosch.com

Abstract

some samples cannot clearly be categorized as either positive
or negative, e.g. the dog breeds in Fig. 1. Treating them as
positives makes the network invariant towards the distinct
attributes of the samples. As a result, the network struggles to
distinguish between different dog breeds. If they are treated
as negatives, the network cannot exploit their similarities. For
transfer learning to other tasks, e.g. out-of-distribution detection, a clean structure of the embedding space, s.t. samples
sharing certain attributes will be closer, is beneficial.
Another example comes from video representation learning: In addition to spatial crops as for images, videos allow
to create temporal crops, i.e. creating a sample from different
frames of the same video. To date, it is an open point of
discussion whether temporally different clips from the same
video should be treated as positive (Feichtenhofer et al. 2021)
or negative (Dave et al. 2021). Treating them as positives will
force the network to be invariant towards changes over time,
but treating them as negatives will encourage the network to
ignore the features that stay constant. In summary, a binary
classification in positive and negative will, for most applications, lead to a sub-optimal solution. To the best of our
knowledge, a method that benefits from a fine-grained definition of negatives, positives and various states in between is
missing.
As a remedy, we propose Ranking Info Noise Contrastive
Estimation (RINCE). RINCE supports a fine-grained definition of negatives and positives. Thus, methods trained with
RINCE can take advantage of various kinds of similarity
measures. For example similarity measures can be based on
class similarities, gradual changes of content within videos,
pretrained feature embeddings, or even the camera positions
in a multi-view setting etc. In this work, we demonstrate class
similarities and gradual changes in videos as examples.
RINCE puts higher emphasis on similarities between related samples than SCL and cross-entropy, resulting in a
richer representation. We show that RINCE learns to represent semantic similarities in the embedding space, s.t. more
similar samples are closer than less similar samples. Key to
this is a new InfoNCE-based loss, which enforces gradually
decreasing similarity with increasing rank of the samples.
The representation learned with RINCE on Cifar-100 improves significantly over cross-entropy for classification, retrieval and OOD detection, and outperforms the stronger
SCL baseline (Khosla et al. 2020). Here, improvements are

This paper introduces Ranking Info Noise Contrastive Estimation (RINCE), a new member in the family of InfoNCE
losses that preserves a ranked ordering of positive samples.
In contrast to the standard InfoNCE loss, which requires a
strict binary separation of the training pairs into similar and
dissimilar samples, RINCE can exploit information about a
similarity ranking for learning a corresponding embedding
space. We show that the proposed loss function learns favorable embeddings compared to the standard InfoNCE whenever
at least noisy ranking information can be obtained or when
the definition of positives and negatives is blurry. We demonstrate this for a supervised classification task with additional
superclass labels and noisy similarity scores. Furthermore, we
show that RINCE can also be applied to unsupervised training with experiments on unsupervised representation learning from videos. In particular, the embedding yields higher
classification accuracy, retrieval rates and performs better in
out-of-distribution detection than the standard InfoNCE loss.

Introduction
Contrastive learning recently triggered progress in selfsupervised representation learning. Most existing variants
require a strict definition of positive and negative pairs used
in the InfoNCE loss or simply ignore samples that can not be
clearly classified as either one or the other (Zhao et al. 2021).
Contrastive learning forces the network to impose a similar
structure in the feature space by pulling the positive pairs
closer to each other while keeping the negatives apart.
This binary separation into positives and negatives can be
limiting whenever the boundary between those is blurry. For
example, different samples from the same classes are used
as negatives for instance recognition, which prevents the network from exploiting their similarities. One way to address
this issue is supervised contrastive learning (SCL) (Khosla
et al. 2020), which takes class labels into account when making pairs: samples from the same class are treated as positives,
while samples of different classes pose negatives. However,
even in this optimal setting with ground truth labels, the problem persists – semantically similar classes share many visual
features (Deselaers and Ferrari 2011) with the query – and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

897

