The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Enhancement of Latent Discovery in GANs
Adarsh Kappiyath1 * , Silpa Vadakkeeveetil Sreelatha2 * , S Sumitra3
1

Flytxt Mobile Solutions, Trivandrum, India
2
TCS Research, Pune, India
3
Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology, Trivandrum, India
kadarsh22@gmail.com, silpavs.43@gmail.com, sumitra@iist.ac.in

Abstract

tions analytically. These directions need not be completely
disentangled.
We propose Scale Ranking Estimator(SRE), a model
learned via self-supervision strategy to enhance disentanglement in the directions derived by current posthoc disentanglement approaches. Self-supervision is a successful
training paradigm for deep learning models that allows them
to learn in a label-efficient manner. In essence, SRE enhances disentanglement by enforcing the order of variation within each transformation. Our method is independent of the GAN architecture used. We perform extensive
qualitative and quantitative analysis on synthetic and natural datasets to show that the proposed method improves the
disentanglement of existing directions. SRE learns to encode
the magnitude of variation in each direction. We demonstrate
a practical application where these encodings can be directly
used for Attribute-based image retrieval task.

Several methods for discovering interpretable directions in
the latent space of pre-trained GANs have been proposed.
Latent semantics discovered by unsupervised methods are
relatively less disentangled than supervised methods since
they do not use pre-trained attribute classifiers. We propose Scale Ranking Estimator (SRE), which is trained using
self-supervision. SRE enhances the disentanglement in directions obtained by existing unsupervised disentanglement
techniques. These directions are updated to preserve the ordering of variation within each direction in latent space. Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the discovered directions demonstrates that our proposed method significantly
improves disentanglement in various datasets. We also show
that the learned SRE can be used to perform Attribute-based
image retrieval task without further training.

Introduction

Related Work

Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) are generative
models that have witnessed significant performance improvements in image synthesis over the last decade (Goodfellow et al. 2014). It has many applications, including image, audio, and video generation, image manipulation and
editing, image-to-image translation, and many others.
The latent space of GANs is hard to interpret due to its
high dimensional and abstract structure. Various architectures such as InfoGAN (Chen et al. 2016), Structured GAN
(Deng et al. 2017), and many others learn interpretable and
meaningful representations from images by either maximizing the information or promoting independence between the
latent variables. The fundamental drawback of these approaches is that they fail in the case of complex datasets
since the generation quality degrades as they learn to disentangle. To alleviate this problem, recent works such as
(Shen et al. 2020), (Voynov and Babenko 2020) discover
interpretable directions directly from the latent space of
pre-trained GANs. (Voynov and Babenko 2020) performs
unsupervised learning to identify distinguishable directions
while (Härkönen et al. 2020), (Spingarn-Eliezer, Banner,
and Michaeli 2020) and (Shen and Zhou 2021) obtains direc-

Generative Adversarial Networks GANs are one of the
most popular generative models that shows promising results on image synthesis (Goodfellow et al. 2014). It consists
of a Generator and Discriminator that learns in an adversarial setting. Recent variants of GANs such as StyleGAN
(Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019), StyleGAN-2 (Karras et al.
2020), Progressive GAN (Karras et al. 2018) and BigGAN
(Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) are shown to be very
successful in generating high-resolution images. Progressive GAN, a successor of conventional GAN, attempts to
generate high-resolution images by progressively growing
the generator and discriminator. StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 learn a mapping network that maps the z-space to w-space
that is more disentangled.
Post-hoc Disentanglement from pre-trained GANs
(Higgins et al. 2017), (Dupont 2018), (Lin et al. 2020)
e.t.c. disentangle factors of variations very well in synthetic
datasets, but they fail to do so in complex natural datasets.
These classical disentanglement learning techniques improve disentanglement at the cost of generation quality. To
overcome this limitation, extensive research has been conducted in the field of learning interpretable directions from
pre-trained models. They can be categorized into three based
on the learning paradigm used :
• Supervised : (Bau et al. 2019) computes the agreement

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7078

