The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Achieving Long-Term Fairness in Sequential Decision Making
Yaowei Hu, Lu Zhang
University of Arkansas
{yaoweihu, lz006}@uark.edu

Abstract

on future decisions for this person. Therefore, fair decision
making should concern not only the fairness of a single decision but more importantly, whether a decision model can
impose fair long-term effects on different groups. This notion of fairness is referred to as long-term fairness in recent
studies (Liu et al. 2018; Hu and Chen 2018; Ge et al. 2021).
The challenge of achieving long-term fairness comes in
two folds. Firstly, different from static settings, decisions
made by models may change users’ behaviors, and/or affect their status such as reputation, qualification, etc., and
impact subsequent decisions via feedback loops. Without
knowing how the population would be reshaped by decisions, enforcing any fairness constraint may create negative
feedback loops and eventually harm fairness in the long run.
Recent research has demonstrated that existing fairness criteria cannot guarantee fairness and sometimes undermine
fairness even if only one time step is taken into consideration
(Liu et al. 2018; Kannan, Roth, and Ziani 2019; D’Amour
et al. 2020; Creager et al. 2020). Secondly, due to the feedback loops, the deployment of the decision model will cause
changes in the data distribution that is originally used for
training. This can be viewed as a distribution shift problem
as the distribution of the training data (i.e., distribution before the model deployment) is different from the distribution of the test data (i.e., distribution after the model deployment). Ignoring the distribution shift will critically affect the
achievement of long-term fairness, as long-term fairness is
affected by all decisions made by the model along the time.
In this paper, we propose a framework for achieving longterm fair sequential decision making by addressing both
above challenges. We model the dynamics of the decisionmaking process by employing Pearl’s Structural Causal
Model (SCM) (Pearl 2009), in which the relations among
user features and decisions and how those decisions affect the data distribution can be encoded in a probabilistic
graphical model. Specifically, we leverage the time-lagged
causal graph (Runge et al. 2019) to describe the causal relations over time, and adopt the soft intervention (Correa and
Bareinboim 2020) for modeling the model deployment and
inferring its impacts on the underlying population. Then, we
measure long-term fairness as the path-specific effect on the
time-lagged causal graph under both the hard intervention
on the sensitive attribute and the soft intervention on the
predicted decisions. A constrained optimization problem is

In this paper, we propose a framework for achieving longterm fair sequential decision making. By conducting both the
hard and soft interventions, we propose to take path-specific
effects on the time-lagged causal graph as a quantitative tool
for measuring long-term fairness. The problem of fair sequential decision making is then formulated as a constrained optimization problem with the utility as the objective and the
long-term and short-term fairness as constraints. We show
that such an optimization problem can be converted to a performative risk optimization. Finally, repeated risk minimization (RRM) is used for model training, and the convergence
of RRM is theoretically analyzed. The empirical evaluation
shows the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm on synthetic and semi-synthetic temporal datasets.

Introduction
Fair machine learning has received increasing attention in
the past years, especially in decision making tasks such as
hiring (Caton and Haas 2020), college admissions (Zhang,
Wu, and Wu 2017a) and bank loans (Johnson, Foster, and
Stine 2016). Many algorithms for achieving fair decision
making have been proposed based on various fairness notions (e.g. demographic parity (Zemel et al. 2013), equalized
odds (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) and counterfactual fairness (Kusner et al. 2017)). At present, the majority of studies on fair machine learning focus on the static or one-shot
classification setting. However, in practice, decision making systems are usually operating in a dynamic manner such
that the classifier makes sequential decisions over a period
of time. In many situations, each decision made by the classifier may change the underlying data population and further
affect subsequent decisions. For example, suppose a person
applies to a bank for a loan and the bank estimates the risk
of default according to his/her credit score. Then, the bank’s
decision on the loan application (e.g., whether to grant the
loan and the interest rate assigned) may in turn affect the
default risk and change the person’s credit score (e.g., the
credit score will decrease if the loan is granted but he/she defaults on the loan) which will affect his/her next loan application. If the bank’s decision leads to a long-term decrease in
the credit score, then it imposes a negative long-term effect
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9549

