The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pretrained Cost Model for Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems
Yanchen Deng, Shufeng Kong∗ , Bo An
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{ycdeng, shufeng.kong, boan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

solution by either distributed backtracking search (Hirayama
and Yokoo 1997; Modi et al. 2005; Litov and Meisels 2017;
Yeoh, Felner, and Koenig 2010) or dynamic-programming
(Chen et al. 2020; Petcu and Faltings 2005, 2007). However, complete algorithms scale poorly and are unsuitable
for large real-world applications. Therefore, considerable research efforts have been devoted to develop incomplete algorithms that trade the solution quality for smaller computational overheads, including local search (Maheswaran,
Pearce, and Tambe 2004; Okamoto, Zivan, and Nahon 2016;
Zhang et al. 2005), belief propagation (Cohen, Galiki, and
Zivan 2020; Farinelli et al. 2008; Rogers et al. 2011; Zivan
et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018) and sampling (Nguyen et al.
2019; Ottens, Dimitrakakis, and Faltings 2017).
However, the existing DCOP algorithms usually rely on
handcrafted heuristics which need expertise to tune for different settings. In contrast, Machine Learning (ML) based
techniques learn effective heuristics for existing methods automatically (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021; Gasse et al.
2019; Lederman et al. 2020), achieving state-of-the-art performance in various challenging problems like Mixed Integer Programming (MIP), Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problems (CVRPs), and Boolean Satisfiability Problems (SATs).
Unfortunately, these methods are often not generalizable to
different search algorithms. Most importantly, many of these
methods usually require the full knowledge about the problems to be solved, making them unsuitable for a distributed
setting where centralization is not realistic due to geographical limitations or privacy concerns.
Therefore, we develop the first general-purpose ML
model, named GAT-PCM, to generate effective heuristics for
a wide range of DCOP algorithms and propose a distributed
embedding schema of GAT-PCM for decentralized model
inference. Specifically, we make the following key contributions: (1) We propose a novel directed tripartite graph representation based on microstructure (Jégou 1993) to encode a
partially instantiated DCOP instance and use Graph Attention Networks (GATs) (Vaswani et al. 2017) to learn generalizable embeddings. (2) Instead of generating heuristics for
a particular algorithm, GAT-PCM predicts the optimal cost
of a target assignment given a partial assignment, such that
it can be applied to boost the performance of a wide range
of DCOP algorithms where evaluating the quality of an assignment is critical. To this end, we pretrain our model on a

Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) are
an important subclass of combinatorial optimization problems, where information and controls are distributed among
multiple autonomous agents. Previously, Machine Learning
(ML) has been largely applied to solve combinatorial optimization problems by learning effective heuristics. However,
existing ML-based heuristic methods are often not generalizable to different search algorithms. Most importantly, these
methods usually require full knowledge about the problems
to be solved, which are not suitable for distributed settings
where centralization is not realistic due to geographical limitations or privacy concerns. To address the generality issue, we propose a novel directed acyclic graph representation
schema for DCOPs and leverage the Graph Attention Networks (GATs) to embed graph representations. Our model,
GAT-PCM, is then pretrained with optimally labelled data in
an offline manner, so as to construct effective heuristics to
boost a broad range of DCOP algorithms where evaluating
the quality of a partial assignment is critical, such as local
search or backtracking search. Furthermore, to enable decentralized model inference, we propose a distributed embedding
schema of GAT-PCM where each agent exchanges only embedded vectors, and show its soundness and complexity. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our model by combining it with a local search or a backtracking search algorithm. Extensive empirical evaluations indicate that the GATPCM-boosted algorithms significantly outperform the stateof-the-art methods in various benchmarks.

Introduction
As a fundamental formalism in multi-agent systems, Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) (Modi
et al. 2005) capture the essentials of cooperative distributed
problem solving and have been successfully applied to
model the problems in many real-world domains like radio
channel allocation (Monteiro et al. 2012), vessel navigation
(Hirayama et al. 2019), and smart grid (Fioretto et al. 2017).
Over the past two decades, numerous algorithms have
been proposed to solve DCOPs and can be generally classified as complete and incomplete algorithms. Complete algorithms aim to exhaust the search space and find the optimal
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9331

