The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Model Doctor: A Simple Gradient Aggregation Strategy for Diagnosing and
Treating CNN Classifiers
Zunlei Feng, Jiacong Hu, Sai Wu, Xiaotian Yu, Jie Song, Mingli Song∗
Zhejiang University
{zunleifeng, jiaconghu, wusai, yuxiaotian, sjie, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

classifier predictions (Jie et al. 2018; Ras, Haselager, and
Gerven 2018; Riccardo et al. 2018). In other words, the classifier acts as a blackbox and does not provide details about
why it reaches a specific classification decision.
Some works are developed to explain and debug the machine learning models (Shouling et al. 2019). Most current works (Krause, Perer, and Ng 2016; Krause et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2019) focus on explaining and diagnosing the
deep learning model’s prediction with visual analysis techniques. Based on those visualized diagnoses and analyses,
researchers interactively optimize the deep learning models through improving data quality, choosing reliable features, and fine-tuning the model parameters. Another kind
of works (Bastani, Kim, and Bastani 2017; Lei et al. 2018)
adopted the explainable random forest to approximate the
deep learning models and analyze the deep learning model
by examining the explainable model. To sum up, all existing deep model explanation and debugging methods require
humans interaction. There is a lack of an entirely automatic
model diagnosing and treating tool for efficiently and effectively optimize the deep learning models.
In this paper, we put forward a completely automatic
model diagnosing and treating tool, termed as Model Doctor, which is based on two discoveries. The first discovery is
that the target category is highly correlated with sparse and
specific convolutional kernels in the last few layers of the CNN classifier. Meanwhile, there are also some incorrect responses for those corresponding convolutional kernels in the
background areas. The second discovery is that adversarial
samples are isolated while normal samples are successive in
the feature space. So, we devise the gradient aggregation strategy for diagnosing the deficiency of CNN classifiers and
treating them automatically.
In the diagnosing stage, the absolute value of the firstorder derivatives of the predict category w.r.t. each feature
map of each layer are summed into a single correlation index, which denotes the correlation degree between the target
category and the corresponding convolutional kernel. To alleviate the disturbance of inaccurate features, we also calculate the relevance index for the disturbed feature maps that
are synthesized by adding some small noises to the original feature maps. Then, we aggregate those correlation index values in each layer of the CNN classifier for all training
samples of the same category. The aggregated correlation in-

Recently, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has achieved
excellent performance in the classification task. It is widely
known that CNN is deemed as a ‘black-box’, which is hard
for understanding the prediction mechanism and debugging
the wrong prediction. Some model debugging and explanation works are developed for solving the above drawbacks. However, those methods focus on explanation and diagnosing possible causes for model prediction, based on which
the researchers handle the following optimization of models
manually. In this paper, we propose the first completely automatic model diagnosing and treating tool, termed as Model Doctor. Based on two discoveries that 1) each category is
only correlated with sparse and specific convolution kernels,
and 2) adversarial samples are isolated while normal samples are successive in the feature space, a simple aggregate
gradient constraint is devised for effectively diagnosing and
optimizing CNN classifiers. The aggregate gradient strategy
is a versatile module for mainstream CNN classifiers. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed Model Doctor applies to all existing CNN classifiers, and improves the
accuracy of 16 mainstream CNN classifiers by 1% ∼ 5%.

Introduction
Image classification is a widely studied topic in the computer
vision area. The image classification algorithms are the essential ingredient in many applications, such as, face recognition (Masi et al. 2018), autonomous driving (Bojarski et al.
2016), text recognition (Chen et al. 2020; Ye and Doermann 2015), medical image analysis (Litjens et al. 2017; Feng
et al. 2021), product quality inspection (Lei et al. 2018) and
so on. In recent years, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based classification networks, e.g., AlexNet (Technicolor et al. 2012), VGG-Net (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014),
ResNet (He et al. 2016), DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017), SimpleNet (HasanPour et al. 2016), GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al.
2014), MobileNet (Howard et al. 2017), ShuffleNet (Zhang
et al. 2017), SqueezeNet (Iandola et al. 2016), MnasNet (Tan
et al. 2019), have achieved breakthrough results across a variety of image classification tasks.
Those CNN classifiers achieve high classification performance but often lack straightforward interpretability of the
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

616

