The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Geometry Interaction Knowledge Graph Embeddings
Zongsheng Cao 1,2 , Qianqian Xu 3,* , Zhiyong Yang 4 , Xiaochun Cao 1,2 , Qingming Huang 3,4,5,6,*
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{caozongsheng,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

methods, learning in the Euclidean space E and ComplEx
space C is highly effective, which has been demonstrated
by methods such as DistMult (Yang et al. 2015), ComplEx
(Trouillon et al. 2016) and TuckER (Balažević, Allen, and
Hospedales 2019) (i.e., bilinear models). These methods can
infer new relational triplets and capture chain structure with
the scoring function based on the intuitive Euclidean distance. However, learning embeddings in Euclidean space are
weak to capture complex structures (e.g., hierarchy and ring
structures) (Balazevic, Allen, and Hospedales 2019b).
As another branch of KGE methods, learning KG embeddings in the non-Euclidean space (e.g., hyperspheric space S
and hyperbolic space H) has received wide attention in recent
years. Drawing on the geometric properties of the sphere,
ManifoldE (Xiao, Huang, and Zhu 2016a) embeds entities
into the manifold-based space such as hypersphere space,
which is beneficial to improve the precision of knowledge
embedding and model the ring structure. Due to the capability
of hyperbolic geometry in modeling hierarchical structure,
methods such as MuRP (Balazevic, Allen, and Hospedales
2019b) and ROT H (Chami et al. 2020) can outperform the
methods based on Euclidean space and Complex space in
knowledge graphs of hierarchical structures. However, note
that most knowledge graphs embrace complicated structures
as shown in Figure 1, it implies that these methods perform a
bit poorly when modeling the knowledge graph with hybrid
structures (Balazevic, Allen, and Hospedales 2019b) (e.g.,
ring, hierarchy and chain structures). Recently, (Wang et al.
2021) develops a mixed-curvature multi-relational graph neural network for knowledge graph completion, which is constructed by a Riemannian product manifold between different
spaces. However, it does not delve into the interaction of the
various spaces and the heterogeneity of different spaces will
limit its pattern reasoning ability between spaces.
From the analysis above, we can see learning knowledge graph embeddings without geometry interaction will
inevitably result in sub-optimal results. The reason lies in that
it cannot accurately capture the complex structural features
of the entity location space, and the transfer of inference rules
in different spaces will be affected or even invalid. Inspired
by this, to capture a richer set of structural information and
model key inference patterns for KG with complex structures,
we attempt to embed the knowledge graph into Euclidean,
hyperbolic and hyperspherical spaces jointly by geometry

Knowledge graph (KG) embeddings have shown great power
in learning representations of entities and relations for link
prediction tasks. Previous work usually embeds KGs into a
single geometric space such as Euclidean space (zero curved),
hyperbolic space (negatively curved) or hyperspherical space
(positively curved) to maintain their specific geometric structures (e.g., chain, hierarchy and ring structures). However,
the topological structure of KGs appears to be complicated,
since it may contain multiple types of geometric structures
simultaneously. Therefore, embedding KGs in a single space,
no matter the Euclidean space, hyperbolic space or hyperspheric space, cannot capture the complex structures of KGs
accurately. To overcome this challenge, we propose Geometry Interaction knowledge graph Embeddings (GIE), which
learns spatial structures interactively between the Euclidean,
hyperbolic and hyperspherical spaces. Theoretically, our proposed GIE can capture a richer set of relational information,
model key inference patterns, and enable expressive semantic
matching across entities. Experimental results on three wellestablished knowledge graph completion benchmarks show
that our GIE achieves the state-of-the-art performance with
fewer parameters.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) attract more and more attentions
in the past years, which play an important role in many semantic applications (e.g., question answering (Diefenbach,
Singh, and Maret 2018; Keizer et al. 2017), semantic search
(Berant et al. 2013; Berant and Liang 2014), recommender
systems (Gong et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2020), and dialogue
generation (Keizer et al. 2017; He et al. 2017)). KGs can not
only represent vast amounts of information available in the
world, but also enable powerful relational reasoning. However, real-world KGs are usually incomplete, which restricts
the development of downstream tasks above. To address such
an issue, Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) emerges as
an effective solution to predict missing links by the lowdimensional representations of entities and relations.
In the past decades, researchers propose various KGE
methods which achieve great success. As a branch of KGE
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5521

