The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepStochLog: Neural Stochastic Logic Programming
Thomas Winters,* 1 Giuseppe Marra,* 1 Robin Manhaeve,1 Luc De Raedt1,2
1

Department of Computer Science; Leuven.AI, KU Leuven, Belgium,
2
AASS, Örebro University, Sweden
{thomas.winters, giuseppe.marra, robin.manhaeve, luc.deraedt}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
Recent advances in neural-symbolic learning, such as DeepProbLog, extend probabilistic logic programs with neural predicates. Like graphical models, these probabilistic logic programs define a probability distribution over possible worlds,
for which inference is computationally hard. We propose DeepStochLog, an alternative neural-symbolic framework based
on stochastic definite clause grammars, a kind of stochastic
logic program. More specifically, we introduce neural grammar rules into stochastic definite clause grammars to create
a framework that can be trained end-to-end. We show that
inference and learning in neural stochastic logic programming scale much better than for neural probabilistic logic programs. Furthermore, the experimental evaluation shows that
DeepStochLog achieves state-of-the-art results on challenging
neural-symbolic learning tasks.

Introduction
The integration of neural and symbolic learning methods
is high on the research agenda. It is popular to use (variants of) logic programs to represent the available symbolic
knowledge and use Prolog-like mechanisms to generate computation structures that can then be differentiated (Manhaeve
et al. 2018; Dai et al. 2019; Rocktäschel and Riedel 2017;
Yang, Ishay, and Lee 2020; Cohen, Yang, and Mazaitis 2020;
Sourek et al. 2018; Si et al. 2019). Several of these approaches
also incorporate probability into these neural logic programming models, cf. (De Raedt et al. 2020). Most notably, one
distinguishes probabilistic from stochastic logic programs
(PLPs vs SLPs). The more popular PLPs (De Raedt and Kimmig 2015) are based on a possible worlds semantics (i.e. the
distribution semantics (Sato 1995)), which extends probabilistic graphical models, while the SLPs (Muggleton 1996,
2000; Cussens 2001) are based on stochastic grammars. The
difference can also be described as a random graph vs a random walk model. So far, the emphasis in neural-symbolic
computation has been on the PLP approach, especially (Yang,
Ishay, and Lee 2020; Manhaeve et al. 2018; Sourek et al.
2018; Tsamoura and Michael 2020), with only Tensorlog
(Cohen, Yang, and Mazaitis 2020) adopting the SLP semantics in an efficient but restricted Datalog or database setting.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10090

To fill this gap, we introduce DeepStochLog, a neural stochastic logic programming approach. It incorporates ideas from
DeepProbLog, such as the neural predicate. The neural predicate encapsulates neural networks to cope with sub-symbolic
data such as images. Without loss of generality, we base
DeepStochLog on stochastic definite clause grammars (SDCGs) as this notation is not only easier to introduce and use,
but also results in a sequence-based model. SDCGs are a kind
of probabilistic unification-based grammar formalism (Have
2009). However, SDCGs and SLPs are very closely related.
SDCGs can be directly translated and executed as SLPs, and
all the concepts we introduce for SDCGs can directly apply to
SLPs as well. More specifically, the key contributions of this
paper are: 1) the introduction of the neural stochastic logic
programming framework DeepStochLog; 2) the introduction of inference and learning algorithms (through gradient
descent) for DeepStochLog programs; and 3) experimental
results that show that DeepStochLog obtains state-of-the-art
results on a number of challenging tasks for neural-symbolic
computation and that it is also several orders of magnitude
faster than alternative approaches based on PLPs.

Stochastic DCGs
A context-free grammar (CFG) G is a 4-tuple (V, Σ, S, R),
with V the set of non-terminals, Σ the set of terminals, S ∈ V
the starting symbol and R a set of rewrite rules of the form
N → S1 , ..., Sk where N is a non-terminal, the Si are either terminals or non-terminals. A probabilistic context-free
grammar (PCFG) extends a CFG by adding probabilities to
the rules R, i.e., the rules take the form pi :: N → S1 , ..., Sk ,
where pi is a probability. Furthermore, the probabilities of
rules with the same non-terminal N on the left-hand side
must sum to 1. We use list notation for sequences of terminals such as [cat] and [the, cat]. Whereas CFGs only define
whether a sequence can be parsed, PCFGs define a probability distribution over possible parses. This allows for the most
likely parse to be identified. An example PCFG is shown at
the top of Example 1.
Definite clause grammars (DCGs) (Pereira and Warren
1980) are a well-known logic programming-based extension of CFGs. DCGs are unification base and can represent
context-sensitive grammars. They differ from CFGs in that
logical atoms are used instead of the non-terminals. An atom
a(t1 , ..., tn ) consists of a predicate a of arity n followed by

