The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Uncertainty Estimation via Response Scaling for Pseudo-Mask Noise Mitigation in
Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yi Li1,2 , Yiqun Duan3 , Zhanghui Kuang2 , Yimin Chen2 , Wayne Zhang2 , Xiaomeng Li1,4, *
1

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
SenseTime Research
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Technology Sydney
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Shenzhen Research Institute
ylini@connect.ust.hk, eexmli@ust.hk
Abstract

segmentation model with the pseudo-masks in a fullysupervised manner. These methods improve the quality of
pseudo-mask by solving the under activation problem of
Class Activation Map (Zhou et al. 2016) as these papers
(Kolesnikov and Lampert 2016; Jiang et al. 2019; Chang
et al. 2020), also distinguishing foreground from background with AffinityNet (Ahn and Kwak 2018) or saliency
(Yao and Gong 2020; Fan et al. 2020). But the noisy pixels are inevitable after applying these methods. As far as we
know, only PMM (Li et al. 2021) tries to relieve the influence
of noise. While it does not work on refined pseudo-mask and
COCO dataset, without location of noisy pixels. So in this
paper, we mitigate the noise in a more effective way.
We observe that the noisy pixels are mainly divided into
missing positives and false positives. To be specific, if the
response range (scope of activated area) is narrow, the missing positives take the lead, otherwise false positives become
the majority as shown in Fig.2. Because of the variation of
the response scale, there are many false pixels (noise) with
high confidence. And this phenomenon is exactly belongs
to uncertainty. Thus, in this paper, we locate the noise via
uncertainty estimation.
Uncertainty estimation requires multiple predictions for
each image, so how to generate these predictions and reflect
the noise is important in the setting of WSSS. By observation of false pixels whose confidences are high in Figure 2,
the uncertain pixels are highly related to the response scale.
So we simulate response maps in different activation scales
by probability scaling. Besides, we add dense-CRF (Zheng
et al. 2015) to response maps after scaling scheme as the formation of pseudo-mask. After above operations, we estimate
the uncertainty with these scaled responses, and the affinity
is built between uncertainty and noise.
After uncertainty estimation via response scaling, we normalize the uncertainty and transform it to loss weight in optimization to mitigate the damage of noise. We observe that
the pixel whose uncertainty is higher is more likely to be
noise as shown in Figure 1. Thus, a lower loss weight is
applied to relieve the adverse effect of it. We multiply the
weight map and loss map with a mean operation to get the
final loss in optimization.
The overall process is call URN abbreviated from Uncertainty estimation via Response scaling for Noise mitigation.

Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) segments objects without a heavy burden of dense annotation.
While as a price, generated pseudo-masks exist obvious
noisy pixels, which result in sub-optimal segmentation models trained over these pseudo-masks. But rare studies notice or
work on this problem, even these noisy pixels are inevitable
after their improvements on pseudo-mask. So we try to improve WSSS in the aspect of noise mitigation. And we observe that many noisy pixels are of high confidence, especially when the response range is too wide or narrow, presenting an uncertain status. Thus, in this paper, we simulate noisy
variations of response by scaling the prediction map multiple times for uncertainty estimation. The uncertainty is then
used to weight the segmentation loss to mitigate noisy supervision signals. We call this method URN, abbreviated from
Uncertainty estimation via Response scaling for Noise mitigation. Experiments validate the benefits of URN, and our
method achieves state-of-the-art results at 71.2% and 41.5%
on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 respectively,
without extra models like saliency detection. Code is available at https://github.com/XMed-Lab/URN.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the fundamental task in computer
vision. One of the main challenges is the prohibitive cost of
obtaining dense pixel-level annotations to supervise model
training. To reduce the annotation cost, researchers replace
the dense pixel-level annotations by weak annotations, such
as scribble (Lin et al. 2016; Tang et al. 2018), bounding
boxes (Xu, Schwing, and Urtasun 2015; Dai, He, and Sun
2015; Khoreva et al. 2017), points (Bearman et al. 2016) and
image-level labels (Kolesnikov and Lampert 2016; Pathak,
Krahenbuhl, and Darrell 2015; Pinheiro and Collobert 2015;
Ahn and Kwak 2018). In this paper, our goal is to develop
a novel method for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) based on image-level class labels only.
Most existing methods (Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2020; Li et al. 2021) in WSSS follow the common pipeline
that generates pseudo-masks firstly and then trains the
* Corresponding Author: eexmli@ust.hk
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1447

