The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Active Boundary Loss for Semantic Segmentation
Chi Wang1,2 , Yunke Zhang1,2 , Miaomiao Cui2 , Peiran Ren2
Yin Yang3 , Xuansong Xie2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2 , Hujun Bao1 , Weiwei Xu1 *
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba Inc
3
Clemson University
{wangchi1995, yunkezhang}@zju.edu.cn, {miaomiao.cmm, peiran.rpr}@alibaba-inc.com
yin5@clemson.edu, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com, xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com, {bao, xww}@cad.zju.edu.cn
Abstract
This paper proposes a novel active boundary loss for semantic segmentation. It can progressively encourage the alignment between predicted boundaries and ground-truth boundaries during end-to-end training, which is not explicitly enforced in commonly used cross-entropy loss. Based on the
predicted boundaries detected from the segmentation results
using current network parameters, we formulate the boundary
alignment problem as a differentiable direction vector prediction problem to guide the movement of predicted boundaries in each iteration. Our loss is model-agnostic and can be
plugged in to the training of segmentation networks to improve the boundary details. Experimental results show that
training with the active boundary loss can effectively improve
the boundary F-score and mean Intersection-over-Union on
challenging image and video object segmentation datasets.

RGB

CE

CIBL

DenseCRF

Segfix

Ours

Figure 1: Segmentation results of an internet image. CE:
Produced by DeeplabV3 (Chen et al. 2017a) trained with
cross-entropy loss on Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016) dataset.
CIBL: Produced by DeeplabV3 trained with cross-entry loss
+ lovász-softmax (Berman et al. 2018) + Boundary Loss
(Kervadec et al. 2019) on Cityscapes dataset. DenseCRF:
Refined results of column ‘CE’ by DenseCRF (Krähenbühl
et al. 2011). Segfix: Refined results of column ‘CE’ by Segfix (Yuan et al. 2020b). Ours: Re-trained by adding our loss.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fine-grained, pixel-wise classification task that assigns each pixel a semantic class label to facilitate high-level image analysis and processing.
Recently, the accuracy of semantic segmentation has been
substantially improved with the introduction of fully convolutional networks (FCNs) (Long et al. 2015; Minaee
et al. 2021). FCNs leverage convolutional layers and downsampling operations to achieve a large receptive field. Although these operations can encode context information surrounding a pixel, they tend to propagate feature information throughout the image, leading to undesirable feature
smoothing across object boundaries. Thus, the segmentation
results might be blurred and lack fine object boundary details. To address this issue, boundary-aware information flow
control and multi-task training methods have been proposed
to improve the discriminative power of features belonging
to different objects (Bertasius et al. 2016; Takikawa et al.
2019; Zhu et al. 2019). Alternatively, the segmentation errors at boundaries can be remedied by learning the correspondence between a boundary pixel and its corresponding
interior pixel (Yuan et al. 2020b). Despite the empirical success of boundary-aware methods in improving the segmentation accuracy, there still exist a significant amount of seg-

mentation errors at object boundaries, especially for small
and thin objects. The mutual dependence between semantic segmentation and boundary detection should be further
studied to improve the quality of segmentation results.
In this paper, we propose a novel active boundary loss
(ABL) to progressively encourage the alignment between
predicted boundaries (PDBs) and ground-truth boundaries
(GTBs) during end-to-end training, in which the PDBs are
semantic boundaries detected in the segmentation results of
the current network. To facilitate end-to-end training, the
loss is formulated as a differentiable direction vector prediction problem. Specifically, for a pixel on the PDBs, we
first determine a direction pointing to the closest GTB pixel,
and then move the PDB at this pixel towards the direction in
a probabilistic manner. Moreover, we also propose to detach
the gradient flow to suppress possible conflicts. Overall, the
behavior of ABL is dynamic because the PDBs are changing
with the updated network parameters during training. It can
be viewed as a variant of classical active contour methods
(Kass et al. 1988), since our method first determines the direction vectors in accordance with the PDBs in the current
iteration and lets the PDBs move along the direction vectors
to reach the GTBs.
Unlike the cross-entropy loss that only supervises pixellevel classification accuracy, ABL supervises the relationship between PDB and GTB pixels. It embeds boundary in-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2397

