The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TransZero: Attribute-Guided Transformer for Zero-Shot Learning
Shiming Chen1 * , Ziming Hong1 * , Yang Liu2 , Guo-Sen Xie3 , Baigui Sun2 ,
†
Hao Li2 , Qinmu Peng1 , Ke Lu4,5 , Xinge You1
1

3

2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

{shimingchen, pengqinmu, youxg}@hust.edu.cn

{hoongzm, gsxiehm}@gmail.com

Abstract

CNN
Backbone

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize novel classes by
transferring semantic knowledge from seen classes to unseen
ones. Semantic knowledge is learned from attribute descriptions shared between different classes, which act as strong
priors for localizing object attributes that represent discriminative region features, enabling significant visual-semantic
interaction. Although some attention-based models have attempted to learn such region features in a single image, the
transferability and discriminative attribute localization of visual features are typically neglected. In this paper, we propose an attribute-guided Transformer network, termed TransZero, to refine visual features and learn attribute localization
for discriminative visual embedding representations in ZSL.
Specifically, TransZero takes a feature augmentation encoder
to alleviate the cross-dataset bias between ImageNet and ZSL
benchmarks, and improves the transferability of visual features by reducing the entangled relative geometry relationships among region features. To learn locality-augmented visual features, TransZero employs a visual-semantic decoder
to localize the image regions most relevant to each attribute in
a given image, under the guidance of semantic attribute information. Then, the locality-augmented visual features and semantic vectors are used to conduct effective visual-semantic
interaction in a visual-semantic embedding network. Extensive experiments show that TransZero achieves the new state
of the art on three ZSL benchmarks. The codes are available
at: https://github.com/shiming-chen/TransZero.

luk@ucas.ac.cn

Attention
Mechanism

Visual-Semantic
Interaction

(a) Existing Attention-based Method
CNN
Backbone

Attribute-Guided
Transformer

Visual-Semantic
Interaction

(b) Our TransZero

Figure 1: Motivation illustration. (a) Existing attentionbased ZSL methods simply learn region embeddings (e.g.,
the whole bird body), neglecting the transferability and discriminative attribute localization (e.g., the distinctive bird
body parts) of visual features; (b) Our TransZero reduces
the entangled relationships among region features to improve their transferability and localizes the object attributes
to represent discriminative region features, enabling significant visual-semantic interaction.

based on the semantic information (e.g., sentence embeddings (Reed et al. 2016), and attribute vectors (Lampert,
Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014)), which are shared between
the seen and unseen classes employed to support the knowledge transfer. According to their classification range, ZSL
methods can be categorized into conventional ZSL (CZSL),
which aims to predict unseen classes, and generalized ZSL
(GZSL), which can predict both seen and unseen classes
(Xian, Schiele, and Akata 2017).
To enable visual-semantic interactions, early ZSL methods attempt to build an embedding between seen classes and
their class semantic vectors, and then classify unseen classes
by nearest neighbor search in the embedding space. Since
the embedding is only learned by seen class samples, these
embedding-based methods usually overfit to seen classes under the GZSL setting (known as the bias problem). To tackle
this problem, many generative ZSL methods have been proposed to generate samples of unseen classes by leveraging
generative models (e.g., variational autoencoders (VAEs)
(Arora et al. 2018; Schönfeld et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2021b),
generative adversarial nets (GANs) (Xian et al. 2018, 2019;
Chen et al. 2021a), and generative flows (Shen, Qin, and
Huang 2020)) for data augmentation. Thus the ZSL task is

Introduction
Inspired by human cognitive competence, zero-shot learning
(ZSL) was proposed to recognize new classes during learning by exploiting the intrinsic semantic relatedness between
seen and unseen classes (Larochelle, Erhan, and Bengio
2008; Palatucci et al. 2009; Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009). In ZSL, there are no training samples available
for unseen classes in the test set, and the label spaces for the
training set and test set are disjoint from each other. Thus,
the key task for ZSL is to learn discriminative visual features for conducting effective visual-semantic interactions
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

330

