The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semi-supervised Learning with Multi-Head Co-Training
Mingcai Chen, Yuntao Du, Yi Zhang, Shuwei Qian, Chongjun Wang*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{chenmc, duyuntao, njuzhangy, QianSW}@smail.nju.edu.cn,
chjwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

2019b,a; McLachlan 1975). Despite its simplicity and alignment to the task of interest (Zoph et al. 2020), self-training
underperforms due to the “confirmation bias” or “error accumulation”. It means that some incorrect predictions could
be selected as pseudo-labels to guide subsequent training,
resulting in a loop of self-reinforcing errors (Zhang et al.
2016).
As an extension of self-training, co-training lets multiple
individual models iteratively learn from each other (Zhou
and Li 2010; Wang and Zhou 2017). In the early multi-view
co-training setting (Blum and Mitchell 1998), there should be
a natural split of features where the “sufficiency and independence” assumptions should hold, i.e., it’s sufficient to make
predictions based on each view, and views are conditionally
independent. Later studies gradually reveal that co-training
can also be successful in the single-view setting (Wang and
Zhou 2017; Dasgupta, Littman, and McAllester 2002; Abney
2002; Balcan, Blum, and Yang 2005; Wang and Zhou 2007).
Despite being feasible, the single-view co-training framework
has received little attention recently. We attribute it to (a) the
extra computational cost, which means at least twice model
parameters of its self-training counterpart, and (b) the loss in
simplicity, i.e., more design choices and hype-parameters are
introduced for keeping individual classifiers uncorrelated.
In this paper, we aim to facilitate the adoption of singleview co-training. Inspired by recent developments of data
augmentation and its applications in SSL (Berthelot et al.
2019b; Sohn et al. 2020; Cubuk et al. 2020; DeVries and Taylor 2017), we find that the enormous size of the augmentation
search space naturally prevents base learners from converging
to a consensus. Employing the stochastic image augmentation
frees us from delicately design different network structures
or training algorithms. Moreover, by replacing multiple individual models with a shared module followed by multiple
classification heads, the model can achieve co-training in
a minimal amount of extra parameters. Combining these,
we propose Multi-Head Co-Training, a new algorithm that
facilitates the usage of single-view co-training. The main
contributions are as follows:
• Multi-Head Co-Training addresses two obstacle factors
of standard single-view co-training, i.e., extra design and
computational cost.
• Experimentally, we show that our method obtains state-ofthe-art results on CIFAR, SVHN, and Mini-ImageNet. Be-

Co-training, extended from self-training, is one of the frameworks for semi-supervised learning. Without natural split of
features, single-view co-training works at the cost of training
extra classifiers, where the algorithm should be delicately designed to prevent individual classifiers from collapsing into
each other. To remove these obstacles which deter the adoption of single-view co-training, we present a simple and efficient algorithm Multi-Head Co-Training. By integrating
base learners into a multi-head structure, the model is in a
minimal amount of extra parameters. Every classification head
in the unified model interacts with its peers through a “Weak
and Strong Augmentation” strategy, in which the diversity is
naturally brought by the strong data augmentation. Therefore,
the proposed method facilitates single-view co-training by 1).
promoting diversity implicitly and 2). only requiring a small
extra computational overhead. The effectiveness of MultiHead Co-Training is demonstrated in an empirical study on
standard semi-supervised learning benchmarks.

Introduction
Benefiting from the rich data sources and growing computing
power in the last decade, the field of machine learning has
been thriving drastically. The advent of public datasets with
a large amount of high-quality labels has further spawned
many successful deep learning methods (Deng et al. 2009;
He et al. 2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). However, there could be various
difficulties for obtaining label information, such as privacy,
labor costs, safety or ethic issues, and requirement of domain
experts (Zhou 2018; Chapelle, Schlkopf, and Zien 2010;
Mahajan et al. 2018). All of these impel us to find a way
of bringing unlabeled data into full play. Semi-Supervised
Learning (SSL) is a branch of machine learning which seeks
to address the problem (Chapelle, Schlkopf, and Zien 2010;
Chapelle, Chi, and Zien 2006; Prakash and Nithya 2014;
Van Engelen and Hoos 2020). It utilizes both labeled and
unlabeled data to improve performance.
As one of the earliest and most popular SSL frameworks,
self-training works by iteratively retraining the model using
pseudo-labels obtained from itself (Lee 2013; Berthelot et al.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6278

