The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Context-Based Contrastive Learning for Scene Text Recognition
Xinyun Zhang1 , Binwu Zhu1 , Xufeng Yao1 , Qi Sun1 , Ruiyu Li2 , Bei Yu1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SmartMore
{xyzhang21,bwzhu,xfyao,qsun,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, royliruiyu@gmail.com

Abstract
Pursuing accurate and robust recognizers has been a longlasting goal for scene text recognition (STR) researchers. Recently, attention-based methods have demonstrated their effectiveness and achieved impressive results on public benchmarks. The attention mechanism enables models to recognize
scene text with severe visual distortions by leveraging contextual information. However, recent studies revealed that the
implicit over-reliance of context leads to catastrophic out-ofvocabulary performance. On the contrary to the superior accuracy of the seen text, models are prone to misrecognize unseen
text even with good image quality. We propose a novel framework, Context-based contrastive learning (ConCLR), to alleviate this issue. Our proposed method first generates characters
with different contexts via simple image concatenation operations and then optimizes contrastive loss on their embeddings.
By pulling together clusters of identical characters within various contexts and pushing apart clusters of different characters in embedding space, ConCLR suppresses the side-effect
of overfitting to specific contexts and learns a more robust
representation. Experiments show that ConCLR significantly
improves out-of-vocabulary generalization and achieves stateof-the-art performance on public benchmarks together with
attention-based recognizers.

SIMON

FDDB

Figure 1: Text recognition samples for in- and out-ofvocabulary text. For images containing in-vocabulary text
(left), even confronted with occlusion, models can still predict correctly by inferring from the context, while models are
more prone to make wrong predictions for images containing
out-of-vocabulary text (right), even though the text is clear
and free of distortions.

Introduction
Reading text in the wild has been one of the most studied
topics in the computer vision community. In this deep learning era (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Ren et al. 2015;
Bai and Wang 2019; Ge et al. 2021), the rich information in
scene text images plays a vital role in a series of artificial
intelligence applications, such as Visual Question Answering (Biten et al. 2019), Autonomous Driving (Yu et al. 2021)
and Image Retrieval (Gomez et al. 2018). Previous methods
(Jaderberg et al. 2016; Wang, Babenko, and Belongie 2011)
attempted to solve this problem from a symbol classification
perspective. However, significant variations and even distortions in scene text images, such as blur and occlusion, hinder
satisfactory performance. To bridge this gap, many attentionbased methods (Fang et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2020; Yue et al.
2020; Li et al. 2019; Lyu et al. 2019; Qiao et al. 2020)
have emerged and made remarkable progress in public benchmarks (Karatzas et al. 2015; Mishra, Alahari, and Jawahar
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3353

2012; Wang, Babenko, and Belongie 2011; Phan et al. 2013;
Risnumawan et al. 2014; Karatzas et al. 2013). By leveraging the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015; Vaswani et al. 2017), models can attend to neighboring characters instead of looking at each one, leading to significant improvement in understanding irregular and hard-torecognize text (Karatzas et al. 2015; Phan et al. 2013; Risnumawan et al. 2014).
The key to the success of attention-based methods is to encode context information into character embeddings, whether
in an auto-encoding or auto-regressive way. This feature allows models to reason target characters not only from the
pixels at the corresponding position but also from the linguistic information coming from surrounding symbols. As
shown in Figure 1 (left), even with severe occlusion that
makes text non-identifiable, models can still infer the missing character based on the other ones. However, recent work
(Wan et al. 2020) has revealed one crucial issue: Attentionbased methods are more prone to vocabulary reliance. For
images containing text seen in the training stage, state-of-theart attention-based recognizers achieve promising accuracy
while their performance drops drastically when predicting
images with out-of-vocabulary text, even though they are relatively visually high-quality and free of distortions, as shown
in Figure 1 (right). We conjecture that the leading cause is the
over-reliance on context information. During training, the implicit context encoding dominates the discrimination process.
Therefore, models overfit specific contexts instead of learning the discriminative features of each character. This problem significantly harms the robustness and generalization of

