The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Non-local Contrastive Attention for Image Super-resolution
Bin Xia1 * , Yucheng Hang1 * , Yapeng Tian2 , Wenming Yang1† , Qingmin Liao1 , Jie Zhou3
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School / Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
University of Rochester
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
xiab20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hangyc20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yapengtian@rochester.edu,
yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, liaoqm@tsinghua.edu.cn, jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Non-Local Attention (NLA) brings significant improvement
for Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) by leveraging
intrinsic feature correlation in natural images. However,
NLA gives noisy information large weights and consumes
quadratic computation resources with respect to the input
size, limiting its performance and application. In this paper, we propose a novel Efficient Non-Local Contrastive
Attention (ENLCA) to perform long-range visual modeling
and leverage more relevant non-local features. Specifically,
ENLCA consists of two parts, Efficient Non-Local Attention (ENLA) and Sparse Aggregation. ENLA adopts the kernel method to approximate exponential function and obtains
linear computation complexity. For Sparse Aggregation, we
multiply inputs by an amplification factor to focus on informative features, yet the variance of approximation increases
exponentially. Therefore, contrastive learning is applied to
further separate relevant and irrelevant features. To demonstrate the effectiveness of ENLCA, we build an architecture
called Efficient Non-Local Contrastive Network (ENLCN) by
adding a few of our modules in a simple backbone. Extensive
experimental results show that ENLCN reaches superior performance over state-of-the-art approaches on both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

(a) Input image

(b) Non-Local

(c) NLSA

(d) ENLCA

Figure 1: The visualization of correlation maps obtained by
softmax and inner product between the marked red feature
and all features. We can see that Non-Local attention pays
attention to irrelevant features, and NLSA (Mei, Fan, and
Zhou 2021) ignores the related features, while our ENLCA
can simultaneously leverage relevant features and suppress
irrelevant contents for SR.

itself. Besides, Huang, Singh, and Ahuja (2015a) expands
the internal similar patch search space by allowing geometric variations.
Since SRCNN (Dong et al. 2015) firstly adopted deep
learning in SISR, deep learning based methods have
achieved a significant performance boost compared with traditional methods. The key to the success of deep learning
is learnable feature representation. Therefore, certain works
increase the depth and width of the network to further expand the receptive field and enhance representation ability.
However, the solutions merely utilize relevant local information. Afterward, networks equip non-local modules, formulated as Eq 1, to exploit the image self-similarity prior
globally and boost performance. Nevertheless, as shown in
Figure 1 (b), the non-local module fuses excessive irrelevant features, which imports noise and limits the non-local
module performance. In addition, the non-local module requires to compute feature mutual-similarity among all the
pixel locations, which leads to quadratic computational cost
to the input size. Limiting the non-local matching range can
alleviate the issue at the expense of the loss of much global
information. To address the problems, NLSA (Mei, Fan, and
Zhou 2021) adopted Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) to
aggregate the possible relevant features rapidly. However, as
shown in Figure 1 (c), NLSA fixes the maximum number of
hash buckets and chunk sizes to keep linear complexity with
the input size, which results in ignoring important global related information.

Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) has essential applications in certain areas, such as surveillance monitoring
and medical detection. The goal of SISR is to generate a
high-resolution (HR) image with realistic textures from its
low-resolution (LR) counterpart. However, SISR is an illposed inverse problem, which is challenging to produce
high-quality HR details. Thus, numerous image priors (Sun,
Xu, and Shum 2008; Dai et al. 2007; Chang, Yeung, and
Xiong 2004; Glasner, Bagon, and Irani 2009) are introduced
to limit the solution space of SR, including local and nonlocal prior.
Among traditional methods, non-local priors (Glasner,
Bagon, and Irani 2009; Zontak and Irani 2011) have been
widely used. NCSR (Dong et al. 2012) reconstructs SR pixels by the weighted sum of similar patches in the LR image
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2759

