The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FedInv: Byzantine-Robust Federated Learning by Inversing Local Model Updates
Bo Zhao,1 Peng Sun,2,3, * Tao Wang,1 Keyu Jiang1
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society (AIRS), China
bozhao@nuaa.edu.cn, sunpeng@cuhk.edu.cn, {wangtao1, jiangky}@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract

clients’ local training data and the uninspectable local training processes. Effective Byzantine-robust FL schemes (i.e.,
defense mechanisms) are highly desired to achieve satisfactory model performance via FL model training.
Thus far, researchers have proposed many Byzantinerobust FL schemes, which can be roughly grouped into two
categories. The first kind of scheme (e.g., (Blanchard et al.
2017; Yin et al. 2018; Mhamdi, Guerraoui, and Rouault
2018)) identifies and excludes poisoned local model updates
under the assumption that they are geometrically far away
from benign ones. The second kind of scheme (e.g., (Xie,
Koyejo, and Gupta 2019, 2020)) assumes the server maintains a public clean validation dataset. The server uses this
dataset to evaluate local model updates in terms of test accuracy or loss. Those with poor performance are determined
as poisoned local models and then are excluded from local
model aggregation. Very recently, some works (e.g., (Cao
et al. 2020; Prakash and Avestimehr 2020)) combine the
above two and propose hybrid robust FL schemes.
However, most of the existing Byzantine-robust FL
schemes have the following limitations:

Federated learning (FL) is a privacy-preserving distributed
machine learning paradigm that enables multiple clients to
collaboratively train statistical models without disclosing raw
training data. However, the inaccessible local training data
and uninspectable local training process make FL susceptible to various Byzantine attacks (e.g., data poisoning and
model poisoning attacks), aiming to manipulate the FL model
training process and degrade the model performance. Most
of the existing Byzantine-robust FL schemes cannot effectively defend against stealthy poisoning attacks that craft poisoned models statistically similar to benign models. Things
worsen when many clients are compromised or data among
clients are highly non-independent and identically distributed
(non-IID). In this work, to address these issues, we propose
FedInv, a novel Byzantine-robust FL framework by inversing local model updates. Specifically, in each round of local
model aggregation in FedInv, the parameter server first inverses the local model updates submitted by each client to
generate a corresponding dummy dataset. Then, the server
identifies those dummy datasets with exceptional Wasserstein
distances from others and excludes the related local model
updates from model aggregation. We conduct an exhaustive
experimental evaluation of FedInv. The results demonstrate
that FedInv significantly outperforms the existing robust FL
schemes in defending against stealthy poisoning attacks under highly non-IID data partitions.

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz
et al. 2019) is a distributed machine learning framework
that enables multiple clients to collaboratively train statistical models without raw data exchange under the orchestration of a parameter server. Thus, FL can significantly alleviate clients’ privacy concerns compared to the conventional centralized machine learning paradigm. However, FL
is susceptible to Byzantine attacks (e.g., data/model poisoning attacks) (e.g., (Jagielski et al. 2018; Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012; Chen et al. 2017; Fang et al. 2018;
Shafahi et al. 2018; Li et al. 2016; Fang et al. 2020; Shejwalkar and Houmansadr 2021)) due to the inaccessibility of

• First, as demonstrated in (Fang et al. 2020; Shejwalkar
and Houmansadr 2021), several advanced poisoning attacks could craft poisoned local models that are geometrically close to benign ones. Thus, the first kind of
scheme’s assumption (also the precondition) is violated,
leading to its ineffectiveness.
• Second, centralizing a public validation dataset and using it to evaluate local model updates in the second kind
of scheme cannot defend against advanced poisoning attacks with dual optimization objectives, such as backdoor
attacks (Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017; Bagdasaryan
et al. 2020). Moreover, the centralization of a public validation dataset disobeys the principle of FL to some degree and may not be realized in some real-world cases.
• Third, all of these defense mechanisms suffer from significant performance degradation when a relatively large
proportion of clients are compromised, or data among
clients is highly non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID).

* Peng Sun is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To tackle the issues mentioned above, in this work, we
propose FedInv, a novel Byzantine-robust FL scheme by inversing local model updates. FedInv could effectively de-

Introduction

9171

