The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Control-Oriented Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
with Implicit Differentiation
Evgenii Nikishin,1 Romina Abachi,2 Rishabh Agarwal,1 3 Pierre-Luc Bacon1 4
1

Mila, Université de Montréal, 2 Vector Institute, University of Toronto
3
Google Research, Brain Team, 4 Facebook CIFAR AI Chair
evgenii.nikishin@mila.quebec

Abstract

et al. 2018), we propose an algorithm for learning a model
that directly optimizes the expected return using implicit
differentiation (Christianson 1994). Specifically, we assume
that there exists an implicit function that takes the model as
input and outputs a value function that is a fixed point of the
Bellman optimality operator induced by the model. We then
calculate the derivatives of the optimal value function with
respect to the model parameters using the implicit function
theorem (IFT), allowing us to form a differentiable computational graph from model parameters to the sum of rewards.
In reference to (Rust 1988; Bacon et al. 2019), we call our
control-oriented method optimal model design (OMD).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose OMD, an end-to-end MBRL method that optimizes expected returns directly.
• We characterize the set of OMD models in the tabular
case and derive an approximation bound on the optimal
Q-function that is tighter than a likelihood-based one.
• We propose a series of approximations to scale our approach to non-tabular environments.
• We show that OMD outperforms likelihood-based
MBRL agents under the model misspecification in both
tabular and non-tabular settings. This finding suggests
that our method should be preferred when we cannot approximate the true model accurately.
• We empirically demonstrate that models obtained by
OMD can have lower likelihood than a random model
yet generate useful targets for updating the value function. This finding suggests that likelihood optimization
might be an unnecessary step for MBRL.

The shortcomings of maximum likelihood estimation in the
context of model-based reinforcement learning have been
highlighted by an increasing number of papers. When the
model class is misspecified or has a limited representational
capacity, model parameters with high likelihood might not
necessarily result in high performance of the agent on a downstream control task. To alleviate this problem, we propose an
end-to-end approach for model learning which directly optimizes the expected returns using implicit differentiation. We
treat a value function that satisfies the Bellman optimality operator induced by the model as an implicit function of model
parameters and show how to differentiate the function. We
provide theoretical and empirical evidence highlighting the
benefits of our approach in the model misspecification regime
compared to likelihood-based methods.

1

Introduction

The conceptual separation between model learning and policy optimization is the basis for much of the work on modelbased reinforcement learning (MBRL) (Sutton 1991; Boots,
Siddiqi, and Gordon 2011). A standard MBRL agent first
estimates the transition parameters and the reward function
of a Markov Decision Process and then uses the approximate model for planning (Theil 1957; Sato, Abe, and Takeda
1988). If the estimated model perfectly captures the actual
system, the resulting policies are not affected by the model
approximation error. However, if the model is imperfect, the
inaccuracies can lead to nuanced effects on the policy performance (Abbad and Filar 1992). Several works (Skelton
1989; Joseph et al. 2013; Lambert et al. 2020) have pointed
out on the objective mismatch in MBRL and demonstrated
that optimization of model likelihood might be unrelated to
optimization of the returns achieved by the agent that uses
the model. For example, accurately predicting individual
pixels of the next state (Kaiser et al. 2019) might be neither easy nor necessary for decision making. Motivated by
these observations, our paper studies control-oriented model
learning that takes into account how the model is used by the
agent.
While much of such work has focused on robust or
uncertainty-based methods (Xu and Mannor 2010; Chua

2

Related Work

Learning control-oriented models. Earlier work in optimal
control and econometrics (Skelton 1989; Rust 1988) studied
the relation between the model approximation error and the
control performance and noted that true parameter identification could be suboptimal when the model class is limited.
Joseph et al. (2013) were one of the first to address the objective mismatch (Lambert et al. 2020) and proposed an algorithm for training models that maximize the expected returns
using zero-order optimization.
Several papers have proposed model learning approaches
that optimize other return-aware objectives. Farahmand,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7886

