The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

I Can Find You! Boundary-Guided Separated Attention Network for Camouflaged
Object Detection
Hongwei Zhu1,2 * , Peng Li1,2 * , Haoran Xie3 , Xuefeng Yan1,2 , Dong Liang1,2 , Dapeng Chen4 ,
Mingqiang Wei1,2† , Jing Qin5
2

1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China
3
Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
AI Application Research Center, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
5
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract

salient objects do. Those SOD techniques or even the elaborate hand-crafted COD features are not sensitive enough to
capture subtle differences between any camouflaged object
and its background, leading to poor COD results.
Recently, many promising COD methods based on deep
learning have been proposed. For example, inspired by the
hunting process of a hunter, SINet (Fan et al. 2020a) pioneers to collect a large-scale COD dataset called COD10K,
and utilizes a search module and an identification module
to locate and identify camouflaged objects. MirrorNet (Yan
et al. 2021) assumes that changing the perspective of the
same scene can enhance the difference between an object
and its background. Rank-Net (Lv et al. 2021) proposes a
model to locate, segment and rank camouflaged objects simultaneously, in which the rank module can rank the capability of COD. However, these efforts seldom consider to
simulate how humans to detect camouflaged objects, which
cannot well vanquish the camouflaged objects with their ambiguous boundaries to the backgrounds.
You may recall how to detect potential camouflaged objects in an image: you first search throughout the image to
find the possible region that contains the camouflaged object, then you focus on both the foreground and background
in order to find the inconspicuous difference between them.
When you gradually discover the difference between them,
the boundary of the camouflaged object is highlighted. Finally, you utilize the boundary as an enhancement guidance
to improve the COD capability. Inspired by this observation,
we propose an effective boundary-guided separated attention network for the COD task (termed as BSA-Net).
Beyond the existing COD wisdom, BSA-Net is a coarseto-fine learning model, which exploits three main modules
to help improve the COD results: the Residual Multi-scale
Feature Extractor (RMFE) to capture rich context information, the Separated Attention (SEA) module to handle the
sensitivity-invariance dilemma, and the Boundary Guider
(BG) to accurately highlight the boundary of a camouflaged
object. Specifically, SEA contains two streams: the normal
attention stream and the reverse attention stream focus on
the foreground and background of the input image respectively, and then integrate the two streams for collaboration.
Since the boundary of any camouflaged object (i.e., the separator of foreground and background of an image) is difficult

Can you find me? By simulating how humans to discover
the so-called ‘perfectly’-camouflaged object, we present a
novel boundary-guided separated attention network (call
BSA-Net). Beyond the existing camouflaged object detection
(COD) wisdom, BSA-Net utilizes two-stream separated attention modules to highlight the separator (or say the camouflaged object’s boundary) between an image’s background
and foreground: the reverse attention stream helps erase the
camouflaged object’s interior to focus on the background,
while the normal attention stream recovers the interior and
thus pay more attention to the foreground; and both streams
are followed by a boundary guider module and combined to
strengthen the understanding of the boundary. The core design of such separated attention is motivated by the COD procedure of humans: find the subtle difference between the foreground and background to delineate the boundary of a camouflaged object, then the boundary can help further enhance
the COD accuracy. We validate on three benchmark datasets
that our BSA-Net is very beneficial to detect camouflaged objects with the blurred boundaries and similar colors/patterns
with their backgrounds. Extensive results exhibit very clear
COD improvements on our BSA-Net over sixteen SOTAs.

Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD) from single images
aims to find an object that has colors or patterns very similar
to but with intrinsic different attributes from its background.
A successful effort of COD will facilitate many practically
meaningful applications of polyp segmentation (Fan et al.
2020b), lung infection segmentation (Wu et al. 2021), recreational art (Chu et al. 2010), and even the rescue mission in
extreme weather and anti-military camouflage.
Traditionally, one may adapt salient object detection
(SOD) techniques (Zhao et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2019; Wei
et al. 2020; Wu, Su, and Huang 2019b; Feng, Lu, and Ding
2019) to the task of COD; or one may develop various handcrafted features to deal with COD. Unfortunately, the camouflaged objects often conceal themselves in the background
as much as possible instead of highlighting themselves as
* Joint first authors
†

Corresponding author: mingqiang.wei@gmail.com
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3608

