The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Generalized Bootstrap Target for Value-Learning,
Efficiently Combining Value and Feature Predictions
Anthony GX-Chen 1,2 , Veronica Chelu 1,2 , Blake A. Richards 1,2,3 , Joelle Pineau 1,2,3,4
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute
2
McGill University
3
Canada AI Chair program, CIFAR, Learning in Machines & Brains
4
Meta AI Research
anthony.gx.chen@gmail.com
construct the learning target—the return—for the current
timestep. However, the value estimate in the backup target does not need to come from the current value function
being learned. For instance, value can be estimated using
successor features—the (discounted) cumulative features—
linearly combined with an estimate of instantaneous rewards
(Barreto et al. 2017). This approach can make use of the
same TD methods (Sutton 1988) to estimate the successor
features as the former does when learning the value function,
requiring similar amounts of sampled experience. Moreover,
the backup target and the value function can be completely
distinct (e.g. if the successor features and learned value function are dis-jointly parameterized); they can share feature
representations (e.g. when the value function and the successor features are both linear functions of the features); or
partially share representations (e.g. through Polyak averaging). Since the value function is regressed toward the target,
the method of computing the target influences the quality of
the value function.
In this paper, we aim to improve credit assignment and
data efficiency for value-based methods, by proposing a
new method of constructing a learning target, which borrows properties from all aforementioned approaches of target construction. This η-return mixture uses a parameter η
to combine an ηγ-discounted successor features model (ηγSF) with the current value function estimate to parameterize the learning target used during bootstrapping—with the
η parameter controlling the combination of value-predictive
and feature-predictive knowledge. We observe an intermediate value of η incorporates the benefits of both approaches in
a complementary way, using sampled experience more efficiently.
Contributions In this paper we make three contributions:
(i) We introduce the η-return mixture, a simple yet novel
way of constructing a backup target for value learning, using
an ηγ-discounted SF model to interpolate between a direct
value estimate and the fully factorized estimate relying on
SF and instantaneous rewards. (ii) We describe a new learning algorithm using the η-return mixture as the bootstrap target for value estimation. (iii) We provide empirical results
showing more efficient use of experience with the η-return
mixture as the backup target, in both prediction and control,
for tabular and nonlinear approximation, when compared to
baselines.

Abstract
Estimating value functions is a core component of reinforcement learning algorithms. Temporal difference (TD) learning
algorithms use bootstrapping, i.e. they update the value function toward a learning target using value estimates at subsequent time-steps. Alternatively, the value function can be updated toward a learning target constructed by separately predicting successor features (SF)—a policy-dependent model—
and linearly combining them with instantaneous rewards. We
focus on bootstrapping targets used when estimating value
functions, and propose a new backup target, the η-return mixture, which implicitly combines value-predictive knowledge
(used by TD methods) with (successor) feature-predictive
knowledge—with a parameter η capturing how much to rely
on each. We illustrate that incorporating predictive knowledge through an ηγ-discounted SF model makes more efficient use of sampled experience, compared to either extreme,
i.e. bootstrapping entirely on the value function estimate, or
bootstrapping on the product of separately estimated successor features and instantaneous reward models. We empirically
show this approach leads to faster policy evaluation and better control performance, for tabular and nonlinear function
approximations, indicating scalability and generality.

1

Introduction

The fundamental goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to
maximize return, i.e. (temporally discounted) cumulative reward. Value functions provide an estimate of the expected
return from a specific state (and action), and as such, they are
a fundamental component of RL algorithms. Modern deep
RL methods require numerous environment interactions to
solve complex tasks, which can be expensive or impossible
to obtain, particularly for tasks resembling the real-world.
This makes it essential to develop data-efficient methods for
learning accurate value functions.
The problem we address in this work is that of credit
assignment, namely how to associate (distant) rewards to
the states and actions that caused them. Value-based RL
methods tackle this problem through temporal difference
(TD) learning algorithms (Sutton 1988). TD algorithms rely
on bootstrapping: using the value estimate at a subsequent
timestep, together with the observed data (e.g. rewards), to
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6829

