The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Sacle Dynamic Coding Improved Spiking Actor Network
for Reinforcement Learning
Duzhen Zhang1,2 * , Tielin Zhang1,2 * † , Shuncheng Jia1,2 , Bo Xu1,2,3†
1

Research Center for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
{xubo, tielin.zhang, zhangduzhen2019}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

2015; Vinyals et al. 2019; Ruan et al. 2022), and robotic
control (Duan et al. 2016; Lillicrap et al. 2016), etc.
However, the powerful DRL is still far from efficient
reward-based learning in the biological brain, where spiking neurons with more complex dynamics and learning
paradigms with biologically plausible plasticity principles
are integrated to generate complex cognitive functions. The
biological brain makes efficient computation possible by cell
assembly (Harris et al. 2003) which focuses more on spatialtemporal coding for memory than readout for decisionmaking. Compared to DNNs, SNNs have more significant
potential in simulating brain-inspired topology and functions due to their complex dynamics. For instance, SNNs can
be seamlessly compatible with multiscale dynamic coding,
including network and neuron scales, towards a powerful
temporal information representation. The SNNs inherently
transmit and compute information with dynamic spikes distributed over time (Maass 1997). Further research on them
might help us open the black box of efficient information
coding of the brain (Painkras et al. 2013). Hence, we think
RL using SNNs may be better than using DNNs.
To this end, we propose a multiscale dynamic coding
improved spiking actor network (MDC-SAN) to simulate
the cell assembly in the biological brain, which contains a
complex spiking coding module for state representation but
a simple readout module for action inference. The coding
module combines population coding and dynamic neurons
(DNs) coding, making it more potent on state representation
at both network and neuron scales. Specifically, for a given
input state, we encode each dimension in individual neuron
populations with learnable receptive fields. Then the coded
analog information is directly delivered to the network as input. Inside the network, we propose novel DNs to improve
SNNs for a better information representation during spatialtemporal learning. The DNs contain 2nd-order dynamics of
membrane potentials supported by key dynamic parameters.
These parameters are self-learned from one of OpenAI gym
(Brockman et al. 2016) tasks (e.g., Ant-v3) first, and then extend to other similar tasks (e.g., HalfCheetah-v3, Walker2dv3, and Hopper-v3). After dynamic coding, we average the
accumulated spikes in a predefined time window to obtain
the average firing rate, further used to infer the output action
by a simple readout module.
For effective learning, the proposed MDC-SAN is trained

With the help of deep neural networks (DNNs), deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved great success on
many complex tasks, from games to robotic control. Compared to DNNs with partial brain-inspired structures and
functions, spiking neural networks (SNNs) consider more biological features, including spiking neurons with complex
dynamics and learning paradigms with biologically plausible plasticity principles. Inspired by the efficient computation
of cell assembly in the biological brain, whereby memorybased coding is much more complex than readout, we propose a multiscale dynamic coding improved spiking actor
network (MDC-SAN) for reinforcement learning to achieve
effective decision-making. The population coding at the network scale is integrated with the dynamic neurons coding
(containing 2nd-order neuronal dynamics) at the neuron scale
towards a powerful spatial-temporal state representation. Extensive experimental results show that our MDC-SAN performs better than its counterpart deep actor network (based on
DNNs) on four continuous control tasks from OpenAI gym.
We think this is a significant attempt to improve SNNs from
the perspective of efficient coding towards effective decisionmaking, just like that in biological networks.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is staying at an increasingly
important position in the research area of machine learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore 1996), where agents interact with the environment in a trial-and-error manner and
learn an optimal policy by maximizing accumulated rewards
to reach excellent decision-making performance (Sutton and
Barto 2018). However, it is a general but challenging problem for all conventional RL algorithms to extract features
from complex state space efficiently. With deep neural networks (DNNs) as powerful function approximators, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has resolved this problem to
some extent by directly learning a mapping from raw state
space to action space and has been well applied on various
applications, including recommendation systems (Zou et al.
2019; Warlop, Lazaric, and Mary 2018), games (Mnih et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

59

