The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Text Is No More Enough!
A Benchmark for Profile-Based Spoken Language Understanding
Xiao Xu1 * , Libo Qin1 * , Kaiji Chen2 , Guoxing Wu2 , Linlin Li2 , Wanxiang Che1†
1

Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
{xxu, lbqin, car}@ir.hit.edu.cn, {chenkaiji, wuguoxing1, lynn.lilinlin}@huawei.com

Abstract

KG

Current researches on spoken language understanding (SLU)
heavily are limited to a simple setting: the plain text-based
SLU that takes the user utterance as input and generates its
corresponding semantic frames (e.g., intent and slots). Unfortunately, such a simple setting may fail to work in complex real-world scenarios when an utterance is semantically
ambiguous, which cannot be achieved by the text-based SLU
models. In this paper, we first introduce a new and important task, Profile-based Spoken Language Understanding
(P RO SLU), which requires the model that not only relies
on the plain text but also the supporting profile information
to predict the correct intents and slots. To this end, we further introduce a large-scale human-annotated Chinese dataset
with over 5K utterances and their corresponding supporting
profile information (Knowledge Graph (KG), User Profile
(UP), Context Awareness (CA)). In addition, we evaluate several state-of-the-art baseline models and explore a multi-level
knowledge adapter to effectively incorporate profile information. Experimental results reveal that all existing text-based
SLU models fail to work when the utterances are semantically
ambiguous and our proposed framework can effectively fuse
the supporting information for sentence-level intent detection
and token-level slot filling. Finally, we summarize key challenges and provide new points for future directions, which
hopes to facilitate the research.

Input

Monkey King

Video

＞

UP

Music Audiobook

＞

Video Audiobook

Running

Home

CA

……

……

Music

……

(a) Supporting Profile Information
Utterance

Play

Monkey

King

(b) Input Utterance
Output

Intent
Slot

PlayMusic
O

B-PM.songName
(c) Semantic Frame

I-PM.songName

Figure 1: An example in P RO SLU. Semantic frame denotes
the intent and slots of the input utterance. The “>” implies
that the probability of the former is greater than the latter.

and intent detection on the ATIS dataset (Hemphill, Godfrey, and Doddington 1990). Though achieving good performance, the current researches on SLU mainly focus on a
simple scenario: the plain text-based setting.
More specifically, traditional SLU systems are based on
the assumption that simply relying on plain text can capture intent and slots correctly. Unfortunately, such an assumption may not be achieved in real-world scenarios when
the user utterance is semantically ambiguous. For example,
as shown in Figure 1(b)&(c), when a user asks the agent
(e.g., Apple Siri) for the query “Play Monkey King”, simply relying on the text is not enough for extracting correct
semantic frame results, since “Monkey King” could indicate a “rock song” or an “eponymous Chinese TV
cartoon”. Therefore, we argue that the existing text-based
SLU is not enough for the complex setting in real-world scenarios when the utterance is semantically ambiguous. In this
paper, we assume that the profile information of the user can
help to solve the issue where the corresponding profile information can be used as supplementary knowledge to alleviate
the ambiguity of utterance. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), if
a user is running and prefers music to video, Monkey King
is more likely to be music than video. Unfortunately, none
of the work considers the profile-based SLU in real-world
scenarios. One of the key reasons for hindering the progress
is the lacking of public benchmarks.

Introduction
Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) (Young et al. 2013;
Qin et al. 2021d) is a core component in task-oriented
dialogue systems, aiming to extract intent and semantic
constituents from the natural language utterances (Tur and
De Mori 2011). It consists of two typical subtasks: intent
detection and slot filling to map the user input utterance into
an overall intent and a slot label sequence.
With the help of pre-trained models, recent work has
achieved remarkable success on the SLU system. Qin et al.
(2021d) surveys that performance improvement on traditional SLU is relatively already saturated because the neural
joint model has achieved over 96% and 99% on slot filling
* Equal Contribution.
†

Email Corresponding.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11575

