The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The FF Heuristic for Lifted Classical Planning
Augusto B. Corrêa1 , Florian Pommerening1 , Malte Helmert1 , Guillem Francès2
1

University of Basel, Switzerland
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain
{augusto.blaascorrea,florian.pommerening,malte.helmert}@unibas.ch
guillem.frances@upf.edu
2

Abstract

task, where any fact that is made true by an action remains
true forever. This estimate is usually well informed and thus
gives good guidance for heuristic search planners.
We show how to compute hFF on lifted representations,
making it unnecessary to ground the task. Our work is based
on using Datalog programs to compute delete-relaxation
heuristics (Corrêa et al. 2021). We introduce the notion of
an annotated Datalog program, where atoms and rules are
associated with instructions. After evaluating a query, we
execute the instructions of all atoms and rules used to derive this query. This allows us to collect a relaxed plan and
compute hFF . Furthermore, we show how to transform annotated Datalog programs in order to make them cheaper
to evaluate. Our transformations can simulate the optimizations introduced by Corrêa et al. (2021) and have the advantage of being independent of previous transformations. In
our experiments, we show that a planner using the lifted hFF
heuristic achieves state-of-the-art performance among lifted
planners and is competitive with Fast Downward (Helmert
2006) using a ground implementation of the heuristic.

Heuristics for lifted planning are not yet as informed as the
best heuristics for ground planning. Recent work introduced
the idea of using Datalog programs to compute the additive
heuristic over lifted tasks. Based on this work, we show how
to compute the more informed FF heuristic in a lifted manner. We extend the Datalog program with executable annotations that can also be used to define other delete-relaxation
heuristics. In our experiments, we show that a planner using
the lifted FF implementation produces state-of-the-art results
for lifted planners. It also reduces the gap to state-of-the-art
ground planners in domains where grounding is feasible.

Introduction
Planning is one of the oldest subfields of Artificial Intelligence. A planning task defines the current state of the world
and a set of actions. Applying an action changes the state of
the world. The objective of planning is to find a sequence of
actions leading to a state that satisfies a goal condition.
Planning tasks are usually described in a lifted representation (McDermott 2000). While it was common to work directly on lifted representations (e.g., McDermott 1996, Reiter 2001), research in the last two decades mostly focused
on ground planning where the task is grounded to a propositional description that is then used to solve this task. Heuristic search (Bonet and Geffner 2001), in particular, has been
very successful for ground planning. The main idea here is
to search for a solution in the space of all applicable action
sequences. Using a heuristic, the planner focuses the search
on promising sequences and thus speeds up the process.
Grounding a task sometimes has high costs, even if the
final propositional representation is not that large. For this
reason lifted planners – those that work directly on the lifted
representation – are seeing renewed interest (Corrêa et al.
2020; Lauer et al. 2021; Horčı́k and Fišer 2021). To benefit
from the advances in ground planning, in particular in the
area of heuristic search, we need strong heuristics that can
be computed for lifted representations.
The FF heuristic hFF (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001) is part
of state-of-the-art ground planners even 20 years after its invention. It is based on the delete-relaxation of a planning

Background
In this paper, planning languages and Datalog programs assume a function-free logical vocabulary over an infinite set
of variables V, a finite set of constants C, and a finite number
of predicate symbols P. A term t is either a variable or a constant. Each predicate symbol has a non-negative arity (in particular, this may be zero). Given an n-ary predicate P ∈ P
and a tuple of terms t = ht1 , . . . , tn i, we call P (t) an atom.
If t contains a variable, then P (t) is a lifted atom, otherwise
it is a ground atom. We define Atoms as the set of all possible atoms. Grounding an atom P (t) replaces all variables in
t by constants according to a substitution σ : V → C.

Classical Planning
With predicate symbols P and constants C, a lifted planning task is a tuple Π = hP, C, A, s0 , goal i. The finite set
A represents the action schemas. An action schema A ∈ A
consists of a cost c(A) ∈ R+
0 , and of three sets of atoms: the
precondition pre(A), the add list add(A), and the delete list
del(A). The parameters of A are the set of variables occurring in any atom of pre(A) ∪ add(A) ∪ del(A) in some fixed
order. An action schema A with no parameters is a ground
action (sometimes called just action). If action schema A

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9716

