The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Max-Min Grouped Bandits
Zhenlin Wang,1 Jonathan Scarlett1,2
1

2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Department of Mathematics & Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
wang zhenlin@u.nus.edu, scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

• In a resource allocation setting, suppose that we would
like to choose the best group of computing machines
(or other resources), but we require robustness because
the slowest machine will be bottleneck when it comes to
running jobs. Then, we would like to find the group whose
worst-case machine is the best.

In this paper, we introduce a multi-armed bandit problem
termed max-min grouped bandits, in which the arms are
arranged in possibly-overlapping groups, and the goal is
to find the group whose worst arm has the highest mean
reward. This problem is of interest in applications such as
recommendation systems and resource allocation, and is also
closely related to widely-studied robust optimization problems.
We present two algorithms based successive elimination and
robust optimization, and derive upper bounds on the number
of samples to guarantee finding a max-min optimal or nearoptimal group, as well as an algorithm-independent lower
bound. We discuss the degree of tightness of our bounds
in various cases of interest, and the difficulties in deriving
uniformly tight bounds.

1

More generally, this problem captures the notion of a group
only being as strong as its weakest link, and is closely
related to widely-studied robust optimization problems (e.g.,
(Bertsimas, Nohadani, and Teo 2010)).
Before describing our main contributions, we provide a
more detailed overview of the most related existing works.

1.1

Related Work

The related work on multi-armed bandits and best-arm
identification is extensive; we only provide a brief outline
here with an emphasis on the most closely related works.
The standard best-arm identification problem was studied
in (Audibert, Bubeck, and Munos 2010; Gabillon et al. 2012;
Jamieson and Nowak 2014; Kaufmann, Cappé, and Garivier
2016; Garivier and Kaufmann 2016), among others. These
works are commonly distinguished according to whether the
time horizon is fixed (fixed-budget setting) or the target error
probability is fixed (fixed-confidence setting), and the latter
is more relevant to our work. In particular, we will utilize
anytime confidence bounds from (Jamieson and Nowak 2014)
in our upper bounds, as well as a fundamental change-ofmeasure technique from (Kaufmann, Cappé, and Garivier
2016) in our lower bounds.
A notable grouped best-arm identification problem was
studied in (Gabillon et al. 2011; Bubeck, Wang, and
Viswanathan 2013), where the arms are partitioned into
disjoint groups, and the goal is to find the best arm
in each group. A generalization of this problem to the
case of overlapping groups was provided in (Scarlett,
Bogunovic, and Cevher 2019). Another notable setting in
which multiple arms are returned is that of subset selection,
where one seeks to find a subset of k arms attaining
the highest mean rewards (Kalyanakrishnan et al. 2012;
Kaufmann and Kalyanakrishnan 2013; Kaufmann, Cappé,
and Garivier 2016). In our understanding, all of these works
are substantially different from the max-min grouped bandit
problem that we consider.

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithms are widely adopted in
scenarios of decision-making under uncertainty (Lattimore
and Szepesvári 2020). In theoretical MAB studies,
two particularly common performance goals are regret
minimization and best-arm identification, and this paper is
more closely related to the latter.
The most basic form of best-arm identification seeks to
identify the arm with the highest mean (e.g., see (Kaufmann,
Cappé, and Garivier 2016)). Other variations are instead
based on returning multiple arms, such as the k believed
to have the highest k means (Kalyanakrishnan et al. 2012),
or the individual highest-mean arms within a pre-defined set
of groups that may be non-overlapping (Gabillon et al. 2011)
or overlapping (Scarlett, Bogunovic, and Cevher 2019).
In this paper, we introduce a distinct problem setup
in which we are again given a collection of (possibly
overlapping) groups of arms, but the goal is to identify the
group whose worst arm (in terms of the mean reward) is as
high as possible. To motivate this problem setup, we list two
potential applications:
• In recommendation systems, the groups may correspond
to packages of items than can be offered or advertised
together. If the users are highly averse to poor items, then
it is natural to model the likelihood of clicking/purchasing
as being dictated by the worst item.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8603

