The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DanceFormer: Music Conditioned 3D Dance Generation with Parametric Motion
Transformer
Buyu Li,1 Yongchi Zhao,1 Zhelun Shi,2 Lu Sheng2 *
1

Huiye Technology, 2 College of Software, Beihang University
{libuyu, zhaoyongchi}@huiye.tech, {18373044, lsheng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

choreographies, no matter how hard a machine is to generate
visually plausible dances that accompanied by the music.
Most of the prior works (Lee et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021;
Lee, Kim, and Lee 2018; Tang, Jia, and Mao 2018; Li et al.
2020; Zhuang et al. 2020; Alemi, Françoise, and Pasquier
2017) formulated the music conditioned 3D dance generation as a sequence generation problem, where each frame
in the sequence describes the human pose by the joint-level
rotations and translations. However, rendering a long-term
pose sequence with high kinematic complexity and coherent
movements is still an open question.
In this paper, we would like to exploit a popular animation strategy (Lasseter 1987; Thomas, Johnston, and Thomas
1995) in the field of computer graphics, where the motion
of characters is efficiently rendered by interpolating poses
in keyframes through parametric curves. This coarse-to-fine
strategy is especially beneficial in our task since it both ensures kinematic complexity and motion coherency in the
generated dances, where the poses in the keyframes can be
generated and synchronized with the music beats due to their
co-occurrence (Lee et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021), and the parametric curves can be efficiently regressed so as to produce
diverse motion patterns that are consistent with the rhythms
of the music. It also allows user-controlled temporal resolutions, and generates smooth sequences with fewer temporal flickers (Williams 2012). Moreover, formulating dances
as a sequence of key poses and parametric motion curves
would be seamlessly compatible with industrial animation
pipelines. Therefore, we would like to tackle the music conditioned 3D dance generation from this new perspective, and
decompose this task into two easier sub-tasks, namely, the
key pose generation and the subsequent parametric motion
curve regression.
To this end, we propose DanceFormer, a two-stage music
conditioned 3D dance generation framework that consists of
two cascaded Transformer-like (Vaswani et al. 2017) networks (called DanTrans), where the first one is to generate
key poses and the second one is to regress the parameters
of the motion curves between adjacent key poses. At first,
we employ an off-the-shelf beat track algorithm (Ellis 2007)
to detect beats from the input music (e.g., around 30 seconds). The DanTrans for the key pose generation takes a sequence of music spectrum features centered at each beat as
the input, and then generates a sequence of key poses that

Generating 3D dances from music is an emerged research
task that benefits a lot of applications in vision and graphics.
Previous works treat this task as sequence generation, however, it is challenging to render a music-aligned long-term sequence with high kinematic complexity and coherent movements. In this paper, we reformulate it by a two-stage process,
i.e., a key pose generation and then an in-between parametric
motion curve prediction, where the key poses are easier to be
synchronized with the music beats and the parametric curves
can be efficiently regressed to render fluent rhythm-aligned
movements. We named the proposed method as DanceFormer, which includes two cascading kinematics-enhanced
transformer-guided networks (called DanTrans) that tackle
each stage, respectively. Furthermore, we propose a largescale music conditioned 3D dance dataset, called PhantomDance, that is accurately labeled by experienced animators
rather than reconstruction or motion capture. This dataset
also encodes dances as key poses and parametric motion
curves apart from pose sequences, thus benefiting the training of our DanceFormer. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed method, even trained by existing datasets,
can generate fluent, performative, and music-matched 3D
dances that surpass previous works quantitatively and qualitatively. Moreover, the proposed DanceFormer, together with
the PhantomDance dataset, are seamlessly compatible with
industrial animation software, thus facilitating the adaptation
for various downstream applications.

Introduction
Automatically generating music conditioned 3D dances is an
appealing but challenging task that emerged in the research
community of vision and graphics, which can significantly
benefit various downstream applications in AR/VR, games,
films, and even the social networks. Beyond human actions
like walking, jumping, and sitting with atomic functionalities, dancing is a type of artistic performance that focuses
more on its choreography, i.e., sequential steps and movements with high kinematic complexity that are synchronized
with the beats and rhythms of the music. It is challenging
for humans with professional training to generate expressive
* Lu Sheng is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1272

