The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Temporal Point Processes for
Efficient Retrieval of Continuous Time Event Sequences
Vinayak Gupta1 , Srikanta Bedathur1 and Abir De2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{vinayak.gupta, srikanta}@cse.iitd.ac.in, abir@cse.iitb.ac.in
2

Abstract

signatures; in social network, retrieval of trajectories of information diffusion, relevant to a given trajectory can assist
in viral marketing, fake news detection, etc. Despite having
a rich literature on searching similar time-series (Blondel
et al. 2021; Gogolou et al. 2020; Alaee et al. 2020; Yoon et al.
2019; Cai et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2018; Cuturi and Blondel
2017; Paparrizos and Gravano 2015), the problem of designing retrieval models specifically for CTES has largely been
unaddressed in the past. Moreover, we show that the existing
search methods for time sequences are largely ineffective for
a CTES retrieval task, since the underlying characterization
of the sequences vary across these two domains.

Recent developments in predictive modeling using marked
temporal point processes (MTPP) have enabled an accurate
characterization of several real-world applications involving
continuous-time event sequences (CTESs). However, the retrieval problem of such sequences remains largely unaddressed
in literature. To tackle this, we propose N EURO S EQ R ET which
learns to retrieve and rank a relevant set of continuous-time
event sequences for a given query sequence, from a large
corpus of sequences. More specifically, N EURO S EQ R ET first
applies a trainable unwarping function on the query sequence,
which makes it comparable with corpus sequences, especially
when a relevant query-corpus pair has individually different
attributes. Next, it feeds the unwarped query sequence and the
corpus sequence into MTPP guided neural relevance models.
We develop two variants of the relevance model which offer a
tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency. We also propose an
optimization framework to learn binary sequence embeddings
from the relevance scores, suitable for the locality-sensitive
hashing leading to a significant speedup in returning top-K results for a given query sequence. Our experiments with several
datasets show the significant accuracy boost of N EURO S E Q R ET beyond several baselines, as well as the efficacy of our
hashing mechanism.

Present Work
In this paper, we first introduce N EURO S EQ R ET, a family
of supervised retrieval models for continuous-time event sequences and then develop a trainable locality sensitive hashing (LSH) based method for efficient retrieval over very large
datasets. Specifically, our contributions are as follows:
Query unwarping. The notion of relevance between two
sequences varies across applications. A relevant sequence
pair can share very different individual attributes, which can
mislead the retrieval model if the sequences are compared asit-is. In other words, an observed sequence may be a warped
transformation of a hidden sequence (Xu et al. 2018; Gervini
and Gasser 2004). To tackle this problem, N EURO S EQ R ET
first applies a trainable unwarping function on the query
sequence before the computation of a relevance score. Such
an unwarping function is a monotone transformation, which
ensures that the chronological order of events after unwarping
the observed sequence remains the same (Xu et al. 2018).
Neural relevance scoring model. In principle, the relevance
score between two sequences depends on their latent similarity. We measure such similarity by comparing the generative distribution between the query-corpus sequence pairs.
In detail, we feed the unwarped query sequence and the corpus sequence into a neural MTPP based relevance scoring
model, which computes the relevance score using a Fisher
kernel (Jaakkola et al. 1999) between the corpus and the unwarped query sequences. Such a kernel offers two key benefits over other distribution similarity measures, e.g., KL divergence or Wasserstein distance: (i) it computes a natural similarity score between query-corpus sequence pairs in terms of

Introduction
The recent developments in marked temporal point processes
(MTPP) has dramatically improved the predictive analytics in
several real world applications— from information diffusion
in social networks to healthcare— by characterizing them
with continuous-time event sequences (CTESs) (Tabibian
et al. 2019; Gupta et al. 2021a; Samanta et al. 2017; De et al.
2018; Valera et al. 2014; Rizoiu et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017;
Daley and Vere-Jones 2007; Guo et al. 2018; Du et al. 2015;
Tabibian et al. 2019; Kumar et al. 2019; De et al. 2016; Zhang
et al. 2021; Du et al. 2016; Farajtabar et al. 2017; Jing and
Smola 2017; Saha et al. 2018; Gupta and Bedathur 2021;
Likhyani et al. 2020). In this context, given a query sequence,
retrieval of relevant CTESs from a corpus of sequences is a
challenging problem having a wide variety of search-based
applications. For example, in audio or music retrieval, one
may like to search sequences having different audio or music
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4005

