The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Computable Definition of the Spectral Bias
Jonas Kiessling, Filip Thor*
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
H-AI AB, Stockholm, Sweden
jonas.kiessling@h-ai.se, filip.thor@it.uu.se

frequency ω0 , and we denote the corresponding NN reconstruction error contributions as Elow and Ehigh and refer to
them as the frequency errors. The spectral bias is defined as
the quotient SB = (Ehigh − Elow )/(Ehigh + Elow ). The cutoff frequency is defined such that half the variance of the
target function is comprised of low frequencies.
Two methods for computing the spectral bias are presented. In Method 1 we estimate the Fourier transform of
the difference between the target and the output of the NN
with the discrete Fourier transform. The frequency errors
are then estimated with a simple quadrature rule. Method
2 avoids computation of the Fourier transform. It relies on
convolution and Monte Carlo quadrature for estimation of
the frequency errors.
To compute the spectral bias we need an expression for
the density of the data. In cases where the density is not
known explicitly, we estimate it with kernel density estimation. We compute the spectral bias in a number of experiments, and our results are in line with previous work in that
low frequencies are learned first.

Abstract
Neural networks have a bias towards low frequency functions. This spectral bias has been the subject of several previous studies, both empirical and theoretical. Here we present
a computable definition of the spectral bias based on a decomposition of the reconstruction error into a low and a high
frequency component. The distinction between low and high
frequencies is made in a way that allows for easy interpretation of the spectral bias. Furthermore, we present two methods for estimating the spectral bias. Method 1 relies on the
use of the discrete Fourier transform to explicitly estimate
the Fourier spectrum of the prediction residual, and Method
2 uses convolution to extract the low frequency components,
where the convolution integral is estimated by Monte Carlo
methods. The spectral bias depends on the distribution of the
data, which is approximated with kernel density estimation
when unknown. We devise a set of numerical experiments
that confirm that low frequencies are learned first, a behavior
quantified by our definition.

Introduction
Neural networks (NN) have been observed to perform exceptionally well on a large set of machine learning problems.
However, all aspects of their convergence are not completely
understood. One example of this knowledge gap resides in
the frequency domain. The NNs have been seen to earlier
in training better approximate low frequency functions than
high frequency ones (Basri et al. 2019). In other words, the
NNs seem to learn the low frequency components of the
target function before it finds the high frequencies, which
is sometimes referred to as the spectral bias of neural networks (Rahaman et al. 2019). With a computable definition
of the spectral bias the phenomenon can be measured quantitatively, and we hope to gain insights on the behavior of
network optimization.

Related Work
Rahaman et al. (2019) use Fourier analysis on ReLU NNs
and perform experiments with both synthetic and real-world
data to show that NNs have a spectral bias. They highlight
the spectral bias by for example studying how different frequencies of noise affect the accuracy on the MNIST classification problem, and conclude that the networks’ performance is more sensitive to low frequency noise than high
frequency noise.
Basri et al. (2019) use harmonic analysis to show that neural networks learn high frequency functions at a lower rate
than low frequency functions. Cao et al. (2021) show, using the neural tangent kernel (NTK), that the lower spherical
harmonics are more easily captured when learning data with
uniform distributions. Basri et al. (2020) also study the NTK,
and show that the convergence rate depends on the density of
the data. Zhang, Xiong, and Wu (2021) discuss the relation
between the spectral bias, generalization, and memorization
of NNs. To study the spectrum of the NN for high dimensional targets they introduce a metric based on computing
local low dimensional discrete Fourier transforms, instead
of the expensive d- dimensional Fourier transform.
A sequence of publications Xu (2018, 2020); Xu, Zhang,

Our Contribution
Our main contribution is a computable definition of the spectral bias in function reconstruction problems. The frequency
domain is split into high and low frequencies by a cut-off
* Current affiliation is Department of Information Technology,
Uppsala University.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7168

