The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Attribute-Based Progressive Fusion Network for RGBT Tracking
Yun Xiao1,2,4 , Mengmeng Yang3 , Chenglong Li1,2,4 * , Lei Liu3 , Jin Tang1,2,3
1

Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Hefei, China
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, Hefei, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
xiaoyun@ahu.edu.cn, xiuxiaoran@163.com, lcl1314@foxmail.com, liulei970507@163.com, tangjin@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract

RGB
RGB

Attribute2 Based
Feature Extractor

Feature
Extractor

Aggregation

Attribute1 Based
Feature Extractor

Fusion
Module
T

Feature
Extractor

Feature
Extractor

T

(a)

(b)
RGB

Feature
Extractor

Attribute2Specific Fusion

T

Aggregation

Attribute1Specific Fusion

Enhancement Fusion

RGBT tracking usually suffers from various challenging factors of fast motion, scale variation, illumination variation,
thermal crossover and occlusion, to name a few. Existing
works often study fusion models to solve all challenges simultaneously, which requires fusion models complex enough
and training data large enough, and are usually difficult to be
constructed in real-world scenarios. In this work, we disentangle the fusion process via the challenge attributes, and thus
propose a novel Attribute-Based Progressive Fusion Network
(APFNet) to increase the fusion capacity with a small number
of parameters while reducing the dependence on large-scale
training data. In particular, we design five attribute-specific
fusion branches to integrate RGB and thermal features under
the challenges of thermal crossover, illumination variation,
scale variation, occlusion and fast motion respectively. By
disentangling the fusion process, we can use a small number
of parameters for each branch to achieve robust fusion of different modalities and train each branch using the small training subset with the corresponding attribute annotation. Then,
to adaptive fuse features of all branches, we design an aggregation fusion module based on SKNet. Finally, we also design an enhancement fusion transformer to strengthen the aggregated feature and modality-specific features. Experimental
results on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our APFNet against other state-of-the-art methods.

Feature
Extractor

Feature
Extractor

(c)

Figure 1: Advances of our fusion model over existing
ones. (a) Common fusion models. (b) Attribute-aware fusion model (Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a) which extracts appearance features under certain attributes and then
perform feature fusion. (c) Our attribute-based progressive
fusion model, which performs fusion under certain attributes
and then aggregate and enhance them in a progressive manner.

Introduction
RGBT tracking is to use the complementary benefits of RGB
and thermal infrared data to achieve robust visual tracking,
which has various applications such as autonomous driving,
surveillance security and robotics. RGBT tracking is a challenging task since it usually suffers from various factors,
such as thermal crossover, illumination variation, scale variation, occlusion and fast motion.
Existing works often try studying various fusion models
to solve all challenges simultaneously in RGBT tracking.
Zhu et al. (2019) fuse features of RGB and thermal modalities in each layer and recursively aggregate these features
in all layers. Li et al. (2019b) mine modality-shared and specific information by a multi-adapter network which includes modality-shared and modality-specific feature learn-

ing modules in all layers. Zhang et al. (2019) design different fusion strategies in the DiMP tracking framework (Bhat
et al. 2019), which requires a large-scale training dataset, including 9,335 videos with 1,403,359 frames in total. However, these methods need to either design complex fusion
models or construct large-scale training data for all challenge factors, but the performance improvement is still limited since challenge factors are numerous in real-world scenarios. To relieve the burden of model design and data construction, Li et al. (2020) model the target appearance under different challenge attributes separately and then fuse

* Chenglong Li is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2831

