The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Supervising Model Attention with Human Explanations for
Robust Natural Language Inference
Joe Stacey1 , Yonatan Belinkov2 , Marek Rei1
1

Imperial College London
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
j.stacey20@imperial.ac.uk, belinkov@technion.ac.il, marek.rei@imperial.ac.uk
2

Abstract

Premise:
Wet
Å brown dog swims towards camera.

PhD reading
Robust NLP

Natural Language Inference (NLI) models are known to learn
from biases and artefacts within their training data, impacting
how well they generalise to other unseen datasets. Existing
de-biasing approaches focus on preventing the models from
learning these biases, which can result in restrictive models
and lower performance. We instead investigate teaching the
model how a human would approach the NLI task, in order
to learn features that will generalise better to previously unseen examples. Using natural language explanations, we supervise the model’s attention weights to encourage more attention to be paid to the words present in the explanations,
significantly improving model performance. Our experiments
show that the in-distribution improvements of this method
are also accompanied by out-of-distribution improvements,
with the supervised models learning from features that generalise better to other NLI datasets. Analysis of the model indicates that human explanations encourage increased attention
on the important words, with more attention paid to words in
the premise and less attention paid to punctuation and stopwords.

Hypothesis:
A dog is sleeping in his bed.
Explanation for contradiction class:
A dog cannot be sleeping while he swims.

Figure 1: An example of using a free text explanation to
identify important words in the premise and hypothesis. In
this case the words dog, sleeping and swims have been identified from the explanation.
Human explanations have been found to improve performance on a range of tasks (Rajani et al. 2019; Andreas,
Klein, and Levine 2018; Mu, Liang, and Goodman 2020;
Liang, Zou, and Yu 2020); however, this has largely not been
the case in NLI (Hase and Bansal 2021; Kumar and Talukdar
2020; Camburu et al. 2018). Generating human explanations
from e-SNLI has been found to improve model performance
(Zhao and Vydiswaran 2021), but this process is highly computationally expensive and the in-distribution improvements
are accompanied by a reduction in out-of-distribution performance. We aim to address both issues, proposing a simple and efficient method for using explanations to improve
model robustness while also improving in-distribution performance.
We investigate multiple approaches to incorporate these
human explanations. Firstly, we introduce an additional loss
term to encourage the model to pay more attention to words
in the explanation, supervising the attention from the [CLS]
token in the existing model self-attention layers. Additionally, we introduce another attention layer on top of the model
and supervise its weights. We also adapt a further attentionbased approach for incorporating explanations as proposed
by Pruthi et al. (2020), testing whether this method also improves performance and model robustness for NLI. Each approach considers the most important words in the hypothesis
and premise based on the e-SNLI human explanations (see
Figure 1).
To summarise our contributions: 1) We propose a method
for supervising with human explanations that provides sig-

Introduction
Natural Language Inference (NLI) models predict the relationship between a premise and hypothesis pair, deciding
whether the hypothesis is entailed by the premise, contradicts the premise, or is neutral with respect to the premise.
While NLI models achieve impressive in-distribution performance, they are known to learn from dataset-specific artefacts, impacting how well these models generalise on outof-distribution examples (Gururangan et al. 2018; Tsuchiya
2018; Poliak et al. 2018). De-biasing efforts to date have
successfully improved out-of-distribution results, but mostly
at the expense of in-distribution performance (Belinkov et al.
2019a; Mahabadi, Belinkov, and Henderson 2020; Sanh
et al. 2020).
While most previous work creating more robust NLI models has focused on preventing models learning from biases or
artefacts in their datasets (more details in the Related Work
section), we take a different approach. We aim to use information about how humans approach the task, training with
natural language explanations in the e-SNLI dataset (Camburu et al. 2018) to create more robust models.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11349

