The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

L-CoDe: Language-based Colorization Using Color-object Decoupled Conditions
Shuchen Weng1# , Hao Wu2# , Zheng Chang3 , Jiajun Tang1 , Si Li3* , Boxin Shi1, 4, 5, 6
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 5 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{shuchenweng, haowu, jiajun.tang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, {zhengchang98, lisi}@bupt.edu.cn
A purple horse in the green grass ﬁeld gazing around.

Abstract
Colorizing a grayscale image is inherently an ill-posed problem with multi-modal uncertainty. Language-based colorization offers a natural way of interaction to reduce such uncertainty via a user-provided caption. However, the colorobject coupling and mismatch issues make the mapping from
word to color difficult. In this paper, we propose L-CoDe, a
Language-based Colorization network using color-object Decoupled conditions. A predictor for object-color corresponding matrix (OCCM) and a novel attention transfer module
(ATM) are introduced to solve the color-object coupling problem. To deal with color-object mismatch that results in incorrect color-object correspondence, we adopt a soft-gated injection module (SIM). We further present a new dataset containing annotated color-object pairs to provide supervisory signals for resolving the coupling problem. Experimental results
show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods
conditioned on captions.

1

Grayscale

Manjunatha et al.

Xie et al.

Ours

A small red sign that says whoa in a stop sign shape.

Grayscale

Manjunatha et al.

Xie et al.

Ours

Figure 1: L-CoDe conducts colorization on a grayscale image according to a given caption displayed on top of each image row. Due to challenges caused by color-object coupling
(top row) and color-object mismatch (bottom row), state-ofthe-art methods (Manjunatha et al. 2018; Xie 2018) fail to
add the designated color according to the caption correctly,
while L-CoDe succeeds.

Introduction

Image colorization, as the name implies, aims to add colors
to a grayscale image, since there are various types of pictures that do not contain color, such as legacy photos, nearinfrared images, sketch or manga, and so on. The colorization process could be fully automatic by predicting colors
from large-scale data using data-driven approaches (Isola
et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2018; Su, Chu, and Huang 2020).
However, the problem is inherently ambiguous since there
are potentially infinite many colors that can be assigned to
the gray pixels of an input image (e.g., an apple may be colorized by green, yellow, or red). Hence, human intervention
often plays an important role to determine a unique solution.
With user interaction, scribble-based colorization methods (Luan et al. 2007; Zhang et al. 2017; Sangkloy et al.
2017) focus on propagating local user scribbles (e.g., color
points or strokes), while example-based colorization methods (Gupta et al. 2012; He et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2020; Lu
et al. 2020) colorize the input grayscale image with color
statistics transferred from a similar reference image. However, these methods often require a good sense of aesthetics or a suitable reference image, which could be time-

consuming for an untrained user. Language-based colorization, a new interactive approach appearing in the recent
years (Manjunatha et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018; Xie 2018),
colorizes a grayscale image conditioned on a caption. Users
only need to describe the object1 category desired to be colorized and the corresponding color of that region in the form
of natural language.
For language-based colorization, the colorized result
should be consistent with the description of the caption. To
meet this requirement, a caption is usually encoded into a
vector and injected into a colorization network as a condition (Manjunatha et al. 2018; Xie 2018), which makes it
more difficult than automatic colorization. There are two
problems with such an approach: (1) Color-object coupling:
When the color and object combination specified in the cap-

#

1

Equal contributions. * Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this paper, with a bit of abuse of concept, we refer to
thing/instance class (e.g., person, car, elephant) and stuff class (e.g.,
grass, wall, sky) together as “object”.

2677

