The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Two-Price Equilibrium
Michal Feldman, Galia Shabtai, Aner Wolfenfeld
Tel Aviv University
michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il, galiashabtai@gmail.com, anerwolf@gmail.com

Suppose every item j has some price pj ∈ R+ . Given a
vector of prices p1 , . . . , pm , and an allocation S,P
the (quasilinear) utility of buyer i is ui (Si , p) = vi (Si ) − j∈Si pj .
Walrasian equilibrium (WE) is a classical and appealing
market equilibrium notion that dates back to the 70’s (Walras
(1874)). In a WE, despite competition among buyers, every
buyer is maximally happy with her bundle and the market
clears. That is, a WE is given by a tuple (S, p) satisfying: (i)
Utility maximization: ui (Si , p) ≥ ui (T, p) for every bundle
T ⊆ [m], and (ii) Market clearance: all items are sold. Moreover, by the first welfare theorem (Bikhchandani and Mamer
(1997)), any allocation supported in a WE has optimal social
welfare.
This appealing notion, however, comes with a serious
downside, namely, it rarely exists in markets. In particular, it is known to exist for a strict subclass of submodular
valuations, known as gross substitutes (Kelso and Crawford
(1982)), and in some precise technical sense, gross substitutes is a maximal class for WE existence (Gul and Stacchetti (1999)).
As a result, different relaxations of WE have been introduced and studied. A notable one is the notion of conditional equilibrium (CE) (Fu, Kleinberg, and Lavi (2012)),
which is a tuple (S, p) satisfying: (i) individual rationality:
ui (Si , p) ≥ 0, (ii) outward stability: ui (Si , p) ≥ ui (T ∪
Si , p) for every bundle T ⊆ [m] and (iii) market clearance
(all items are sold). That is, the difference between a WE
and a CE is that it only requires that buyers do not wish to
add items to their bundle, whereas a WE requires that buyers
don’t wish to change their bundle with any other bundle. A
CE is guaranteed to exist for every market with submodular
valuations (or even a superclass of submodular, called XOS).
In addition, the CE notion admits an approximate version of
the first welfare theorem; namely, any allocation supported
in a CE has social welfare of at least half of the optimal social welfare. However, the notion of CE has its limitations
— it may not exist even in a market with two subadditive
buyers (see Example 3.2).
Two-price equilibrium. We introduce a new notion of
equilibrium that is based on the idea that an item may be
assigned more than a single price. Indeed, item prices often
have different prices based on different buyer characteristics,
such as location, time, and history.
The new notion, termed two-price equilibrium (2PE), uti-

Abstract
Walrasian equilibrium is a prominent market equilibrium notion, but rarely exists in markets with indivisible items. We
introduce a new market equilibrium notion, called two-price
equilibrium (2PE). A 2PE is a relaxation of Walrasian equilibrium, where instead of a single price per item, every item
has two prices: one for the item’s owner and a (possibly)
higher one for all other buyers. Thus, a 2PE is given by a tuple
(S, p̂, p̌) of an allocation S and two price vectors p̂, p̌, where
every buyer i is maximally happy with her bundle Si , given
prices p̌ for items in Si and prices p̂ for all other items. 2PE
generalizes previous market equilibrium notions, such as conditional equilibrium, and is related to relaxed equilibrium notions like endowment equilibrium. We define the discrepancy
of a 2PE — a measure of distance from Walrasian equilibrium
— as the sum of differences p̂j −p̌j over all items (normalized
by social welfare). We show that the social welfare degrades
gracefully with the discrepancy; namely, the social welfare
1
of the
of a 2PE with discrepancy d is at least a fraction d+1
optimal welfare. We use this to establish welfare guarantees
for markets with subadditive valuations over identical items.
In particular, we show that every such market admits a 2PE
with at least 1/7 of the optimal welfare. This is in contrast to
Walrasian equilibrium or conditional equilibrium which may
not even exist. Our techniques provide new insights regarding
valuation functions over identical items, which we also use to
characterize instances that admit a WE.

1

Introduction

We consider a combinatorial market setting with m items
and n buyers. Every buyer i has a valuation function, vi :
2[m] → R+ , which maps every subset of items to a nonnegative real number. A valuation profile is given by a vector
v = (v1 , . . . , vn ). As standard, we assume that valuation
functions are monotone and normalized, i.e., for every S ⊆
T ⊆ [m], vi (S) ≤ vi (T ) and vi (∅) = 0 for every i.
An allocation is a partition of the items among the buyers; i.e., a vector S = (S1 , . . . , Sn ) of disjoint sets, where
Si denotes the bundle allocated to buyer i. The social
welfare (SW) of an allocation S under valuation profile
v is the sum of the buyers’
valuations for their bundles,
P
that is, SW (S, v) =
v
i∈[n] i (Si ). The optimal (welfaremaximizing) allocation is denoted by OP T (v).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5008

