The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Instance Selection: A Bayesian Decision Theory Perspective
Qingqiang Chen, Fuyuan Cao,∗ Ying Xing, Jiye Liang
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, P.R. China
chenqq18@126.com, cfy@sxu.edu.cn, sxxying@126.com, ljy@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract

the KNN-based instance selection, which is a kind of instance selection method that is based on the k-nearest neighbour rule, has received more attention (Garcia et al. 2012;
Cavalcanti and Soares 2020; Malhat et al. 2020). The existing KNN-based instance selection methods can be classified into three categories: condensation, edition, and hybrid
(Kim and Oommen 2003). The condensation methods focus on maintaining those instances located at the classification boundary and removing the instances that are far away
from the boundary, among which condensed nearest neighbour (Hart 1968) is the most classical algorithm. The edition
methods aim at cleaning the noisy labelled instances and
outlier instances. Edited Nearest Neighbors (Wilson 1972)
is a classical method in this category. The hybrid methods
select the most representative instances even though the instances are at or far away from the boundary. Most of the
existing methods fall into this category, such as, decremental reduction optimization procedure (DROP) (Wilson and
Martinez 2000), iterative case filtering (ICF) (Brighton and
Mellish 2002), Adaptive threshold-based instance selection
(ATISA) (Cavalcanti, Ren, and Pereira 2013), ranking-based
instance selection (RIS) (Cavalcanti and Soares 2020), and
enhanced global density-based instance selection (EGDIS)
(Malhat et al. 2020). Among them, RIS and EGDIS obtain
excellent experimental results.
Although those instance selection methods have made
significant progress, some issues need to be further study.
The first issue is that these methods lack a theoretical foundation. While these methods are convenient and intuitive,
there is no theoretical foundation supporting their core ideas
to the best of our knowledge. The second issue is that these
methods face the problem of low execution efficiency. Since
these methods are derived from the k-nearest neighbour rule,
they inevitably need to calculate the similarity among instances. However, calculating and storing the similarity matrix is a big overhead for large-scale instances. For example,
storing a 50, 000 × 50, 000 64-bit float matrix requires about
19G of memory, and storing a 500, 000 × 500, 000 float matrix requires about 1900G of memory.
In this paper, we propose an instance selection method
called the Bayesian decision-based instance selection (BDIS) method, supported by Bayesian decision theory and
percolation theory, and that can deal with instance selection problems on large-scale data. First, from the perspec-

In this paper, we consider the problem of lacking theoretical foundation and low execution efficiency of the instance selection methods based on the k-nearest neighbour
rule when processing large-scale data. We point out that the
core idea of these methods can be explained from the perspective of Bayesian decision theory, that is, to find which
instances are reducible, irreducible, and deleterious. Then,
based on the percolation theory, we establish the relationship between these three types of instances and local homogeneous cluster (i.e., a set of instances with the same labels). Finally, we propose a method based on an accelerated k-means algorithm to construct local homogeneous clusters and remove the superfluous instances. The performance
of our method is studied on extensive synthetic and benchmark data sets. Our proposed method can handle large-scale
data more effectively than the state-of-the-art instance selection methods All code and data results are available at
https://github.com/CQQXY161120/Instance-Selection.

Introduction
The massive data collected in many practical problems
present new challenges for data mining and knowledge discovery approaches (Hariri, Fredericks, and Bowers 2019).
For example, training the support vector machines (SVM)
classifier (Chang and Lin 2011) is time-consuming on a
dataset with more than one million instances (Singh, Roy,
and Mohan 2016). Therefore, for these large-scale data, scalability becomes an issue. One of the most common ways
to deal with this problem is instance selection (Brighton and
Mellish 2002; Olvera-López et al. 2010; Hamidzadeh, Monsefi, and Yazdi 2015). It removes redundant and deleterious
instances from a data set to obtain a tractable amount of instances. The significance of the instance selection method is
multiple. It can reduce data storage requirements, improve
the generalization performance of the classification models,
and reduce the training time of the classification models.
For a classification task, the purpose of instance selection is to select a subset of instances so that a classifier
trained on the subset can obtain the same or better performance than when whole instances are used. In recent years,
∗

Corresponding author: Fuyuan Cao. Email: cfy@sxu.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6287

