The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GraphMemDialog: Optimizing End-to-End Task-Oriented Dialog Systems Using
Graph Memory Networks
Jie Wu1 , Ian G. Harris1 , Hongzhi Zhao2
1

2

University of California, Irvine
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiao Tong University
wuj8@uci.edu, harris@ics.uci.edu, hzzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

However, pipelined dialog systems usually suffer from the
credit assignment problem (Yang, Zhang, and Erfani 2020)
and easily lead to error propagation. Furthermore, they are
not flexible enough to be adapted to new domains.
Recently, in order to address these issues, end-to-end
TDSs (Serban et al. 2016; Wen et al. 2017) with sequenceto-sequence models (Seq2Seq) have attracted attention due
to their great flexibility and good quality. The core idea of
a Seq2Seq model is to leverage an encoder to directly map
the dialog history and KB to a vector representation, which
is then fed into a decoder to generate a response word by
word. Later, memory networks (MemNN) are used to effectively incorporate KB information into the Seq2seq model
(Madotto, Wu, and Fung 2018; Zhong, Xiong, and Socher
2018). Despite achieving promising results, these models
are inherently weak at representing temporal dependencies
between memories, so they ignore the association between
KB entities. Subsequently, Banerjee and Khapra (2019) first
proposed to use Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to
capture the rich structural information hidden in the dialog
history and the KB, and achieved big improvement compared with Seq2Seq models with attention. Yang, Zhang,
and Erfani (2020) employed a new recurrent cell architecture
to allow representation learning on graphs. However, these
models still suffer from two major issues: 1) Learning of
context-aware KB representation. Although GCNs show
promising results at capturing graph structural information
inherent in the KB, current state-of-the-art models still fail
to fuse meaningful dialog context semantics into the KB representation. Our study shows that making it fully contextaware can significantly reduce the response errors especially
on datasets with more complicated KB information. 2) Modeling sequential and structural dialog context concurrently. Both type of information can be jointly beneficial to
response generation by capturing distinct aspects of semantic information. Unfortunately, they have never been combined to promote performance in parallel for TDSs.
In this paper, we propose a novel Graph Memory
Network (GMN) based end-to-end task-oriented dialog
model, GraphMemDialog. The proposed model learns fully
context-aware KB representations integrated with both KB
graph structural information and dialog history semantics.
Multi-hop reasoning further enables a deeper level of semantic modeling of KB entities. A multi-head graph atten-

Effectively integrating knowledge into end-to-end taskoriented dialog systems remains a challenge. It typically requires incorporation of an external knowledge base (KB) and
capture of the intrinsic semantics of the dialog history. Recent research shows promising results by using Sequence-toSequence models, Memory Networks, and even Graph Convolutional Networks. However, current state-of-the-art models are less effective at integrating dialog history and KB
into task-oriented dialog systems in the following ways: 1.
The KB representation is not fully context-aware. The dynamic interaction between the dialog history and KB is seldom explored. 2. Both the sequential and structural information in the dialog history can contribute to capturing the dialog semantics, but they are not studied concurrently. In this
paper, we propose a novel Graph Memory Network (GMN)
based Seq2Seq model, GraphMemDialog, to effectively learn
the inherent structural information hidden in dialog history,
and to model the dynamic interaction between dialog history
and KBs. We adopt a modified graph attention network to
learn the rich structural representation of the dialog history,
whereas the context-aware representation of KB entities are
learnt by our novel GMN. To fully exploit this dynamic interaction, we design a learnable memory controller coupled
with external KB entity memories to recurrently incorporate
dialog history context into KB entities through a multi-hop
reasoning mechanism. Experiments on three public datasets
show that our GraphMemDialog model achieves state-of-theart performance and outperforms strong baselines by a large
margin, especially on datatests with more complicated KB
information.

Introduction
Task-oriented dialogue systems (TDSs), in contrast with
chichat systems, help users complete a specific task with natural language, for example, inquiring about weather, reserving restaurants, or booking flights. In one specific domain,
TDS takes dialog utterances and a knowledge base (KB) as
input and produces responses by understanding dialog history, retrieving the most related KB entities, and generating readable sentences. Traditionally, these dialog systems
have been built as a pipeline, with modules including spoken language understanding (SLU), dialog state tracking, action selection and language generation (Young et al. 2013).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11504

