The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Structured Semantic Transfer for Multi-Label Recognition with Partial Labels
Tianshui Chen 1 , Tao Pu 2 , Hefeng Wu 2 , Yuan Xie 2 , Liang Lin 2 *
1

Guangdong University of Technology, 2 Sun Yat-Sen University
tianshuichen@gmail.com, putao3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wuhefeng@gmail.com, phoenixsysu@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

person, traffic light, truck, car, bus

Abstract

person

Multi-label image recognition is a fundamental yet practical
task because real-world images inherently possess multiple
semantic labels. However, it is difficult to collect large-scale
multi-label annotations due to the complexity of both the input images and output label spaces. To reduce the annotation
cost, we propose a structured semantic transfer (SST) framework that enables training multi-label recognition models
with partial labels, i.e., merely some labels are known while
other labels are missing (also called unknown labels) per image. The framework consists of two complementary transfer
modules that explore within-image and cross-image semantic
correlations to transfer knowledge of known labels to generate pseudo labels for unknown labels. Specifically, an intraimage semantic transfer module learns image-specific label
co-occurrence matrix and maps the known labels to complement unknown labels based on this matrix. Meanwhile,
a cross-image transfer module learns category-specific feature similarities and helps complement unknown labels with
high similarities. Finally, both known and generated labels are
used to train the multi-label recognition models. Extensive
experiments on the Microsoft COCO, Visual Genome and
Pascal VOC datasets show that the proposed SST framework
obtains superior performance over current state-of-the-art algorithms. Codes are available at https://github.com/HCPLabSYSU/HCP-MLR-PL.

traffic light
truck

horse
giraffe

car

toilet

bus

person

traffic light

horse
giraffe
bus

truck
car

toilet

person, traffic light, truck, car, bus

Figure 1: Two examples of images with partial labels (unknown labels are highlighted in red). We can mine the intraimage and cross-image correlations to help complement the
unknown labels.

cult and less scalable. In contrast, it is easy and scalable
to annotate partial labels for each image, which can be regarded as an alternative way to address the above problem.
In this work, we aim to address the task of learning multilabel recognition models with partial labels (MLR-PL).
Current algorithms mainly consider multi-label recognition as a multiple binary classification task. Treating the unknown labels as missing or negative labels is an intuitive
way to adapt these algorithms to address the MLR-PL task
(Sun et al. 2017; Joulin et al. 2016). However, it results in
an obvious performance drop as it loses some data or even
incurs some noisy labels. Fortunately, strong semantic correlations within each image and cross different images exist,
and these correlations can efficiently help to transfer semantic knowledge of known labels to construct the unknown labels: i) Label co-occurrences are widespread in real-world
images, e.g., tables tend to co-occur with chairs and cars are
likely to co-exist with roads; ii) Objects of the same category
in different images may share similar visual appearances,
and thus images with similar visual features may have the
same labels.
In this work, we explore mining these correlations to
help complement the unknown labels by a novel structured semantic transfer (SST) framework. It consists of

Introduction
Recently, lots of efforts (Chen et al. 2019c,a, 2020) are dedicated to the task of multi-label image recognition as it benefits various applications ranging from content-based image retrieval and recommendation systems to surveillance
systems and assistive robots. Despite achieving impressive
progress, current leading algorithms (Chen et al. 2019c,a,
2020) introduce data-hungry deep convolutional networks
(He et al. 2016; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) to learn
discriminative features, and thus they depend on collecting
large-scale clean and complete multi-label datasets. However, it is very time-consuming to collect a consistent and
exhaustive list of labels for every image, making collecting clean and complete multi-label annotations more diffi* Tianshui Chen and Tao Pu contribute equally to this work and
share first authorship. Corresponding author is Liang Lin.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

339

