The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fusing Task-Oriented and Open-Domain Dialogues in Conversational Agents
Tom Young1 , Frank Xing2 , Vlad Pandelea1 , Jinjie Ni1 , Erik Cambria1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
yang0552@e.ntu.edu.sg, xing@nus.edu.sg, {vlad.pandelea, jinjie001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, cambria@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Such models generate the response based on the context
and exhibit general chitchat ability. Their primary goal in a
conversation is to keep the user engaged and chat over random open-domain topics that he is interested in. The dialogues can be sustained by commonsense without the need
for any special databases. TOD models are vastly different.
The dialogues exist for the purpose of serving specific functions, such as finding restaurants and booking airlines. They
operate on closed domains that are often supported by structured databases and APIs (Budzianowski et al. 2018; Rastogi et al. 2020). Commonly three characteristics distinguish
them from ODD models: (1) an entity-centered database, (2)
explicit dialogue state modeling, and (3) a pre-defined set
of dialogue domains and functions (dialogue acts). Humans
are able to effortlessly conduct both types of conversations
seamlessly together. It is ideal for a dialogue system to be
able to do so, because such integration offers a fused system with increased usability. Furthermore, it allows rich interactions between the two dialogue modes, which can not
be modeled in either mode independently. Such a dialogue
model would better mimic human-level conversation capabilities, e.g., chatting with a friendly assistant (Fig. 1).

The goal of building intelligent dialogue systems has largely
been separately pursued under two paradigms: task-oriented
dialogue (TOD) systems, which perform task-specific functions, and open-domain dialogue (ODD) systems, which focus on non-goal-oriented chitchat. The two dialogue modes
can potentially be intertwined together seamlessly in the same
conversation, as easily done by a friendly human assistant.
Such ability is desirable in conversational agents, as the integration makes them more accessible and useful. Our paper addresses this problem of fusing TODs and ODDs in
multi-turn dialogues. Based on the popular TOD dataset MultiWOZ, we build a new dataset FusedChat, by rewriting the
existing TOD turns and adding new ODD turns. This procedure constructs conversation sessions containing exchanges
from both dialogue modes. It features inter-mode contextual
dependency, i.e., the dialogue turns from the two modes depend on each other. Rich dependency patterns such as coreference and ellipsis are included. The new dataset, with 60k
new human-written ODD turns and 5k re-written TOD turns,
offers a benchmark to test a dialogue model’s ability to perform inter-mode conversations. This is a more challenging
task since the model has to determine the appropriate dialogue mode and generate the response based on the intermode context. However, such models would better mimic
human-level conversation capabilities. We evaluate two baseline models on this task, including the classification-based
two-stage models and the two-in-one fused models. We publicly release FusedChat and the baselines to propel future
work on inter-mode dialogue systems.

Despite numerous datasets have been created in recent
years for both ODDs and TODs, there is no high-quality
human-written dataset on their fusion, especially with intermode contextual dependency. Our work aims to fill this void.
We use the popular TOD dataset MultiWOZ (Budzianowski
et al. 2018) as the backbone and let human creators add
ODD turns before or after the existing TOD turns. For
roughly half the MultiWOZ dialogues, we prepend ODD
turns, creating ODD + TOD sessions. For the other half, we
append ODD turns, creating TOD + ODD sessions. In both
cases, the creator writes an ODD that is contextually related
to the existing TOD. We enforce inter-mode dependency in
FusedChat. In the prepending case, we make sure the TOD
is dependent on the ODD by rewriting the first turn of the
TOD, typically with co-reference or ellipsis. In the appending cases, we make sure at least one exchange in the ODD
is dependent on concepts or knowledge found in the TOD.
In a nutshell, these dependency patterns in our dataset mean
that when a dialogue model handles a turn of one dialogue
mode, it sometimes has to refer to the contextual information given in the history turns of the other dialogue mode.

Introduction
Recent years have seen a popularity of models on building intelligent systems that converse with humans naturally (Ni et al. 2021). Two mainstream models can be categorized as the open-domain dialogue (ODD) models (Adiwardana et al. 2020; Roller et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019)
and the task-oriented dialogue (TOD) models (Ham et al.
2020; Budzianowski et al. 2018). ODD models, when first
adapted with the Seq2Seq modeling paradigm (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014), focused on learning open-domain
human conversation based on massive [context, response]
pairs (Vinyals and Le 2015; Li et al. 2016).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11622

