The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Translation Prior: Test-Time Training for Photorealistic Style Transfer
Sunwoo Kim*

Soohyun Kim∗

Seungryong Kim†

Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{sw-kim, shkim1211, seungryong_kim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

Since the loss function for style transfer is often non-convex,
most methods leverage an iterative solver to optimize the output image itself (Li and Wand 2016; Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge
2016; Luan et al. 2017), and thus they can benefit from error
feedback for stylization. Moreover, they are limited to encode
an image translation prior on synthesized images, and thus
often generate artifacts and show limited photorealism.
In contrast, recent learning-based methods (Li et al. 2017,
2018; Gu et al. 2018; Yoo et al. 2019; Huang and Belongie
2017; Park and Lee 2019) attempt to address these limitations by learning such image translation prior within networks
from large-scale datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Lin et al. 2014),
often followed by pre- or post-processing (Li et al. 2018; Yoo
et al. 2019; Huang and Belongie 2017). Since it is notoriously
challenging to collect training pairs for photorealistic style
transfer due to its subjectivity, most methods alternatively
leverage an auto-encoder to learn a decoder that captures
the translation prior (Huang and Belongie 2017; Chen and
Schmidt 2016; Li et al. 2017). However, during the training,
these methods (Li et al. 2018, 2019) do not leverage explicit
content and style loss functions, and thus may have poor
generalization ability on unseen images or styles. In addition,
adopting fixed network parameters at test-time may not account for the fact that a pair of images may require their own
prior, namely an image pair-specific translation prior.
In this paper, we explore an alternative, dubbed Deep
Translation Prior (DTP), to overcome aforementioned limitations of both optimization- and learning-based methods. Our
work accomplishes this without need of intensive training
process using large-scale dataset or paired data, but through
a test-time training on given input image pair. We argue that
the translation prior does not necessarily need to be learned
from intensive learning. Instead, an image pair-specific translation prior can be captured by solely minimizing explicit
content and style loss functions on the image pair with untrained network for stylization. Tailored to this framework,
we formulate novel network architectures consisting of two
sub-modules, namely correspondence and generation modules, which are learned with well-designed content, style, and
cycle consistency loss functions at test time.
Our experiments on standard benchmark for photorealistic
style transfer (Luan et al. 2017; An et al. 2020), CelebAHQ (Liu et al. 2015), and Flickr Faces HQ (FFHQ) (Karras,
Laine, and Aila 2019) demonstrate that our framework con-

Recent techniques to solve photorealistic style transfer within
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) generally require
intensive training from large-scale datasets, thus having limited applicability and poor generalization ability to unseen
images or styles. To overcome this, we propose a novel framework, dubbed Deep Translation Prior (DTP), to accomplish
photorealistic style transfer through test-time training on given
input image pair with untrained networks, which learns an
image pair-specific translation prior and thus yields better performance and generalization. Tailored for such test-time training for style transfer, we present novel network architectures,
with two sub-modules of correspondence and generation modules, and loss functions consisting of contrastive content, style,
and cycle consistency losses. Our framework does not require
offline training phase for style transfer, which has been one
of the main challenges in existing methods, but the networks
are to be solely learned during test time. Experimental results
prove that our framework has a better generalization ability to
unseen image pairs and even outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
Photorealistic style transfer is one of appealing image manipulation and editing tasks, which aims to, given a pair of
images, i.e., the content and style image, synthesize an image
by transferring the style to the content. Recent approaches for
this task leverage statistics of content and style features extracted by deep convolutional neural network (CNNs) (Gatys,
Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Li et al. 2017; Ulyanov, Vedaldi,
and Lempitsky 2017), which can be divided into optimization-based and learning-based methods. Optimization-based
methods (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Li and Wand 2016;
Luan et al. 2017) directly obtain a stylized image by optimizing an image itself with well-defined content and style loss
functions. As the seminal work, Gatys et al. (Gatys, Ecker,
and Bethge 2016) present the style loss function based on
Gram matrix and optimize the stylized image with the loss
function, of which many variants were also proposed (Li and
Wand 2016; Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Luan et al. 2017).
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1183

