The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Context Uncertainty in Contextual Bandits
with Applications to Recommender Systems
Hao Wang1,2 * , Yifei Ma1 , Hao Ding1 , Yuyang Wang1
1

AWS AI Labs 2 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
hw488@cs.rutgers.edu, {yifeim,haodin,yuyawang}@amazon.com

Abstract

exploration during recommendations using the learned representations.
One roadblock is that effective exploration relies heavily
on well learned representations, which in turn require sufficient exploration; this is a chicken-and-egg problem. In a
case where RNN learns unreasonable representations (e.g.,
all items have the same representations), exploration in the
latent space is meaningless. To address this problem, we enable REN to take into account the uncertainty of the learned
representations as well during recommendations. Essentially
items whose representations have higher uncertainty can be
explored more often. Such a model can be seen as a contextual bandit algorithm that is aware of the uncertainty for each
context. Our contributions are as follows:

Recurrent neural networks have proven effective in modeling
sequential user feedbacks for recommender systems. However, they usually focus solely on item relevance and fail to
effectively explore diverse items for users, therefore harming the system performance in the long run. To address this
problem, we propose a new type of recurrent neural networks,
dubbed recurrent exploration networks (REN), to jointly perform representation learning and effective exploration in the
latent space. REN tries to balance relevance and exploration
while taking into account the uncertainty in the representations.
Our theoretical analysis shows that REN can preserve the rateoptimal sublinear regret even when there exists uncertainty
in the learned representations. Our empirical study demonstrates that REN can achieve satisfactory long-term rewards
on both synthetic and real-world recommendation datasets,
outperforming state-of-the-art models.

1. We propose REN as a new type of RNN to balance relevance and exploration during recommendation, yielding
satisfactory long-term rewards.
2. Our theoretical analysis shows that there is an upper confidence bound related to uncertainty in learned representations. With such a bound implemented in the algorithm,
REN can achieve the same rate-optimal sublinear regret.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study the
regret bounds under “context uncertainty”.
3. Experiments of joint learning and exploration on both
synthetic and real-world temporal datasets show that REN
significantly improve long-term rewards over state-of-theart RNN-based recommenders.

Introduction
Modeling and predicting sequential user feedbacks is a core
problem in modern e-commerce recommender systems. In
this regard, recurrent neural networks (RNN) have shown
great promise since they can naturally handle sequential
data (Hidasi et al. 2016; Quadrana et al. 2017; Belletti, Chen,
and Chi 2019; Ma et al. 2020). While these RNN-based models can effectively learn representations in the latent space
to achieve satisfactory immediate recommendation accuracy,
they typically focus solely on relevance and fall short of effective exploration in the latent space, leading to poor performance in the long run. For example, a recommender system
may keep recommending action movies to a user once it
learns that she likes such movies. This may increase immediate rewards, but the lack of exploration in other movie genres
can certainly be detrimental to long-term rewards.
So, how does one effectively explore diverse items for
users while retaining the representation power offered by
RNN-based recommenders. We note that the learned representations in the latent space are crucial for these models’ success. Therefore we propose recurrent exploration networks
(REN) to explore diverse items in the latent space learned
by RNN-based models. REN tries to balance relevance and

Related Work
Deep Learning for Recommender Systems. Deep learning
(DL) has been playing a key role in modern recommender systems (Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and Hinton 2007; van den Oord,
Dieleman, and Schrauwen 2013; Wang, Wang, and Yeung
2015; Wang, Shi, and Yeung 2015, 2016; Li and She 2017;
Chen et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2019; Ding
et al. 2021; Gupta et al. 2021). (Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and
Hinton 2007) uses restricted Boltzmann machine to perform
collaborative filtering in recommender systems. Collaborative deep learning (CDL) (Wang, Wang, and Yeung 2015;
Wang, Shi, and Yeung 2016; Li and She 2017) is devised
as Bayesian deep learning models (Wang and Yeung 2016,
2020; Wang 2017) to significantly improve recommendation
performance. In terms of sequential (or session-based) rec-

* Work done while at AWS AI Labs.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8539

