The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Analysis of Pure Literal Elimination Rule for Non-uniform Random (MAX)
k-SAT Problem with an Arbitrary Degree Distribution
Oleksii Omelchenko, Andrei A. Bulatov
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
{oomelche, abulatov}@cs.sfu.ca

quantity r > 0 is called density (Achlioptas 2009). It turns
out that many key properties of the model depend on the
density. One such property is the satisfiability threshold,
a critical density ρk = ρk (n), which depends on k (and
maybe on n), such that with high probability (w.h.p.) ϕ is
satisfiable whenever r ≤ (1 − ϵ)ρk (n), and unsatisfiable
if r ≥ (1 + ϵ)ρk (n) for ϵ > 0. Finding the satisfiability
threshold for different values of k has been a very active
and fruitful research direction, see, e.g., (Achlioptas 2009;
Ding, Sly, and Sun 2015; Mitchell, Selman, and Levesque
1992; Larrabee and Tsuji 1992; Chvatal and Reed 1992; Goerdt 1996; Achlioptas 2001; Achlioptas and Sorkin 2000;
Achlioptas and Peres 2004).
A similar quantity related to MAX k-SAT, the optimization version of k-SAT, is the (expected) number of clauses
in a formula from Fk (n, rn) that can be simultaneously satisfied. Although this value is not known, a straightforward
argument gives a lower bound of (1 − 2−k )rn and in the
case of MAX 2-SAT (Coppersmith
et al. 2003) places
√
√ this
value between (3/4r + 0.34 r)n and (3/4r + 0.5 r)n.
Lower bounds on the satisfiability thresholds and on the
number of satisfiable clauses of MAX k-SAT instances are
often proved by analyzing relatively simple heuristics. For
example, the (1 − 2−k )rn bound is obtained as the expected number of satisfiable clauses, and this simple technique can be derandomized using the method of conditional expectations (Erdös and Selfridge 1973). A number of more sophisticated heuristics of different types have
been analyzed as well, see, e.g., (Broder, Frieze, and Upfal 1993; Luby, Mitzenmacher, and Shokrollahi 1998; Molloy 2005; Achlioptas and Sorkin 2000; Achlioptas 2001;
Kaporis, Kirousis, and Lalas 2002, 2006; Hajiaghayi and
Sorkin 2003; Frieze and Suen 1996; Alekhnovich and BenSasson 2007), for a survey see (Achlioptas 2009). In this paper we focus on the pure literal elimination heuristic. Given
a CNF ϕ this algorithm simply selects a variable that appears
in ϕ in only one polarity, that is, either only negated or only
unnegated, assigns it the value that satisfies all its occurrences, and removes the clauses that get satisfied. (Broder,
Frieze, and Upfal 1993) (see also (Kim 2008)) analysed the
pure literal elimination rule for solving uniform random 3SAT and MAX 3-SAT. They obtained an expression, which
shows how many clauses are satisfied by each iteration of the
algorithm, and proved that the maximal number of clauses

Abstract
MAX k-SAT is one of the archetypal NP-hard problems.
Its variation called random MAX k-SAT problem was introduced in order to understand how hard it is to solve instances of the problem on average. The most common model
to sample random instances is the uniform model, which has
received a large amount of attention. However, the uniform
model often fails to capture important structural properties
we observe in the real-world instances.
To address these limitations, a more general (in a certain
sense) model has been proposed, the configuration model,
which is able to produce instances with an arbitrary distribution of variables’ degrees, and so can simulate biases in
instances appearing in various applications.
Our overall goal is to expand the theory built around the
uniform model to the more general configuration model for
a wide range of degree distributions. This includes locating satisfiability thresholds and analysing the performance of
the standard heuristics applied to instances sampled from the
configuration model.
In this paper we analyse the performance of the pure literal
elimination rule. We provide an equation that given an underlying degree distribution gives the number of clauses the
pure literal elimination rule satisfies w.h.p. We also show how
the distribution of variable degrees changes over time as the
algorithm is being executed.

Introduction
MAX SAT and its variant MAX k-SAT are known NP-hard
problems even for k = 2. Hence, it is unlikely there exists
an efficient algorithm, unless P=NP, and so we must rely on
heuristics and approximation algorithms. Therefore, it is natural to ask what heuristics are good at solving typical SAT
instances.
There are many ways to define which instances are typical. One of the approaches is to construct a random distribution of SAT formulas, and call formulas sampled from
the distribution as representative or typical. By constructing
appropriate distributions we may imitate formulas coming
from different domains.
The most well-studied random model of k-CNF formulas
is the uniform model Fk (n, rn), which samples equiprobably formulas having n variables and rn k-clauses, where
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3804

