The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

QueryProp: Object Query Propagation for High-Performance Video Object
Detection
Fei He1,2 , Naiyu Gao1,2 , Jian Jia1,2 , Xin Zhao1,2 * , Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1

CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{hefei2018, gaonaiyu2017, jiajian2018}@ia.ac.cn, {xzhao, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Video object detection has been an important yet challenging topic in computer vision. Traditional methods mainly focus on designing the image-level or box-level feature propagation strategies to exploit temporal information. This paper
argues that with a more effective and efficient feature propagation framework, video object detectors can gain improvement in terms of both accuracy and speed. For this purpose,
this paper studies object-level feature propagation, and proposes an object query propagation (QueryProp) framework
for high-performance video object detection. The proposed
QueryProp contains two propagation strategies: 1) query
propagation is performed from sparse key frames to dense
non-key frames to reduce the redundant computation on nonkey frames; 2) query propagation is performed from previous
key frames to the current key frame to improve feature representation by temporal context modeling. To further facilitate
query propagation, an adaptive propagation gate is designed
to achieve flexible key frame selection. We conduct extensive experiments on the ImageNet VID dataset. QueryProp
achieves comparable accuracy with state-of-the-art methods
and strikes a decent accuracy/speed trade-off.

Mean Average Precision (mAP)

85

FGFA

RDN

DorT

Faster R-CNN

MEGA

DFF

LSTS

QueryProp

QueryProp-R-101

80

QueryProp-R-50

image
baseline

75

70
0

10

20

30

40

Frame Per Second (FPS)

Figure 1: mAP vs. FPS on ImageNet VID dataset. The
hollow/solid symbol represents online/offline algorithms.
Methods include FGFA (Zhu et al. 2017a), MEGA (Chen
et al. 2020), RDN (Deng et al. 2019b), DFF (Zhu et al.
2017b), DorT (Luo et al. 2019), LSTS (Jiang et al.
2020), Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015) and our proposed QueryProp. QueryProp outperforms all previous online video detectors and strikes a decent accuracy/speed
trade-off. All methods are tested on a TITAN RTX GPU.

Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental and challenging problems in computer vision. Over the past decades,
remarkable breakthroughs have been made in object detection, with the advances of well-designed modules, e.g., anchor generator and NMS (Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016;
Tian et al. 2019). Recently, DETR (Carion et al. 2020)
and follow-up works (Zhu et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021) reformulate object detection as a query-based set prediction
problem to simplify the detection pipeline. These querybased detectors no longer require heuristic components and
have achieved comparable performance with state-of-the-art
methods.
Although promising results can be achieved on static images, it might not be suitable to directly extend image detectors to videos. The reasons mainly lie in two aspects. First,
object appearances are usually deteriorated by motion or severe occlusion in videos, which bring extreme challenges to

image detectors. Second, existing image detectors generally
depend on cumbersome stacked modules to generate accurate predictions. It might be inefficient to directly perform
frame-by-frame prediction on videos using image detectors,
and the computation burden also restricts the applications of
detectors in real-world systems (Huang et al. 2017).
To address the above challenges, the core idea is to exploit temporal context in videos to boost detection performance. Figure 1 visualizes recent progress of video detectors on ImageNet VID dataset (Deng et al. 2009). As is illustrated, most state-of-the-art detectors gain performance
improvement in terms of either accuracy or speed. That is,
detection accuracy is usually promoted at the expense of
speed, and vice versa. Specifically, to obtain more accurate
predictions of deteriorated frames, some methods (Zhu et al.
2017a; Deng et al. 2019b; Chen et al. 2020) adopt dense feature aggregation strategy for feature representation. In these
methods, each frame is enhanced in an undifferentiated way

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

834

