The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Lower Bounds on Intermediate Results in Bottom-Up Knowledge Compilation
Alexis de Colnet and Stefan Mengel
Univ. Artois, CNRS, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens (CRIL), F-62300 Lens, France
{decolnet, mengel}@cril.fr

Abstract

such as SDD (Darwiche 2011; Choi and Darwiche 2013) or
OBDD (Bryant 1986; Somenzi 2009).
One inconvenience of bottom-up compilation that topdown compilation does not have is that it may create intermediate results that are far bigger in size than the final compiled form of the complete input. This was mentioned for OBDD e.g. in (Narodytska and Walsh 2007;
Huang and Darwiche 2004), and proved for specific bottomup algorithms compiling unsatisfiable CNF formulas into
OBDD in (Krajı́cek 2008; Tveretina, Sinz, and Zantema
2010; Friedman and Xu 2013). As remarked by these works,
large intermediate results are problematic because they may
lead to failed compilation due to memory outs or very long
runtime even for instances that have small representations.
The same problem occurs also for the state of the art SDDcompiler of (Choi and Darwiche 2013), as can be verified
experimentally. To mitigate the problem of large intermediate results, Narodytska and Walsh (2007) introduce heuristics for choosing an order in which to conjoin the clauses
to try to decrease the size of these intermediate OBDD and
show experimentally that these work well when compiling
certain configuration problems bottom-up.
In this paper, we show that having large intermediate results is unavoidable for certain formulas when compiling
them bottom-up, even when the final compiled form is of
constant size. This is true regardless of the order in which
the clauses are conjoined during compilation. We do this
by formalizing the bottom-up compilation process into strDNNF as a deduction process which only uses conjunctive
apply and changing of the vtree, also called restructuring, a
common operation in bottom-up compilation. We then show
that in this framework large intermediate results must occur,
even when compiling unsatisfiable formulas.
Informally stated, our main result is the following.
Theorem 1 (informal). There is a class of CNF formulas
that have constant size str-DNNF representations such that
any bottom-up compilation must produce intermediate strDNNF of exponential size.
Note that the result of Theorem 1 is unconditional and
does not depend on any unproven complexity assumptions.
Moreover, since str-DNNF encompass OBDD and SDD, it
is true for bottom-up compilation into these formats.
The formulas that we use to show Theorem 1 are socalled Tseitin formulas which encode certain systems of

Bottom-up knowledge compilation is a paradigm for generating representations of functions by iteratively conjoining
constraints using a so-called apply function. When the input is not efficiently compilable into a language – generally a
class of circuits – because optimal compiled representations
are provably large, the problem is not the compilation algorithm as much as the choice of a language too restrictive for
the input. In contrast, in this paper, we look at CNF formulas
for which very small circuits exists and look at the efficiency
of their bottom-up compilation in one of the most general
languages, namely that of structured decomposable negation
normal forms (str-DNNF). We prove that, while the inputs
have constant size representations as str-DNNF, any bottomup compilation in the general setting where conjunction and
structure modification are allowed takes exponential time and
space, since large intermediate results have to be produced.
This unconditionally proves that the inefficiency of bottomup compilation resides in the bottom-up paradigm itself.

Introduction
One of the main objectives of knowledge compilation is
transforming, or compiling, knowledge given as a CNF
formula into other representations, generally subclasses of
circuits in decomposable negation normal form (DNNF),
which allow for efficient reasoning (Darwiche 2001). There
are mainly two approaches to this: top-down compilation
roughly consists of remembering the trace of an exhaustive backtracking algorithm exploring the whole solution
space (Huang and Darwiche 2005), while bottom-up compilation iteratively conjoins representations of the clauses
of the input in DNNF. For the latter approach to work, one
needs an efficient so-called apply function which, given two
DNNF and a binary Boolean operation, computes a representation of the function we get by applying the operation
on the two DNNF. The only known fragments of DNNF
that have such an efficient apply function for conjunctions
are so-called structured DNNF (str-DNNF) in which intuitively the variable occurrences in the DNNF must follow
a common tree structure called a vtree (Pipatsrisawat and
Darwiche 2008). As a consequence, in practice, bottomup knowledge compilation targets fragments of str-DNNF
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5564

