The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DPCD: Discrete Principal Coordinate Descent for Binary Variable Problems
Huan Xiong
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
huan.xiong.math@gmail.com

Abstract

solved for millions of binary variables, which makes the size
2n of the feasible set very large (far larger than the number
of atoms in the universe). Usually, it is difficult to find the
optimal solution. Therefore, providing a fast algorithm to
approximately solve Problem (1) is important in practice.
Furthermore, additional constraints on the numbers of 1s
and −1s in the binary variables x are adopted in many cases.
For example, in binary hashing (Shen et al. 2015, 2018) and
graph bisection (Wang et al. 2017; Yuan and Ghanem 2016a),
a balance condition is often required, which means that the
numbers of 1s and −1s are equal to each other. On the other
hand, dense subgraph discovery (Ames 2015; Balalau et al.
2015; Yuan and Ghanem 2016a; Yuan and Zhang 2013) and
information theoretic clustering (Wang and Sha 2011) require
that the numbers of 1s and −1s in x are some fixed integers.
To handle the previously mentioned constraints, in this paper, we focus on the following binary optimization problem:

Binary optimization, a representative subclass of discrete optimization, plays an important role in mathematical optimization
and has various applications in computer vision and machine
learning. Generally speaking, binary optimization problems
are NP-hard and difficult to solve due to the binary constraints,
especially when the number of variables is very large. Existing methods often suffer from high computational costs or
large accumulated quantization errors, or are only designed
for specific tasks. In this paper, we propose an efficient algorithm, named Discrete Principal Coordinate Descent (DPCD),
to find effective approximate solutions for general binary optimization problems. The proposed algorithm iteratively solves
optimization problems related to the linear approximation of
loss functions, which leads to updating the binary variables
that most impact the value of the loss functions at each step.
Our method supports a wide range of empirical objective functions with/without restrictions on the numbers of 1s and −1s in
the binary variables. Furthermore, the theoretical convergence
of our algorithm is proven, and the explicit convergence rates
are derived for objective functions with Lipschitz continuous
gradients, which are commonly adopted in practice. Extensive
experiments on binary hashing tasks and large-scale datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algorithm over
several state-of-the-art methods in terms of both effectiveness
and efficiency.

min f (x),
x

Binary optimization problems are generally formulated as
follows:
x

s.t. x ∈ {±1}n .

(2)

where x is a binary vector of length n, f (·) is a differentiable
objective function (which may be nonconvex), r ≥ −1 is a
given integer, N0 denotes the set of nonnegative integers, and
the restriction Ωr on x is defined as

{±1}n , if r = −1;
Ωr =
(3)
{x ∈ {±1}n : 1⊤ x = 2r − n}, if r ∈ N0 .

Introduction

min f (x),

s.t. x ∈ Ωr ,

(1)

Problem (1) appears naturally in several fields of computer
vision and machine learning, including clustering (Wang and
Sha 2011), graph bisection (Wang et al. 2017; Yuan and
Ghanem 2016a), image denoising (Bi, Liu, and Pan 2014),
dense subgraph discovery (Ames 2015; Balalau et al. 2015;
Yuan and Ghanem 2016a; Yuan and Zhang 2013), multitarget tracking (Shi et al. 2013), and community discovery
(He et al. 2016). In many application scenarios, such as binary
hashing (Gui et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2014; Shen et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018; Xiong et al. 2021), Problem (1) needs to be
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10391

When r = −1, Problem (2) is a binary optimization problem
without further constraints. When r ∈ N0 , Problem (2) becomes an optimization problem with the restriction that there
are exactly r 1s in the binary vector x. For instance, when
r = n/2, the constraint 1⊤ x = 2r − n = 0 implies that the
number of 1s is equal to the number of −1s in x.
In general, Problem (2) is NP-hard due to the binary constraints (Johnson and Garey 1979). Many algorithms, such as
continuous relaxation, equivalent optimization, signed gradient optimization and direct discrete optimization, have been
proposed to approximate the solution (for details, please refer
to Section ). However, they usually suffer from high computational costs or large accumulated quantization errors, or are
only designed for specific tasks.
To overcome these difficulties, in this paper, we propose a
fast and generalized optimization algorithm, termed Discrete
Principal Coordinate Descent (DPCD), to approximately

