The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Regularized Modal Regression on Markov-Dependent Observations: A
Theoretical Assessment
Tieliang Gong1,2 , Yuxin Dong1,2 , Hong Chen3 , Wei Feng1,2 , Bo Dong2,4 , Chen Li1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Ministry of Education, Xi’an 710049, China
3
College of Science, Huazhong Agriculture University, Wuhan 430070, China
4
School of Continuing Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,710049, China
adidasgtl@gmail.com, dongyuxin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn, weifeng.ft@foxmail.com,
dong.bo@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, cli@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Fan, and Suykens 2020), which correspond to mean regression, quantile regression and modal regression (MR), respectively. Each regression protocol has its own benefits in
modeling the noise. For instance, conditional mean regression can achieve satisfactory effect when the noise is Gaussian or sub-Gaussian, while regression towards the conditional quantile and conditional mode can be more robust in
complex noise cases. In practice, selecting an appropriate
regression protocol usually depends on the data type.

Modal regression, a widely used regression protocol, has been
extensively investigated in statistical and machine learning
communities due to its robustness to outliers and heavy-tailed
noises. Understanding modal regression’s theoretical behavior can be fundamental in learning theory. Despite significant
progress in characterizing its statistical property, the majority
of the results are based on the assumption that samples are
independent and identical distributed (i.i.d.), which is too restrictive for real-world applications. This paper concerns the
statistical property of regularized modal regression (RMR)
within an important dependence structure - Markov dependent. Specifically, we establish the upper bound for RMR estimator under moderate conditions and give an explicit learning rate. Our results show that the Markov dependence impacts on the generalization error in the way that sample size
would be discounted by a multiplicative factor depending on
the spectral gap of underlying Markov chain. This result shed
a new light on characterizing the theoretical underpinning for
robust regression.

where  is the noise term. The goal of non-parametric regression is to find the unknown function f ? in a non-parametric
manner while some certain assumptions on noise term are
imposed. This problem can be boiled down to learn a characterization of the conditional distribution, given a set of observations. Some commonly used characterizations include the
conditional mean (Tibshirani 1996), the conditional quantile (Yu, Lu, and Stander 2003; Meinshausen and Ridgeway
2006) and the conditional mode (Chen et al. 2016; Feng,

Modal regression is an appropriate regression protocol
when facing heavy-tailed noises and outliers. Different from
the conventional mean regression, which aims to estimate
the conditional mean, modal regression seeks for the unknown truth f ? by regressing towards to the conditional
mode function. For a set of observations, the mode denotes
the value that appears most frequently. In the context of density estimation, the mode is the value at which the density
function achieves its peak value. Hence, conditional mode
can reveal the structure of outputs and the trends of observations. Research on modal regression can be broadly classified into two categories: (semi-) parametric and nonparametric approaches. For parametric approaches, a parametric
form of the global conditional mode function is required. To
name a few, studies in (Lee 1989; Yu and Aristodemou 2012;
Yao and Li 2014; Lv, Zhu, and Yu 2014; Khardani and Yao
2017) fall in this setting. For non-parametric approaches,
the conditional mode is sought by maximizing a conditional
density or a joint density which is typically estimated in a
non-parametric manner. Typical works include (Chen et al.
2016; Feng, Fan, and Suykens 2020; Yao and Xiang 2016;
Zhou, Huang et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017). Great progress
on understanding the theoretical property of modal regression estimator have been made during the last two decades
(we refer the reader to (Feng, Fan, and Suykens 2020)). In
particular, Chen et al. (Chen et al. 2016) derived asymptotic
error bounds for local modal regression within the framework of kernel density estimation. Feng et al. (Feng, Fan,
and Suykens 2020) established the statistical consistency
for modal regression estimator by assuming the existence
of global conditional mode function.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

All the works mentioned above are based on the assumption that data are independent and identical distributed

Introduction
In this paper, we consider the non-parametric regression
problem which aims at inferring the relationship between
input and output. To formulate this problem, denote X as
the covariate variable that takes values in a compared metric
space X ⊂ Rd and Y that take values in Y = R. The sample
pair (X, Y ) is generated from the following model :
Y = f ∗ (X) + ,

6721

