The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Language Modelling via Learning to Rank
Arvid Frydenlund1,2 , Gagandeep Singh3 , Frank Rudzicz1,2,4
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Nuance Communications Inc.
4
Unity Health Toronto
arvie@cs.toronto.edu, gagandeep.singh1@nuance.com, frank@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract

where we use the softmax function to model a multinomial
distribution over a set vocabulary V , wt ∈ R|V | are the logits produced by the model at step t, j indexes the score for
the j th word-type, and gt is the ground-truth (GT) index at
time t. Such models are trained by minimizing the per-word
cross-entropy (CE or H(y, p)) against the ground-truth text,
y = y1 , . . . , yT ∈ R|V | which are one-hot representations
of x1 , . . . , xT ,

We consider language modelling (LM) as a multi-label structured prediction task by re-framing training from solely predicting a single ground-truth word to ranking a set of words
which could continue a given context. To avoid annotating
top-k ranks, we generate them using pre-trained LMs: GPT2, BERT, and Born-Again models. This leads to a rankbased form of knowledge distillation (KD). We also develop a
method using N -grams to create a non-probabilistic teacher
which generates the ranks without the need of a pre-trained
LM.
We confirm the hypotheses that we can treat LMing as a ranking task and that we can do so without the use of a pre-trained
LM. We show that rank-based KD generally improves perplexity (PPL) — often with statistical significance — when
compared to Kullback–Leibler-based KD. Surprisingly, given
the simplicity of the method, the N -grams act as competitive teachers and achieve similar performance as using either
BERT or a Born-Again model as teachers. GPT-2 always acts
as the best teacher, though, and using it and a Transformer-XL
student on Wiki-02, rank-based KD reduces a cross-entropy
baseline from 65.27 to 55.94 and against a KL-based KD of
56.70.

1

−

During training, we assume that y is a one-hot distribution since we do not have access to the true data distribution.
This assumption is obviously incorrect, considering that humans are able to form a valid continuation of most contexts
with multiple potential words. Call these potential words the
branching set of a given context. Instead, we may want to
give partial credit for predicting words in the branching set,
like ‘rug’ in instances when the GT is ‘mat’ (and vice versa)
based on the semantic similarity between the words and contexts. One method for achieving this is via label smoothing.

Introduction and Motivation

1.1

T
Y

p(xt | x<t )

t=1

=

T
Y
t=1

gt

e wt
P|V |

j

wt
j=1 e

=

gt
T
Y
e wt

t=1

Zt

Label Smoothing and Knowledge Distillation

Label smoothing (LS) is a method which modifies each yt
to be soft-targets, instead of one-hot, by redistributing probability from the GT label to other labels (Szegedy et al. 2016).
It is commonly implemented using a hand-crafted function,
such as setting the GT probability to 0.9 and spreading the
remaining 0.1 uniformly across the other labels (Pereyra
et al. 2017). LS is a simple method which has different motivations depending on the problem it is meant to solve. One
problem is noisy labels (Lukasik et al. 2020a). Here one
views the GTs as truly one-hot but possibly incorrect due to
errors in annotation. A second problem is to regularize overconfident models in situations where we desire that model’s
probabilities should not spike to a single prediction (Pereyra
et al. 2017; Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019). Here, one
again views the GTs as truly one-hot but they do not want
the model to make predictions too close to the one-hot distribution due to how the model is to be used. However, in our
case, we use label smoothing to make the single-target GTs
multi-target, under the view that the true GTs are actually
multi-target but that we lack access to this information.

More often than not, there are many ways to say the same
thing. For example, ‘the cat sat on the mat’ is semantically equivalent to ‘the cat sat on the rug’, in most contexts.
This basic fact about language is ignored when training language models, where we try to maximize the probability
of predicting a single ground-truth word for a given context and penalize all other words regardless of any potential
semantic equivalence. In particular, a word-level language
model (LM) defines a distribution over T discrete tokens,
x1 , . . . , xT , as

p(x1 , . . . , xT | x0 ) =

i
T |V |
T |V |
1 XX i
e wt
1 XX i
yt log
y (log Zt − wti ). (2)
=
T t=1 i=1
Zt
T t=1 i=1 t

(1)
,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10636

