The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MODNet: Real-Time Trimap-Free Portrait Matting via Objective Decomposition
Zhanghan Ke1,2 , Jiayu Sun1 , Kaican Li2 , Qiong Yan2 , Rynson W.H. Lau1
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research
{zhanghake2-c,jiayusun5-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, {likaican,yanqiong}@sensetime.com, rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

pseudo trimap or semantic mask, which is then used to serve
as the priori for alpha matte prediction. Nonetheless, using
the background image as input has to take and align two
photos, while having multiple stages would significantly increase the inference time. These drawbacks make all aforementioned matting methods not suitable for real-time applications, such as camera preview. Besides, limited by insufficient amount of labeled training data, existing trimap-free
methods often suffer from the domain shift problem (Sun,
Feng, and Saenko 2016) in practice, i.e., the models cannot
generalize well to real-world data.
In this work, we present MODNet, a light-weight model
for real-time trimap-free portrait matting. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, unlike prior methods which require auxiliary inputs
or consist of multiple stages, MODNet inputs a single RGB
image and applies explicit constraints to solve matting subobjectives simultaneously in one stage. There are two insights behind our design. First, applying explicit constraints
to different parts of the model can address portrait matting
effectively under a single input image. In contrast, to obtain comparable results, auxiliary inputs would be necessary
for the model trained by only one matting constraint. Second, optimizing sub-objectives simultaneously can further
exploit the model capability by sharing intermediate representations. In contrast, training multiple stages sequentially
will accumulate the errors from the early stages and magnify
them in subsequent stages. We further propose two novel
techniques to improve MODNet’s efficiency and robustness,
including (1) an Efficient Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling
(e-ASPP) module for fast multi-scale feature fusion in portrait semantic estimation, and (2) a self-supervised strategy
based on sub-objective consistency (SOC) to alleviate the
domain shift problem in real-world data.
MODNet has several advantages over previous trimapfree methods. First, MODNet is much faster, running at
67 frames per second (f ps) on a GTX 1080Ti GPU with
an input size of 512 × 512 (including data loading). Second, MODNet achieves state-of-the-art results on both open
source Adobe Matting benchmark and our newly proposed
PPM-100 benchmark. Third, MODNet can be easily optimized end-to-end as it is a single model instead of a complex
pipeline. Finally, MODNet has better generalization ability,
due to our SOC strategy.
Since open-source portrait matting datasets (Shen et al.

Existing portrait matting methods either require auxiliary inputs that are costly to obtain or involve multiple stages that
are computationally expensive, making them less suitable for
real-time applications. In this work, we present a light-weight
matting objective decomposition network (MODNet) for portrait matting in real-time with a single input image. The key
idea behind our efficient design is by optimizing a series of
sub-objectives simultaneously via explicit constraints. In addition, MODNet includes two novel techniques for improving
model efficiency and robustness. First, an Efficient Atrous
Spatial Pyramid Pooling (e-ASPP) module is introduced to
fuse multi-scale features for semantic estimation. Second, a
self-supervised sub-objectives consistency (SOC) strategy is
proposed to adapt MODNet to real-world data to address
the domain shift problem common to trimap-free methods.
MODNet is easy to be trained in an end-to-end manner. It is
much faster than contemporaneous methods and runs at 67
frames per second on a 1080Ti GPU. Experiments show that
MODNet outperforms prior trimap-free methods by a large
margin on both Adobe Matting Dataset and a carefully designed photographic portrait matting (PPM-100) benchmark
proposed by us. Further, MODNet achieves remarkable results on daily photos and videos.

Introduction
Portrait matting aims to predict a precise alpha matte that
can be used to extract the persons in a given image or video.
It has a wide variety of applications, such as photo editing
and movie re-creation. Most existing matting methods use a
pre-defined trimap as a priori to produce an alpha matte (Cai
et al. 2019; Hou and Liu 2019; Li and Lu 2020; Lu et al.
2019; Tang et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2017). However, trimaps are
costly to annotate. Although a depth sensor (Foix, Alenyà,
and Torras 2011) can ease the task, the resulting trimaps may
suffer from low precision. Some recent trimap-free methods
attempt to eliminate the model dependence on the trimap.
For example, background matting (Sengupta et al. 2020) replaces the trimap by a separate background image. Other
methods (Chen et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020; Shen et al.
2016) include multiple stages (i.e., with several independent
models that are optimized sequentially) to first generate a
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1140

