The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Can Semantic Labels Assist Self-Supervised Visual
Representation Learning?
Longhui Wei,1,2 Lingxi Xie,2 Jianzhong He,2 Xiaopeng Zhang,2 Qi Tian,2 .
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Inc.
weilh2568@gmail.com, 198808xc@gmail.com, q-tian@hotmail.com

Abstract

Dataset

Recently, contrastive learning has largely advanced the
progress of unsupervised visual representation learning. Pretrained on ImageNet, some self-supervised algorithms reported higher transfer learning performance compared to
fully-supervised methods, seeming to deliver the message
that human labels hardly contribute to learning transferrable
visual features. In this paper, we defend the usefulness of
semantic labels but point out that fully-supervised and selfsupervised methods are pursuing different kinds of features. To alleviate this issue, we present a new algorithm
named Supervised Contrastive Adjustment in Neighborhood (SCAN) that maximally prevents the semantic guidance
from damaging the appearance feature embedding. In a series
of downstream tasks, SCAN achieves superior performance
compared to previous fully-supervised and self-supervised
methods, and sometimes the gain is significant. More importantly, our study reveals that semantic labels are useful in assisting self-supervised methods, opening a new direction for
the community.

VOC
COCO
Cityscapes

Task

Metric

Det
Seg
Det
InsSeg
InsSeg
Seg

AP50
mIoU
APbb
APmk
AP
mIoU

Pre-Training Method
FSup MoCo SCAN
81.4
82.5
83.4
74.4
73.4
76.6
38.9
39.2
40.9
35.4
35.7
37.2
32.9
33.1
33.8
74.6
75.2
76.5

Table 1: Comparison among three pre-training methods,
namely, fully-supervised (FSup), MoCo (v2 (Chen et al.
2020b)), and SCAN (our approach), in the performance (%)
of downstream transfer. ResNet-50 is used as the standard
backbone, and all models are pre-trained only on ImageNet1K. SCAN enjoys advantages over a wide range of datasets,
tasks, and evaluation protocols. Please refer to the experimental section for full results.
can distinguish the instance from a large gallery containing
its variant as well as other instances. Contrastive learning
has claimed significant improvement over traditional pretext tasks and, interestingly, the performance in some popular downstream tasks (including object detection and image
segmentation, see Tab. 1) has surpassed the fully-supervised
counterpart. This raises an important question: are the semantic labels useless for transferring the learned visual representations to other scenarios?
This paper aims to answer the above question and defend
the usefulness of semantic labels in visual representation
learning. We first point out that fully-supervised and selfsupervised methods are trying to capture different kinds of
features for visual representation. We refer to them as taskspecific semantic features and task-agnostic appearance
features, respectively, where the former mainly focuses on
semantic understanding and the latter is better at instance
discrimination. Typical examples are shown in Fig. 1 where
we extract features from a query image and try to find its
nearest neighbors in the gallery. When the semantic features
are used, the returned images are mostly from the same object class but the general layout may be quite different; when
the appearance features are used, the opposite phenomenon
is observed. Though the appearance features are verified to
have better transfer ability, we expect the semantic features
to assist visual understanding, e.g., improving the classifica-

Introduction
Self-supervised learning has shown its potential in various fields of artificial intelligence. In the natural language
processing (NLP) community, researchers have shown a
promising pipeline that uses a large amount of unlabeled
data for model pre-training (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al. 2018)
and GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020)) and then fine-tunes them
in a series of downstream tasks. This idea is attracting increasing attentions in the computer vision community, yet
the key is to define proper pretext tasks, e.g., solving jigsaw
puzzles (Noroozi and Favaro 2016; Wei et al. 2019; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015), colorization (Zhang, Isola, and
Efros 2016), to facilitate learning efficient visual representations from unlabeled image data.
Recently, this progress is largely advanced by contrastive
learning (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a,b; Tian, Krishnan,
and Isola 2019; Tian et al. 2020; Grill et al. 2020; Krishna
et al. 2020). The assumption is that each image can be encoded into a low-dimensional feature vector and the encoding scheme is resistant against data augmentation (e.g., image cropping and horizontal flipping) so that the algorithm
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2642

