The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DiPS: Differentiable Policy for Sketching in Recommender Systems
Aritra Ghosh1 , Saayan Mitra2 , Andrew Lan1
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Adobe Research
arighosh@cs.umass.edu, smitra@adobe.com, andrewlan@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

which can also be critical to future recommendations. Recently, (Wang et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2019) found that storing
a small set of historical items is highly beneficial in sessionbased SRS. Therefore, the sketching policy, i.e., how to select
which items to keep in the sketch, is key to the effectiveness
of SRS approaches.
The sketching policy plays an important role in real-world
SRS applications to reduce memory consumption and has
been extensively studied in the context of problems such
as moment finding, k-minimum value, and distinct element
counting with probabilistic guarantees (Cormode 2011). Various data structures can be used for sketching (Cormode 2011);
in this paper, we will focus on sample-based sketching as
used in previous RS literature (Wang et al. 2018; Guo et al.
2019) where each sketch item is a past user-item interaction.
This setting is related to problems such as data summarization
and coreset construction where influence score and item hardness are often used to select representative samples (Aljundi,
Kelchtermans, and Tuytelaars 2019; Koh and Liang 2017).
Another related problem is active learning where the label
uncertainty of future items is often used to select the next
item to query (Settles 2011). A common theme for all these
methods is that they define a measure of informativeness to
select the most informative item(s).
The signature of RS applications is that items come in a
streaming fashion (Chang et al. 2017); thus, at each time step,
we observe a single item, decide whether to store it in the
sketch, and decide which item to remove from the sketch if
the current item is stored. This streaming nature is in stark
contrast to the aforementioned problems where one often
have access to the full set of items available to select from.
This “one-pass” sketching setup is more challenging than
the sketching setup in other problems. In practice, simple
sketching strategies such as uniform reservoir sampling are
often adopted in RS applications (Guo et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2018). These approaches usually keep a reservoir of random
historical items to compute the gradient required for model
updates.
Although static sketching policies often work well, two major limitations hinder their further development. First, these
methods define a heuristic informativeness measure to select
items to add or remove from the sketch that is not optimized
on the real objective of RS: predictive quality of the user’s
interaction with future items. Second, these informativeness

In sequential recommender system applications, it is important to develop models that can capture users’ evolving interest over time to successfully recommend future items that
they are likely to interact with. For users with long histories,
typical models based on recurrent neural networks tend to
forget important items in the distant past. Recent works have
shown that storing a small sketch of past items can improve
sequential recommendation tasks. However, these works all
rely on static sketching policies, i.e., heuristics to select items
to keep in the sketch, which are not necessarily optimal and
cannot improve over time with more training data. In this paper, we propose a differentiable policy for sketching (DiPS),
a framework that learns a data-driven sketching policy in an
end-to-end manner together with the recommender system
model to explicitly maximize recommendation quality in the
future. We also propose an approximate estimator of the gradient for optimizing the sketching algorithm parameters that is
computationally efficient. We verify the effectiveness of DiPS
on real-world datasets under various practical settings and
show that it requires up to 50% fewer sketch items to reach
the same predictive quality than existing sketching policies.

Introduction
Recommender Systems (RSs) have seen great success in
matching users with items they are interested in when largescale user-item interaction datasets are available. Early approaches in RS assume that a user’s interest is static over
time and uses a RS model to compute their latent interest
state from historical interactions and predict their ratings on
future items (He et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2017). Sequential RS
(SRS) is an emerging research topic on how to effectively
capture user preference changes over time. The general idea
is to keep track of a user’s latent interest state over time, e.g.,
using a recurrent neural network (Wu et al. 2017; Chung
et al. 2014; Belletti, Chen, and Chi 2019). Since recurrent
neural networks are prone to forget interactions in the distant
past, in many practical scenarios, sequential RS approaches
prioritize on making decisions according to a user’s recent
interactions in the current session (Hidasi et al. 2015; Hidasi
and Karatzoglou 2018). However, these approaches are not
adept at capturing a user’s static interests from their history,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6703

