The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reinforcement Learning with Stochastic Reward Machines
Jan Corazza1,2 , Ivan Gavran2 , Daniel Neider2
1

2

University of Zagreb
Max Planck Institute for Software System

corazzajan@gmail.com, gavran@mpi-sws.org, neider@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

Reward machines only model deterministic rewards.
When the machine is not known upfront, existing learning
methods prove counterproductive in the presence of noisy
rewards, as there is either no reward machine consistent with
the agent’s experience, or the learned reward machine explodes in size, overfitting the noise.
In this paper, we introduce the notion of a stochastic reward machine, which can capture noisy, non-Markovian reward functions, together with a novel algorithm for learning
them. The algorithm is an extension of the constraint-based
formulation of Xu et al. (2020). The extension relies on the
parameters of the reward’s distribution, making sure that experiential rewards respect the distribution. In every iteration,
if the agent establishes that its current hypothesis about the
machine is wrong, it updates the hypothesis (either by fixing
the machine’s parameters or by solving the constraint problem and learning a new machine).
While one could use the proposed algorithm to learn a
suitable (non-stochastic) reward machine and use that machine to guide the reinforcement learning process, we recognize the value of modeling stochasticity explicitly. First,
it reveals information about the distribution of rewards, improving interpretability of the problem at hand. Second, a
direct correspondence between the stochastic reward function and the stochastic reward machine that models it makes
the exposition clearer.
In our experimental evaluation, we demonstrate the successful working of our algorithm on two noisy, nonMarkovian case studies. We compare our algorithm with existing methods (which do not deal explicitly with noise) on
the same case studies: as expected, disregarding the noise by
using existing inference algorithms for classical RMs performs substantially worse than our new approach. Finally,
we compare our algorithm to a baseline method that tries to
“average out” the noise.
To summarize, in this paper we 1) introduce stochastic
reward machines, 2) present a novel algorithm for learning
stochastic reward machines by a RL agent, and 3) experimentally demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm.

Reward machines are an established tool for dealing with reinforcement learning problems in which rewards are sparse
and depend on complex sequences of actions. However, existing algorithms for learning reward machines assume an
overly idealized setting where rewards have to be free of
noise. To overcome this practical limitation, we introduce a
novel type of reward machines, called stochastic reward machines, and an algorithm for learning them. Our algorithm,
based on constraint solving, learns minimal stochastic reward
machines from the explorations of a reinforcement learning agent. This algorithm can easily be paired with existing
reinforcement learning algorithms for reward machines and
guarantees to converge to an optimal policy in the limit. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm in two case
studies and show that it outperforms both existing methods
and a naive approach for handling noisy reward functions.

1

Introduction

The key assumption of a reinforcement learning (RL) model
is that the reward function is Markovian: the received reward
depends only on the agent’s immediate state and action. For
many practical RL tasks, however, the most natural conceptualization of the state-space is the one in which the reward
function depends on the history of actions that the agent has
performed. (Those are typically the tasks in which the agent
is rewarded for complex behaviors over a longer period.)
An emerging tool used for reinforcement learning in environments with such non-Markovian rewards are reward
machines. A reward machine is an automaton-like structure
which augments the state space of the environment, capturing the temporal component of rewards. It has been demonstrated that Q-learning (Sutton and Barto 2018), a standard
RL algorithm, can be adapted to use and benefit from reward
machines (Toro Icarte et al. 2018).
Reward machines are either given by the user, or inferred
by the agent on the fly (Gaon and Brafman 2020; FurelosBlanco et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020). The used learning methods ensure that the inferred machine is minimal, enabling
quick optimal convergence. Besides a faster convergence,
learning minimal reward machines contributes to the interpretability of problems with an unclear reward structure.

1.1

Related Work

Using finite state machines to capture non-Markovian reward functions has been proposed already in the early
work on the topic (Bacchus, Boutilier, and Grove 1996).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6429

