The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ShuttleNet: Position-Aware Fusion of Rally Progress and Player Styles for Stroke
Forecasting in Badminton
Wei-Yao Wang, Hong-Han Shuai, Kai-Shiang Chang, Wen-Chih Peng
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
{sf1638.cs05, hhshuai, kevin5260523.cs05}@nctu.edu.tw, wcpeng@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
The increasing demand for analyzing the insights in sports
has stimulated a line of productive studies from a variety
of perspectives, e.g., health state monitoring, outcome prediction. In this paper, we focus on objectively judging what
and where to return strokes, which is still unexplored in turnbased sports. By formulating stroke forecasting as a sequence
prediction task, existing works can tackle the problem but
fail to model information based on the characteristics of badminton. To address these limitations, we propose a novel
Position-aware Fusion of Rally Progress and Player Styles
framework (ShuttleNet) that incorporates rally progress and
information of the players by two modified encoder-decoder
extractors. Moreover, we design a fusion network to integrate
rally contexts and contexts of the players by conditioning
on information dependency and different positions. Extensive
experiments on the badminton dataset demonstrate that ShuttleNet significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
and also empirically validates the feasibility of each component in ShuttleNet. On top of that, we provide an analysis
scenario for the stroke forecasting problem.

Figure 1: An example of stroke forecasting in a singles rally.
The black line in the middle is the net. Each stroke consists
of the order in the rally and its shot type. Blue lines with shot
types represent possible choices in the next stroke.

(Decroos et al. 2017), play retrieval (Wang et al. 2019) and
autonomous broadcast production (Giancola and Ghanem
2021). There are also sports analytics applications that are
both for coaching-oriented groups and community-oriented
groups (Decroos et al. 2019; Merhej et al. 2021), e.g., player
performance analysis and providing the relation between
performance and market value of the player.
In this paper, we focus on turn-based sports and use badminton as the demonstration example. The related works on
badminton mainly focus on quantifying stroke performance
(Sharma et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021) or detecting strokerelated information from videos (Chu and Situmeang 2017;
Hsu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Yoshikawa et al. 2021).
However, there is another application that has not yet been
addressed by previous works: to forecast the future strokes
including shot types and locations given the past stroke sequences. Predicting future strokes based on the past strokes
is essential and beneficial for coaching the player and determining the strategies since it simulates the tactics of the
players, which can be used to investigate what shot types are
often returned and where the strokes are returned to by the
player for decision-making. In addition, stroke forecasting
can also benefit the community for storytelling by assessing
returning probability distributions during the matches.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of stroke forecasting. Sup-

Introduction
In recent years, sports analytics has drawn significant attention due to the enormous market, which focuses on collecting sports data and implementing advanced techniques for
mining useful information from the data. In Major League
Baseball, for example, teams started to shift to defense by
moving infielders to specific positions according to the hitting pattern of opposing batters, and these types of shifts
dramatically rose from 4.62% in 2012 to 21.17% in 2019
(Bechtold 2019). Furthermore, there are about 100 sportsrelated organizations currently investigating new technologies for delivering interesting stream contents to fans in 2021
(Morrison 2021). Generally, the target audience of sports analytics is composed of both coaching-oriented groups and
community-oriented groups. Coaching-oriented groups aim
at improving player performance, e.g., tactic investigation
(Decroos, Haaren, and Davis 2018; Beal et al. 2020) and
action valuing (Jayanth et al. 2018; Sicilia, Pelechrinis, and
Goldsberry 2019), while community-oriented groups try to
boost the spectator engagement, e.g., highlight prediction
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4219

