The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Beyond GNNs: An Efficient Architecture for Graph Problems
Pranjal Awasthi,1 Abhimanyu Das, 1 Sreenivas Gollapudi 1
1

Google Research
pranjalawasthi@google.com, abhidas@google.com, sgollapu@google.com

Abstract

using GNNs to compute several fundamental graph problems
such as shortest paths, minimum spanning tree, min cut etc.,
necessarily requires the product of√the depth of the GNN and
the embedding size to scale as n where n is the size of
the graph (Loukas 2020b). This in turn places a significant
statistical burden when learning these fundamental problems
on large scale graphs. A natural question then is whether
graph neural networks have any advantage over combinatorial algorithms for the above “simple” graph problems that
lie in the complexity class P, i.e., they admit polynomial time
algorithms. As has been observed in practice (Veličković et al.
2017), and we will demonstrate via experiments in Section ,
graph neural network based approaches can often significantly outperform combinatorial algorithms. In light of the
above we ask the the following: Can one develop sample efficient neural network architectures for graph problems while
retaining the simplicity of the message passing framework?

Despite their popularity for graph structured data, existing
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have inherent limitations
for fundamental graph problems such as shortest paths, kconnectivity, minimum spanning tree and minimum cuts. In
these instances, it is known that one needs GNNs of high
depth, scaling at a polynomial rate with the number of nodes
n, to provably encode the solution space, in turn affecting their
statistical efficiency. In this work we propose a new hybrid
architecture to overcome this limitation. Our proposed architecture that we call as GNN+ networks involve a combination
of multiple parallel low depth GNNs along with simple pooling layers involving low depth fully connected networks. We
provably demonstrate that for many graph problems, the solution space can be encoded by GNN+ networks using depth
that scales only poly-logarithmically in the number of nodes.
This also has statistical advantages that we demonstrate via
generalization bounds for GNN+ networks. We empirically
show the effectiveness of our proposed architecture for a variety of graph problems and real world classification problems.

Recent works have addressed the above question empirically by proposing extensions to GNN by augmenting various pooling operations in conjunction with message passing rounds to capture more global structure (Ying et al.
2018; Simonovsky and Komodakis 2017; Fey et al. 2018). In
this work we propose a theoretically principled architecture,
called GNN+ networks for learning graph problems. Specifically, we borrow from two fundamental paradigms in graph
algorithm design namely, sketching and parallel computation, to design the proposed networks and show that these
paradigms admit a neural architecture that simultaneously
achieves low depth and low embedding size for many graph
problems. Before we present our improved architecture, we
briefly describe the standard GNN framework.

Introduction
In recent years Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become
a popular choice for learning problems over graph structured
data (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Kipf and Welling
2016; Veličković et al. 2017). Computation in GNNs is performed by each node sending and receiving messages along
the edges of the graph, and aggregating messages from its
neighbors to update its embedding vector. After a few rounds
of message passing, the computed node embeddings from all
the nodes are aggregated to compute the final output (Gilmer
et al. 2017). This leads to a simple and elegant architecture
for learning functions on graphs. On the other hand, from a
theoretical and practical perspective, we also need these architectures to be sample efficient, i.e., learnable from a small
number of training examples, where each training example
corresponds to a graph. Recent works have shown that generalization in GNNs depends upon the depth of the architecture,
i.e., the number of rounds of message passing, as well as the
embedding size for each node in the graph (Garg, Jegelka, and
Jaakkola 2020). However, this requirement is in fundamental
conflict with the message passing framework. In particular,

Model for GNNs. In this work we will study GNNs that
fall within the message passing framework, and using notation from previous works we denote such networks as
GNNmp (Loukas 2020b). A GNNmp network operates in
the AGGREGATE and COMBINE model (Gilmer et al.
2017) that captures many popular variants such as GraphSAGE, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) and GIN
networks (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Kipf and
Welling 2016; Xu et al. 2019a). Given a graph G = (V, E),
(k)
let xi ∈ Rd denote the feature representation of node i
at layer k. We will refer to d as the embedding size of the

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6019

