The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Entropy-Based Logic Explanations of Neural Networks
Pietro Barbiero1 , Gabriele Ciravegna 2,3,4 , Francesco Giannini 3 ,
Pietro Lió 1 , Marco Gori 3,4 , Stefano Melacci 3 ,
1

University of Cambridge (UK)
Università di Firenze (Italy)
3
Università di Siena (Italy)
4
Université Côte d’Azur (France)
{pb737, pl213}@cam.ac.uk, gabriele.ciravegna@unifi.it, {francesco.giannini, marco.gori}@unisi.it, mela@diism.unisi.it
2

Abstract

make predictions (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013;
Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016b;
Lundberg and Lee 2017; Selvaraju et al. 2017). Such featurescoring methods are very efficient and widely used, but they
cannot explain how neural networks compose such features
to make predictions (Kindermans et al. 2019; Kim et al.
2018; Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018). In addition, a key
issue of most explaining methods is that explanations are
given in terms of input features (e.g. pixel intensities) that
do not correspond to high-level categories that humans can
easily understand (Kim et al. 2018; Su, Vargas, and Sakurai 2019). To overcome this issue, concept-based approaches
have become increasingly popular as they provide explanations in terms of human-understandable categories (i.e. the
concepts) rather than raw features (Kim et al. 2018; Ghorbani et al. 2019; Koh et al. 2020; Chen, Bei, and Rudin
2020). However, fewer approaches are able to explain how
such concepts are leveraged by the classifier and even fewer
provide concise explanations whose validity can be assessed
quantitatively (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016b; Guidotti
et al. 2018; Das and Rad 2020).

Explainable artificial intelligence has rapidly emerged since
lawmakers have started requiring interpretable models for
safety-critical domains. Concept-based neural networks have
arisen as explainable-by-design methods as they leverage
human-understandable symbols (i.e. concepts) to predict
class memberships. However, most of these approaches focus on the identification of the most relevant concepts but do
not provide concise, formal explanations of how such concepts are leveraged by the classifier to make predictions. In
this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end differentiable approach enabling the extraction of logic explanations from
neural networks using the formalism of First-Order Logic.
The method relies on an entropy-based criterion which automatically identifies the most relevant concepts. We consider four different case studies to demonstrate that: (i) this
entropy-based criterion enables the distillation of concise
logic explanations in safety-critical domains from clinical
data to computer vision; (ii) the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art white-box models in terms of classification accuracy and matches black box performances.

1

Introduction

The lack of transparency in the decision process of some
machine learning models, such as neural networks, limits
their application in many safety-critical domains (EUGDPR
2017; Goddard 2017). For this reason, explainable artificial
intelligence (XAI) research has focused either on explaining
black box decisions (Zilke, Loza Mencı́a, and Janssen 2016;
Ying et al. 2019; Ciravegna et al. 2020a; Arrieta et al. 2020)
or on developing machine learning models interpretable by
design (Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Letham et al. 2015; Cranmer et al. 2019; Molnar 2020). However, while interpretable
models engender trust in their predictions (Doshi-Velez and
Kim 2017, 2018; Ahmad, Eckert, and Teredesai 2018; Rudin
et al. 2021), black box models, such as neural networks,
are the ones that provide state-of-the-art task performances
(Battaglia et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2018; Dosovitskiy et al.
2020; Xie et al. 2020). Research to address this imbalance is
needed for the deployment of cutting-edge technologies.
Most techniques explaining black boxes focus on finding
or ranking the most relevant features used by the model to

Contributions. In this paper, we first propose an entropybased layer (Sec. 3.1) that enables the implementation of
concept-based neural networks, providing First-Order Logic
explanations (Fig. 1). The proposed approach is not just a
post-hoc method, but an explainable by design approach as it
embeds additional constraints both in the architecture and in
the learning process, to allow the emergence of simple logic
explanations. This point of view is in contrast with posthoc methods, which generally do not impose any constraint
on classifiers: After the training is completed, the post-hoc
method kicks in. Second, we describe how to interpret the
predictions of the proposed neural model to distill logic explanations for individual observations and for a whole target
class (Sec. 3.3). We demonstrate how the proposed approach
provides high-quality explanations according to six quantitative metrics while matching black-box and outperforming
state-of-the-art white-box models (Sec. 4) in terms of classification accuracy on four case studies (Sec. 5). Finally, we
share an implementation of the entropy layer, with extensive
documentation and all the experiments in the public repository: https://github.com/pietrobarbiero/entropy-lens.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6046

