The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph Filtration Kernels
Till Schulz1 , Pascal Welke1 , Stefan Wrobel1,2,3
1
Universität Bonn, Germany
Fraunhofer IAIS, Sankt Augustin, Germany
3
Fraunhofer Center for Machine Learning, Sankt Augustin, Germany
{schulzth, welke, wrobel}@cs.uni-bonn.de
2

Abstract

and Kriegel 2005) and the cyclic pattern kernel (Horváth,
Gärtner, and Wrobel 2004). Generally, such kernels revert
to simply comparing counts of mutual substructures. We refer to these kernels as histogram kernels. While they prove
to be successful in many classification tasks, their notion of
comparing features is often too rigid.
Motivated by this limitation, we introduce a family of
graph kernels which regard a graph at multiple levels of resolution. This is realized using the concept of graph filtrations, which define sequences of nested subgraphs that differ only in the sets of edges. Such a sequence can be viewed
as incremental refinements that construct a graph by gradually adding sets of edges. An example depicting this concept is found in Fig. 1. Clearly, with changing sets of edges,
the graph features change as well. That is, features occurring at some point in the sequence may disappear at a later
moment. In this work, we track such feature existence intervals which allows for a comparison not only in terms of
feature frequency but also by when and for how long they
exist. This comparison of feature occurrence distributions is
realized using the Wasserstein distance which, using recent
results, allows for proper kernel functions on this kind of information. A benefit of this approach is the kernels’ ability
to handle continuous edge attributes.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

The majority of popular graph kernels is based on the concept of Haussler’s R-convolution kernel and defines graph
similarities in terms of mutual substructures. In this work, we
enrich these similarity measures by considering graph filtrations: Using meaningful orders on the set of edges, which
allow to construct a sequence of nested graphs, we can consider a graph at multiple granularities. A key concept of our
approach is to track graph features over the course of such
graph resolutions. Rather than to simply compare frequencies of features in graphs, this allows for their comparison in
terms of when and for how long they exist in the sequences.
In this work, we propose a family of graph kernels that incorporate these existence intervals of features. While our approach can be applied to arbitrary graph features, we particularly highlight Weisfeiler-Lehman vertex labels, leading
to efficient kernels. We show that using Weisfeiler-Lehman
labels over certain filtrations strictly increases the expressive power over the ordinary Weisfeiler-Lehman procedure
in terms of deciding graph isomorphism. In fact, this result
directly yields more powerful graph kernels based on such
features and has implications to graph neural networks due to
their close relationship to the Weisfeiler-Lehman method. We
empirically validate the expressive power of our graph kernels and show significant improvements over state-of-the-art
graph kernels in terms of predictive performance on various
real-world benchmark datasets.

1. We introduce a general graph kernel framework which
defines similarity by comparing graph feature occurrence
distributions over sequences of graph resolutions and
show that such kernels generalize histogram kernels.
2. We particularly consider the well-known WeisfeilerLehman subtree features and show that there exist filtration kernels using such features which strictly increase the expressive power over the ordinary WeisfeilerLehman subtree kernel.
3. We empirically validate our theoretical findings on the
expressive power of our kernels and furthermore provide
experiments on real-world benchmark datasets which
show a favorable performance of our approach compared
to state-of-the-art graph kernels.

Introduction
Graph-structured data is prevalent in countless domains
such as social networks, biological interaction graphs and
molecules. A central task on this kind of data is the classification of graphs. Perhaps the most established machine
learning methods for graph classification are based on
graph kernels which, even in the advent of neural network
approaches, remain highly relevant due to their remarkable predictive performance (Kriege, Johansson, and Morris 2020). The majority of graph kernels are instances of
Haussler’s R-convolution kernel (Haussler 1999) which define graph similarity in terms of pairwise similarities between the graphs’ substructures. Some well-known representatives are the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph kernels (Shervashidze et al. 2011), the shortest-path kernel (Borgwardt

Background
Graph kernels. Kernels are functions of the form k :
X ×X → R which define similarity measures on non-empty

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8196

