The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Clinical-BERT: Vision-Language Pre-training for Radiograph Diagnosis and
Reports Generation
Bin Yan, Mingtao Pei*
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
{bean.yan, peimt}@bit.edu.cn

The young man are playing a game of soccer in the field.
Two teams are playing soccer on the grass.
Soccer teams compete to keep the ball on their side.
A couple of guys kicking a soccer ball around.
A group of young men playing a game of soccer.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a vision-language pre-training
model, Clinical-BERT, for the medical domain, and devise three domain-specific tasks: Clinical Diagnosis (CD),
Masked MeSH Modeling (MMM), Image-MeSH Matching
(IMM), together with one general pre-training task: Masked
Language Modeling (MLM), to pre-train the model. The CD
task helps the model to learn medical domain knowledge by
predicting disease from radiographs. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) words are important semantic components in
radiograph reports, and the MMM task helps the model focus on the prediction of MeSH words. The IMM task helps
the model learn the alignment of MeSH words with radiographs by matching scores obtained by a two-level sparse attention: region sparse attention and word sparse attention. Region sparse attention generates corresponding visual features
for each word, and word sparse attention enhances the contribution of images-MeSH matching to the matching scores.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to learn
domain knowledge during pre-training for the medical domain. We evaluate the pre-training model on Radiograph Diagnosis and Reports Generation tasks across four challenging
datasets: MIMIC-CXR, IU X-Ray, COV-CTR, and NIH, and
achieve state-of-the-art results for all the tasks, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our pre-training model.

Frontal and lateral views of the chest. the lungs are
clear. There is no pleural effusion or pneumothorax or
focal consolidation. The cardiomediastinal and hilar
contours are unremarkable.
MeSH: Lungs | Pleural Effusion | Pneumothorax | …

Figure 1: Comparison of sentences in different domains. Radiograph reports are less diverse compared to natural language captions. In the upper part, words highlighted in same
color indicate same semantic. In the bottom part, words
highlighted are full matches (green) or sub-matches (yellow)
for MeSH.

performance degradation since the two domains have different characteristics.
For example, radiograph report generation is similar to
image captioning, but the radiograph report needs to be more
exact than natural captions. As shown in Figure 1, in the five
captions of the first image, the people are stated as ”men”,
”teams” or ”guys”; their actions are expressed as ”play”,
”keep” or ”kick”; the soccer is expressed as ”soccer” or
”ball”. Such expressions with synonyms do not change the
semantic information of sentences. However, radiograph reports requires the use of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
words, such as ”Lungs” and ”Pleural Effusion”, which are
unique in expression and are important semantic components in the reports. It is logical that the MeSH words require
more focus than other words.
As mentioned above, currently, there are only few researches about VL pre-training for medical domain. In current researches, models are usually pre-trained by general pre-training tasks such as Masked Language Modeling
(MLM) and Image Report Matching (IRM). In these tasks,
MeSH words and other words are treated equally, which ignores the important domain knowledge. The MeSH words
should receive more attention in pre-training tasks, which
can enable the pre-trained model to learn domain knowledge
and obtain better performance in the downstream tasks.

Introduction
Vision-Language (VL) pre-training aims to learn general
representations between images and text, that can help to improve the performance of downstream tasks such as Visual
Question Answering, Visual Grounding, and Image Captioning. Many BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) based pre-training
methods (Zhou et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Zhuge et al.
2021) are proposed recently, and achieve promising performance under the context of general domain.
However, there are only few researches about VL pretraining for medical domain, in which there are also many
vision-language tasks such as radiograph diagnosis (Rajpurkar et al. 2017) and reports generation (Jing, Xie, and
Xing 2018; Chen et al. 2020b). Directly applying the model
pre-trained in general domain to medical domain will cause
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2982

