The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Building ASR Systems for the Next Billion Users
Tahir Javed1,2 , Sumanth Doddapaneni2,4 , Abhigyan Raman2 , Kaushal Santosh Bhogale2 ,
Gowtham Ramesh2,4 , Anoop Kunchukuttan2,3 , Pratyush Kumar2,3 , Mitesh M. Khapra1,2,4
1

IIT Madras,
AI4Bharat,
3
Microsoft,
4
RBCDSAI
{tahirjmakhdoomi, dsumanth17, ramanabhigyan, kaushal98b, gowtham.ramesh1}@gmail.com
{ankunchu, kumar.pratyush}@microsoft.com
miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in
2

Abstract

strict ourselves to 30 odd languages which have more than a
million speakers. Many modern ASR models rely on large
amounts of labeled data for each language to build highquality ASR systems. Such approaches are expensive and
not scalable, thus limiting the reach of ASR technologies to
some languages and a section of the population. In addition
to these challenges on availability of labeled data, Indian
languages also face a set of common challenges that need
to be addressed. Collection on unlabeled data for pretraining
can be undertaken as a joint effort since many sources might
be shared amongst these languages. Most Indic scripts have
a larger character set than English which can be addressed in
a uniform way. The complex inflectional systems of Indian
languages would make modelling phonotactics more challenging. The rich inflectional/agglutinative nature of Indian
languages result in larger vocabulary sizes, presenting challenges to incorporating language models. At the same time
there are opportunities from a unified perspective. A largely
overlapping phoneme inventory, logically overlapping character sets and syntactic similarity can help utilize linguistic similarity at various levels to build multilingual models
where transfer learning can be effective.
In this context, it is important to take note of recent work
that has demonstrated the benefits of unsupervised pretraining and multilingual fine-tuning to significantly improve
ASR quality for low-resource languages (Baevski et al.
2020; Conneau et al. 2020a). In particular, the wav2vec
model has established two key results for English ASR.
One, an end-to-end DNN architecture borrowing the popular Transformer architecture from NLP establishes SOTA
results. And two, pretraining on a large corpus of data reduces the requirement for labeled fine-tuning from hundreds
of hours to few hours and to even tens of minutes. It is worthwhile to explore if these findings from English ASR transfer to Indic ASR, especially given the diversity and above
mentioned challenges with Indic languages. More specifically, would a wav2vec-like model establish SOTA results
on available benchmarks across Indic languages? Further,
would large pretraining preclude the need for collecting
large amounts of labeled data? And finally, would pretraining a multilingual model across Indian languages provide
positive benefits across these related languages? In order to
answer these questions, we make the following contribu-

Recent methods in speech and language technology pretrain
very large models which are fine-tuned for specific tasks.
However, the benefits of such large models are often limited to a few resource rich languages of the world. In this
work, we make multiple contributions towards building ASR
systems for low resource languages from the Indian subcontinent. First, we curate 17,000 hours of raw speech data for
40 Indian languages from a wide variety of domains including education, news, technology, and finance. Second, using
this raw speech data we pretrain several variants of wav2vec
style models for 40 Indian languages. Third, we analyze the
pretrained models to find key features: codebook vectors of
similar sounding phonemes are shared across languages, representations across layers are discriminative of the language
family, and attention heads often pay attention within small
local windows. Fourth, we fine-tune this model for downstream ASR for 9 languages and obtain state-of-the-art results on 3 public datasets, including on very low-resource languages such as Sinhala and Nepali. Our work establishes that
multilingual pretraining is an effective strategy for building
ASR systems for the linguistically diverse speakers of the Indian subcontinent.

Introduction
The Indian subcontinent is one of the most linguistically diverse regions in the world as well as one of the most populous regions in the world - little wonder that is called a
‘subcontinent’. It is home to around 2 billion people from 7
countries who speak 100+ major languages (and thousands
of minority languages and dialects) belonging to four major
language families1,2 . Of these the Indo-Aryan and Dravidian
languages are spoken by a large section of the population.
These language families have intermingled over a large period of time giving rise to the Indian linguistic area/sprachbund where languages across these families share many features (Emeneau 1956; Subbārāo 2012; Kunchukuttan and
Bhattacharyya 2020).
Building high-quality ASR models for such a large and
diverse pool of languages is challenging, even if we reCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages of South Asia
2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages of India

10813

