The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GEQCA: Generic Qualitative Constraint Acquisition
Mohamed-Bachir Belaid,1 Nassim Belmecheri,2,3 Arnaud Gotlieb,1 Nadjib Lazaar3 and Helge
Spieker1
1

Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway
LITIO, University of Oran 1, Oran, Algeria
3
LIRMM, University of Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
{bachir@simula.no, belmecheri.nassim@edu.univ-oran1.dz, arnaud@simula.no, lazaar@lirmm.fr, helge@simula.no}
2

Abstract

not formulated as constraint networks and are only solved
via historical records and hand-crafted solutions. Moreover,
inter-relationships among entities may only be known on a
local and pair-wise level, but not all implications for other
pairs of entities are known. To ease the modelling of CP
problems, Bessiere et al. introduced the framework of constraint acquisition (CA) to learn CP models either via passive learning from a set of labelled example assignments
(Bessiere et al. 2005) or via active learning with specific
queries that help to classify complete assignments (Bessiere
et al. 2007). State-of-the-art active CA algorithms include:
Q UACQ (Bessiere et al. 2013), a query-directed learning approach also known as exact learning (Bshouty 2018), which
interacts with the user by asking either complete or partial
queries to reduce the set of possible satisfiable constraints
from a given constraint language; M ULTI ACQ (Arcangioli, Bessiere, and Lazaar 2016), which extends Q UACQ by
learning a maximum number of constraints violated by a
given negative example; T-Q UACQ (Addi et al. 2018), which
bounds the query-generation time in order to speed-up CA;
MQ UACQ -2 (Tsouros, Stergiou, and Bessiere 2019), which
exploits the structure of learned models by focusing queries
on quasi-cliques of constraints; and C LASS ACQ (Prestwich
et al. 2021), which uses a Naive Bayes classifier to discriminate solutions from non-solutions and exploiting this to passively acquire constraint models.

Many planning, scheduling or multi-dimensional packing
problems involve the design of subtle logical combinations
of temporal or spatial constraints. On the one hand, the precise modelling of these constraints, which are formulated in
various relation algebras, entails a number of possible logical
combinations and requires expertise in constraint-based modelling. On the other hand, active constraint acquisition (CA)
has been used successfully to support non-experienced users
in learning conjunctive constraint networks through the generation of a sequence of queries. In this paper, we propose
GEQCA, which stands for Generic Qualitative Constraint
Acquisition, an active CA method that learns qualitative constraints via the concept of qualitative queries. GEQCA combines qualitative queries with time-bounded path consistency
(PC) and background knowledge propagation to acquire the
qualitative constraints of any scheduling or packing problem. We prove soundness, completeness and termination of
GEQCA by exploiting the jointly exhaustive and pairwise
disjoint property of qualitative calculus and we give an experimental evaluation that shows (i) the efficiency of our approach in learning temporal constraints and, (ii) the use of
GEQCA on real scheduling instances.

Introduction
Reasoning about time and space is crucial for many practical problems including automated planning (Belhadji and
Isli 1998), scheduling (Barták, Salido, and Rossi 2008), or
multi-dimensional packing problems (Crainic, Perboli, and
Tadei 2012). In that context, qualitative calculus provide an
algebraic framework that establishes relations between pairs
of entities through a language that is jointly exhaustive and
pairwise disjoint. Examples of qualitative calculus include
(and are not limited to) Point Algebra (Vilain and Kautz
1986b) or Allen’s interval algebra (Allen 1983) to reason
about temporal tasks, Region Connection Calculus (RCC)
(Randell, Cui, and Cohn 1992) to reason about topological
relationships between spatial regions.
In this context, constraint satisfaction techniques and
Constraint Programming (CP) are convenient frameworks
to model and solve qualitative constraint networks. Nevertheless, in many practical situations, complex problems are

Other key approaches to learning constraint models include ModelSeeker (Beldiceanu and Simonis 2012, 2016),
which is able to acquire global constraints or the general
framework of constraint learning (De Raedt, Passerini, and
Reso 2018) or constraint synthesis, which is based on mixed
linear integer programming (Pawlak and Krawiec 2017).
The issue of handling errors in a user’s answer to a query
is also at the heart of the most recent development of interactive CA (Tsouros, Stergiou, and Bessiere 2020). Standard
active CA algorithms cannot easily address qualitative constraints because handling disjunctions of relations leads to a
combinatorial explosion of the constraint basis size. Moreover, although the number of possible inter-relations is limited, controlling the number of queries asked to the user or
the time allocated to generate these queries is a key aspect of
the adoption of CA in practical applications (Bessiere et al.
2017). Learning qualitative temporal constraints has been
initiated by (Mouhoub, Marri, and Alanazi 2018) in LQCN.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3690

