The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adversarial Bone Length Attack on Action Recognition
Nariki Tanaka,1 Hiroshi Kera,2 Kazuhiko Kawamoto,2
1

Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Chiba University
2
Graduate School of Engineering, Chiba University
{ntanaka, kera}@chiba-u.jp, kawa@faculty.chiba-u.jp

Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition models have recently been
shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Compared to
adversarial attacks on images, perturbations to skeletons are
typically bounded to a lower dimension of approximately
100 per frame. This lower-dimensional setting makes it more
difficult to generate imperceptible perturbations. Existing attacks resolve this by exploiting the temporal structure of the
skeleton motion so that the perturbation dimension increases
to thousands. In this paper, we show that adversarial attacks
can be performed on skeleton-based action recognition models, even in a significantly low-dimensional setting without
any temporal manipulation. Specifically, we restrict the perturbations to the lengths of the skeleton’s bones, which allows an adversary to manipulate only approximately 30 effective dimensions. We conducted experiments on the NTU
RGB+D and HDM05 datasets and demonstrate that the proposed attack successfully deceived models with sometimes
greater than 90% success rate by small perturbations. Furthermore, we discovered an interesting phenomenon: in our lowdimensional setting, the adversarial training with the bone
length attack shares a similar property with data augmentation, and it not only improves the adversarial robustness but
also improves the classification accuracy on the original data.
This is an interesting counterexample of the trade-off between
adversarial robustness and clean accuracy, which has been
widely observed in studies on adversarial training in the highdimensional regime.

(a) Original data (hopRLeg)

Adversarial bone
length attack

(b) Adversarial data (jogOnP lace)

Figure 1: The overview of the adversarial bone length attack. Only the bone length of a skeleton is perturbed (approximately 30 effective dimension). Nevertheless, the classification of the motion changes from (a) hopRLeg to (b)
jogOnPlace.
2019; Chen et al. 2021b), text classification (Fursov et al.
2021), and speaker recognition (Chen et al. 2021a).
One of the reasons underlying the current success of adversarial attacks in various domains and tasks is that adversarial attacks manipulate high-dimensional data (Gilmer
et al. 2018; Simon-Gabriel et al. 2019). For example,
in the image domain, even small datasets (e.g., CIFAR10 Krizhevsky (2009)) have hundreds or thousands of
pixels to perturb. In the video domain, more dimensions
can be perturbed by exploiting the temporal structure. Recently, it was shown that adversarial attacks can succeed
even on data in moderate-dimensional settings (Su, Vargas,
and Sakurai 2019; Pony, Naeh, and Mannor 2021). In particular, (Liu, Akhtar, and Mian 2020; Zheng et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2021; Diao et al. 2021) considered adversarial attacks
in skeleton-based action recognition. In this case, an attacker
is allowed to perturb the shape and motion of the skeleton
along frames, and a skeleton at each frame is represented
by approximately 100 parameters (two or three-dimensional
coordinates of approximately 30 joints). With constraints on

Introduction
Deep neural network models are highly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, which are small input perturbations
intentionally applied by an attacker (Szegedy et al. 2014).
This poses a security concern in the use of deep neural network models in practical scenarios. Szegedy et al. (2014)
was the first to discover the adversarial attack, that is, applying small perturbations to images that are imperceptible
to a human but can fool deep neural network models. Since
then, various adversarial attack methods have been proposed
in computer vision (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Carlini and Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018). Adversarial
attacks are not limited to the image domain; they are also
possible in domains such as video classification (Wei et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2335

