The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Token-Based Representation for Image Retrieval
Hui Wu1 , Min Wang2 * , Wengang Zhou1,2 * , Yang Hu1 , Houqiang Li1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
wh241300@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangmin@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, eeyhu, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In image retrieval, deep local features learned in a data-driven
manner have been demonstrated effective to improve retrieval
performance. To realize efficient retrieval on large image
database, some approaches quantize deep local features with
a large codebook and match images with aggregated match
kernel. However, the complexity of these approaches is nontrivial with large memory footprint, which limits their capability to jointly perform feature learning and aggregation. To
generate compact global representations while maintaining
regional matching capability, we propose a unified framework
to jointly learn local feature representation and aggregation.
In our framework, we first extract deep local features using
CNNs. Then, we design a tokenizer module to aggregate them
into a few visual tokens, each corresponding to a specific visual pattern. This helps to remove background noise, and capture more discriminative regions in the image. Next, a refinement block is introduced to enhance the visual tokens with
self-attention and cross-attention. Finally, different visual tokens are concatenated to generate a compact global representation. The whole framework is trained end-to-end with
image-level labels. Extensive experiments are conducted to
evaluate our approach, which outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods on the Revisited Oxford and Paris datasets.

(a) DELG (global)

(b) SOLAR (global)

(c) HOW (local aggregation with a large codebook)
Query
(d) Ours (joint feature learning and aggregation)

Figure 1: Top-5 retrieval results of different methods, including DELG (Cao, Araujo, and Sim 2020), SOLAR (Ng et al.
2020), HOW (Tolias, Jenicek, and Chum 2020) and ours.
Query image is on the left (black outline) with a target object (orange box), and the right are the top-ranking images
for the query. Our approach achieves similar results as HOW,
which use large visual codebook to aggregate local features,
with lower memory and latency. Green solid outline: positive images for the query; red solid outline: negative results.

Introduction
Given a large image corpus, image retrieval aims to efficiently find target images similar to a given query. It is
challenging due to various situations observed in large-scale
dataset, e.g., occlusions, background clutter, and dramatic
viewpoint changes. In this task, image representation, which
describes the content of images to measure their similarities,
plays a crucial role. With the introduction of deep learning
into computer vision, significant progress (Babenko et al.
2014; Gordo et al. 2017; Cao, Araujo, and Sim 2020; Xu
et al. 2018; Noh et al. 2017) has been witnessed in learning image representation for image retrieval in a data-driven
paradigm. Generally, there are two main types of representation for image retrieval. One is global feature, which maps
an image to a compact vector, while the other is local feature,
where an image is described with hundreds of short vectors.

In global feature based image retrieval (Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2018; Babenko and Lempitsky 2015), although the representation is compact, it usually lacks capability to retrieve target images with only partial match. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), when the query image occupies
only a small region in the target images, global features tend
to return false positive examples, which are somewhat similar but do not indicate the same instance as the query image.
Recently, many studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of combining deep local features (Tolias, Jenicek, and
Chum 2020; Noh et al. 2017; Teichmann et al. 2019) with
traditional ASMK (Tolias, Avrithis, and Jégou 2013) aggregation method in dealing with background clutter and occlusion. In those approaches, the framework usually consists of
two stages: feature extraction and feature aggregation, where
the former extracts discriminative local features, which are
further aggregated by the latter for the efficient retrieval.
However, they require offline clustering and coding proce-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2703

