The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Clustering Approach to Solve Hierarchical Classification Problem Complexity
Aomar Osmani1 , Massinissa Hamidi1 , Pegah Alizadeh2
1

2

LIPN-UMR CNRS 7030, Univ. Sorbonne Paris Nord
De Vinci Research Center, Pôle Universitaire Léonard de Vinci
{ao,hamidi}@lipn.univ-paris13.fr, pegah.alizadeh@devinci.fr

Abstract

on its own. For instance, if we consider analyzing human
activities through the accelerometer and heart rate, it is first
easier to separate all activities (concepts) into two main
classes, e.g., body required movements versus others movements, instead of separating the activities between these two
general classes. This general observation shows that inductive biases needed to separate homogeneous groups of concepts recursively give better results and build hierarchical
concept structure between concepts. We propose an original
approach for structuring the considered concepts into hierarchies so that very similar concepts are grouped together and
tackled by specialized classifiers. The idea is that classification at different levels of the hierarchy may rely on different
features or different combinations of the same features (Osmani, Hamidi, and Alizadeh 2021; Yao et al. 2019). Indeed,
many real-world classification problems are naturally cast
as hierarchical classification problems (Cai and Hofmann
2004; Wehrmann, Cerri, and Barros 2018; Yao et al. 2019;
Zhou, Xiao, and Wu 2011; Hamidi, Osmani, and Alizadeh
2020). A work on the semantic relationships between categories in a hierarchical structure shows that they are usually of the type generalization-specialization (Zhou, Xiao,
and Wu 2011). In other words, the lower-level categories are
supposed to have the same general properties as the higherlevel categories plus additional more specific properties.
The problem at hand is twice difficult as we have to, first,
find the most appropriate hierarchical structure and, second, find optimal learners assigned to the nodes of the hierarchical structure. Some works have tackled this problem
by exploiting a priori knowledge and structures of the domain (Samie, Bauer, and Henkel 2020; Scheurer et al. 2020).
However, such a priori knowledge is not always available. A
naive approach consists in building all the combinations of
concepts to check for which groups of classes the quality
of the learning is optimal and to start again recursively this
approach until the concepts are totally separated from each
other. However, this approach faces the combinatorial explosion of the number of cases that should be treated (see § for
more details on the complexity analysis).
To overcome this complexity limitation, we propose an
original approach combining clustering and classification
on groups of concepts based on two original measures between concepts, namely cohesion and dispersion, optimized
throughout the process until the derivation of an optimal

In a large domain of classification problems for real applications, like human activity recognition, separable spaces between groups of concepts are easier to learn than each concept alone. This is because the search space biases required
to separate groups of classes (or concepts) are more relevant
than the ones needed to separate classes individually. For example, it is easier to learn the activities related to the body
movements group (running, walking) versus ”on-wheels” activities group (bicycling, driving a car), before learning more
specific classes inside each of these groups. Despite the obvious interest of this approach, our theoretical analysis shows
a high complexity for finding an exact solution. We propose
in this paper an original approach based on the association of
clustering and classification approaches to overcome this limitation. We propose a better approach to learn the concepts by
grouping classes recursively rather than learning them class
by class. We introduce an effective greedy algorithm and
two theoretical measures, namely cohesion and dispersion, to
evaluate the connection between the clusters and the classes.
Extensive experiments on the SHL dataset show that our approach improves classification performances while reducing
the number of instances used to learn each concept.

Introduction
In Internet of Things and particularly human activity recognition (HAR), concepts (or activities) naturally intermingle and the boundaries are not evident, e.g., the transition
from the concept walking to running remains blurred. These
phenomena are accentuated by the sensors capabilities and
the perspectives (views) through which the data is collected
(position in space, position on the body, sensor characteristics) (Aghajan and Cavallaro 2009; Hamidi and Osmani
2020). Incomplete or redundant perspectives can lead to further confuse the concepts between them and to reduce the
performance of the learning process. Beyond the dependencies (overlap) relating to the perspectives provided by the
deployments of sensors, the phenomena themselves and the
concepts which compose them often exhibit intrinsic dependencies (Silla and Freitas 2011; Essaidi, Osmani, and Rouveirol 2015; Hamidi and Osmani 2021).
We find that some concepts are easier to distinguish when
grouped with other concepts than when each one is learned
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7904

