The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Unsupervised Way to Understand Artifact Generating Internal Units
in Generative Neural Networks
Haedong Jeong1,2 , Jiyeon Han2 , Jaesik Choi2,3 *
1
2

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
3
INEEJI, South Korea
{haedong.jeong, j.han, jaesik.choi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

based similarity in the feature manifold (Kynkäänniemi et al.
2019), was proposed as an alternative to estimate the quality
of individual generations. Although this method has shown
effectiveness in evaluation, it requires a huge amount of real
data and an external network for feature embedding to make
the scoring process reliable.
A few studies have been conducted to understand the internal generation mechanism of GANs to detect or correct
the individual generations with low visual fidelity. In GAN
Dissection (Bau et al. 2019), the authors identify the defective units that mainly cause artifacts based on a set of
generations on which a featuremap unit is highly activated.
The authors further improve the fidelity of individual generations by zero-ablating the detected featuremap units. A
similar approach trains an external classifier to extract the
region with low visual fidelity in the individual generations
and identifies internal units related to the extracted region
(Tousi et al. 2021). On the other hand, manipulation of the
latent code based on the binary linear classifier has been proposed to correct the artifact (Shen et al. 2020). While these
approaches can be utilized to evaluate the fidelity of individual samples, they still require additional resources such as a
human annotation process.
In this paper, we propose the concept of local activation to
detect and correct the artifact generations in an unsupervised
manner. We also discuss a geometrical analysis to partially
investigate the relation between the local activation and low
visual fidelity of individual generations. The main advantages of our method are twofold: (1) external networks or
supervisions are unnecessary to detect and correct artifact
generations. The evaluation is performed solely on the target generator by using the internal property for scoring, and
(2) the proposed approach can be applicable to various structures of GANs for evaluating the visual fidelity, because the
proposed approach is based on neurons that are the common basic components of neural networks. We experimentally verify that our method can detect and correct artifact
effectively on PGGAN (Karras et al. 2018), and StyleGAN2
(Karras et al. 2020) with various datasets.

Despite significant improvements on the image generation
performance of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs),
generations with low visual fidelity still have been observed.
As widely used metrics for GANs focus more on the overall performance of the model, evaluation on the quality of
individual generations or detection of defective generations
is challenging. While recent studies try to detect featuremap
units that cause artifacts and evaluate individual samples,
these approaches require additional resources such as external networks or a number of training data to approximate the
real data manifold. In this work, we propose the concept of
local activation, and devise a metric on the local activation to
detect artifact generations without additional supervision. We
empirically verify that our approach can detect and correct artifact generations from GANs with various datasets. Finally,
we discuss a geometrical analysis to partially reveal the relation between the proposed concept and low visual fidelity.

Introduction
Since the adversarial generative training scheme (Goodfellow et al. 2014) emerged, deep generative neural networks (DGNNs) have shown incredible performance on image generation tasks. From recent research with generative
adversarial networks (GANs), various structures and training strategies (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019; Karras et al. 2018; Miyato et al. 2018; Karras, Laine, and Aila
2019) have been proposed to overcome the weaknesses of
the adversarial training scheme (e.g., unstable training) and
to accelerate the improvements of visual fidelity of the generations.
Despite significant improvements, models sometimes
present undesirable outcomes such as perceptually defective generations called artifacts. Various metrics have been
suggested to evaluate the performance of a generator (Salimans et al. 2016; Heusel et al. 2017; Sajjadi et al. 2018;
Kynkäänniemi et al. 2019). However, it is non-trivial to evaluate the visual fidelity of each individual sample because
existing metrics mainly focus on the distributional difference between the real dataset and the generations in the feature manifold. A research, which uses the nearest neighbor

Related Work
Deep Generative Neural Networks DGNNs are the models which approximate the input distribution given a target with neural networks. Representative architectures in-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1052

