The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Achieving Counterfactual Fairness for Causal Bandit
Wen Huang, Lu Zhang, Xintao Wu
University of Arkansas
{wenhuang, lz006, xintaowu}@uark.edu

Abstract

et al. (2016) was the first paper of studying fairness in classic and contextual bandits. It defined fairness with respect
to one-step rewards and introduced a notion of meritocratic
fairness, i.e., the algorithm should never place higher selection probability on a less qualified arm (e.g., job applicant)
than on a more qualified arm. The following works along
this direction include (Joseph et al. 2018) for infinite and
contextual bandits, (Jabbari et al. 2017) for reinforcement
learning, (Liu et al. 2017) for the simple stochastic bandit
setting with calibration based fairness. However, all existing
works require some fairness constraint on arms at every round
of the learning process, which is different from our user-side
fairness setting. One recent work (Huang et al. 2020) focused
on achieving user-side fairness in bandit setting, but it only
purposed a heuristic way to achieve correlation based group
level fairness and didn’t incorporate causal inference and
counterfactual fairness into bandits.
By incorporating causal inference into bandits, we first
propose the d-separation based upper confidence bound bandit algorithm (D-UCB), based on which we then propose the
fair causal bandit (F-UCB) for achieving the counterfactual
individual fairness. Our work is inspired by recent research
on causal bandits (Lattimore, Lattimore, and Reid 2016; Sen
et al. 2017; Lee and Bareinboim 2018, 2019; Lu et al. 2020),
which studied how to learn optimal interventions sequentially
by representing the relationship between interventions and
outcomes as a causal graph along with associated conditional
distributions. For example, Lu et al. (2020) developed the
causal UCB (C-UCB) that exploits the causal relationships
between the reward and its direct parents. However, different
from previous works, our algorithms adopt soft intervention
(Correa and Bareinboim 2020) to model the arm selection
strategy and leverage the d-separation set identified from the
underlying causal graph, thus greatly reducing the amount
of exploration needed to achieve low
p cumulative regret. We
show that our D-UCB achieves Õ( |W| · T ) regret bound
where T is the number of iterations and W is a set that dseparates arm/user features and reward R in the
p causal graph.
As a comparison, the C-UCB achieves Õ( |P a(R)| · T )
where P a(R) is the parental variables of R that is a trivial
solution of the d-separation set. In our F-UCB, we further
achieve counterfactual fairness in each round of exploration.
Counterfactual fairness requires the expected reward an individual would receive keeps the same if the individual’s

In online recommendation, customers arrive in a sequential
and stochastic manner from an underlying distribution and the
online decision model recommends a chosen item for each
arriving individual based on some strategy. We study how to
recommend an item at each step to maximize the expected
reward while achieving user-side fairness for customers, i.e.,
customers who share similar profiles will receive a similar
reward regardless of their sensitive attributes and items being
recommended. By incorporating causal inference into bandits
and adopting soft intervention to model the arm selection strategy, we first propose the d-separation based UCB algorithm
(D-UCB) to explore the utilization of the d-separation set in
reducing the amount of exploration needed to achieve low cumulative regret. Based on that, we then propose the fair causal
bandit (F-UCB) for achieving the counterfactual individual
fairness. Both theoretical analysis and empirical evaluation
demonstrate effectiveness of our algorithms.

Introduction
Fairness in machine learning has been a research subject with
rapid growth recently. Although there are many works focusing on fairness in personalized recommendation (Celis et al.
2018; Liu et al. 2017; Zhu, Hu, and Caverlee 2018), how to
achieve individual fairness in bandit recommendation still
remains a challenging task. We focus on online recommendation, e.g., customers are being recommended items, and
consider the setting where customers arrive in a sequential
and stochastic manner from an underlying distribution and
the online decision model recommends a chosen item for
each arriving individual based on some strategy. The challenge here is how to choose the arm at each step to maximize
the expected reward while achieving user-side fairness for
customers, i.e., customers who share similar profiles will
receive similar rewards regardless of their sensitive attributes
and items being recommended.
Recently researchers have started taking fairness and discrimination into consideration in the design of personalized
recommendation algorithms (Celis et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2017;
Zhu, Hu, and Caverlee 2018; Joseph et al. 2016, 2018; Jabbari et al. 2017; Burke 2017; Burke, Sonboli, and OrdonezGauger 2018; Ekstrand et al. 2018). Among them, Joseph
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6952

