The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GALAXY: A Generative Pre-trained Model for Task-Oriented Dialog with
Semi-supervised Learning and Explicit Policy Injection
Wanwei He1,2 * † , Yinpei Dai3 * , Yinhe Zheng3 , Yuchuan Wu3 , Zheng Cao3 , Dermot Liu3
Peng Jiang3 , Min Yang1‡ , Fei Huang3 , Luo Si3 , Jian Sun3 , Yongbin Li3‡
1

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Alibaba Group, China
{ww.he, min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, {yinpei.dyp, shuide.lyb, f.huang, luo.si, jian.sun}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Can you find me a place to eat in the city center?

Pre-trained models have proved to be powerful in enhancing task-oriented dialog systems. However, current
pre-training methods mainly focus on enhancing dialog understanding and generation tasks while neglecting the exploitation of dialog policy. In this paper, we
propose GALAXY, a novel pre-trained dialog model
that explicitly learns dialog policy from limited labeled
dialogs and large-scale unlabeled dialog corpora via
semi-supervised learning. Specifically, we introduce a
dialog act prediction task for policy optimization during pre-training and employ a consistency regularization term to refine the learned representation with the
help of unlabeled dialogs. We also implement a gating mechanism to weigh suitable unlabeled dialog samples. Empirical results show that GALAXY substantially improves the performance of task-oriented dialog systems, and achieves new state-of-the-art results on
benchmark datasets: In-Car, MultiWOZ2.0 and MultiWOZ2.1, improving their end-to-end combined scores
by 2.5, 5.3 and 5.5 points, respectively. We also show
that GALAXY has a stronger few-shot ability than existing models under various low-resource settings. For
reproducibility, we release the code and data at https:
//github.com/siat-nlp/GALAXY.

Understanding

Intent: FindRestaurants
Slots: area = center

Request

Dialog Act
Policy

Generation

Request

Inform … Confirm

Sure, any cuisine preference?

Figure 1: Given the input user utterance, a task-oriented dialog system needs to perform understanding, policy planning,
and generation successively to complete the reply.

However, as reported in previous studies (Zhang et al.
2020b; Kulhánek et al. 2021), there are intrinsic differences
between the distribution of human conversations and plain
texts. Directly fine-tuning plain-text-trained PLMs on downstream dialog tasks hinders the model from effectively capturing conversational linguistic knowledge and thus leads to
sub-optimal performances (Mehri et al. 2019; Zeng and Nie
2021; Wu and Xiong 2020). Current attempts to tackle this
issue try to build Pre-trained Conversation Models (PCMs)
by directly optimizing vanilla language model objectives on
dialog corpora (Mehri, Eric, and Hakkani-Tur 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020b; Henderson et al. 2019), which shows improved
results on both dialog understanding (Wu et al. 2020) and
generation (Peng et al. 2020b).
Despite these reported advances, few approaches are proposed to further enrich the pre-training process of PCMs
with the knowledge of dialog policy. Specifically, existing
methods either ignore explicit policy modeling or use latent
variables without considering external dialog policy information (Bao et al. 2020), which hinders the possibility of
learning controllable policy during pre-training. The optimization of dialog policy is usually formulated as a DA prediction task, which is crucial in TOD systems (Su et al. 2017;
Liu et al. 2018). Therefore, we hypothesize that explicitly incorporating the DA annotations into the pre-training process
can also facilitate learning better representations for policy
optimization to improve the overall end-to-end performance.
A naive way to utilize these labels is to design a multi-

Introduction
Task-oriented dialog (TOD) systems aim to help users accomplish certain tasks through conversations. Fundamental
abilities of a TOD system include: (1) Dialog understanding: extracting structured semantics from user utterances; (2)
Policy planning: determining a Dialog Act (DA) that leads
to successful task completion; and (3) Dialog generation:
producing appropriate responses (Figure 1). With the recent
progress of Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs), remarkable performances improvements are achieved by casting
TODs as generative language modeling tasks (Peng et al.
2020a; Lin et al. 2020), which benefit from the rich linguistic knowledge embedded in PLMs.
* Equal Contribution.
†

Work done while the author was interning at Alibaba.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

10749

