The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improved Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks for Quantized Networks
Kartik Gupta 1,3 , Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan †1,2
1

Australian National University
2
Amazon Science
3
DATA61-CSIRO
kartik.gupta@anu.edu.au, thalaiyasingam.ajanthan@anu.edu.au

Abstract

these quantized models suffer from gradient masking issues (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018) and in turn show
fake robustness. We attribute this vanishing gradients issue to poor forward-backward signal propagation caused by
trained binary weights, and our idea is to improve signal
propagation of the network without changing the prediction.
There is a body of work on improving signal propagation
in a neural network (e.g., (Glorot and Bengio 2010; Pennington, Schoenholz, and Ganguli 2017; Lu, Gould, and Ajanthan 2020)), however, we are facing a unique challenge of
improving signal propagation while preserving the decision
boundary, since our ultimate objective is to generate adversarial attacks. To this end, we first discuss the conditions to
ensure informative gradients and then resort to a temperature
scaling approach (Guo et al. 2017) (which scales the logits
before applying softmax cross-entropy) to show that, even
with a single positive scalar the vanishing gradients issue in
BNN s can be alleviated achieving near perfect success rate.
Specifically, we introduce two techniques to choose the
temperature scale: 1) based on the singular values of the
input-output Jacobian, 2) by maximizing the norm of the
Hessian of the loss with respect to the input. The justification
for the first case is that if the singular values of input-output
Jacobian are concentrated around 1 (defined as dynamical
isometry (Pennington, Schoenholz, and Ganguli 2017)) then
the network is said to have good signal propagation. On the
other hand, the intuition for maximizing the Hessian norm
is that if the Hessian norm is large, then the gradient of the
loss with respect to the input is sensitive to an infinitesimal
change in the input. This is a sufficient condition for the network to have good signal propagation as well as informative
gradients under the assumption that the network does not
have any randomized or non-differentiable components.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We first show via various empirical checks that BNNs possess fake robustness against gradient based adversarial attacks such as FGSM (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014) and PGD (Madry et al. 2017).
• By accounting poor signal propagation for the failure of
gradient based adversarial attacks, we present temperature scaling based solution to improve the existing attacks
without changing the prediction of the network.
• In order to estimate appropriate scalar for temperature
scaling in gradient based adversarial attacks, we present

Neural network quantization has become increasingly popular due to efficient memory consumption and faster computation resulting from bitwise operations on the quantized networks. Even though they exhibit excellent generalization capabilities, their robustness properties are not well-understood.
In this work, we systematically study the robustness of quantized networks against gradient based adversarial attacks and
demonstrate that these quantized models suffer from gradient vanishing issues and show a fake sense of robustness. By
attributing gradient vanishing to poor forward-backward signal propagation in the trained network, we introduce a simple
temperature scaling approach to mitigate this issue while preserving the decision boundary. Despite being a simple modification to existing gradient based adversarial attacks, experiments on multiple image classification datasets with multiple network architectures demonstrate that our temperature
scaled attacks obtain near-perfect success rate on quantized
networks while outperforming original attacks on adversarially trained models as well as floating-point networks.

Introduction
Neural Network (NN) quantization has become increasingly
popular due to reduced memory and time complexity enabling real-time applications and inference on resourcelimited devices. Such quantized networks often exhibit excellent generalization capabilities despite having low capacity due to reduced precision for parameters and activations. However, their robustness properties are not wellunderstood. In particular, while parameter quantized networks are claimed to have better robustness against gradient based adversarial attacks (Galloway, Taylor, and Moussa
2018), activation only quantized methods are shown to be
vulnerable (Lin, Gan, and Han 2019).
In this work1 , we consider the extreme case of Binary
Neural Networks (BNNs) and systematically study the robustness properties of parameter quantized models, as well
as both parameter and activation quantized models against
gradient based adversarial attacks. Our analysis reveals that
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Open-source implementation available at https://github.com/
kartikgupta-at-anu/attack-bnn. † Work done prior to joining Amazon

6810

