The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Inharmonious Region Localization by Magnifying Domain Discrepancy
Jing Liang1 , Li Niu1 * , Penghao Wu1 , Fengjun Guo2 , Teng Long2
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
INTSIG
{leungjing,ustcnewly,wupenghaoCraig}@sjtu.edu.cn, {fengjun guo, mike long}@intsig.net

Abstract
Inharmonious region localization aims to localize the region
in a synthetic image which is incompatible with surrounding
background. The inharmony issue is mainly attributed to the
color and illumination inconsistency produced by image editing techniques. In this work, we tend to transform the input
image to another color space to magnify the domain discrepancy between inharmonious region and background, so that
the model can identify the inharmonious region more easily.
To this end, we present a novel framework consisting of a
color mapping module and an inharmonious region localization network, in which the former is equipped with a novel
domain discrepancy magnification loss and the latter could
be an arbitrary localization network. Extensive experiments
on image harmonization dataset show the superiority of our
designed framework.

Figure 1: We show the examples of inharmonious synthetic
images in the top row and their inharmonious region masks
in the bottom row.

Introduction
With the rapid development of image editing techniques and
tools (e.g., appearance adjustment, copy-paste), users can
blend and edit existing source images to create fantastic images that are only limited by an artist’s imagination. However, some manipulated regions in the created synthetic images may have inconsistent color and lighting statistics with
the background, which could be attributed to careless editing or the difference among source images (e.g., capture
condition, camera setting, artistic style). We refer to such
regions as inharmonious regions (Liang, Niu, and Zhang
2021), which will remarkably downgrade the quality and fidelity of synthetic images.
Recently, the task of inharmonious region localization (Liang, Niu, and Zhang 2021) has been proposed to
identify the inharmonious regions. When the inharmonious
regions are identified, users can manually adjust the inharmonious regions or employ image harmonization methods (Tsai et al. 2017; Cong et al. 2020; Cun and Pun 2020;
Cong et al. 2021) to harmonize the inharmonious regions,
yielding the images with higher quality and fidelity.
To the best of our knowledge, the only existing inharmonious region localization method is DIRL (Liang, Niu,

and Zhang 2021), which attempted to fuse multi-scale features and avoid redundant information. However, DIRL is a
rather general model without exploiting the uniqueness of
this task, that is, the discrepancy between inharmonious region and background. Besides, the performance of DIRL
is still far from satisfactory when the inharmonious region
is surrounded by cluttered background or objects that have
similar shapes to the inharmonious region.
Considering the uniqueness of inharmonious region localization task, we refer to each suite of color and illumination
statistics as one domain following (Cong et al. 2020, 2021).
Thus, the inharmonious region and the background belong
to two different domains. In this work, we propose a novel
method based on a simple intuition: can we transform the
input image to another color space to magnify the domain
discrepancy between inharmonious region and background,
so that the model can identify the inharmonious region more
easily?
To achieve this goal, we propose a framework composed of two components: one color mapping module and
one inharmonious region localization network. First, the
color mapping module transforms the input image to another color space. Then, the inharmonious region localization network detects the inharmonious region based on the
transformed image. For color mapping module, we extend

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1574

