The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Coarse-to-Fine Generative Modeling for Graphic Layouts
Zhaoyun Jiang1,3 * , Shizhao Sun2 ,
Jihua Zhu3† , Jian-Guang Lou2† , Dongmei Zhang2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
jzy124@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, shizsu@microsoft.com, zhujh@xjtu.edu.cn, jlou@microsoft.com, dongmeiz@microsoft.com
Abstract
Even though graphic layout generation has attracted growing
attention recently, it is still challenging to synthesis realistic
and diverse layouts, due to the complicated element relationships and varied element arrangements. In this work, we seek
to improve the performance of layout generation by incorporating the concept of regions, which consist of a smaller
number of elements and appears like a simple layout, into the
generation process. Specifically, we leverage Variational Autoencoder (VAE) as the overall architecture and decompose
the decoding process into two stages. The first stage predicts
representations for regions, and the second stage fills in the
detailed position for each element within the region based on
the predicted region representation. Compared to prior studies that merely abstract the layout into a list of elements and
generate all the element positions in one go, our approach
has at least two advantages. First, by the two-stage decoding,
our approach decouples the complex layout generation task
into several simple layout generation tasks, which reduces the
problem difficulty. Second, the predicted regions can help the
model roughly know what the graphic layout looks like and
serve as global context to improve the generation of detailed
element positions. Qualitative and quantitative experiments
demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms the
existing methods, especially on the complex graphic layouts.

Figure 1: Examples for graphic layouts. Each subfigure contains a graphic design (left), a corresponding layout (middle)
and a possible region segmentation (right).
ited number of elements). Though meaningful attempts are
made, it is still challenging to generate realistic and complex layouts, due to the complicated relationships between
elements and the enormous ways that individual elements
can be combined into a layout.
In this work, we propose generating graphic layouts in a
coarse-to-fine manner. While most studies consider the entire layout as a single list of elements, our key insight is to
segment the layout into several regions, each of which appears like an individual simple layout and contains a smaller
number of elements from the whole layout. Figure 1 shows
examples for realistic layouts and their possible region segmentations. Specifically, we leverage Variational Autoencoder (Kingma and Welling 2013) as the overall architecture
and decompose the decoding process into two stages (see
Figure 2(a)). The first decoder, called region decoder, predicts a set of region representations based on the latent code.
As the region segmentation is not explicitly provided by the
layout itself, we propose a simple yet effective method based
on grid lines to extract the pseudo region segmentation from
the layout and take it as the supervision for the training of
the region decoder. The second decoder, called element decoder, fills in the detailed position for each element within
the region by conditioning on the region representation. To
make the model treat each region as a simple layout, element
positions are transformed into relative positions to the corresponding region during the training of the element decoder.

Introduction
Graphic design appears almost everywhere, e.g., posters,
documents and mobile applications. In achieving a successful graphic design, the layout, presented by positions and
sizes of all the elements on a design, plays a critical role.
To aid the creation of graphic layouts, growing interest has
been devoted to automatic layout generation. Most studies
abstract the layout into a list of bounding boxes and generate layouts by predicting positions of all the elements in one
go (Li et al. 2019; Patil et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2020; Gupta
et al. 2020; Arroyo, Postels, and Tombari 2021). Specifically, recent work explores generic layout generation by
leveraging Transformer, while early studies usually impose
restrictions when generating layouts (e.g., using heuristicbased labels for element relationships and handling a lim* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1096

