The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TA2 N: Two-Stage Action Alignment Network for Few-Shot Action Recognition
Shuyuan Li1 * , Huabin Liu1 * , Rui Qian1 , Yuxi Li1 , John See2
Mengjuan Fei3 , Xiaoyuan Yu3 , Weiyao Lin1 †
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Heriot-Watt University Malaysia, Putrajaya, Malaysia
3
Huawei Cloud, China
{shuyuanli,huabinliu,qrui9911,lyxok1}@sjtu.edu.cn, J.See@hw.ac.uk
{feimengjuan1,yuxiaoyuan}@huawei.com, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
(a)

Few-shot action recognition aims to recognize novel action classes (query) using just a few samples (support). The
majority of current approaches follow the metric learning
paradigm, which learns to compare the similarity between
videos. Recently, it has been observed that directly measuring this similarity is not ideal since different action instances
may show distinctive temporal distribution, resulting in severe misalignment issues across query and support videos. In
this paper, we arrest this problem from two distinct aspects –
action duration misalignment and action evolution misalignment. We address them sequentially through a Two-stage Action Alignment Network (TA2 N). The first stage locates the
action by learning a temporal affine transform, which warps
each video feature to its action duration while dismissing the
action-irrelevant feature (e.g. background). Next, the second
stage coordinates query feature to match the spatial-temporal
action evolution of support by performing temporally rearrange and spatially offset prediction. Extensive experiments
on benchmark datasets show the potential of the proposed
method in achieving state-of-the-art performance for fewshot action recognition.

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Example of action misalignment. (a)&(b): action
duration misalignment. The action duration is highlighted
with blue rectangles. (b)&(c): action evolution misalignment
in temporal (left) and spatial (right) aspects. The red dashed
connected lines indicate pairs of temporal or spatial positions are consistent in action content. The action category of
these presented videos is ‘Hammer throw’.

Introduction

2017; Sung et al. 2018; Vinyals et al. 2016), data augmentation (Wang et al. 2018; Hariharan and Girshick 2017),
and optimization-based methods (Ravi and Larochelle 2017;
Wang et al. 2019). Each of them has made impressive
progress in general image recognition. However, fewer studies have been carried out on few-shot video action recognition. The majority of existing approaches in this area follow
the metric learning-based paradigm (Zhu and Yang 2018;
Ben-Ari et al. 2020; Bishay, Zoumpourlis, and Patras 2019),
which learns to compare the similarity between the videos
from known classes and videos from novel classes. Recently, some research works (Bishay, Zoumpourlis, and Patras 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2020) observed that
it is challenging to directly measure the similarity between
videos due to the fact that different action instances show
distinctive temporal distributions, e.g., different temporal locations or evolution processes, along the timeline in videos,
can result in severe misalignment issues between the query
and support videos. Some methods attempted to address
this by performing temporal alignment, e.g., TARN (Bishay,
Zoumpourlis, and Patras 2019) proposed a segment-bysegment attention module to perform temporal alignment at

Action recognition (Tran et al. 2015; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Wang et al. 2016) has received considerable attention in the computer vision community due to the increasing demand for video analysis in real-world scenarios.
In recent years, deep learning methods have dominated the
field of video action recognition with convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). Numerous labeled data empower these
CNNs-based methods to train a discriminative classifier for
a finite set of classes. Nevertheless, in a real sense, the number of novel action categories may be limited. This problem
is compounded by the laborious and expensive task of annotating all available videos for these novel categories. Consequently, the few-shot learning (FSL) task, which aims to
recognize novel visual categories from very few labeled examples, has come into prominence in recent years. The solutions for image-based few-shot learning fall into three general categories: metric learning (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1404

