The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Anchor DETR: Query Design for Transformer-Based Object Detection
Yingming Wang, Xiangyu Zhang, Tong Yang, Jian Sun
MEGVII Technology
{wangyingming, zhangxiangyu, yangtong, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel query design for the
transformer-based object detection. In previous transformerbased detectors, the object queries are a set of learned embeddings. However, each learned embedding does not have
an explicit physical meaning and we cannot explain where
it will focus on. It is difficult to optimize as the prediction
slot of each object query does not have a specific mode. In
other words, each object query will not focus on a specific
region. To solve these problems, in our query design, object
queries are based on anchor points, which are widely used
in CNN-based detectors. So each object query focuses on
the objects near the anchor point. Moreover, our query design can predict multiple objects at one position to solve the
difficulty: “one region, multiple objects”. In addition, we design an attention variant, which can reduce the memory cost
while achieving similar or better performance than the standard attention in DETR. Thanks to the query design and the
attention variant, the proposed detector that we called Anchor
DETR, can achieve better performance and run faster than
the DETR with 10× fewer training epochs. For example, it
achieves 44.2 AP with 19 FPS on the MSCOCO dataset when
using the ResNet50-DC5 feature for training 50 epochs. Extensive experiments on the MSCOCO benchmark prove the
effectiveness of the proposed methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/megvii-research/AnchorDETR.

(a) DETR

(b) Ours
Figure 1: Visualization of the prediction slots. Note that the
sub-figure (a) comes from the figure in DETR (Carion et al.
2020). Each prediction slot includes all box predictions on
the val set of a query. Each of the colored points represents
the normalized center position of a prediction. The points
are color-coded so that the green color corresponds to small
boxes, red to large horizontal boxes, and blue to large vertical boxes. The black points in the last row of sub-figure (b)
indicate the anchor points. The prediction slots of ours are
more related to a specific position than DETR.

Introduction
The object detection task is to predict a bounding box and a
category for each object of interest in an image. In the last
decades, there are many great progresses in object detection
based on the CNN (Ren et al. 2015; Cai and Vasconcelos
2018; Redmon et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2020;
Qiao, Chen, and Yuille 2020; Chen et al. 2021). Recently,
Carion et al. (Carion et al. 2020) propose the DETR which
is a new paradigm of object detection based on the transformer. It uses a set of learned object queries to reason about
the relations of the objects and the global image context to
output the final predictions set. However, the learned object
query is very hard to explain. It does not have an explicit
physical meaning and the corresponding prediction slots of
each object query do not have a specific mode. As shown in

Figure 1(a), the predictions of each object query in DETR
are related to different areas and each object query will be in
charge of a very large area. This positional ambiguity, i.e.,
the object query does not focus on a specific region, makes
it hard to optimize.
Reviewing the detectors based on CNN, the anchors are
highly related to the position and contain interpretable physical meanings. Inspired by this motivation, we propose a
novel query design based on the anchor points, i.e., we en-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2567

