The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shrinking Temporal Attention in Transformers for Video Action Recognition
Bonan Li1 * , Pengfei Xiong2 * , Congying Han1† , Tiande Guo1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
PCG, Tencent
libonan16@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xiongpengfei2019@gmail.com, hancy@ucas.ac.cn, tdguo@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Spatiotemporal modeling in an unified architecture is key for
video action recognition. This paper proposes a Shrinking
Temporal Attention Transformer (STAT), which efficiently
builts spatiotemporal attention maps considering the attenuation of spatial attention in short and long temporal sequences.
Specifically, for short-term temporal tokens, query token interacts with them in a fine-grained manner in dealing with
short-range motion. It then shrinks to a coarse attention in
neighborhood for long-term tokens, to provide larger receptive field for long-range spatial aggregation. Both of them
are composed in a short-long temporal integrated block to
build visual appearances and temporal structure concurrently
with lower costly in computation. We conduct thorough ablation studies, and achieve state-of-the-art results on multiple action recognition benchmarks including Kinetics400 and
Something-Something v2, outperforming prior methods with
50% less FLOPs and without any pretrained model.

Figure 1: Top-1 accuracy and GFLOPs comparisons on Kinetics400. Results of existing state-of-the-art transformerbased models(MViT (Fan et al. 2021), TimeSformer (Bertasius, Wang, and Torresani 2021), ViViT (Arnab et al. 2021),
VidTr (Li et al. 2021)) and CNN-based models(TEA (Li
et al. 2020b), TDN (Wang et al. 2021)) are compared. Our
proposed STAT outperforms all previous models with less
FLOPs and without any pretrained models.
.

Introduction
Action recognition is a fundamental problem in video understanding tasks. Following the rapid development of online video, it becomes increasingly demanding applications
with the rapid development of online video, in the fields of
daily life, traffic surveillance, autonomous driving and so on.
For most such applications, how to effectively build temporal structure and spatial appearances concurrently under different time length videos is a critical problem.
In recent years, end-to-end learning of transformer networks (Li et al. 2021; Arnab et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2021;
Bertasius, Wang, and Torresani 2021; Liu et al. 2021a,b)
has emerged as the prominent paradigm for video classification and action recognition, due to their excellent capabilities at capturing long-range temporal relationships. Though
temporal structure is important for action recognition, it is
also important to model the visual appearances under an unified architecture. The previous works propose several puretransformer architectures which factorise different components of the transformer encoder over the space and time dimensions. Both the spatial and temporal features are divided

into frame-level tokens to incorporate cross self-attention on
spatiotemporal neighborhood in joint, mixed, divided, and
interactive manners. However, dense dual attention brings
huge computational overhead due to quadratic computational in time and space, while progressive self-attention
lead model lack the ability to modelling long range spatial
contextual relationships. It remains unclear how to model
the spatiotemporal structure in an unified architecture effectively and efficiently.
Commonly, spatiotemporal modeling can be separated
two parts: short-range motion between adjacent frames and
long-range visual aggregation. When dealing with shortrange motion, fine grained details need to be considered.
On the contrary, while in the long-term sequence, the influence of motion becomes smaller, and a larger receptive field
is needed to obtain spatial aggregation. Motivated by this,
we propose a Shrinking Temporal Attention Transformer

* Equal contribution, during internship at Tencent
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1263

