The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Programmatic Modeling and Generation of Real-Time Strategic Soccer
Environments for Reinforcement Learning
Abdus Salam Azad* , Edward Kim* , Qiancheng Wu, Kimin Lee,
Ion Stoica, Pieter Abbeel, Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, Sanjit A. Seshia
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

Starcraft (Vinyals et al. 2017), Dota2 (OpenAI et al. 2019),
and soccer (Kurach et al. 2020), due to their lack of support for modeling diverse scenarios involving sophisticated
interactive behaviors.
These RTS environments are characterized by unique
characteristics that require special support for modeling. The
environments involve intelligent entities/non-RL agents cooperating and competing with the RL agents with large state
and action spaces over a long horizon. This opens up extremely diverse strategies consisting of numerous interactive behaviors. Yet, most of the existing simulators rely on
randomly generating the environments based on predefined
settings/layouts and offer limited flexibility and control to
the researchers over the environment dynamics to generate diverse realistic scenarios. As a result RL research face
at least two fundamental challenges: (i) the lack of diverse
and realistic training data often leads to lack of generalization (Cobbe et al. 2019, 2020; Lee et al. 2020a,b), and (ii) the
lack of flexibility and control over the environment dynamics makes it hard to generate realistic evaluation scenarios to
comprehensively test generalization in these complex RTS
environments.
To address this issue, for the first time to the best of our
knowledge, we introduce the benefits of adopting an existing formal scenario specification language, S CENIC, to assist researchers to model and generate diverse realistic scenarios in an RTS environment in a flexible, systematic, and
programmatic manner. Each S CENIC program represents a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) and provides high-level
syntax and semantics, backed by its own compiler, to intuitively and quickly model diverse and complex interactive
scenarios to train RL agents and test their generalization capabilities. Furthermore, it allows researchers/RL practitioners to incorporate their domain knowledge into the training process by generating offline data with stochastic programmatic policies written in high-level intuitive syntax of
S CENIC. To demonstrate the benefits, we interfaced S CENIC
to an existing RTS environment, Google Research Football
(GRF) (Kurach et al. 2020).
Our contributions are as follows:

The capability of a reinforcement learning (RL) agent heavily depends on the diversity of the learning scenarios generated by the environment. Generation of diverse realistic scenarios is challenging for real-time strategy (RTS) environments. The RTS environments are characterized by intelligent entities/non-RL agents cooperating and competing with
the RL agents with large state and action spaces over a long
period of time, resulting in an infinite space of feasible, but
not necessarily realistic, scenarios involving complex interaction among different RL and non-RL agents. Yet, most of
the existing simulators rely on randomly generating the environments based on predefined settings/layouts and offer limited flexibility and control over the environment dynamics
for researchers to generate diverse, realistic scenarios as per
their demand. To address this issue, for the first time, we formally introduce the benefits of adopting an existing formal
scenario specification language, S CENIC, to assist researchers
to model and generate diverse scenarios in an RTS environment in a flexible, systematic, and programmatic manner. To
showcase the benefits, we interfaced S CENIC to an existing
RTS environment Google Research Football(GRF) simulator
and introduced a benchmark consisting of 32 realistic scenarios, encoded in S CENIC, to train RL agents and testing their
generalization capabilities. We also show how researchers/RL
practitioners can incorporate their domain knowledge to expedite the training process by intuitively modeling stochastic
programmatic policies with S CENIC.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful method to solve a variety of sequential decisionmaking problems, including board games (Silver et al. 2017,
2018), video games (Mnih et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2019),
and robotic manipulation (Kalashnikov et al. 2018). These
successes rely heavily on widely-used simulation environments (Bellemare et al. 2013; Brockman et al. 2016) and
benchmarks (Cobbe et al. 2020; Duan et al. 2016; Tassa
et al. 2018). However, regardless of a long history of RL
benchmarks, the existing RL environments/simulators are
insufficient to properly train, test, and benchmark RL algorithms for real-time strategy (RTS) environments such as

• For the first time, we introduce the benefits of adopting a
scenario specification language to (1) flexibly model interactive scenarios to train RL agents, (2) test their generalization capability, and (3) program stochastic RL poli-

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6028

