The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

HAGEN: Homophily-Aware Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network for Crime
Forecasting
Chenyu Wang1 * , Zongyu Lin1 * , Xiaochen Yang2 , Jiao Sun2 ,
Mingxuan Yue2 , Cyrus Shahabi2†
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
{cy-wang18, lin-zy17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xiaochey, jiaosun, mingxuay, shahabi}@usc.edu
2

Abstract

forecasting, including MiST (Huang et al. 2019) and DeepCrime (Huang et al. 2018). However, they assume a gridbased partitioning of the underlying geographic region to
utilize CNN-based models which ignore the geographical extents of neighborhoods. Based on the intuition that
nearby regions (i.e., geographical neighborhoods which collect criminal records within a period of time) have similar
crime patterns, Sun et al. (2020) leveraged a distance-based
region graph to explore the connection between spatial and
temporal crime patterns, and utilized a graph neural network (GNN) technique to model the spatial dependencies
between regions. In this setting, the crime forecasting problem is equivalent to learning a mapping function to predict
the future graph signals (i.e., crime occurrences) given the
historical graph signals (i.e., historical crime records) over a
distance-based region graph.

The goal of the crime forecasting problem is to predict different types of crimes for each geographical region (like a
neighborhood or censor tract) in the near future. Since nearby
regions usually have similar socioeconomic characteristics
which indicate similar crime patterns, recent state-of-the-art
solutions constructed a distance-based region graph and utilized Graph Neural Network (GNN) techniques for crime
forecasting, because the GNN techniques could effectively
exploit the latent relationships between neighboring region
nodes in the graph if the edges reveal high dependency or
correlation. However, this distance-based pre-defined graph
cannot fully capture crime correlation between regions that
are far from each other but share similar crime patterns.
Hence, to make a more accurate crime prediction, the main
challenge is to learn a better graph that reveals the dependencies between regions in crime occurrences and meanwhile captures the temporal patterns from historical crime
records. To address these challenges, we propose an end-toend graph convolutional recurrent network called HAGEN
with several novel designs for crime prediction. Specifically,
our framework could jointly capture the crime correlation between regions and the temporal crime dynamics by combining an adaptive region graph learning module with the Diffusion Convolution Gated Recurrent Unit (DCGRU). Based
on the homophily assumption of GNN (i.e., graph convolution works better where neighboring nodes share the same
label), we propose a homophily-aware constraint to regularize the optimization of the region graph so that neighboring
region nodes on the learned graph share similar crime patterns, thus fitting the mechanism of diffusion convolution.
Empirical experiments and comprehensive analysis on two
real-world datasets showcase the effectiveness of HAGEN.

However, the geographical distance does not always reveal the real correlation of crime patterns because other
shared socioeconomic factors between (possibly far apart)
regions may result in similar crime patterns in the regions.
As illustrated in Figure 1, we observe that even though the
distance between regions a and b is much farther than that of
regions a and c, region a shares similar crime patterns with
c but totally different from b. One may build another graph
on which the edges are defined by the similarity of POIs between regions (Xu et al. 2020), nevertheless, the mismatching phenomenon still remains. In fact, the local government
deploys heavy policing for the university in region a, thus a
has a different crime pattern from c despite both of them being urban regions. Obviously, one can construct customized
graphs for each and every case, but it is hard to predefine
a graph that adapts to all cases. Towards this end, we propose to learn an adaptive graph that could dynamically capture the crime-specific correlations among regions from realworld data. In particular, we utilize a graph learning layer
that learns the graph structure adaptively and jointly with
the training process of crime forecasting. Nevertheless, the
adaptive learning of such graph structure is non-trivial and
usually requires some heuristics to regularize the graph to
avoid over-fitting. For example, in the traffic forecasting domain, Graph WaveNet (Wu et al. 2019) uses the node similarity to construct the graph, and MTGNN (Wu et al. 2020)
is the state-of-the-art spatiotemporal graph neural network
that integrates a graph learning module to extract the uni-

Introduction
Accurate crime forecasting can better guide the police deployment and allocation of infrastructure, resulting in great
benefits for urban safety. Previous studies have designed
several spatiotemporal deep learning frameworks for crime
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Both authors contributed equally to this work. The work was
conducted while both authors were interns at USC’s IMSC.
†
This is the corresponding author.

4193

