The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Apprenticeship Learning
Lior Shani1 , Tom Zahavy2 , Shie Mannor1,3
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
2
Deepmind, UK
3
Nvidia Research, Israel
shanlior@gmail.com, tomzahavy@gmail.com, shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract

expert’s decisions. Methods such as Behavioural Cloning
(BC) try to directly mimic the demonstrator by applying a
supervised learning (SL) algorithm to learn a mapping from
the states to actions. This literature is too vast to cover here
and we refer the reader to (Schaal 1997; Argall et al. 2009).
Apprenticeship Learning (Abbeel and Ng 2004, AL) aims
to address the same motivation using a different goal. Rather
than learning a cost, its goal is to find a policy whose performance is close to that of the expert for any possible cost
in a known set. This keeps the state-action occupancy of
the agent and expert in proximity, requiring the AL agent to
find a path back to the expert trajectories in states that are
unobserved by the expert. This differs from BC, in which
the agent’s policy is undetermined in these unobserved states.
Prior works on AL (Abbeel and Ng 2004; Syed and Schapire
2008; Zahavy et al. 2020) mostly considered a batch RL setting with the purpose of finding an ϵ-optimal solution, where
the transition model is typically known or can be extracted
from the data. However, in many real world applications, the
model is unknown, and the learner is inflicted costs when
performing poorly on the task, even if these costs are not
properly specified to serve as an objective. This leads us to
consider an online version of AL in which an agent should
perform as close as possible to the expert on any possible
cost, while it is learning. As a result, an online autonomous
driver would try to imitate the expert when learning in the
real-world, avoiding unnecessary costs.
AL is typically formulated as a min-max game between
a policy and a cost “players”. This problem was shown to
be convex in the cost and in the feature expectations of the
policy, but not in the policy itself. Abbeel and Ng (2004)
proposed the projection algorithm, in which the policy player
plays the best response and the cost player plays a followthe-leader (FTL) step by utilizing the convexity in the feature
expectations. Alternatively, in MWAL (Syed and Schapire
2008), the policy player applies a similar best response step
and the cost player replace the FTL step with Mirror Descent.
Unfortunately, this requires both algorithms to solve an MDP
in each iteration (see Section 2.2).
Instead, in the convex games setting, min-max games can
be approximately solved by simultaneously running two competing no-regret algorithms, preventing the inefficiency of
finding the best response in each iteration (Abernethy and
Wang 2017). This result builds on the notion of stability found

In Apprenticeship Learning (AL), we are given a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) without access to the cost function.
Instead, we observe trajectories sampled by an expert that
acts according to some policy. The goal is to find a policy
that matches the expert’s performance on some predefined
set of cost functions. We introduce an online variant of AL
(Online Apprenticeship Learning; OAL), where the agent is
expected to perform comparably to the expert while interacting
with the environment. We show that the OAL problem can
be effectively solved by combining two mirror descent based
no-regret algorithms: one for policy optimization and another
for learning the worst case cost. By employing optimistic
√
exploration, we derive a convergent algorithm with O( K)
regret, where K is the number of interactions with the MDP,
and an additional linear error term that depends on the amount
of expert trajectories available. Importantly, our algorithm
avoids the need to solve an MDP at each iteration, making
it more practical compared to prior AL methods. Finally, we
implement a deep variant of our algorithm which shares some
similarities to GAIL, but where the discriminator is replaced
with the costs learned by OAL. Our simulations suggest that
OAL performs well in high dimensional control problems.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (Sutton and Barto 2018, RL) an
agent interacts with an environment by following a policy.
The environment is modeled as a Markov Decision Process
(Puterman 1994, MDP), where in each state, the agent takes
an action based on the policy, and as a result, pays a cost
and transitions to a new state. The goal of RL is to learn
an optimal policy that minimizes the long term cumulative
cost. This makes RL useful when we can specify the MDP
model appropriately. However, in many real-world problems,
it is often hard to define a cost which induces the desired
behaviour. E.g., an autonomous driver might suffer costs
when driving slowly or in a hazardous way. Yet, prescribing
these costs can be eluding.
A feasible solution to this problem is Imitation Learning
(IL). This setup introduces the notion of an expert, typically
a human, that provides us with a set of demonstrations. The
agent’s goal is to learn the optimal policy by imitating the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8240

