The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Optimal Classification Trees against Adversarial Examples
Daniël Vos, Sicco Verwer
Delft University of Technology
d.a.vos@tudelft.nl, s.e.verwer@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Decision trees are a popular choice of explainable model, but
just like neural networks, they suffer from adversarial examples. Existing algorithms for fitting decision trees robustly
against adversarial examples are greedy heuristics and lack
approximation guarantees. In this paper we propose ROCT, a
collection of methods to train decision trees that are optimally
robust against user-specified attack models. We show that
the min-max optimization problem that arises in adversarial
learning can be solved using a single minimization formulation for decision trees with 0-1 loss. We propose such formulations in Mixed-Integer Linear Programming and Maximum Satisfiability, which widely available solvers can optimize. We also present a method that determines the upper
bound on adversarial accuracy for any model using bipartite
matching. Our experimental results demonstrate that the existing heuristics achieve close to optimal scores while ROCT
achieves state-of-the-art scores.

(a) GROOT

(b) TREANT

(c) ROCT (ours)

Figure 1: Existing methods (a)(b) greedily optimize one split
at a time and cannot find a good tree to fit the XOR-shaped
data. ROCT optimizes the entire tree at once and finds the
optimal tree that exactly fits the dataset.

Verwer and Zhang 2017), Boolean Satisfiability (Narodytska et al. 2018; Avellaneda 2020), and Constraint Programming (Verhaeghe et al. 2020).
In this work, we combine these lines of research and propose Robust Optimal Classification Trees (ROCT), a method
to train decision trees that are optimally robust against userspecified adversarial attack models. This model is robust in
the sense that it predicts the correct ground-truth label in
a box of specified size surrounding each sample, this optimizes robustness against corrupted instances (Diochnos,
Mahloujifar, and Mahmoody 2018). Like existing robust decision tree learning algorithms (Calzavara et al. 2020; Vos
and Verwer 2020), ROCT allows users to specify a boxshaped attack model that encodes an attacker’s capability
to modify feature values with the aim of maximizing loss.
Existing robust decision tree learning methods use a greedy
node splitting approach. Other robust learning algorithms
such as adversarial training (Madry et al. 2017) solve the
inner maximization (adversarial attacks) and the outer minimization problems (minimize expected loss) separately. In
this work we prove that this separation is not needed in the
case of decision trees. We provide a formulation that solves
the problem of fitting robust decision trees exactly in a single
minimization step for trees up to a given depth.
ROCT1 uses a novel translation of the problem of fitting robust decision trees into Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) or Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT)

Introduction
While breakthroughs in machine learning research have enabled training of powerful predictive models, most models
are still vulnerable to adversarial examples, samples with
tiny perturbations that cause them to be misclassified. Since
the discovery of adversarial examples in neural networks
(Szegedy et al. 2013) much work has gone into training
models that are robust to these attacks and recently, the first
efforts were made to train robust decision trees against adversarial examples (Chen et al. 2019; Calzavara et al. 2020;
Vos and Verwer 2020). However, the current methods are
greedy and offer no performance guarantees. They can fail
on arbitrary datasets and give results no better than random
guessing (Figure 1).
In decision tree learning, there has been an increased interest in optimal learning algorithms (Carrizosa, MoleroRı́o, and Morales 2021). Although the problem of learning
decision trees is NP-complete (Laurent and Rivest 1976),
these methods can produce optimally accurate decision trees
for many (typically small) datasets. Most methods translate the problem to well-known frameworks such as MixedInteger Linear Programming (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8520

https://github.com/tudelft-cda-lab/ROCT

