The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fully Attentional Network for Semantic Segmentation
Qi Song,1,2 Jie Li,1,2∗ Chenghong Li,1 * Hao Guo,1,2 Rui Huang1†
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{qisong, jieli1, chenghongli, haoguo}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, ruihuang@cuhk.edu.cn
2

(a) Channel NL

Abstract

C×HW
C×HW

Recent non-local self-attention methods have proven to be
effective in capturing long-range dependencies for semantic
segmentation. These methods usually form a similarity map
of RC×C (by compressing spatial dimensions) or RHW ×HW
(by compressing channels) to describe the feature relations
along either channel or spatial dimensions, where C is the
number of channels, H and W are the spatial dimensions
of the input feature map. However, such practices tend to
condense feature dependencies along the other dimensions,
hence causing attention missing, which might lead to inferior
results for small/thin categories or inconsistent segmentation
inside large objects. To address this problem, we propose a
new approach, namely Fully Attentional Network (FLANet),
to encode both spatial and channel attentions in a single similarity map while maintaining high computational efficiency.
Specifically, for each channel map, our FLANet can harvest
feature responses from all other channel maps, and the associated spatial positions as well, through a novel fully attentional
module. Our new method has achieved state-of-the-art performance on three challenging semantic segmentation datasets,
i.e., 83.6%, 46.99%, and 88.5% on the Cityscapes test set,
the ADE20K validation set, and the PASCAL VOC test set,
respectively.

HW×C

C×C

C×H×W

(b) Spatial NL
Conv
Conv

C×H×W

Conv

C×HW

C×H×W

C×H×W

HW×C

C×H×W

HW×C

C×HW
HW×HW

C×H×W

C×H×W

HW×C

(c) Fully Attentional block
Full
Attention
C
C
C×H×W

H+W
(H+W)×C×S

C×H×W

Cut & Merge
inverse operation of Merge

Figure 1: Architectures of Non-Local blocks (NL) and our
proposed Fully Attentional block (FLA). The traditional
NLs compute a similarity map along channel or spatial dimension, while our FLA generates a similarity map in all
dimensions and enables full attentions in the attention map.

Introduction

these explorations have made impressive contributions to semantic segmentation, one acute issue, i.e., attention missing, was mostly ignored. Take Channel NL for example,
the channel attention map RC×C is generated by the matrix
multiplication of two inputs with a dimension of C × HW
and HW × C. It can be found that each channel can be
connected with all other channel maps while the spatial information will be integrated and each spatial position fails
to perceive feature response from other positions during the
matrix multiplication. Similarly, interactions among channel
dimensions are also missing in the Spatial NL.
We argue that the attention missing issue would damage
the integrity of 3D context information (CHW ) and thus
both NL variants can only benefit partially in a complementary way. To verify this hypothesis, we present the per-class
comparison results on the Cityscapes validation set in Fig.2.
As shown in the figure, Channel NL gets better segmentation results among large objects, such as truck, bus and train,
while Spatial NL performs much better on small/thin cate-

Recently, semantic segmentation models achieve great
progress by capturing long-range dependencies (Zhao et al.
2017; Yang et al. 2018; Yuan, Chen, and Wang 2020; Sun
et al. 2019), in which Non-Local (NL) based methods are
the mainstream (Zhao et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2019a; Zhang
et al. 2019a; Zhu et al. 2019; Ramachandran et al. 2019).
To generate dense and well-rounded contextual information,
NL based models utilize a self-attention mechanism to explore the interdependencies along the channel (Cao et al.
2019; Zhao et al. 2018) or spatial (Huang et al. 2019; Yin
et al. 2020; Song, Mei, and Huang 2021) dimensions. We
denote these two variants of NL block as “Channel NL” and
“Spatial NL”, respectively, and the architectures of these
two variants are illustrated in Fig.1 (a) and (b). Although
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2280

