The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Separated Contrastive Learning for Organ-at-Risk and Gross-Tumor-Volume
Segmentation with Limited Annotation
Jiacheng Wang1 , Xiaomeng Li2 , Yiming Han3 , Jing Qin4 , Liansheng Wang1,* , Zhou Qichao5,*
1

2

Department of Computer Science at School of Informatics, Xiamen University
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Peking University 4 Center for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Manteia Technologies Co.,Ltd
jiachengw@stu.xmu.edu.cn, eexmli@ust.hk, yiminghan emilia@foxmail.com, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk,
lswang@xmu.edu.cn, zhouqc@manteiatech.com
Abstract

Automatic delineation of organ-at-risk (OAR) and grosstumor-volume (GTV) is of great significance for radiotherapy planning. However, it is a challenging task to learn powerful representations for accurate delineation under limited
pixel (voxel)-wise annotations. Contrastive learning at pixellevel can alleviate the dependency on annotations by learning
dense representations from unlabeled data. Recent studies in
this direction design various contrastive losses on the feature
maps, to yield discriminative features for each pixel in the
map. However, pixels in the same map inevitably share semantics to be closer than they actually are, which may affect the discrimination of pixels in the same map and lead
to the unfair comparison to pixels in other maps. To address
these issues, we propose a separated region-level contrastive
learning scheme, namely SepaReg, the core of which is to
separate each image into regions and encode each region separately. Specifically, SepaReg comprises two components: a
structure-aware image separation (SIS) module and an intraand inter-organ distillation (IID) module. The SIS is proposed
to operate on the image set to rebuild a region set under the
guidance of structural information. The inter-organ representation will be learned from this set via typical contrastive
losses cross regions. On the other hand, the IID is proposed
to tackle the quantity imbalance in the region set as tiny organs may produce fewer regions, by exploiting intra-organ
representations. We conducted extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed model on a public dataset and two private
datasets. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model, consistently achieving better performance than state-of-the-art approaches. Code is available
at https://github.com/jcwang123/Separate CL.

Figure 1: Motivation of building structure-aware image separation (SIS) module. (a) No separation, that forms comparison of pixels in the feature map. Pixels in the same map
inevitably share semantics, which may affect the discrimination of pixels in the same map and lead to unfair comparison
to pixels in other maps. (b) Regular separation, that regularly
separates each image into square regions and encodes each
region as a discriminative feature. Structure has been broken
in the produced regions. (c) SIS, that separates each image
into regions by superpixel-based division to learn their structural information. Note that the region set has been shuffled
so that green region and orange region could be from different images. Evaluated DSC scores of two private datasets
are shown in the figure.

researchers have proposed many deep models for medical image segmentation, such as U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015), DenseUNet (Li et al. 2018), HyperDenseNet (Dolz et al. 2018), nnUNet (Isensee et al. 2020).
Successfully training these models usually requires a large
number of pixel (voxel)-wise annotations. However, in clinical practice, it is difficult, if not impossible, to acquire these
annotations owing to the need of extensive professional expertise for labelling and the busy schedule of clinicians. In
this regard, self-supervised learning, which attempts to learn
discriminative features from a small set of labelled data and
a large number of unlabeled data, becomes an important research direction in medical image segmentation.
In recent years, contrastive learning (Chen et al. 2020a,b;

Introduction
Accurate delineation of organ-at-risk (OAR) and grosstumor-volume (GTV) in CT scans is a crucial step in radiotherapy treatment. However, manual volume delineation
is one of the most time-consuming and tedious tasks for
clinicians. Hence, automatic and accurate delineation tools
are highly demanded in clinical practice. Recent years,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2459

