The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Label Hallucination for Few-Shot Classification
Yiren Jian, Lorenzo Torresani
Dartmouth College
yiren.jian.gr@dartmouth.edu, LT@dartmouth.edu

Abstract

small subset of categories of a large base dataset. Metalearning algorithms (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Ravi
and Larochelle 2017; Koch 2015; Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell,
Swersky, and Zemel 2017) optimized on these training
episodes have advanced the field of few-shot classification.
However, recent works (Chen et al. 2019; Dhillon et al.
2020; Tian et al. 2020) have shown that a pure transfer learning strategy is often more competitive. For example, Tian et
al. (Tian et al. 2020) proposed to first pretrain a large capacity classification model on the base dataset and then to
simply learn a linear classifier on this pretrained representation using the few novel examples. The few-shot performance of the transferred model can be further improved by
multiple distillation iterations (Furlanello et al. 2018), or by
combining several losses simultaneously, e.g., entropy maximization, rotational self-supervision, and knowledge distillation (Rajasegaran et al. 2020).
In this paper, we follow the transfer learning approach.
However, instead of freezing the representation to the features learned from the base classes (Tian et al. 2020; Rajasegaran et al. 2020; Rizve et al. 2021), we finetune the
entire model. Since finetuning the network using only the
few examples would result in severe overfitting (as evidenced by our ablations), we propose to optimize the model
by re-using the entire base dataset but only after having
swapped the original labels with pseudo-labels corresponding to the novel classes. This is achieved by running on the
base dataset a simple linear classifier trained on the few
examples of the novel categories. The classifier effectively
“hallucinates” the presence of the novel classes in the base
images. Although we empirically evaluate our approach in
scenarios where the classes of the base dataset are completely disjoint from the novel categories, we demonstrate
that this large-scale pseudo-labeled data enables effective
finetuning of the entire model for recognition of the novel
classes. The optimization is carried out using a combination of distillation over the pseudo-labeled base dataset and
cross-entropy minimization over the few-shot examples. An
overview of our proposed approach is provided in Fig. 1.
The intuition is that although the novel classes are not
“properly” represented in the base images, many base examples may include objects that resemble those of the novel
classes as encoded by the soft pseudo-labels that define the
probabilities of belonging to the novel classes. For exam-

Few-shot classification requires adapting knowledge learned
from a large annotated base dataset to recognize novel unseen classes, each represented by few labeled examples. In
such a scenario, pretraining a network with high capacity
on the large dataset and then finetuning it on the few examples causes severe overfitting. At the same time, training a
simple linear classifier on top of “frozen” features learned
from the large labeled dataset fails to adapt the model to
the properties of the novel classes, effectively inducing underfitting. In this paper we propose an alternative approach
to both of these two popular strategies. First, our method
pseudo-labels the entire large dataset using the linear classifier trained on the novel classes. This effectively “hallucinates” the novel classes in the large dataset, despite the
novel categories not being present in the base database (novel
and base classes are disjoint). Then, it finetunes the entire
model with a distillation loss on the pseudo-labeled base
examples, in addition to the standard cross-entropy loss on
the novel dataset. This step effectively trains the network
to recognize contextual and appearance cues that are useful
for the novel-category recognition but using the entire largescale base dataset and thus overcoming the inherent datascarcity problem of few-shot learning. Despite the simplicity
of the approach, we show that that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art on four well-established few-shot classification benchmarks. The code and appendix are available at
https://github.com/yiren-jian/LabelHalluc.

Introduction
Deep learning has emerged as the prominent learning
paradigm for large data scenarios and it has achieved impressive results in wide range of application domains, including
computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
NLP (Devlin et al. 2019) and bioinformatics (Senior et al.
2020). However, it remains difficult to adapt deep learning
models to settings where few labeled examples are available,
since large-capacity models are inherently prone to overfitting.
Few-shot learning is usually studied under the episodic
learning paradigm, which simulates the few-shot setting during training by repeatedly sampling few examples from a
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7005

