The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Amortized Generation of Sequential
Algorithmic Recourses for Black-Box Models
Sahil Verma,1,2 Keegan Hines,1 John P. Dickerson1,3
1

Arthur AI
University of Washington
3
University of Maryland
vsahil@cs.washington.edu, keegan@arthur.ai, john@arthur.ai
2

Abstract

Research in explainable ML is bifurcated. One high-level approach aims to develop inherently interpretable models such
as decision trees and linear models (Rudin 2019). Another
high-level approach aims to utilize existing complex classification techniques (such as deep neural networks) but to
bolster them with surrogate models that can render their predictions and/or internal processes understandable (Adadi and
Berrada 2018). This is achieved through explaining models
holistically (global explanation) or single predictions from
the model (local explanation).
Algorithmic Recourses (ARs). ARs find the minimal
change in a datapoint such that the ML model ends up classifying the new datapoint in the desired class. Such new
datapoint(s) is termed as a counterfactual. For example, if
an individual were denied a loan request, a recourse might
tell them that their request would be approved if they were
to increase their income by $2000. ARs provide a precise
recommendation and are therefore more actionable than other
forms of local explainability like feature importance. Recent
research in this area has aimed to ensure ARs are actionable
and useful by incorporating additional desiderata into the recourse generation problem. As described in Section 2, these
include notions of sparsity, causality, and realism of ARs,
among others. What is needed (see, e.g., Verma, Dickerson,
and Hines 2020; Chou et al. 2021; Karimi et al. 2020b) is
a generalized approach that can accommodate such varied
constraints and can also be computed efficiently.
1
Operationalizing ARs. We propose a novel approach
(FASTAR) for generating ARs by translating a given recourse
generation problem into a Markov Decision Process (MDP).
FASTAR aims to learn a policy that can generate ARs for
given data distribution. Upon learning that policy once, it can
generate ARs for multiple datapoints (from that distribution)
without the need to re-optimize (which is required by most
previous approaches). Thus, FASTAR amortizes the cost of
repeatedly computing ARs. FASTAR also allows enforcing
desirable properties of ARs, such as closeness to the training
data distribution (data manifold), respect of causal relations
between the features, and mutability and actionability of different features. FASTAR works for black-box models and is
therefore model agnostic.
Via the learned policy, FASTAR outputs ARs as a sequence

Explainable machine learning (ML) has gained traction in
recent years due to the increasing adoption of ML-based systems in many sectors. Algorithmic Recourses (ARs) provide
“what if” feedback of the form “if an input datapoint were x0
instead of x, then an ML-based system’s output would be y 0
instead of y.” ARs are attractive due to their actionable feedback, amenability to existing legal frameworks, and fidelity
to the underlying ML model. Yet, current AR approaches are
single shot—that is, they assume x can change to x0 in a single
time period. We propose a novel stochastic-control-based approach that generates sequential ARs, that is, ARs that allow
x to move stochastically and sequentially across intermediate
states to a final state x0 . Our approach is model agnostic and
black box. Furthermore, the calculation of ARs is amortized
such that once trained, it applies to multiple datapoints without the need for re-optimization. In addition to these primary
characteristics, our approach admits optional desiderata such
as adherence to the data manifold, respect for causal relations,
and sparsity—identified by past research as desirable properties of ARs. We evaluate our approach using three real-world
datasets and show successful generation of sequential ARs
that respect other recourse desiderata.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly used to
make predictions in systems that directly or indirectly impact humans. This includes critical applications like healthcare (Faggella 2020), finance (Singla 2020), hiring (Sennaar 2019), and parole (Tashea 2017). To understand ML
models better and to promote their equitable impact in
society, it is necessary to assess stakeholders’—both expert (Holstein et al. 2019) and layperson (Saha et al. 2020)—
comprehension of and needs for general observability into
their systems (Poursabzi et al. 2021; Ehsan et al. 2021a). The
nascent Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, and Ethics
in machine learning (aka “FATE ML”) community conducts
research to develop methods to detect (and counteract) bias in
ML models, develop techniques that make complex models
explainable, and propose policies to advise and adhere to the
regulations of algorithmic decision-making. Here, we focus
on ML model explainability.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8512

Arxiv version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03962

