The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Graph Neural Networks via
Diverse and Interactive Message Passing
Liang Yang1,2,∗ , Cheng Chen1,∗ , Weixun Li1,∗ , Bingxin Niu1 , Junhua Gu1 ,
Chuan Wang2,† , Dongxiao He3 , Yuanfang Guo4 , Xiaochun Cao5
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, CAS, Beijing, China
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
5
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China
yangliang@vip.qq.com, {1437274010, 1043246925}@qq.com, wangchuan@iie.ac.cn
message
passing

Abstract
By interpreting Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) as the message passing from the spatial perspective, their success is attributed to Laplacian smoothing. However, it also leads to
serious over-smoothing issue by stacking many layers. Recently, many efforts have been paid to overcome this issue
in semi-supervised learning. Unfortunately, it is more serious in unsupervised node representation learning task due
to the lack of supervision information. Thus, most of the
unsupervised or self-supervised GNNs often employ onelayer GCN as the encoder. Essentially, the over-smoothing
issue is caused by the over-simplification of the existing message passing, which possesses two intrinsic limits: blind message and uniform passing. In this paper, a novel Diverse and
Interactive Message Passing (DIMP) is proposed for selfsupervised learning by overcoming these limits. Firstly, to
prevent the message from blindness and make it interactive
between two connected nodes, the message is determined by
both the two connected nodes instead of the attributes of
one node. Secondly, to prevent the passing from uniformness and make it diverse over different attribute channels,
different propagation weights are assigned to different elements in the message. To this end, a natural implementation
of the message in DIMP is the element-wise product of the
representations of two connected nodes. From the perspective of numerical optimization, the proposed DIMP is equivalent to performing an overlapping community detection via
expectation-maximization (EM). Both the objective function
of the community detection and the convergence of EM algorithm guarantee that DMIP can prevent from over-smoothing
issue. Extensive evaluations on node-level and graph-level
tasks demonstrate the superiority of DIMP on improving performance and overcoming over-smoothing issue.

mui

message
generation

node

hu representation

muk message

mui

cui
i

hi i

cuj
muj

u

j

muj

u

hj j

hu

hu
cuk
muk
(a) Uniform and Blind
Message Passing

k

muk

hk k

(b) Diverse and Interactive
Message Passing

Figure 1: Comparison between exiting uniform and blind
message passing and the proposed diverse and interactive
message passing (DIMP). hu ’s denote the node representations, while mui ’s stand for the messages. Arrows with single line denote the passing of the message, and the thickness
stands for the propagation weight. The arrows with double
lines stand for the generation of message. The existing uniform and blind message passing generates messages from
the representation of one node, i.e., u, and propagates them
with uniform weights. In contrary, our proposed diverse and
interactive message passing generates messages from two
connected nodes and propagates them with diverse weights.

fields, such as computer vision, natural language processing and information retrieval, etc (Wu et al. 2021). By reducing the computational complexity of graph Fourier transformation via approximation, most GNNs, especially Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017)
and its variants including SGC (Wu et al. 2019) actually
perform Laplacian smoothing (Li, Han, and Wu 2018) and
low-passing filtering (Wu et al. 2019). By interpreting them
as the message passing from the spatial perspective, many
methods have been proposed (Zhou et al. 2020). Although
methods based on the intuitive message passing achieve

Introduction
Originating from spectral graph theory (Chung and Graham
1997), Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) show superior performance on modeling ubiquitous irregular data in many
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4327

