The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Competing Mutual Information Constraints with Stochastic Competition-Based
Activations for Learning Diversified Representations
Konstantinos P. Panousis* , Anastasios Antoniadis* , Sotirios Chatzis
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering and Informatics
Cyprus University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus
k.panousis@cut.ac.cy

Abstract

Soatto 2017; Dai, Zhu, and Wipf 2018). The main IB principle lies on constraining the inferred representations, such that
the information carried about the input is minimized, while
being maximally informative about the target outputs (Tishby
and Zaslavsky 2015). The first implementations of the IB
principle in deep learning can be found in (Shwartz-Ziv and
Tishby 2017; Alemi et al. 2017; Saxe et al. 2018).

This work aims to address the long-established problem of
learning diversified representations. To this end, we combine
information-theoretic arguments with stochastic competitionbased activations, namely Stochastic Local Winner-Takes-All
(LWTA) units. In this context, we ditch the conventional deep
architectures commonly used in Representation Learning, that
rely on non-linear activations; instead, we replace them with
sets of locally and stochastically competing linear units. In
this setting, each network layer yields sparse outputs, determined by the outcome of the competition between units that
are organized into blocks of competitors. We adopt stochastic
arguments for the competition mechanism, which perform
posterior sampling to determine the winner of each block.
We further endow the considered networks with the ability to
infer the sub-part of the network that is essential for modeling the data at hand; we impose appropriate stick-breaking
priors to this end. To further enrich the information of the
emerging representations, we resort to information-theoretic
principles, namely the Information Competing Process (ICP).
Then, all the components are tied together under the stochastic
Variational Bayes framework for inference. We perform a thorough experimental investigation for our approach using benchmark datasets on image classification. As we experimentally
show, the resulting networks yield significant discriminative
representation learning abilities. In addition, the introduced
paradigm allows for a principled investigation mechanism of
the emerging intermediate network representations.

Despite these advances, it is striking that the majority of the
proposed works refrain from examining a core -and probably
the most important- aspect of modern deep architectures; that
is, the employed non-linearities. We posit that a radically different paradigm of latent unit operation may allow for significantly enhancing the representation power of deep networks.
We draw inspiration from biologically-plausible architectures:
it has been shown that neurons with similar functions in the
mammal brain aggregate together in groups/blocks, and a
local competition takes place for their activation (Kandel,
Schwartz, and Jessell 2000; Andersen et al. 1969; Stefanis
1969; Douglas and Martin 2004; Lansner 2009). This leads to
a Local Winner-Takes-All (LWTA) mechanism; the winner
of the competition in each block gets to convey its activation outside the block, while the rest are inhibited to silence.
The incorporation of the LWTA mechanism in deep architectures has been shown to exhibit significant properties such
as noise suppression, robustness to adversarial attacks and
compression (Srivastava et al. 2013; Grossberg 1982; Carpenter and Grossberg 1988; Panousis, Chatzis, and Theodoridis
2019, 2021; Panousis et al. 2021). Despite these properties,
LWTA-based networks have been scarcely examined in the
RL literature.

Introduction
The ability to extract diversified representations is the main
focal point of Representation Learning (RL). Despite the immense amount of research effort, though, learning representations with such qualities remains an open research question.
Recently, information-theoretic arguments, and specifically
mutual information constraints (Bell and Sejnowski 1995;
Belghazi et al. 2018; Hjelm et al. 2019a; van den Oord, Li,
and Vinyals 2019), have risen as a promising direction towards successful RL. Notably, the Information Bottleneck
(IB) (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 1999) has attracted a substantial amount of attention (Alemi et al. 2017; Achille and

On this basis, in this work, we propose a novel deep learning design framework that: (i) replaces the commonly employed non-linear activations with stochastic LWTA activations; (ii) endows the considered networks with a data-driven
component utility inference mechanism, which allows to infer
the essential sub-parts of the network necessary for modeling
the available data; and (iii) utilizes recent advances in the
information-theoretic approaches to yield diversified representations, namely competing mutual information constraints
(Hu et al. 2019). Our ultimate goal is to yield deep networks
with considerably diversified resulting representations. We
evaluate our approach using well-known benchmark datasets
and architectures for image classification.

* Both authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7931

