The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Explainable Action Recognition by
Salient Qualitative Spatial Object Relation Chains
Hua Hua,1 Dongxu Li,1 Ruiqi Li,1 Peng Zhang,1 Jochen Renz,1 Anthony Cohn2
1

Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
{hua.hua, dongxu.li, ruiqi.li, p.zhang, jochen.renz}@anu.edu.au, a.g.cohn@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

We argue that a video action recognizer is trustworthy or at
least its trustworthiness is measurable if it is able to justify its
decisions in a human-understandable way. Such justifications
can be the existence of certain objects, object relations, or
changes in object relations (Zhuo et al. 2019; Li et al. 2021).
For example, in soccer matches, offside occurs if there is a
particular change in positional relations between ball and
players.
We will investigate action recognition and explanation
by qualitative spatial relations; it is not difficult to extend
our approach and relevant discussions to non-qualitative or
non-spatial relations. A spatial relation is a relation that is
relevant to the spatial properties of objects. For example,
connectivity, direction, size, distance, moving direction or
moving speed. Spatial relations between objects are essential
in many real-world actions and one typical example is shown
in Figure 1a. A relation is qualitative if it is a symbol with
specific meaning (e.g. “close”) rather than a numeric value
(e.g. “0.1 meter away from”). We choose qualitative spatial
relations for two reasons: first, qualitative spatial relations are
intuitive and close to human cognition and thus being humanunderstandable (Chen et al. 2015); second, it is possible to
detect such relations without involving much human labor
(Gatsoulis et al. 2016).

In order to be trusted by humans, Artificial Intelligence agents
should be able to describe rationales behind their decisions.
One such application is human action recognition in critical or sensitive scenarios, where trustworthy and explainable
action recognizers are expected. For example, reliable pedestrian action recognition is essential for self-driving cars and
explanations for real-time decision making are critical for
investigations if an accident happens. In this regard, learningbased approaches, despite their popularity and accuracy, are
disadvantageous due to their limited interpretability.
This paper presents a novel neuro-symbolic approach that
recognizes actions from videos with human-understandable
explanations. Specifically, we first propose to represent videos
symbolically by qualitative spatial relations between objects
called qualitative spatial object relation chains. We further
develop a neural saliency estimator to capture the correlation
between such object relation chains and the occurrence of
actions. Given an unseen video, this neural saliency estimator
is able to tell which object relation chains are more important
for the action recognized. We evaluate our approach on two
real-life video datasets, with respect to recognition accuracy
and the quality of generated action explanations. Experiments
show that our approach achieves superior performance on
both aspects to previous symbolic approaches, thus facilitating
trustworthy intelligent decision making. Our approach can
be used to augment state-of-the-art learning approaches with
explainability.

Introduction
While learning-based approaches are very popular (LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015), criticisms remain over their
reliability and explainability in making high-stake decisions (Rudin 2019). Video action recognition (i.e. recognize
which action occurs in a video) is one such typical task.
For example, failures in recognizing pedestrian actions by
self-driving cars may lead to critical safety issues and those
failures could be caused by incorrect reasoning. Most stateof-the-art action recognition approaches (Lin, Gan, and Han
2019; Tran et al. 2019; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020a,c,b; Qian et al. 2021)
cannot be easily understood or justified by humans as they
use neural networks in a black-box fashion (Rudin 2019).

Figure 1: (a) Essential spatial relations when performing
the action of car parking: at first, the car (grey rectangle)
is disconnected from the parking space (dotted rectangle)
and then they overlap; in the end, the car is included in the
parking space. (b) An accidental interaction between the car
and the parking space.
Qualitative spatial relations are formally defined in qualitative spatial calculi (Renz and Nebel 2007; Cohn and Renz
2008). One of the most widely applied qualitative spatial
calculi is Region Connection Calculus (RCC) (Randell, Cui,
and Cohn 1992), which consists of topological relations (or
connectivity relations) between regions (e.g. disjoint or overlapping). The car parking example in Figure 1a can be de-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5710

