The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust and Resource-Efficient Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
by Generative Pseudo Replay
Kuluhan Binici1, 2 , Shivam Aggarwal2 , Nam Trung Pham1 , Karianto Leman1 , Tulika Mitra2
1
2

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (KD) allows knowledge
transfer from a trained neural network (teacher) to a more
compact one (student) in the absence of original training data.
Existing works use a validation set to monitor the accuracy of
the student over real data and report the highest performance
throughout the entire process. However, validation data may
not be available at distillation time either, making it infeasible to record the student snapshot that achieved the peak accuracy. Therefore, a practical data-free KD method should be
robust and ideally provide monotonically increasing student
accuracy during distillation. This is challenging because the
student experiences knowledge degradation due to the distribution shift of the synthetic data. A straightforward approach
to overcome this issue is to store and rehearse the generated
samples periodically, which increases the memory footprint
and creates privacy concerns. We propose to model the distribution of the previously observed synthetic samples with a
generative network. In particular, we design a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a training objective that is customized
to learn the synthetic data representations optimally. The student is rehearsed by the generative pseudo replay technique,
with samples produced by the VAE. Hence knowledge degradation can be prevented without storing any samples. Experiments on image classification benchmarks show that our
method optimizes the expected value of the distilled model
accuracy while eliminating the large memory overhead incurred by the sample-storing methods.

Figure 1: Example of student accuracy degradation over distillation steps due to catastrophic forgetting. Red vertical
line marks the epoch with peak accuracy on the validation
dataset.
Addressing this issue, some works utilize alternative data
that are publicly available (Addepalli et al. 2020; Nayak,
Mopuri, and Chakraborty 2021), while others propose to use
synthetic data. (Zhang et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2020) The second approach is called Data-Free KD and completely eliminates the need for any real data. The decoupling of the KD
from the original dataset allows distillation to be performed
in a much wider spectrum of scenarios in comparison to
the data-dependent approaches. Typically data-free KD approaches contain multiple rounds (epochs) of synthetic data
samples generation and knowledge transfer. In each round,
the synthetic samples are generated to close the current information gap between the teacher and the student. As the
student is trained and the gap gets smaller, the synthetic
sample distribution changes as well. Therefore, if the previously generated synthetic samples are not periodically rehearsed to the student, the information acquired in earlier
distillation epochs might be lost, causing accuracy degradation over time. This is known as catastrophic forgetting
(French 1999) Such accuracy degradation is not desirable
in practice, especially if the validation dataset is also not
available. The absence of the validation dataset prevents the
user from monitoring the student accuracy over time and
choosing the distilled model with the peak accuracy. For
example, Figure 1 shows the CIFAR10 validation accuracy

Introduction
Recently there is a surging interest to deploy neural networks on the edge devices. Most of these devices have strict
resource (e.g., memory or power) constraints that are incompatible with the high computational demand of the neural
networks. Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015) is a well-studied approach to deploy pretrained neural networks on resource-constrained devices by
making them more compact. KD needs access to the original dataset that was used to train the teacher model. This is
challenging if the distillation is performed by a party other
than the model developers as they may not have access to the
original training dataset, either due to privacy issues or the
extremely large dataset size making its relocation infeasible.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6089

