The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Truthful and Fair Mechanisms for Matroid-Rank Valuations
Siddharth Barman,1 Paritosh Verma,2
1

Indian Institute of Science
2
Purdue University
barman@iisc.ac.in, paritoshverma97@gmail.com

Abstract

envy-free iff every agent values her bundle (allocated goods)
at least as much as the bundle of any other agent. Notably,
when the goods are indivisible, the existence of envy-free
allocations is ruled out, even in rather simple instances; consider a setting with a single indivisible good that is desired
by two agents. In light of such non-existence results, meaningful relaxations of envy-freeness (and other classic fairness criteria) have been the focus of research in discrete fair
division. In the context of indivisible goods, the two most
prominent notions of fairness are envy-freeness up to one
good (EF1) (Lipton et al. 2004; Budish 2011) and maximin
shares (MMS) (Budish 2011).
An allocation is said to be envy-free up to one good (EF1)
iff each agent values her bundle no less than the bundle of
any other agent, subject to the removal of one good from the
other agent’s bundle. For indivisible items, EF1 allocations
are guaranteed to exist under monotone valuations and can
be computed efficiently (Lipton et al. 2004). In fact, under
additive1 valuations, there necessarily exist allocations that
are both EF1 and Pareto efficient (i.e., economically efficient) (Caragiannis et al. 2019; Barman, Krishnamurthy, and
Vaish 2018).
Maximin share is a threshold-based fairness notion. That
is, every agent has a threshold—referred to as her maximin share—and an allocation is deemed to be maximin
fair (MMS) iff in the allocation each agent receives a value
at least as much as her maximin share. Conceptually, the
threshold follows from executing a discrete version of the
cut-and-choose protocol: among n participating agents, the
maximin share for an agent i is defined as the maximum
value that i can guarantee for herself by partitioning the set
of (indivisible) goods into n subsets, and then receiving a
minimum valued (according to i’s valuation) one. In contrast to envy-freeness up to one good, MMS allocations are
not guaranteed to exist under additive valuations (Kurokawa,
Procaccia, and Wang 2016; Procaccia and Wang 2014). This
fairness notion, however, admits strong approximation guarantees for additive valuations and beyond; see (Garg and
Taki 2020; Ghodsi et al. 2018), and references therein.
Equipped with relevant fairness criteria (such as EF1
and MMS), research in discrete fair division has primar-

We study the problem of allocating indivisible goods among
strategic agents. We focus on settings wherein monetary
transfers are not available and each agent’s private valuation is a submodular function with binary marginals, i.e., the
agents’ valuations are matroid-rank functions. In this setup,
we establish a notable dichotomy between two of the most
well-studied fairness notions in discrete fair division; specifically, between envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) and maximin shares (MMS).
First, we show that a known Pareto-efficient mechanism
is group strategy-proof for finding EF1 allocations, under
matroid-rank valuations. The group strategy-proofness guarantee strengthens an existing result that establishes truthfulness (individually for each agent) in the same context. Our
result also generalizes prior work from binary additive valuations to the matroid-rank case.
Next, we establish that an analogous positive result cannot be
achieved for MMS, even when considering truthfulness on an
individual level. Specifically, we prove that, for matroid-rank
valuations, there does not exist a truthful mechanism that is
index oblivious, Pareto efficient, and maximin fair.
For establishing our results, we develop a characterization of
truthful mechanisms for matroid-rank functions. This characterization in fact holds for a broader class of valuations
(specifically, holds for binary XOS functions) and might be
of independent interest.

Introduction
The field of discrete fair division studies the allocation
of indivisible goods (i.e., goods that cannot be fractionally divided) among agents with possibly different preferences. Such allocation problems arise naturally in many realworld settings, e.g., assignment of flats in public housing
estates (Deng, Sing, and Ren 2013), allocating courses to
students (Budish et al. 2017), or distributing computational
resources. Motivated, in part, by such applications, in recent
years a significant body of work has been directed towards
the development of algorithms that find fair and economically efficient allocations (Brandt et al. 2016; Endriss 2017).
In the fair division literature, envy-freeness is one of the
most prominent fairness criterion. An allocation is said to be

1
An P
agent’s valuation function v is said to be additive iff
v(S) = g∈S v({g}) for every subset of goods S.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4801

