The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Decentralized Mean Field Games
Sriram Ganapathi Subramanian1, 3 , Matthew E. Taylor2, 4 , Mark Crowley1 , Pascal Poupart1, 3
1

University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
3
Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
4
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
s2ganapa@uwaterloo.ca, matthew.e.taylor@ualberta.ca, mcrowley@uwaterloo.ca, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca
2

Abstract

tractable since, effectively, only two agents are being modelled. Lasry and Lions (2007) introduced the framework of a
mean field game (MFG), which incorporates the mean field
theory in MARL. In MARL, the mean field can be a population state distribution (Huang 2010) or action distribution
(Yang et al. 2018) of all the other agents in the environment.
MFGs have three common assumptions. First, each agent
does not have access to the local information of the other
agents. However, it has access to accurate global information
regarding the mean field of the population. Second, all agents
in the environment are independent, homogeneous, and indistinguishable. Third, all agents maintain interactions with
others only through the mean field. These assumptions (especially the first two) severely restrict the potential of using
mean field methods in real-world environments. The first assumption is impractical, while the second assumption implies
that all agents share the same state space, action space, reward
function, and have the same objectives. Further, given these
assumptions, prior works use centralized learning methods,
where all agents learn and update a shared centralized policy.
These two assumptions are only applicable to cooperative environments with extremely similar agents. Theoretically, the
agent indices are omitted since all agents are interchangeable
(Lasry and Lions 2007). We will relax the first two assumptions. In our case, the agents are not interchangeable and can
each formulate their own policies during learning that differs
from others. Also, we will not assume the availability of the
immediate global mean field. Instead, agents only have local
information and use modelling techniques (similar to opponent modelling common in MARL (Hernandez-Leal, Kartal,
and Taylor 2019)) to effectively model the mean field during the training process. We retain the assumption that each
agent’s impact on the environment is infinitesimal (Huang
2010), and hence agents calculate best responses only to the
mean field. Formulating best responses to each individual
agent is intractable and unnecessary (Lasry and Lions 2007).
The solution concepts proposed by previous mean field
methods have been either the centralized Nash equilibrium
(Yang et al. 2018) or a closely related mean field equilibrium (Lasry and Lions 2007). These solution concepts are
centralized as they require knowledge of the current policy of all other agents or other global information, even in
non-cooperative environments. Verifying their existence is
infeasible in many practical environments (Neumann 1928).

Multiagent reinforcement learning algorithms have not been
widely adopted in large scale environments with many agents
as they often scale poorly with the number of agents. Using
mean field theory to aggregate agents has been proposed as a
solution to this problem. However, almost all previous methods in this area make a strong assumption of a centralized
system where all the agents in the environment learn the same
policy and are effectively indistinguishable from each other.
In this paper, we relax this assumption about indistinguishable
agents and propose a new mean field system known as Decentralized Mean Field Games, where each agent can be quite
different from others. All agents learn independent policies
in a decentralized fashion, based on their local observations.
We define a theoretical solution concept for this system and
provide a fixed point guarantee for a Q-learning based algorithm in this system. A practical consequence of our approach
is that we can address a ‘chicken-and-egg’ problem in empirical mean field reinforcement learning algorithms. Further,
we provide Q-learning and actor-critic algorithms that use the
decentralized mean field learning approach and give stronger
performances compared to common baselines in this area. In
our setting, agents do not need to be clones of each other
and learn in a fully decentralized fashion. Hence, for the first
time, we show the application of mean field learning methods in fully competitive environments, large-scale continuous
action space environments, and other environments with heterogeneous agents. Importantly, we also apply the mean field
method in a ride-sharing problem using a real-world dataset.
We propose a decentralized solution to this problem, which is
more practical than existing centralized training methods.

Introduction
Most multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms
are not tractable when applied to environments with many
agents (infinite in the limit) as these algorithms are exponential in the number of agents (Busoniu, Babuska, and De Schutter 2006). One exception is a class of algorithms that use the
mean field theory (Stanley 1971) to approximate the many
agent setting to a two agent setting, where the second agent
is a mean field distribution of all agents representing the average effect of the population. This makes MARL algorithms
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9439

