The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Promoting Single-Modal Optical Flow Network for Diverse Cross-Modal Flow
Estimation
Shili Zhou, Weimin Tan, Bo Yan *
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
slzhou19@fudan.edu.cn, wmtan@fudan.edu.cn, byan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Single-Modal optical
flow estimation

In recent years, optical flow methods develop rapidly, achieving unprecedented high performance. Most of the methods only consider single-modal optical flow under the wellknown brightness-constancy assumption. However, in many
application systems, images of different modalities need to
be aligned, which demands to estimate cross-modal flow between the cross-modal image pairs. A lot of cross-modal
matching methods are designed for some specific crossmodal scenarios. We argue that the prior knowledge of the
advanced optical flow models can be transferred to the crossmodal flow estimation, which may be a simple but unified
solution for diverse cross-modal matching tasks. To verify
our hypothesis, we design a self-supervised framework to
promote the single-modal optical flow networks for diverse
corss-modal flow estimation. Moreover, we add a CrossModal-Adapter block as a plugin to the state-of-the-art optical flow model RAFT for better performance in cross-modal
scenarios. Our proposed Modality Promotion Framework and
Cross-Modal Adapter have multiple advantages compared to
the existing methods. The experiments demonstrate that our
method is effective on multiple datasets of different crossmodal scenarios.

Diverse Cross-Modal flow
estimation

RGB-NIR

Optical flow
network

Modality
Promotion

RGB-DEP

DEP-FIR

RGB-FIR
DynamicIllumination
…

…

Figure 1: The illustration of the modality promotion process,
which converts the existing deep-learning-based singlemodal optical flow models to the cross-modality flow estimation models.

sume a definite transformation rule. (ii) Most of the crossmodal methods are only aimed at matching in a specific
cross-modal scene, which cannot be generalized to other
scenarios. (iii) Many traditional methods do not use highperformance deep learning architectures, making them computationally inefficient and not robust.
Optical flow estimation can be regarded as a subtask of
image matching, which aims at estimating the dense pixel
correspondences between two time-consecutive frames. In
recent years, the rapid development of deep learning has
aroused a huge wave in the field of optical flow estimation.
Many deep models have been proposed, which greatly refresh the state-of-the-art performance of optical flow estimation. Thus, we come up with an idea: can we make full
use of the existing high-performance optical flow models
in the task of cross-modal image matching?
In this paper, we propose a Modality Promotion Framework (MPF), which can extend the existing single-modal
optical flow estimation models for estimating the flow of
diverse cross-modal scenarios, as shown in Figure 1. Following the self-supervised distillation process used in some
unsupervised optical flow estimation methods (Liu et al.
2019a,b), we use a composite cross-modal augmentation
generator to convert the ordinary RGB frame tuples to
diverse cross-modal frame tuples, and construct a selfsupervised framework based on the off-the-shelf optical
flow estimation models. Our framework has the following

Introduction
With the emergence of a variety of sensors, collecting images of multiple modalities for comprehensive analysis has
become the best solution for many application systems, including medical diagnosis, remote sensing, monitoring, etc.
However, the images of different modalities are usually nonaligned due to the limitation of devices, making it difficult
for the computer to analyze automatically. Therefore, finding the pixel-level correspondences of cross-modal images
is a very meaningful task.
There have been many studies on cross-modal image
matching. However, the current methods have several general shortcomings: (i) Some methods can only match sparse
keypoint pairs. To align the whole images, we have to asCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author: Bo Yan.
This work is supported by NSFC (Grant No.: U2001209,
61902076) and Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai
(21ZR1406600).

3562

