The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Exact Algorithm with New Upper Bounds for the Maximum k-Defective
Clique Problem in Massive Sparse Graphs
Jian Gao1 , Zhenghang Xu2 , Ruizhi Li2,3 , Minghao Yin4 *
2

1
College of Information Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
School of Management Science and Information Engineering, Jilin University of Finance and Economics, China
4
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
gaojian@dlmu.edu.cn, zhenghangxu97@gmail.com, lirz111@jlufe.edu.cn, ymh@nenu.edu.cn

Abstract

and Smith 2006), cluster detection (Stozhkov et al. 2020;
Bomze, Rinaldi, and Zeffiro 2021), and social network analysis (Gschwind et al. 2020; Jain and Seshadhri 2020).
Trukhanov et al. (2013) proposed the first exact algorithm for the MDCP, which was based on the Russian Doll
Search (RDS) (Verfaillie, Lemaı̂tre, and Schiex 1996), and
then Gschwind, Irnich, and Podlinski (2018) improved it
by a new incremental verification procedure with a better worst-case runtime. Shirokikh (2013) proved some upper bounds for the maximum k-defective clique for general
graphs as well as some special graphs (e.g. planar graphs and
r-partite graphs). In recent years, there have been an increasing number of works on the MDCP. Gschwind et al. (2020)
proposed a framework based on the branch-and-price technique to solve the MDCP and other relaxed cliques. They
implemented their algorithm with CPLEX and tested some
small instances. Stozhkov et al. (2020) proposed continuous cubic formulations for the MDCP by generalizing the
Motzkin-Straus formulation, and provided some theoretical
results. They compared their approach with RDS on small
instances. Moreover, a nonlinear optimization approach as
well as an equivalent continuous formulation has been proposed for network-based cluster detection in (Bomze, Rinaldi, and Zeffiro 2021). Besides, Chen et al. (2021) have
proposed an exact algorithm based on the branch-and-bound
framework with some new reduction and pruning strategies,
and showed their algorithm performs best among existing
algorithms for massive graphs.
In the past decade, graphs from real-world applications
have revealed some new characteristics, i.e., massive, sparse
and the power-law distribution of vertex degrees. To find
the maximum (relaxed) clique or enumerate maximal (relaxed) cliques in such graphs, a number of algorithms for
cliques (Rossi et al. 2014; Cai and Lin 2016; Jiang, Li, and
Manyà 2017), k-plexes (Xiao et al. 2017; Miao and Balasundaram 2017; Conte et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2021; Jiang
et al. 2021), and quasi-cliques (Sanei-Mehri et al. 2021;
Marinelli, Pizzuti, and Rossi 2021) have been proposed.
However, compared with the clique and its other relaxations,
existing k-defective algorithms can hardly handle massive
sparse graphs. Though several algorithms have been proposed, the effect of them declines greatly with k growing,
and there is a lack of evaluations on the cases with k > 5. In
fact, study on algorithms for the k-defective clique in mas-

The Maximum k-Defective Clique Problem (MDCP), as a
clique relaxation model, has been used to solve various problems. Because it is a hard computational task, previous works
can hardly solve the MDCP for massive sparse graphs derived from real-world applications. In this work, we propose a
novel branch-and-bound algorithm to solve the MDCP based
on several new techniques. First, we propose two new upper
bounds of the MDCP as well as corresponding reduction rules
to remove redundant vertices and edges. The proposed reduction rules are particularly useful for massive graphs. Second,
we present another new upper bound by counting missing
edges between fixed vertices and an unfixed vertex for cutting
branches. We perform extensive computational experiments
to evaluate our algorithm. Experimental results show that our
reduction rules are very effective for removing redundant vertices and edges so that graphs are reduced greatly. Also, our
algorithm can solve benchmark instances efficiently, and it
has significantly better performance than state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Recently, analyzing cohesive subgraphs has received much
attention as it can deal with a great number of real-world
applications in network analysis. The clique is a basic concept of cohesive subgraphs, while it is difficult to model
real-world problems directly due to its strong restriction on
connectivity. Since identifying cliques from real-world applications is an ideal task, some relaxations of the clique,
such as quasi-cliques (Brunato, Hoos, and Battiti 2007), kplexes (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011), k-clubs
(Almeida and de Carvalho 2014), and k-defective cliques
(Yu et al. 2006), were proposed to deal with real-world applications. Among those relaxations, the k-defective clique,
a relation of clique, allows at most k edges to be absent
from a complete graph. Therefore, it is a more useful tool for
analyzing complex networks encoded from various applications compared with the clique. The concept of k-defective
clique was proposed by Yu et al. (2006) to analyze proteins
and predict protein interactions in biological networks. Besides, it was also employed in many fields, such as transportation science (Sherali, Smith, and Trani 2002; Sherali
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10174

