The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Using MaxSAT for Efficient Explanations of Tree Ensembles
Alexey Ignatiev1 , Yacine Izza2 , Peter J. Stuckey1 , Joao Marques-Silva3
1

Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
2
University of Toulouse, France
3
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
alexey.ignatiev@monash.edu, yacine.izza@univ-toulouse.fr, peter.stuckey@monash.edu, joao.marques-silva@irit.fr

the ML model and formally capture the model’s semantics (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska,
and Marques-Silva 2019a; Barceló et al. 2020; MarquesSilva and Ignatiev 2022). Despite a number of advantages,
model-agnostic approaches are by definition inexact with
respect to the actual ML model since they only examine a small proportion of the possible outputs (Ignatiev,
Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019c; Narodytska et al.
2019; Ignatiev 2020; Shrotri et al. 2022). Rigorous explanations, in contrast, can make accurate statements about the
ML model being explained, although their operation relies
on formal reasoning and often suffers from scalability issues (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska,
and Marques-Silva 2019a).
In this paper, we give explanations of tree ensembles by
applying a formal approach, which returns provably minimal explanations for Boosted Tree classifications. This is
achieved by encoding the tree ensemble in propositional
logic. One of the key difficulties in reasoning about tree ensembles is reasoning about the aggregation over the many
trees in the tree ensemble. Previous approaches to tackling
the large linear constraints that arise in reasoning over the
aggregation of the many trees in the ensemble either used
SAT Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers (Ignatiev, Narodytska,
and Marques-Silva 2019c) or Mixed Integer Programming
(MIP) solvers (Chen et al. 2019; Kanamori et al. 2021; Parmentier and Vidal 2021) to directly handle large linear constraints, or encoded the linear constraints to SAT (Izza and
Marques-Silva 2021), which can be costly.
In this paper, we use the optimisation capabilities of
modern core-guided MaxSAT solvers (Bacchus, Järvisalo,
and Martins 2021) to avoid encoding the linear constraint,
instead mapping the aggregation reasoning to a suite of
MaxSAT queries. This new approach is much more efficient
than competing approaches since the underlying (OLL1 )
MaxSAT optimisation procedure introduces new literals that
allow us to learn about the large linear constraints effectively (Morgado, Dodaro, and Marques-Silva 2014; Ignatiev,
Morgado, and Marques-Silva 2019).

Abstract
Tree ensembles (TEs) denote a prevalent machine learning
model that do not offer guarantees of interpretability, that represent a challenge from the perspective of explainable artificial intelligence. Besides model agnostic approaches, recent
work proposed to explain TEs with formally-defined explanations, which are computed with oracles for propositional satisfiability (SAT) and satisfiability modulo theories. The computation of explanations for TEs involves linear constraints
to express the prediction. In practice, this deteriorates scalability of the underlying reasoners. Motivated by the inherent
propositional nature of TEs, this paper proposes to circumvent the need for linear constraints and instead employ an
optimization engine for pure propositional logic to efficiently
handle the prediction. Concretely, the paper proposes to use
a MaxSAT solver and exploit the objective function to determine a winning class. This is achieved by devising a propositional encoding for computing explanations of TEs. Furthermore, the paper proposes additional heuristics to improve
the underlying MaxSAT solving procedure. Experimental results obtained on a wide range of publicly available datasets
demonstrate that the proposed MaxSAT-based approach is either on par or outperforms the existing reasoning-based explainers, thus representing a robust and efficient alternative
for computing formal explanations for TEs.

1

Introduction

Tree ensembles (Zhou 2012), including random
forests (Breiman 2001) and gradient boosted trees (Friedman 2001), are one of the most successful machine learning
(ML) approaches. Unfortunately, although often succinct
in representation, their decisions are not necessarily easy
to explain, since they involve aggregating information over
many trees.
Besides applying intrinsically interpretable ML models (Rudin 2018; Molnar 2020), there are two major approaches to explaining ML models on demand (Miller 2019;
Guidotti et al. 2019): model-agnostic approaches do not
make any use of the ML model representation that they
are explaining, relying on querying the ML model (Chen
and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2018); and model-precise (or rigorous, or
formal) explanations, which make use of the structure of

1
The OLL algorithm originates from the work on solving optimization problems in ASP (Andres et al. 2012) and was then
adapted to MaxSAT (Morgado, Dodaro, and Marques-Silva 2014;
Ignatiev, Morgado, and Marques-Silva 2019).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3776

