The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CPRAL: Collaborative Panoptic-Regional Active Learning for
Semantic Segmentation
Yu Qiao1∗ , Jincheng Zhu1∗ , Chengjiang Long2†
Zeyao Zhang1 , Yuxin Wang1 , Zhenjun Du3 , Xin Yang1†
1

Dalian University of Technology
JD Finance America Corporation
3
SIASUN Robot & Automation CO.,Ltd
{qiaoyu2020,zjccool951111,zhangzey}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
cjfykx@gmail.com, {wyx,xinyang}@dlut.edu.cn, duzhenjun@siasun.com
2

Abstract
Acquiring the most representative examples via active learning (AL) can benefit many data-dependent computer vision
tasks by minimizing efforts of image-level or pixel-wise annotations. In this paper, we propose a novel Collaborative
Panoptic-Regional Active Learning framework (CPRAL) to
address the semantic segmentation task. For a small batch of
images initially sampled with pixel-wise annotations, we employ panoptic information to initially select unlabeled samples. Considering the class imbalance in the segmentation
dataset, we import a Regional Gaussian Attention module
(RGA) to achieve semantics-biased selection. The subset is
highlighted by vote entropy and then attended by Gaussian
kernels to maximize the biased regions. We also propose a
Contextual Labels Extension (CLE) to boost regional annotations with contextual attention guidance. With the collaboration of semantics-agnostic panoptic matching and regionbiased selection and extension, our CPRAL can strike a balance between labeling efforts and performance and compromise the semantics distribution. We perform extensive experiments on Cityscapes and BDD10K datasets and show that
CPRAL outperforms the cutting-edge methods with impressive results and less labeling proportion.

Figure 1: Red streams-model training, blue streams-samples
selection, black streams-sampled images annotation.

Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019; Choi et al. 2021; Caramalau, Bhattarai, and Kim 2021), there is a further margin
for exploring incremental annotations, especially for pixelwise computer vision tasks, like semantic segmentation.
Some active learning algorithms have been developed
to alleviate the data dependency in semantic segmentation (Górriz et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2017; Mackowiak et al.
2018; Cai et al. 2021). According to the different granularity
of sample annotations, active learning-based semantic segmentation can be divided into panoptic labels guided methods (Dai et al. 2020; Yoo and Kweon 2019; Sinha, Ebrahimi,
and Darrell 2019; Kim et al. 2021) and regional information supervised ones (Mackowiak et al. 2018; Casanova
et al. 2019; Colling et al. 2021). The former provides the
whole images for oracles, and each annotation increment is
based on the image size, while regional annotations consider
region-based label boosting. Flexible shape or size variety
can contribute to the region-based selection. Thus the performance of regional selections usually has an advantage over
image-based annotations. However, more regional selections
require enormous acquisition execution and slow down the
annotation time for the entire active learning framework.
To design an active learning model that can handle largescale semantic segmentation datasets with compatible accuracy and sampling cost, we observe that an initial panoptic
selection is feasible to narrow the acquisition to relatively
few regions. A distillation module after the panoptic selec-

Introduction
Active learning frameworks (Cohn, Ghahramani, and Jordan
1996) resort to well-designed acquiring functions to gradually capture representative samples from the dataset, and the
generalized model can benefit from the final low-cost annotations with comparable performance. Many active learning algorithms have been developed to mitigate the dependency of deep-learning-based models on the finely annotated
dataset. Although active learning has contributed greatly to
image classification (Beluch et al. 2018; Long, Hua, and
Kapoor 2013; Hua et al. 2013; Li and Guo 2013; Long and
Hua 2015; Long, Hua, and Kapoor 2016; Hua et al. 2018;
∗

These authors contributed equally.
This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and Xin
Yang. Xin Yang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2108

