The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Automated Synthesis of Generalized Invariant Strategies via
Counterexample-Guided Strategy Refinement
Kailun Luo,1,2 Yongmei Liu2∗
1

School of Cyberspace Security, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan 523808, China
2
Dept. of Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China
luokl@dgut.edu.cn, ymliu@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Ruzzo 1995]; the computation approaches suffer from
performance issues [Eén et al. 2015].
For domains with similar structures, generalized strategy
synthesis is a promising direction to deal with the statespace explosion problem. Generalized strategy synthesis
can be viewed as a multi-agent extension of generalized
planning, which aims to generate one solution that works
for multiple (possibly infinitely many) planning problems
[Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2011; Hu and De
Giacomo 2011]. Different from the objective to design
on-line systems to play arbitrary games in general game
playing [Genesereth, Love, and Pell 2005], generalized
strategy synthesis focuses on off-line strategy synthesis
for multiple game instances sharing similar structures. If
a generalized solution is generated, for any game instance
with similar structures, we could efficiently produce a
concrete solution from the generalized one.
A typical example is the n-Nim game, played with n
heaps of pebbles. Two players take turns removing pebbles
from a heap. On each turn, a player must remove at least one
pebble, and may remove any number of pebbles provided
that they all come from the same heap. The player to remove
the last pebble wins. The safety objective is to win the game
whenever it ends. The task is to synthesize a strategy that
works for all instances of the n-Nim game.
Wu et al. [2020] consider the automated synthesis of
generalized winning strategies for impartial combinatorial
games. They first generate a winning formula using given
templates by trying to include or exclude states corresponding to counterexamples generated during the verification
process. They then partition the winning formula into several sub-formulas, and attempt to find an action to take under
the condition of each sub-formula via heuristic methods.
While obtaining good performance, their framework has
some limitations. It only considers numerical variables and
the linear relations among them; thus domains and strategies
which involve more expressive formalizations can not be
handled. It requires providing state constraints to denote
legal states, which is not an easy task for some domains.
In this paper, we consider a more general form of synthesis, namely generalized strategy synthesis for finite-state
turn-based two-player games with perfect information and
safety objectives. We formalize the problem of generalized
strategy synthesis as a theorem-proving task in the situation

Strategy synthesis for multi-agent systems has proved to be a
hard task, even when limited to two-player games with safety
objectives. Generalized strategy synthesis, an extension
of generalized planning which aims to produce a single
solution for multiple (possibly infinitely many) planning
instances, is a promising direction to deal with the state-space
explosion problem. In this paper, we formalize the problem
of generalized strategy synthesis in the situation calculus.
The synthesis task involves second-order theorem proving
generally. Thus we consider strategies aiming to maintain
invariants; such strategies can be verified with first-order theorem proving. We propose a sound but incomplete approach
to synthesize invariant strategies by adapting the framework
of counterexample-guided refinement. The key idea for
refinement is to generate a strategy using a model checker
for a game constructed from the counterexample, and use
it to refine the candidate general strategy. We implemented
our method and did experiments with a number of game
problems. Our system can successfully synthesize solutions
for most of the domains within a reasonable amount of time.

Introduction
Two player games with reachability or safety objectives
require a player to reach or avoid a designated set of target
configurations. They are closely related to the synthesis of
reactive systems [Pnueli and Rosner 1989], and logical tasks
such as first-order model checking [Gradel et al. 2007].
While multi-agent systems have received much attention,
verifying strategic abilities and synthesizing strategies for
them have proved to be hard tasks. In Strategy Logic,
the model checking problem is non-elementarily decidable [Chatterjee, Henzinger, and Piterman 2010]. In
Alternating-time Temporal Logic, the model checking
problem is P-complete wrt the state space, even considering
memoryless strategies [Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman
2002; Bulling, Dix, and Jamroga 2010]; it encounters the
state-space explosion problem with the increasing number
of propositions. For games with reachability or safety
objectives, the problem of computing winning regions for
winning strategies, is P-complete [Greenlaw, Hoover, and
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5800

