The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Beyond Learning Features: Training a Fully-Functional Classifier
with ZERO Instance-Level Labels
Deepak Babu Sam∗ , Abhinav Agarwalla∗ , Venkatesh Babu Radhakrishnan
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
deepaksam@iisc.ac.in, agarwallaabhinav@gmail.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We attempt to train deep neural networks for classification
without using any labeled data. Existing unsupervised methods, though mine useful clusters or features, require some
annotated samples to facilitate the final task-specific predictions. This defeats the true purpose of unsupervised learning
and hence we envisage a paradigm of ‘true’ self-supervision,
where absolutely no annotated instances are used for training a classifier. The proposed method first pretrains a deep
network through self-supervision and performs clustering on
the learned features. A classifier layer is then appended to the
self-supervised network and is trained by matching the distribution of the predictions to that of a predefined prior. This
approach leverages the distribution of labels for supervisory
signals and consequently, no image-label pair is needed. Experiments reveal that the method works on major nominal as
well as ordinal classification datasets and delivers significant
performance.

Introduction
One major reason for the practical success of deep learning is unarguably the use of large human annotated datasets.
These huge collections contain labeled data to directly serve
the fully supervised training for the task of interest. Though
this paradigm has enabled excellent performance for nearly
all problems, creating such datasets is laborious and expensive. There is a mounting, but difficult requirement to include more and more diversity in datasets for better generalization. Moreover, many applications deal with data that
changes rapidly, where the annotation process itself is almost impossible. For instance, social media data is very dynamic with new categories being introduced quite often and
manual supervision is challenging given the scale of operation. These issues have accentuated the need for unsupervised training schemes, where the requirement of large labeled datasets is mitigated.
The existing approaches to unsupervised learning broadly
rely on either representation learning or clustering. There
are several methods for learning features, starting from autoencoders (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Vincent et al.
2008; Kingma and Welling 2013; Makhzani and Frey 2015)

Figure 1: Comparison of related learning paradigms. Both
clustering and self-supervision methods utilize labels; former in the cluster assignment step while the latter to train
the classifier layer. Our approach does not require labels at
any stage of the training.

to recent self-supervision (Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016;
Pathak et al. 2016; Komodakis and Gidaris 2018; Noroozi
and Favaro 2016; Kolesnikov, Zhai, and Beyer 2019). Autoencoders, in general, are optimized to predict back their
inputs often through a representational bottleneck, thereby
learning useful features. Self-supervision takes it further and
trains the model for some pseudo label prediction tasks,
where the labels could be easily obtained from the input.
Consider self-supervision with colorization (Zhang, Isola,
and Efros 2016; Larsson, Maire, and Shakhnarovich 2016,
2017), where the objective is to predict the color image given
its grayscale version. Note that the grayscale image is generated from the color input free of any human annotation
cost. One could formulate several tasks like solving jumbled
images (Noroozi and Favaro 2016), inpainting (Pathak et al.
2016), classifying the angle of image rotation (Komodakis
and Gidaris 2018; Feng, Xu, and Tao 2019), etc. In contrast,

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2162

