The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Coherent Video Cartoonization with Perceptual Motion Consistency
Zhenhuan Liu1,2 , Liang Li1∗ , Huajie Jiang3
Xin Jin3 , Dandan Tu3 , Shuhui Wang1 , Zheng-Jun Zha4
1

Institute of Computing Technology, 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huawei Technologies, 4 University of Science and Technology of China
zhenhuan.liu@vipl.ict.ac.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, {jianghuajie1, jinxin11, tudandan}@huawei.com,
wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
In recent years, creative content generations like style transfer
and neural photo editing have attracted more and more attention. Among these, cartoonization of real-world scenes has
promising applications in entertainment and industry. Different from image translations focusing on improving the
style effect of generated images, video cartoonization has
additional requirements on the temporal consistency. In this
paper, we propose a spatially-adaptive semantic alignment
framework with perceptual motion consistency for coherent video cartoonization in an unsupervised manner. The semantic alignment module is designed to restore deformation of semantic structure caused by spatial information lost
in the encoder-decoder architecture. Furthermore, we devise
the spatio-temporal correlative map as a style-independent,
global-aware regularization on the perceptual motion consistency. Deriving from similarity measurement of high-level
features in photo and cartoon frames, it captures global semantic information beyond raw pixel-value in optical flow.
Besides, the similarity measurement disentangles temporal
relationships from domain-specific style properties, which
helps regularize the temporal consistency without hurting
style effects of cartoon images. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate our method is able to generate
highly stylistic and temporal consistent cartoon videos.

Real-world Video

Our generated cartoon video

Figure 1: Illustration of video cartoonization. It requires
smooth surface and clear border with temporal consistency
for a typical cartoon artwork.

cartoonization aims to create highly conceptual and abstract
images. Besides, due to the dynamic training characteristic
of unsupervised GANs, it’s harder to achieve stable convergence of style effects in generated images than style transfer which has explicit style constraints. Compared to image cartoonization, video cartoonization has higher requirements on the temporal consistency between input and output
frames. There are two challenges to the coherence of output
video. The first one is keeping the structure consistency between each input and output frame. It’s difficult to preserve
structure consistency of output image while depicting the
highly abstracted cartoon image structure in unsupervised
learning. The second challenge is to guarantee the temporal
coherence of generated frames. Previous works have shown
that the output of deep neural networks is very sensitive to
small changes in pixel values (Azulay and Weiss 2019). The
generator of video cartoonization needs to be robust under
different transformations of input frames.
There are mainly three kinds of methods to solve the
problem of video temporal inconsistency. The first method
explicitly employs optical flow estimated between input
frames to warp the last output frame for generation (Chen
et al. 2017). However, this method highly relies on the accuracy of flow estimation, which is difficult for complex
real-world environments. The second one is to build a taskindependent model that can repair temporal inconsistency
of videos generated by different image-translation models,
such as Deep Video Prior(Lei, Xing, and Chen 2020). But

Introduction
Cartoon movies are very popular and attractive across the
world, but creating even a short cartoon movie involves a
complex and time-consuming production process with multiple stages. Recently, deep learning based methods have
developed a lot of techniques for creative content generation, like style transfer, semantic image synthesis and neural photo editing. Video cartoonization aims at creating coherent cartoon-styled videos based on real-world videos, as
shown in Figure 1. As a practical technique, it has promising
applications in entertainment and industry.
Given two collections containing unpaired photo and cartoon images, cartoonization usually leverages generative adversarial networks(GANs) to map the input photo into the
distribution of cartoon images. Different from traditional
style transfer which often adds textures like brush strokes,
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1846

