The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FedProto: Federated Prototype Learning across Heterogeneous Clients
Yue Tan1 , Guodong Long1 , Lu Liu1 , Tianyi Zhou2,3 , Qinghua Lu4 , Jing Jiang1 , Chengqi Zhang 1
1

Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
2
University of Washington
3
University of Maryland, College Park
4
Data61, CSIRO
yue.tan@student.uts.edu.au, {guodong.long, jing.jiang, chengqi.zhang}@uts.edu.au,
lu.liu.cs@icloud.com, tianyizh@uw.edu, qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au
Abstract

works for clustered FL (Sattler, Müller, and Samek 2020).
Another widely studied strategy is personalized FL (Tan
et al. 2021) where a personalized model is generated for
each client by leveraging both global and local information.
Nevertheless, most of these methods depend on gradientbased aggregation, resulting in high communication costs
and heavy reliance on homogeneous local models.
However, in real-world applications, model heterogeneity is common because of varying hardware and computation capabilities across clients (Long et al. 2020). Knowledge Distillation (KD)-based FL (Lin et al. 2020) addresses
this challenge by transferring the teacher model’s knowledge
to student models with different model architectures. However, these methods require an extra public dataset to align
the student and teacher models’ outputs, increasing the computation costs. Moreover, the performance of KD-based FL
can significantly degrade with the increase in the distribution
divergence between the public dataset and on-client datasets
that are usually non-IID.
Inspired by prototype learning, merging the prototypes
over heterogeneous datasets can effectively integrate the feature representations from diverse data distributions (Snell,
Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Liu et al. 2020; Dvornik, Schmid,
and Mairal 2020). On-client intelligent agents in the FL
system can share knowledge by exchanging information in
terms of representations, despite statistical and model heterogeneity. For example, when we talk about “dog”, different people will have a unique “imagined picture” or “prototype” to represent the concept “dog”. Their prototypes
may be slightly diverse due to different life experience and
visual memory. Exchanging these concept-specific prototypes across people enables them to acquire more knowledge about the concept “dog”. Treating each FL client as a
human-like intelligent agent, the core idea of our method is
to exchange prototypes rather than share model parameters
or raw data, which can naturally match the knowledge acquisition behavior of humans.
In this paper, we propose a novel prototype aggregationbased FL framework where only prototypes are transmitted
between the server and clients. The proposed solution does
not require model parameters or gradients to be aggregated,
so it has a huge potential to be a robust framework for various heterogeneous FL scenarios. Concretely, each client can
have different model architectures and input/output spaces,

Heterogeneity across clients in federated learning (FL) usually hinders the optimization convergence and generalization
performance when the aggregation of clients’ knowledge occurs in the gradient space. For example, clients may differ
in terms of data distribution, network latency, input/output
space, and/or model architecture, which can easily lead to the
misalignment of their local gradients. To improve the tolerance to heterogeneity, we propose a novel federated prototype learning (FedProto) framework in which the clients
and server communicate the abstract class prototypes instead
of the gradients. FedProto aggregates the local prototypes
collected from different clients, and then sends the global prototypes back to all clients to regularize the training of local
models. The training on each client aims to minimize the classification error on the local data while keeping the resulting
local prototypes sufficiently close to the corresponding global
ones. Moreover, we provide a theoretical analysis to the convergence rate of FedProto under non-convex objectives. In
experiments, we propose a benchmark setting tailored for heterogeneous FL, with FedProto outperforming several recent FL approaches on multiple datasets.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is widely used in multiple applications to enable collaborative learning across a variety of
clients without sharing private data. It aims at training a
global model on a centralized server while all data are distributed over many local clients and cannot be freely transmitted for privacy or communication concerns (McMahan
et al. 2017). The iterative process of FL has two steps:
(1) each local client is synchronized by the global model
and then trained using its local data; and (2) the server updates the global model by aggregating all the local models.
Considering that the model aggregation occurs in the gradient space, traditional FL still has some practical challenges
caused by the heterogeneity of data and model (Kairouz
et al. 2019). Efficient algorithms suitable to overcome both
these two challenges have not yet been fully developed or
systematically examined.
To tackle the statistical heterogeneity of data distributions, one straightforward solution is to maintain multiple global models for different local distributions, e.g., the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8432

