The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Local and Global Linear Convergence of General Low-Rank Matrix Recovery
Problems
Yingjie Bi,1 Haixiang Zhang, 2 Javad Lavaei 1
1

Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of California, Berkeley
2
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley
yingjiebi@berkeley.edu, haixiang zhang@berkeley.edu, lavaei@berkeley.edu

rank-constrained solution M ∗ . The second variant of the
low-rank matrix recovery problem to be studied is the asymmetric problem, in which M ∗ ∈ Rn×m is a possibly nonsquare matrix with rank(M ∗ ) = r, and it is a global minimizer of some loss function fa . Similarly, M ∗ can be recovered by solving

Abstract
We study the convergence rate of gradient-based local search
methods for solving low-rank matrix recovery problems with
general objectives in both symmetric and asymmetric cases,
under the assumption of the restricted isometry property.
First, we develop a new technique to verify the Polyak–
Łojasiewicz inequality in a neighborhood of the global minimizers, which leads to a local linear convergence region for
the gradient descent method. Second, based on the local convergence result and a sharp strict saddle property proven in
this paper, we present two new conditions that guarantee the
global linear convergence of the perturbed gradient descent
method. The developed local and global convergence results
provide much stronger theoretical guarantees than the existing results. As a by-product, this work significantly improves
the existing bounds on the RIP constant required to guarantee
the non-existence of spurious solutions.

min
s. t.

fa (M )
rank(M ) ≤ r,

(2)

M ∈ Rn×m .
As a special case, the loss function fs or fa can be induced
by linear measurements. In this situation, we are given a linear operator A : Rn×n → Rp or A : Rn×m → Rp , where p
denotes the number of measurements. To recover M ∗ from
the vector d = A(M ∗ ), the function fs (M ) or fa (M ) is
often chosen to be
1
kA(M ) − dk2 .
(3)
2
Besides, there are many natural choices for the loss function,
such as a nonlinear model associated with the 1-bit matrix
recovery (Davenport et al. 2014).
The symmetric problem (1) can be transformed into
an unconstrained optimization problem by factoring M as
XX T with X ∈ Rn×r , which leads to the following equivalent formulation:

Introduction
The low-rank matrix recovery problem is to recover an unknown low-rank ground truth matrix from certain measurements. This problem has a variety of applications in machine learning, such as recommendation systems (Koren,
Bell, and Volinsky 2009) and motion detection (Zhou, Yang,
and Yu 2013; Fattahi and Sojoudi 2020), and in engineering problems, such as power system state estimation (Zhang,
Madani, and Lavaei 2018).
In this paper, we consider two variants of the low-rank
matrix recovery problem with a general measurement model
represented by an arbitrary smooth function. The first variant is the symmetric problem, in which the ground truth
M ∗ ∈ Rn×n is a symmetric and positive semidefinite matrix
with rank(M ∗ ) = r, and M ∗ is a global minimizer of some
loss function fs . Then, M ∗ can be recovered by solving the
optimization problem:
min fs (M )
s. t. rank(M ) ≤ r,
(1)

min fs (XX T ).

X∈Rn×r

(4)

In the asymmetric case, one can similarly factor M as U V T
with U ∈ Rn×r and V ∈ Rm×r . Note that (U P, V (P −1 )T )
gives another possible factorization of M for any invertible
matrix P ∈ Rr×r . To reduce the redundancy, a regularization term is usually added to the objective function to enforce that the factorization is balanced, i.e., U T U = V T V
is satisfied (Tu et al. 2016). Since every factorization can be
converted into a balanced one by selecting an appropriate P ,
the original asymmetric problem (2) is equivalent to

M  0, M ∈ Rn×n .
Note that minimizing fs (M ) over positive semidefinite matrices without the rank constraint would often lead to finding a solution with the highest-rank possible rather than the

min

U ∈Rn×r ,V ∈Rm×r

fa (U V T ) +

φ T
kU U − V T V k2F ,
4

(5)

where φ > 0 is an arbitrary constant.
To handle the symmetric and asymmetric problems in a
unified way, we will use the same notation X to denote the

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10129

