The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Do Feature Attribution Methods Correctly Attribute Features?
Yilun Zhou1 , Serena Booth1 , Marco Tulio Ribeiro2 , Julie Shah1
1

MIT CSAIL
Microsoft Research
1
{yilun, serenabooth, julie a shah}@csail.mit.edu, 2 marcotcr@microsoft.com
2

Class 1

Abstract

1

Class 2

Feature attribution methods are popular in interpretable machine learning. These methods compute the attribution of
each input feature to represent its importance, but there is no
consensus on the definition of “attribution”, leading to many
competing methods with little systematic evaluation, complicated in particular by the lack of ground truth attribution. To
address this, we propose a dataset modification procedure to
induce such ground truth. Using this procedure, we evaluate
three common methods: saliency maps, attentions and rationales. We identify several deficiencies and add new perspectives to the growing body of evidence questioning the correctness and reliability of these methods applied on datasets in the
wild. We further discuss possible avenues for remedy and recommend new attribution methods to be tested against ground
truth before deployment. The code and appendix are available
at https://yilunzhou.github.io/feature-attribution-evaluation/.

Figure 1: The intuition behind our feature attribution ground
truth: if we know that for every input, only specific features
(orange) are informative to the label, then across the dataset,
a high-performing model has to focus on them and not get
“distracted” by other irrelevant features. Thus, feature attributions should highlight the union of these features (purple),
and any attribution outside this area is misleading.

Introduction
Crucially, this procedure assumes that the attribution methods works correctly and does not miss influential features.
Is this truly the case? Direct evaluation on natural datasets
is impossible as the very spurious correlations we want attribution methods to find are, by definition, unknown. Many
evaluations try to sidestep this problem with proxy metrics
(Samek et al. 2017; Hooker et al. 2019; Bastings, Aziz, and
Titov 2019), but they are limited in various ways, notably by
a lack of ground truth, as discussed in Sec. 2.2.

Consider the task of training a neural network to detect cancers from X-ray images, wherein the data come from two
sources: a general hospital and a specialized cancer center.
As can be expected, images from the cancer center contain
many more cancer cases, but imagine the cancer center adds
a small timestamp watermark to the top-left corner of its images. Since the timestamp is a strongly correlated with cancer presence, a model may learn to use it for prediction.
It is important to ensure the deployed model makes predictions based on genuine medical signals rather than image artifacts like watermarks. If these artifacts are known a priori,
we can evaluate the model on counterfactual pairs—images
with and without them—and compute prediction difference
to assess their impact. However, for almost all datasets,
we cannot realistically anticipate every possible artifact. As
such, feature attribution methods like saliency maps (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014) are used to identify
regions which are important for prediction, which humans
then inspect for evidence of any artifacts. This train-andinterpret pipeline has been widely adopted in data-driven
medical diagnosis (Shen et al. 2019; Mostavi et al. 2020;
Si et al. 2021) and many other applications.

Instead, we propose evaluating these attribution methods on
semi-natural datasets: natural datasets systematically modified to introduce ground truth information for attributions.
This modification (Fig. 1) ensures that any classifier with
sufficiently high performance has to rely, sometimes solely,
on the manipulations. We then present desiderata, or necessary conditions, for correct attribution values; for example,
features known not to affect the model’s decision should not
receive attribution. The high-level idea is domain-general,
and we instantiate it on image and text data to evaluate
saliency maps, attention mechanisms and rationale models
used to explain common deep learning architectures. We
identify several failure modes of these methods, discuss potential reasons and recommend directions to fix them. Last,
we advocate for testing new attribution methods against
ground truth to validate their attributions before deployment.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9623

