The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DIRL: Domain-Invariant Representation Learning for Generalizable Semantic
Segmentation
Qi Xu1 , Liang Yao2 , Zhengkai Jiang2 , Guannan Jiang3 , Wenqing Chu2 , Wenhui Han4 ,
Wei Zhang3 , Chengjie Wang2 , Ying Tai2 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Limited, Shanghai, China
4
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
txxqsh@sjtu.edu.cn, {liangyao, zhengkjiang, jasoncjwang, yingtai}@tencent.com, wqchu16@gmail.com,
19210980110@fudan.edu.cn, {jianggn, zhangwei}@catl.com
Abstract
Model generalization to the unseen scenes is crucial to realworld applications, such as autonomous driving, which requires robust vision systems. To enhance the model generalization, domain generalization through learning the domaininvariant representation has been widely studied. However,
most existing works learn the shared feature space within
multi-source domains but ignore the characteristic of the feature itself (e.g., the feature sensitivity to the domain-specific
style). Therefore, we propose the Domain-invariant Representation Learning (DIRL) for domain generalization which
utilizes the feature sensitivity as the feature prior to guide
the enhancement of the model generalization capability. The
guidance reflects in two folds: 1) Feature re-calibration that
introduces the Prior Guided Attention Module (PGAM) to
emphasize the insensitive features and suppress the sensitive
features. 2): Feature whiting that proposes the Guided Feature Whiting (GFW) to remove the feature correlations which
are sensitive to the domain-specific style. We construct the
domain-invariant representation which suppresses the effect
of the domain-specific style on the quality and correlation
of the features. As a result, our method is simple yet effective, and can enhance the robustness of various backbone networks with little computational cost. Extensive experiments
over multiple domains generalizable segmentation tasks show
the superiority of our approach to other methods.

Figure 1: Illustration on feature sensitivity to the domainspecific style. We visualize some feature maps generated
by the first residual group in ResNet50. The images share
the same content but differ in style. (a) Original image. (b)
Augmented image through photo-metric transform. (c) Augmented image through BDL-GAN (Li, Yuan, and Vasconcelos 2019). ‘Dif’ means the mean squared loss between the
extracted features from the original and augmented images.

Lee et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2021) reduces
the domain gap by aligning the data distribution between the
source and target domains. However, DA requires to access
the target domain which limits its application. In particular,
this requirement is hard to be satisfied in the model adaptation to the real world since it is quite difficult to create
a dataset that covers all real unseen scenes. Therefore, Domain Generalization (DG) has been widely studied to overcome this limitation. DG aims to improve the model generalization to the target domain without the target data in
training. The essence of domain generalization is to learn
domain-agnostic features. (Li et al. 2018b,a; Dou et al. 2019;
Seo et al. 2020) learn the shared feature space within multisource domains to construct domain-invariant representation. However, the question is the characteristics of the feature itself (e.g., the feature sensitivity to the domain-specific
style) are usually overlooked. The feature sensitivity reflecting how likely the feature is domain-invariant can act as the
useful prior knowledge to guide the learning of the domaininvariant representation. As shown in Fig. 1, when sending the images with the same content but different styles to

Introduction
Recently deep learning-based methods (Chen et al. 2017;
Lin et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2021) have obtained great
progress in semantic segmentation, which greatly benefits
from large-scale densely-annotated training data. However,
when applying these models trained on the labeled dataset
(source domain) to the unlabeled dataset (target domain),
the performance drops significantly due to the huge domain
gap. Therefore, how to reduce the domain gap to improve
the model performance in the target domain has become a
longstanding challenge in computer vision.
To tackle this challenge, Domain Adaptation (DA) (Tsai
et al. 2018; Saito et al. 2018; Zou et al. 2018; Chu et al. 2019;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2884

