The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Planning to Avoid Side Effects
Toryn Q. Klassen1,2,3 , Sheila A. McIlraith1,2,3 , Christian Muise4 , Jarvis Xu4
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
2
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada
3
Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society, Toronto, Canada
4
School of Computing, Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada
toryn@cs.toronto.edu, sheila@cs.toronto.edu, christian.muise@queensu.ca, 15gx3@queensu.ca
Abstract

Objective underspecification seems to be an overlooked
topic in the classical planning literature. This may be because symbolic planning domains are typically designed by
hand for specific tasks, often without the necessary symbols to even represent many side effects. However, in the
future more general-purpose symbolic domains – perhaps
learned from data – may come into use, bringing the issue of
side effects to the fore. Such domain descriptions may yield
more expansive state representations and associated action
descriptions. Those action descriptions are likely to characterize action effects beyond those germane to the pursuit of
some preconceived tasks, and thereby expose a litany of side
effects. Furthermore, domain descriptions learned from data
may themselves be inaccurate or incomplete, which can also
be a cause of (negative) side effects (e.g., Saisubramanian,
Zilberstein, and Kamar 2020).
Here, we restrict our attention to side effects that result
from the underspecification of symbolic planning objectives.
The side effects we are largely concerned with are those that
impact the agency of other independent agents that co-exist
in the same environment. Consider, for example, a home environment with several humans and robots. In this context,
whether a side effect of a robot plan is construed as negative
or positive is determined by those affected by the change.
Consider a robot’s plan that has the side effect that a screwdriver is left in the robot’s possession. This side effect may
be positive for the robot, but negative for all other agents
who require the screwdriver to realize their goals and plans.
How do we generate classical plans that avoid such negative side effects? In the absence of definitive information,
a conservative stance is for an agent generating a plan in
pursuit of an underspecified objective to minimize all side
effects – to leave the world as close as possible to the way it
was prior to the execution of its plan. In this paper, we consider how one agent’s actions may prevent other agents from
achieving goals or executing plans that they would have otherwise been able to pursue and achieve, and propose means
to generate plans that minimize such negative side effects.
The main contributions of this paper are the following.
1. We formalize the notion of side effect in classical planning.
2. We characterize classes of negative side effects that relate
to the impact of an acting agent’s plan on other agents’
ability to subsequently realize their goals and plans.

In sequential decision making, objective specifications are often underspecified or incomplete, neglecting to take into account potential (negative) side effects. Executing plans without consideration of their side effects can lead to catastrophic
outcomes – a concern recently raised in relation to the safety
of AI. In this paper we investigate how to avoid side effects in a symbolic planning setting. We study the notion of
minimizing side effects in the context of a planning environment where multiple independent agents co-exist. We define
(classes of) negative side effects in terms of their effect on
the agency of those other agents. Finally, we show how plans
which minimize side effects of different types can be computed via compilations to cost-optimizing symbolic planning,
and investigate experimentally.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision making relies on the specification of an
objective, such as a final-state goal condition in the case of
symbolic planning, or a reward function in the case of reinforcement learning. Such objectives may be underspecified
or incomplete, allowing an AI to cause additional (often discretionary) changes to the environment, which we refer to
as side effects. In some cases these side effects are of little
consequence, while in other cases they may change the environment in ways that are undesirable. Amodei et al. (2016)
give the example of a robot breaking a vase that it wasn’t
explicitly told not to break, noting that
[F]or an agent operating in a large, multifaceted environment, an objective function that focuses on only
one aspect of the environment may implicitly express
indifference over other aspects of the environment.
More reflective of the potential for catastrophic outcomes,
Stuart Russell gave the example of a robot, tasked to get coffee, killing everyone on its path to getting it (Lebans 2020).
A number of approaches to (learn to) avoid negative side
effects have recently been developed for Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) and related formalisms (Zhang, Durfee,
and Singh 2018; Krakovna et al. 2019; Turner, HadfieldMenell, and Tadepalli 2020; Krakovna et al. 2020; Saisubramanian, Kamar, and Zilberstein 2020). In this paper we
explore how to avoid side effects in symbolic planning.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9830

