The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reforming an Envy-Free Matching
Takehiro Ito1 , Yuni Iwamasa2 , Naonori Kakimura3 , Naoyuki Kamiyama4 , Yusuke Kobayashi5 ,
Yuta Nozaki6 , Yoshio Okamoto7 , Kenta Ozeki8
1

Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Japan
2
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Japan
3
Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, Japan
4
Institute of Mathematics for Industry, Kyushu University, Japan
5
Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan
6
Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Hiroshima University, Japan
7
Graduate School of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications, Japan
8
Faculty of Environment and Information Sciences, Yokohama National University, Japan
takehiro@tohoku.ac.jp, iwamasa@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp, kamiyama@imi.kyushu-u.ac.jp,
yusuke@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp, nozakiy@hiroshima-u.ac.jp, okamotoy@uec.ac.jp, ozeki-kenta-xr@ynu.ac.jp
Abstract

Stability is often studied in terms of envy of agents in the
house allocation problem. Given a matching, an agent i has
a (justified) envy for another agent j if the agent i prefers
the item assigned to j to the item assigned to i. If there is no
agent with envy, the matching is said to be envy-free. Even
with envy-freeness, there may be many possible matchings,
and we want to look for a good envy-free matching. This
motivates the following simple procedure that can be implemented in a decentralized way. Agents start with any envyfree matching. There are many unassigned items on the table. Then an agent i can exchange the item x assigned to her
with an item y on the table if i prefers y to x and the exchange does not break the envy-freeness. This “reforming”
process can continue until no agent has an incentive for exchange. Then every agent will be assigned an item that is at
least as good as the item that was initially assigned, and the
resulting matching is still envy-free.
Our problem arises in the following situation. First, items
are assigned to agents by an envy-free matching. The matching is given a priori, and agents are satisfied by the items
assigned to them. Then the agents face the arrival of extra
items. This may happen, for example, when some new items
are brought into the market, or when some of the agents
leave the market and release their items. Since the new items
could improve agents’ utilities, the agents might not be satisfied with the items currently assigned to them any longer.
Hence, we want to reassign items by incorporating the existence of new items. One way to redistribute items is to compute a new envy-free matching from scratch. However, this
requires the agents first to release their items, which will results in the decrease of their utilities. Our proposal here is to
exchange items one by one so that the intermediate matchings are all envy-free and no agent decreases her utility at
any moment during the procedure.
In this paper, we call a matching obtained by the process
above a reformist envy-free matching. A reformist envy-free
matching can depend on the choice of an initial envy-free
matching and the sequence of exchanges. Our first result
states that the exchange sequence does not affect the resulting reformist envy-free matching. Namely, a reformist envy-

We consider the problem of reforming an envy-free matching
when each agent is assigned a single item. Given an envy-free
matching, we consider an operation to exchange the item of
an agent with an unassigned item preferred by the agent that
results in another envy-free matching. We repeat this operation as long as we can. We prove that the resulting envy-free
matching is uniquely determined up to the choice of an initial
envy-free matching, and can be found in polynomial time. We
call the resulting matching a reformist envy-free matching,
and then we study a shortest sequence to obtain the reformist
envy-free matching from an initial envy-free matching. We
prove that a shortest sequence is computationally hard to obtain even when each agent accepts at most four items and each
item is accepted by at most three agents. On the other hand,
we give polynomial-time algorithms when each agent accepts
at most three items or each item is accepted by at most two
agents. Inapproximability and fixed-parameter (in)tractability
are also discussed.

1

Introduction

Matching under preferences constitutes an important and
well investigated subarea of economics and game theory,
and its computational aspects are intensively studied in algorithmic game theory and computational social choice (see,
e.g., (Klaus, Manlove, and Rossi 2016; Manlove 2013)). In
a lot of situations, we are interested in allocating indivisible
items, namely, items that cannot be subdivided into several
parts. Examples include job allocation, college admission,
school choice, kidney exchange, and junior doctor allocation
to hospital posts. Especially, this paper is concerned with the
situation where each agent is assigned a single item. This
situation is often called the house allocation problem. A set
of agents faces a set of items, and each agent has a preference over her acceptable items (i.e., her preference list can
be incomplete). In this situation, there may be many possible matchings. However, some of those matchings suffer
from “instability.”
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5084

