The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reconfiguring Shortest Paths in Graphs*
Kshitij Gajjar1 , Agastya Vibhuti Jha2 , Manish Kumar3 , Abhiruk Lahiri4
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
4
Ariel University, Israel
kshitijgajjar@gmail.com, agastya.jha@epfl.ch, manishk@post.bgu.ac.il, abhiruk@ariel.ac.il
2

is a sequence of s–t shortest paths (P0 , P1 , . . . , Pk−1 , Pk )
where P0 = P and Pk = Q (for some positive integer k)
such that Pi and Pi+1 (for each i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , k − 1}) differ
in only one vertex. (See Figure 1 for an example.)
Technically, SPR is the decision problem of checking
whether two given shortest paths in a graph are reconfigurable. Additionally, one can ask questions of the following form. If two paths are reconfigurable, is the reconfiguration sequence short enough? If so, is the sequence efficiently
computable?

Abstract
Reconfiguring two shortest paths in a graph means modifying one shortest path to the other by changing one vertex at a
time, so that all the intermediate paths are also shortest paths.
This problem has several natural applications, namely: (a) revamping road networks, (b) rerouting data packets in a synchronous multiprocessing setting, (c) the shipping container
stowage problem, and (d) the train marshalling problem.
When modelled as graph problems, (a) is the most general
case while (b), (c) and (d) are restrictions to different graph
classes. We show that (a) is intractable, even for relaxed variants of the problem. For (b), (c) and (d), we present efficient
algorithms to solve the respective problems. We also generalize the problem to when at most k (for some k ≥ 2) contiguous vertices on a shortest path can be changed at a time.

1

P0
s

Introduction

P5
t

P1

A reconfiguration problem asks computational questions of
the following type. Given two different configurations of a
system, is it possible to gradually transform one to the other?
The two most popular examples of reconfiguration problems
are the 15-puzzle (Ratner and Warmuth 1986; Goldreich
2011) and the Rubik’s cube (Demaine et al. 2011; Demaine,
Eisenstat, and Rudoy 2018). In both, we want to determine
how to reach a “solved” final configuration using a sequence
of “moves”, starting from a given initial configuration. Recently, a lot of research has gone into the study of different types of reconfiguration problems on graphs (Mouawad
et al. 2017; Lokshtanov and Mouawad 2018; Lokshtanov
et al. 2018; Mouawad et al. 2018).
In this paper, we undertake a theoretical study of the reconfiguration problem on shortest paths, known as the Shortest Path Reconfiguration problem (abbreviated as SPR), introduced by (Kaminski, Medvedev, and Milanic 2010).

s

t

P4
t

s

t

P3

P2
s

s

t

s

t

Figure 1: Reconfiguring a path P = P0 to another path Q =
P5 by changing one vertex at a time. Note that all paths in
the sequence (P0 , P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 , P5 ) are s–t shortest paths.
SPR has several real-world applications, some of which
we describe in Subsection 1.2. Despite these numerous applications, SPR has not received its fair share of attention
from the theoretical standpoint. This is because when research on reconfiguration began almost forty years ago, the
main motivation behind studying the problem was in the
context of coordinated motion planning of robots (Hopcroft,
Schwartz, and Sharir 1984). Large swarms of robots are operated by a central algorithm, which gives specific instructions to each robot so that they can function as a team to
solve a given task. Given the initial and final configurations
of the robots (a configuration is simply a snapshot of the
positions of the robots), the goal of the algorithm is to mod-

Definition 1. Given an undirected, unweighted graph G
with a source vertex s and a target vertex t, we say that two
s–t shortest paths P and Q in G are reconfigurable if there
* This project has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No. 682203-ERC-[Inf-Speed-Tradeoff].
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9758

