The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ApproxASP – a Scalable Approximate Answer Set Counter
Mohimenul Kabir1 , Flavio O Everardo2 , Ankit K Shukla3 , Markus Hecher4 , Johannes Klaus
Fichte4 , Kuldeep S Meel1
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore
Tec de Monterrey Campus Puebla, Mexico
3
JKU, Linz, Austria
4
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria

2

Abstract

in the late 1970s (Durand, Hermann, and Kolaitis 2005;
Hemaspaandra and Vollmer 1995; Valiant 1979). For the
propositional model counting problem, #SAT for short,
#·P-completeness was established quite early (Valiant 1979).
Later Toda (1991) showed that polynomially many calls to
a #SAT oracle can be used to capture the entire polynomial
hierarchy. Recently, there has been growing interest in the application side of counting solutions to problems (Chakraborty,
Meel, and Vardi 2016; Domshlak and Hoffmann 2007;
Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2009; Chavira and Darwiche
2008; Darwiche 2020).
Approximate counting (ApproxMC) (Chakraborty, Meel,
and Vardi 2016; Soos and Meel 2019; Soos, Gocht, and Meel
2020) showed to be particularly successful in the recent competition (Fichte, Hecher, and Hamiti 2021). The core idea is
hashing-based frameworks, which partition the solution space
into roughly equal small cells of solutions by employing pairwise independent hashing functions using XOR-constraints,
and then the count is obtained by enumerating solutions in
one of the randomly chosen cells. Motivated by the development of scalable techniques for propositional model counting,
there has been a surge of interest in designing scalable counting techniques for problems whose decision problem lies
beyond NP (Bendı́k and Meel 2020, 2021). Inspired by the
success of the aforementioned efforts, we investigate the
design of scalable techniques for #ASP. Of particular interesting to us are hashing-based frameworks developed in the
context of approximate model counting. In this context, one
may wonder whether #ASP can be reduced to #SAT, since
then invoking a counter such as ApproxMC suffices. However, it is well-known (and observed in practice) that such a
reduction might result in exponential blow-up (Lifschitz and
Razborov 2006).
In this paper, we present an approach to approximate ASP
counting and establish a scalable solver, which is based on an
incremental implementation for Gauss-Jordan elimination.

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a framework in artificial
intelligence and knowledge representation for declarative modeling and problem solving. Modern ASP solvers focus on the
computation or enumeration of answer sets. However, a variety
of probabilistic applications in reasoning or logic programming require counting answer sets. While counting can be
done by enumeration, simple enumeration becomes immediately infeasible if the number of solutions is high. On the other
hand, approaches to exact counting are of high worst-case
complexity. In fact, in propositional model counting, exact
counting becomes impractical. In this work, we present a scalable approach to approximate counting for ASP. Our approach
is based on systematically adding parity (XOR) constraints to
ASP programs, which divide the search space. We prove that
adding random XOR constraints partitions the answer sets of
an ASP program. In practice, we use a Gaussian eliminationbased approach by lifting ideas from SAT to ASP and integrate
it into a state of the art ASP solver, which we call ApproxASP.
Finally, our experimental evaluation shows the scalability of
our approach over existing ASP systems.

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczyński 2011; Gebser et al. 2012) is a form of declarative programming, which is based on the stable model semantics of logic programming (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991).
Two decades of progress in the theory and practice of solving
ASP offers rich modeling and solving framework that has
well-known applications (Balduccini, Gelfond, and Nogueira
2006; Niemelä, Simons, and Soininen 1999; Guziolowski
et al. 2013; Schaub and Woltran 2018) in the area of knowledge representation and reasoning, and artificial intelligence.
The problem of counting the number of solutions to a given
ASP program, known as #ASP, is a computationally intriguing problem that has applications in probabilistic reasoning (Lee, Talsania, and Wang 2017), planning (Fichte, Gaggl,
and Rusovac 2022). The computational complexity of #ASP
for disjunctive programs is # · coNP-complete (Fichte et al.
2017), which further increases to # · ΣP
2 -complete (Fichte
and Hecher 2019) if counting with respect to a projection.
Counting solutions is a well-studied theoretical problem
in mathematics and computer science since its introduction

Contributions. The primary contribution of this work is
the design of, to the best of our knowledge, the first scalable
technique for #ASP that provides rigorous (ε, δ) guarantees. From the technical perspective, we lift the XOR-based
hashing framework developed in the context of propositional
model counting to ASP. As is witnessed in the development of
ApproxMC, designing a scalable counter requires engineer-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5755

