The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Minimally-Supervised Joint Learning of
Event Volitionality and Subject Animacy Classification
Hirokazu Kiyomaru, Sadao Kurohashi
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan
{kiyomaru, kuro}@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Joint learning with regularization

Abstract
Volitionality and subject animacy are fundamental and
closely related properties of an event. Their classification is
challenging because it requires contextual text understanding
and a huge amount of labeled data. This paper proposes a
novel method that jointly learns volitionality and subject animacy at a low cost, heuristically labeling events in a raw corpus. Volitionality labels are assigned using a small lexicon of
volitional and non-volitional adverbs such as “deliberately”
and “accidentally”; subject animacy labels are assigned using
a list of animate and inanimate nouns obtained from ontological knowledge. We then consider the problem of learning a
classifier from the labeled events so that it can perform well
on unlabeled events without the words used for labeling. We
view the problem as a bias reduction or unsupervised domain
adaptation problem and apply the techniques. We conduct experiments with crowdsourced gold data in Japanese and English and show that our method effectively learns volitionality
and subject animacy without manually labeled data.

• … deliberately
… … … (V)
• … accidentally
… … … (NV)
•………

• … … … (?)
• … … … (?)
• … … … (?)
• … … … (?)
• ………

• … guy … …
… … … (A)
• … rocket … …
… … … (IA)
•………

Volitionality indicating words
Volitional (V)
• deliberately
•…

• … … … (?)
• … … … (?)
• … … … (?)
• … … … (?)
• ………

Animacy indicating words

Non-volitional (NV)
• accidentally
•…

Animate (A)
• guy
•…

Inanimate (IA)
• rocket
•…

Raw corpus

Figure 1: Overview of our method. We construct labeled
and unlabeled datasets for volitionality and subject animacy
classification by heuristically labeling events in a raw corpus
using the volitionality/animacy indicating words. Our model
jointly learns volitionality and subject animacy on them with
regularization to prevent the model from focusing on words
used for labeling.

Introduction
Volitionality is a fundamental property of an event that indicates whether someone is volitionally involved in the event.
This study particularly focuses on volitionality with respect
to the subject of an event. For example, “eating” and “writing” are usually volitional from the viewpoint of the subject, while “crying” and “getting injured” are non-volitional.
Event volitionality classification has been used for causal
knowledge categorization (Lee and Jun 2008; Inui, Inui, and
Matsumoto 2003; Abe, Inui, and Matsumoto 2008a,b) and
has various potential applications such as conditional event
prediction (Du et al. 2019), script induction (Chambers and
Jurafsky 2008), and customer feedback analysis (Liu et al.
2017).
On the other hand, animacy is a fundamental property
of a noun that indicates whether the entity described by
the noun is capable of human-like volition (Bowman and
Chopra 2012). Since this study focuses on volitionality with
respect to the subject of an event, it would be helpful to consider the animacy of the subject as a necessary condition for
volitionality. Consequently, this study considers the event
property of subject animacy. The close relationship between

volitionality and subject animacy suggests a synergistic effect of joint learning.
The challenge of identifying volitionality and subject animacy lies in limited language resources and contextual dependence. The volitionality of an event is largely decided by
its predicate. However, existing language resources such as
ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017) do not provide
an exhaustive list of volitional predicates.
Even with a rich language resource, however, volitionality cannot be entirely identified due to its context-dependent
nature. Let us consider the following Japanese examples.
(1)

a.

shawa-o

abiru (V)

shower-ACC1 take

b.

hinan-o

abiru (NV)

criticism-ACC get

Example (1-a) and example (1-b) have the same predicate

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10921

ACC is the accusative case marker.

