The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Event-Image Fusion Stereo Using Cross-Modality Feature Propagation
Hoonhee Cho and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
{gnsgnsgml, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

They adopt various embedding, matching, and regularization modules for the stereo model to solve such problems.
Although such frame-based stereo has achieved successful
performance, the effects of motion blur on estimation and
the difficulty of operations in challenging light scenes remain.
Compared with conventional frame-based cameras, eventbased cameras provide information on the amount of temporal change in each pixel value. Data with such information are called events. Events are asynchronous stream data
with the information about the spatial position, polarity, and
timestamps of intensity changes. Some event cameras (e.g.,
DAVIS346 (Brandli et al. 2014)) also provide aligned active
pixel sensor (APS) intensity images. Event cameras provide
event data with low latency (without motion blur) and have
the advantage of a high dynamic range, which enables operation under extreme lighting conditions, and therefore event
cameras can be more suitable for real-world applications.
Recent stereo matching studies with two event cameras
(Tulyakov et al. 2019; Ahmed et al. 2021) adopt CNN structures as frame-based stereo matching methods. They embed
event data from a stream format to a queue format, considering both spatial and temporal coordinates. The event
sequence that has passed through temporal aggregation becomes an event image of size c × h × w, thus facilitating
standard 2D convolution. They effectively estimated the disparity by matching the correspondence points between the
two event cameras. However, obtaining a dense disparity
map solely with sparse event data as input is an ill-posed
problem.
In this study, we propose a novel end-to-end deep stereo
architecture to generate a dense disparity map by combining the event features with the image features. Our method
adopts both the image and event streams from the event camera as inputs. The proposed method creates a dense disparity
map by effectively aggregating the two types of features using the proposed feature fusion module.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized
as follows:
• We propose the novel end-to-end architecture of deep
dense stereo, combining the event data and image. To
fuse the two input data with different modalities into one
feature, we propose a feature fusion module.
• We propose a method for generating a correlation volume

Event cameras asynchronously output the polarity values of
pixel-level log intensity alterations. They are robust against
motion blur and can be adopted in challenging light conditions. Owing to these advantages, event cameras have been
employed in various vision tasks such as depth estimation, visual odometry, and object detection. In particular, event cameras are effective in stereo depth estimation to find correspondence points between two cameras under challenging illumination conditions and/or fast motion. However, because event
cameras provide spatially sparse event stream data, it is difficult to obtain a dense disparity map. Although it is possible
to estimate disparity from event data at the edge of a structure
where intensity changes are likely to occur, estimating the
disparity in a region where event occurs rarely is challenging.
In this study, we propose a deep network that combines the
features of an image with the features of an event to generate
a dense disparity map. The proposed network uses images
to obtain spatially dense features that are lacking in events. In
addition, we propose a spatial multi-scale correlation between
two fused feature maps for an accurate disparity map. To validate our method, we conducted experiments using synthetic
and real-world datasets.

Introduction
Stereo matching is the problem of determining correspondence points across two different images. In the rectified
stereo camera setup with known parameters, the objective is
to determine the horizontal pixel displacement between the
left and right images, called disparity. The depth can be calculated using the parameters between the two cameras and
the disparity. Therefore, stereo matching is important in 3D
structure reconstruction (Yao et al. 2018) and autonomous
driving cars (Yang et al. 2019).
Stereo matching conventionally employs frame-based images with RGB channels. Most of recent methods adopt
CNN-based deep learning (Zhang et al. 2020, 2019; Kendall
et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2019; Chang and Chen 2018; Yang
et al. 2018; Tulyakov, Ivanov, and Fleuret 2018) and show
reasonable performance. Their primary objective is to effectively extract features from input images, use context features for stereo, and guide the model to learn the correlation between the two features generated from input images.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

454

