The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Spatiotemporal Representation Learning by Exploiting Video
Continuity
Hanwen Liang1 * , Niamul Quader 1 , Zhixiang Chi 1 , Lizhe Chen1 , Peng Dai1 * ,
Juwei Lu1 and Yang Wang1,2
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
University of Manitoba, Canada
{hanwen.liang, niamul.quader1, zhixiang.chi, lizhe.chen, peng.dai, juwei.lu, yang.wang3}@huawei.com
2

Time

Abstract
Recent self-supervised video representation learning methods
have found significant success by exploring essential properties of videos, e.g. speed, temporal order, etc. This work
exploits an essential yet under-explored property of videos,
the video continuity, to obtain supervision signals for selfsupervised representation learning. Specifically, we formulate three novel continuity-related pretext tasks, i.e. continuity justification, discontinuity localization, and missing section approximation, that jointly supervise a shared backbone
for video representation learning. This self-supervision approach, termed as Continuity Perception Network (CPNet),
solves the three tasks altogether and encourages the backbone
network to learn local and long-ranged motion and context
representations. It outperforms prior arts on multiple downstream tasks, such as action recognition, video retrieval, and
action localization. Additionally, the video continuity can be
complementary to other coarse-grained video properties for
representation learning, and integrating the proposed pretext
task to prior arts can yield much performance gains.

….

discontinuous clip
continuous clip
missing section

clip cut-off
similar action
different action

Figure 1: Illustration of continuity perception. Observing the
long-jump video after manual clip cut-off, a human can easily identify the discontinuity between “takeoff” and “landing” and infer the “action-in-the-air” of the athlete.
consecutive frames (Yi et al. 2008). Our choice of using video continuity for designing a self-supervision strategy is motivated by the research findings in cognition sciences (Spelke et al. 1995; Yi et al. 2008). They claim that
temporal continuity is essential for a correct and persisting
understanding of the visual environment. In fact, based on
years of visual experience, human beings can easily detect
discontinuity in videos, if any. Furthermore, humans are often capable of inferring the high-level semantics associated
with the missing section at the discontinuous point. For example, in Fig. 1, after we manually cut off some portions
from the long-jump video, one can easily notice the discontinuity between “takeoff” and “landing” and infer the missing
section corresponding to “action-in-the-air” of the athlete.
We hypothesize that enabling the neural networks to master
this exercise of detecting discontinuity and estimating the
high-level semantics of the missing sections will empower
the model to obtain high-quality spatiotemporal representations of videos. This hypothesis is motivated by the following observations. Effective video embedding requires learning both short- and long-ranged features of videos. The features could be temporally-rich motion patterns and spatiallyrich context information, both of which are complementary
to each other (Huang et al. 2021; Wang, Jiao, and Liu 2020).
Solving the continuity-aware tasks requires the model to
learn those features comprehensively. Fig. 2(a) gives an illustration of the continuity-aware tasks used in this work.
First, identifying whether the clip is continuous or not, i.e.
continuity justification, requires a global or long-term view
of the motion consistency across the clip. Inferring a clip
to be discontinuous based on a local perception of motion

Introduction
Self-supervised video representation learning has recently
received great attention owing to its success in learning informative spatiotemporal features from unlabeled videos.
These methods commonly take inspiration from human’s visual understanding system and devise various pretext tasks
rooted in certain video attributes, e.g., speed or playback
rate (Benaim et al. 2020; Wang, Jiao, and Liu 2020; Chen
et al. 2021; Yao et al. 2020), arrow of time (Wei et al. 2018),
motion and appearance statistics (Wang et al. 2019) etc.
However, these attributes over the input video clips are temporally invariant and coarse-grained. For example, speediness is mostly constant for a given clip instance. This limits the methods’ potential in extensively exploring the finegrained features of videos (Wang et al. 2021a). To learn both
coarse- and fine-grained features within a self-supervision
framework, in this work, we exploit an essential yet underexplored property of videos, namely, “video continuity”.
Video continuity suggests that objects are represented as
the same persisting individuals over time and motion across
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1564

