The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Delving into the Local: Dynamic Inconsistency Learning for DeepFake Video
Detection
Zhihao Gu1,2 * , Yang Chen2 * , Taiping Yao2 * , Shouhong Ding2† , Jilin Li2 , Lizhuang Ma1,3,4†
1

School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
YouTu Lab, Tencent
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
East China Normal University
ellery-holmes@sjtu.edu.cn, {wizyangchen, taipingyao, ericshding, jerolinli}@tencent.com, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Fake Video

Abstract

Intra-Snippets Inconsistency

…

The rapid development of facial manipulation techniques has
aroused public concerns in recent years. Existing deepfake
video detection approaches attempt to capture the discriminative features between real and fake faces based on temporal modelling. However, these works impose supervisions
on sparsely sampled video frames but overlook the local motions among adjacent frames, which instead encode rich inconsistency information that can serve as an efficient indicator for DeepFake video detection. To mitigate this issue, we
delves into the local motion and propose a novel sampling
unit named snippet which contains a few successive videos
frames for local temporal inconsistency learning. Moreover,
we elaborately design an Intra-Snippet Inconsistency Module
(Intra-SIM) and an Inter-Snippet Interaction Module (InterSIM) to establish a dynamic inconsistency modelling framework. Specifically, the Intra-SIM applies bi-directional temporal difference operations and a learnable convolution kernel to mine the short-term motions within each snippet. The
Inter-SIM is then devised to promote the cross-snippet information interaction to form global representations. The IntraSIM and Inter-SIM work in an alternate manner and can be
plugged into existing 2D CNNs. Our method outperforms
the state of the art competitors on four popular benchmark
dataset, i.e., FaceForensics++, Celeb-DF, DFDC and WildDeepfake. Besides, extensive experiments and visualizations
are also presented to further illustrate its effectiveness.

Sampled Snippets

…

Figure 1: Illustration of local inconsistency in snippets.
Since the snippet contains densely sampled frames, different type of inconsistency caused by subtle motions can be
captured better, which can serve as a strong indicator for
identifying DeepFakes.

world. Therefore, it is of great importance to develop effective methods for face forgery detection.
Recently, significant progress has been achieved in DeepFake detection. As the release of large-scale face forgery
video datasets (Rossler et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020b; Dolhansky et al. 2019; Zi et al. 2020), it enables the training
of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) to identify DeepFakes with various manipulations, e.g., DeepFakes
and FaceSwap. Image-based methods focus on mining various frame-level cues including frequency information (Qian
et al. 2020), auxiliary masks (Chen et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2020) and textural information (Zhao et al. 2021) to improve
performance. However, when encountering extremely realistic images, image-based methods may fail to mine them
and thus have limited performance. Besides, they do not
consider the inconsistent facial movements between real and
fake videos, which derives from the frame-by-frame manipulation.
Therefore, many researchers recently develop videobased methods to capture such inconsistency as a discriminative clue for DeepFake detection. Earlier methods treat

Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning-based methods, especially generative models, various DeepFake techniques (Koujan et al. 2020; Nirkin, Keller, and Hassner
2019) have been proposed. Since these techniques can synthesize more and more realistic DeepFakes that are hardly
distinguishable by humans, abuse of them can easily trigger severe societal problems or political threats over the
* These authors contributed equally. This work was done when

Zhihao Gu was a research intern at Tencent YouTu Lab.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

744

