The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Evidential Deep Learning via Multi-Task Learning
Dongpin Oh,1 Bonggun Shin2
1

Deargen Inc., Seoul, South Korea
Deargen USA Inc., Atlanta, GA
1
dongpin.oh@deargen.me, 2 bonggun.shin@deargen.me
2

Abstract

Blundell 2017; Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Maddox et al.
2019). However, since multiple numbers of models are required in ensemble models, and expansive approximations
are necessary in BNNs for the intractable posterior, neither
of these methodologies can be considered cost-effective in
real-world applications (Amini et al. 2020).
In contrast, the evidential neural network (ENet) is a costeffective deterministic neural network, designed to accomplish uncertainty estimation by generating conjugate prior
parameters as its outputs (Malinin and Gales 2018; Sensoy,
Kaplan, and Kandemir 2018; Gurevich and Stuke 2020; Malinin et al. 2020). The ENet can model both epistemic and
aleatoric uncertainty based on the uncertainty of the generated conjugate prior. The ability of the ENet to estimate
uncertainty without an ensemble or an expensive posterior
approximation is remarkable.
On the other hand, the fundamental goal of deep learning is to accomplish state-of-the-art predictive accuracy, not
only to estimate uncertainty. Although the ENet architecture can achieve outstanding and practical uncertainty estimations, NLL loss (negative log marginal likelihood)—the
original loss function of the ENet—may result in the high
mean squared error (MSE) of the ENet’s prediction in a certain condition. Intuitively speaking, this problem is caused
by the fact that the NLL loss could finish training by determining that the target values are unknown instead of correcting the prediction of the ENet. We show that this phenomenon occurs when the estimated epistemic uncertainty is
high. This high epistemic uncertainty implies that the given
training samples are sparse or biased (Gal 2016), which is a
common situation in real-world applications, such as drugtarget affinity prediction tasks (Ezzat et al. 2016; Yang et al.
2021).
One possible solution to resolve this issue is reformulating the training objective of the ENet as the Multi-task learning (MTL) loss with an additional loss function which only
optimizes the predictive accuracy, such as the MSE loss.
However, in the MTL, the conflicting gradients problem
could occur, which negatively impact performance (Sener
and Koltun 2018; Lin et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020). In particular, for the safety-critical systems, it can be harmful if
the uncertainty estimation capability is degraded despite improved accuracy due to the gradient conflict between the
losses. Therefore, to identify and determine the reason for

The Evidential regression network (ENet) estimates a continuous target and its predictive uncertainty without costly
Bayesian model averaging. However, it is possible that the
target is inaccurately predicted due to the gradient shrinkage
problem of the original loss function of the ENet, the negative
log marginal likelihood (NLL) loss. In this paper, the objective is to improve the prediction accuracy of the ENet while
maintaining its efficient uncertainty estimation by resolving
the gradient shrinkage problem. A multi-task learning (MTL)
framework, referred to as MT-ENet, is proposed to accomplish this aim. In the MTL, we define the Lipschitz modified mean squared error (MSE) loss function as another loss
and add it to the existing NLL loss. The Lipschitz modified
MSE loss is designed to mitigate the gradient conflict with
the NLL loss by dynamically adjusting its Lipschitz constant.
By doing so, the Lipschitz MSE loss does not disturb the uncertainty estimation of the NLL loss. The MT-ENet enhances
the predictive accuracy of the ENet without losing uncertainty
estimation capability on the synthetic dataset and real-world
benchmarks, including drug-target affinity (DTA) regression.
Furthermore, the MT-ENet shows remarkable calibration and
out-of-distribution detection capability on the DTA benchmarks.

Introduction
The essential task in the safety-critical deep learning systems is to quantify uncertainty (Gal 2016; Kendall and Gal
2017). The factors contributing to uncertainty can be classified into two types: irreducible observation noise (aleatoric
uncertainty) and the uncertainty of model parameters (epistemic uncertainty) (Gal 2016; Guo et al. 2017). In particular, the difficulty and expense involved in representing the
uncertainty of the model parameters make it challenging to
quantify epistemic uncertainty.
Common approaches used to estimate epistemic uncertainty are Ensemble-based methods and Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) (Wilson and Izmailov 2020). Ensemblebased methods and BNNs have been shown to produce impressive results in terms of both accuracy and the robustness of uncertainty estimation (Welling and Teh 2011; Neal
2012; Blundell et al. 2015; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7895

