The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

BATUDE: Budget-Aware Neural Network Compression Based on Tucker
Decomposition
Miao Yin1* , Huy Phan1 , Xiao Zang1 , Siyu Liao2† , Bo Yuan1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University,
2
Amazon
{miao.yin, huy.phan, xiao.zang}@rutgers.edu, liasiyu@amazon.com, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Existing Tensor Rank Selection Strategy (Manual or Heuristic)

Abstract
Model compression is very important for the efficient deployment of deep neural network (DNN) models on resourceconstrained devices. Among various model compression approaches, high-order tensor decomposition is particularly attractive and useful because the decomposed model is very
small and fully structured. For this category of approaches,
tensor ranks are the most important hyper-parameters that
directly determine the architecture and task performance of
the compressed DNN models. However, as an NP-hard problem, selecting optimal tensor ranks under the desired budget
is very challenging and the state-of-the-art studies suffer from
unsatisfied compression performance and timing-consuming
search procedures. To systematically address this fundamental problem, in this paper we propose BATUDE, a BudgetAware TUcker DEcomposition-based compression approach
that can efficiently calculate optimal tensor ranks via oneshot training. By integrating the rank selecting procedure to
the DNN training process with a specified compression budget, the tensor ranks of the DNN models are learned from
the data and thereby bringing very significant improvement
on both compression ratio and classification accuracy for the
compressed models. The experimental results on ImageNet
dataset show that our method enjoys 0.33% top-5 higher accuracy with 2.52× less computational cost as compared to
the uncompressed ResNet-18 model. For ResNet-50, the proposed approach enables 0.37% and 0.55% top-5 accuracy increase with 2.97× and 2.04× computational cost reduction,
respectively, over the uncompressed model.

Progressive Search and Adjustment

Budget-Aware One-Shot Training with Automatic Rank Selection (Ours)
Original Model

Desired Budget

Compressed
Model

Intermediate
Model

Full Training

Figure 1: Comparison with existing tensor rank selection
methods, where the tensor ranks are determined via a complicated search process with many times of full training.
tensor decomposition-based compression (Kim et al. 2016;
Novikov et al. 2015; Garipov et al. 2016; Yang, Krompass,
and Tresp 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Pan et al. 2019) is recently
getting increasing attentions. By decomposing large weight
matrices and tensors of DNNs to multiple small tensor cores,
tensor decomposition can bring very high compression ratio
with low performance degradation. Such unique compression strategy has another promising benefit – the decomposed model is very hardware friendly since the kernel computation is just a series of small and dense matrix multiplications, which are very attractive for various computing platforms, such as ASIC/FPGA and mobile devices (Deng et al.
2019a,b; Kim et al. 2016).
Tensor Rank Selection: Importance & Challenges. To
obtain a high-performance compressed DNN model under
desired budget (e.g. model size or computational cost) via
tensor decomposition approach, proper tensor rank selection
for the decomposed tensor is particularly important and critical. To be specific, as the hyper-parameter that reflects the
linear correlations in each dimension, tensor ranks directly
define the architecture and overall size of the decomposed
DNN model. Consequently, selecting the proper tensor ranks
significantly controls and impacts DNN compression performance, in terms of storage and computational complexity, as
well as DNN task performance, such as classification accuracy and prediction quality.
Despite its criticality and fundamentality, selecting the
optimal rank is very challenging. Different from the rank selection in matrix decomposition, where the rank is a scalar,

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used in
many applications, such as image classification (He et al.
2016), objective detection (Girshick 2015) and image caption (Xu et al. 2015). Despite the current unprecedented success, deploying DNNs on resource-constrained devices is
challenging – DNNs have huge storage and computational
demands to guarantee performance. To address this problem, many techniques like pruning (Han, Mao, and Dally
2015) and quantization (Han et al. 2015) have been proposed
to compress and accelerate DNNs. Among these methods,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author. † This work was done when the author was
with Rutgers University.

8874

