The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ContrastNet: A Contrastive Learning Framework for Few-Shot Text Classification
Junfan Chen1 , Richong Zhang1 * , Yongyi Mao2 , Jie Xu3
2

1
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Leeds, UK
chenjf@act.buaa.edu.cn, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca, j.xu@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract
prototype
prototype

Few-shot text classification has recently been promoted by
the meta-learning paradigm which aims to identify target
classes with knowledge transferred from source classes with
sets of small tasks named episodes. Despite their success, existing works building their meta-learner based on Prototypical
Networks are unsatisfactory in learning discriminative text
representations between similar classes, which may lead to
contradictions during label prediction. In addition, the tasklevel and instance-level overfitting problems in few-shot text
classification caused by a few training examples are not sufficiently tackled. In this work, we propose a contrastive learning framework named ContrastNet to tackle both discriminative representation and overfitting problems in few-shot text
classification. ContrastNet learns to pull closer text representations belonging to the same class and push away text representations belonging to different classes, while simultaneously introducing unsupervised contrastive regularization at
both task-level and instance-level to prevent overfitting. Experiments on 8 few-shot text classification datasets show that
ContrastNet outperforms the current state-of-the-art models.

prototype
prototype

(a) Prototypical Networks

(b) ContrastNet

Figure 1: The learning strategies of Prototypical Network
and proposed ContrastNet. Q and S respectively denote
the query set and support set. The rectangles with different colors denote text representations from different classes.
The green and red dashed arrow lines respectively indicate
pulling closer and pushing away the representations. Picture (a) shows that Prototypical Networks learn to align
a given query-text representations to prototypes computed
by support-text representations. Picture (b) shows that ContrastNet learns to pull closer the given query-text representation with text representations belonging to the same class
and push away text representations with different classes.

Introduction
Building a human-like learning system that has the ability
to quickly learn new concepts from scarce experience is one
of the targets in modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) communities. Meta-learning or referred to as learning to learn is
such a few-shot learning paradigm that aims to mimics human abilities to learn from different small tasks (or episodes)
of source classes in the training set and generalize to unseen tasks of target classes in the test set. Meta-learning has
been extensively studied in image classification and achieve
remarkable successes (Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky,
and Zemel 2017; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Sung et al.
2018; Hou et al. 2019; Tseng et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Gao
et al. 2021). The effectiveness in image classification motivates the recent application of meta-learning to few-shot text
classification (Yu et al. 2018; Geng et al. 2019, 2020; Bao
et al. 2020; Han et al. 2021).
One of the metric-based meta-learning methods that has
been widely studied and shown effectiveness in few-shot

learning is Prototypical Networks (Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017). As shown in Figure 1 (a), at each episode, Prototypical Networks first compute the prototype for each class
using the text representations in the support set, then align
each text representation in the query set to the prototypes under some measurement, e.g., Euclidean distance. This learning strategy allows the meta-learner to perform few-shot text
classification by simply learning the representations of the
texts. However, as the model design in Prototypical Networks ignores the relationships among the texts in the query
set, the discrimination among the query-text representations
is not guaranteed, which may lead to difficulty in prediction when two text representations in the query set are very
similar but they belong to different classes. Such similar
texts with different classes are common because real-world
few-shot text classification tasks may involve fine-grained
classes with very similar semantics. For example, in intent classification, the sentences “who covered the song one
more cup of coffee” with intent music-query and “play the
song one more cup of coffee” with intent music-play may
produce similar text representations but they belong to dif-

* Corresponding author: zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10492

