The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generalized Dynamic Cognitive Hierarchy Models for Strategic Driving Behavior
Atrisha Sarkar 1 , Kate Larson 1 , Krzysztof Czarnecki 2
1

David R Cheriton School of Computer Science 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
atrisha.sarkar, kate.larson, k2czarne@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

Nash equilibiria based models (rational agents assuming everyone else is a rational agent) (Geiger and Straehle 2021;
Schwarting et al. 2019), in Stackelberg equilibrium based
models (common understanding of the leader-follower relationship) (Fisac et al. 2019), or level-k model (the level of
reasoning of AVs and humans), there has to be a consensus between an AV planner and other road users on the type
of reasoning everyone is engaging in. How to reconcile this
assumption with the evidence that human drivers engage in
different types of reasoning processes is a key question.

While there has been an increasing focus on the use of game
theoretic models for autonomous driving, empirical evidence
shows that there are still open questions around dealing with
the challenges of common knowledge assumptions as well
as modeling bounded rationality. To address some of these
practical challenges, we develop a framework of generalized dynamic cognitive hierarchy for both modelling naturalistic human driving behavior as well as behavior planning for autonomous vehicles (AV). This framework is built
upon a rich model of level-0 behavior through the use of automata strategies, an interpretable notion of bounded rationality through safety and maneuver satisficing, and a robust
response for planning. Based on evaluation on two large naturalistic datasets as well as simulation of critical traffic scenarios, we show that i) automata strategies are well suited for
level-0 behavior in a dynamic level-k framework, and ii) the
proposed robust response to a heterogeneous population of
strategic and non-strategic reasoners can be an effective approach for game theoretic planning in AV.

Whereas the challenge of common knowledge deals with
questions around how agents model other agents, the second challenge is dealing with bounded rational agents, i.e.
modelling sub-optimal behavior in their own response. With
the general understanding that human drivers are bounded
rational agents, the Quantal level-k model (QLk) has been
widely proposed as a model of strategic planning for AV
(Li et al. 2018, 2019; Tian et al. 2018). One way the QLk
model deals with bounded rationality is through suboptimal reasoning, i.e., by mapping each agent into a hierarchy (k) of bounded cognitive reasoning. In this model, the
choice of level-0 model becomes critical, since the behavior of every agent in the hierarchy depends on the assumption about the behavior of level-0 agents. The main models proposed for level-0 behavior include simple obstacle
avoidance (Tian et al. 2021), maxmax, and maxmin models (Sarkar and Czarnecki 2021; Wright and Leyton-Brown
2020). Although such elementary models may be acceptable in other domains of application, it is not clear why human drivers, especially in a dynamic game setting, would
cognitively bound themselves to such elementary models.
Another way QLk model deals with bounded rationality is
through suboptimal response, i.e., by the use of a precision
parameter, where agents instead of selecting the utility maximizing response, make cost proportional errors modelled by
the precision parameter (Wright and Leyton-Brown 2010).
While the precision parameter provides a convenient way
to fit the model to empirical data, it also runs the risk of
being a catch-all for different etiologies of bounded rationality, including, people being indifferent to choices, uncertainty around multiple objectives, as well as the model not
being a true reflection of the decision process. This impairs
the explainability of the model since it is hard to encode and
communicate such disparate origins of bounded rationality

Introduction
One of many challenges of autonomous vehicles (AV) in an
urban setting is the safe handling of other human road users
who show complex and varied driving behaviors. As AVs
integrate into human traffic, there has been a move from a
predict-and-plan approach of behavior planning to a more
strategic approach where the problem of behavior planning
of an AV is set up as a non-zero sum game between road
users and the AV; and such models have shown efficacy in
simulation of different traffic scenarios (Fisac et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2019; Sadigh et al. 2016; Tian et al. 2018). However,
when game theoretic models are evaluated on naturalistic
human driving data, studies have shown that human driving behavior is diverse, and therefore developing a unifying
framework that can both model the diversity of human driving behavior as well as plan a response from the perspective
of an AV is challenging (Sarkar and Czarnecki 2021; Sun
et al. 2020).
The first challenge is dealing with common knowledge
(Geanakoplos 1992) assumptions. Whether in the case of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5173

