The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning from the Target: Dual Prototype Network for Few Shot Semantic
Segmentation
Binjie Mao1,2 , Xinbang Zhang1,2 , Lingfeng Wang1 * , Qian Zhang3 ,
Shiming Xiang1,2 , Chunhong Pan1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
3
Horizon Robotics.
{binjie.mao, xinbang.zhang, lfwang, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Prototype

Due to the scarcity of annotated samples, the diversity between support set and query set becomes the main obstacle
for few shot semantic segmentation. Most existing prototypebased approaches only exploit the prototype from the support feature and ignore the information from the query sample, failing to remove this obstacle.In this paper, we proposes
a dual prototype network (DPNet) to dispose of few shot
semantic segmentation from a new perspective. Along with
the prototype extracted from the support set, we propose to
build the pseudo-prototype based on foreground features in
the query image. To achieve this goal, the cycle comparison
module is developed to select reliable foreground features and
generate the pseudo-prototype with them. Then, a prototype
interaction module is utilized to integrate the information of
the prototype and the pseudo-prototype based on their underlying correlation. Finally, a multi-scale fusion module is introduced to capture contextual information during the dense
comparison between prototype (pseudo-prototype) and query
feature. Extensive experiments conducted on two benchmarks
demonstrate that our method exceeds previous state-of-thearts with a sizable margin, verifying the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

Support Set

Query Image

𝐹𝑠

Prediction

𝐹𝑞

(a) Previous prototype-based network
Prototype

Support Set

𝐹𝑠

Query Image

𝐹𝑞

Pseudo-Prototype

CCM

PIM

Prediction

(b) Our dual prototype network

Figure 1: Illustration of previous prototype-based network
(a) and our proposed dual prototype network (b). Along
with exploiting the information from the support set like
previous prototype-based methods, our proposed approach
also learns from the target sample to generate the pseudoprototype which provides extra valuable information for enhancing the few-shot segmentation model.

Introduction
Aiming to give pixel-level classification, semantic segmentation has witnessed remarkable improvements in recent
years (Chen et al. 2017; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Zhao et al. 2017). Although these works are brilliant, they almost require abundant annotated images. When faced with
limited annotated samples, they may fail to achieve satisfying performance. To solve this problem, few shot semantic segmentation has drawn growing attention. Designed to
learn transferable knowledge from given classes and generalize it to novel classes, few shot semantic segmentation is
capable of giving pixel-wise classification with a few annotated samples.
Following the pioneer (Shaban et al. 2017), most previous
methods adopt a prototype-based network where the prototype is extracted by averaging foreground features from support images. The extracted prototype then is used to guide

the segmentation of query samples. To further overcome the
obstacle brought by the diversity between the support images and the query images, such as large variations in object
appearance and shape, some methods intend to keep spatial
information in the prototype. PPM (Yang et al. 2020a), PPNet (Liu et al. 2020b) and ASGNet (Li et al. 2021) decompose the original prototype into a set of part-aware prototypes, then compare the query feature with each part. Unfortunately, they only focus on extracting features on the support set, and ignore the connection between the support set
and the query set. Another stream of researchers (Liu et al.
2020a; Yang et al. 2020b; Mao et al. 2021) proposes to build
a relation between support samples and query samples via
designed interaction modules. However, the entire feature
of query sample they apply contains irrelevant background
context, which degrades the effectiveness of these methods.
In this paper, a novel dual prototype network (DPNet) is
introduced to effectively bridge the gap between the sup-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1953

