The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shape Prior Guided Attack: Sparser Perturbations on 3D Point Clouds
Zhenbo Shi1 , Zhi Chen1 , Zhenbo Xu2 , Wei Yang1 * , Zhidong Yu1
Liusheng Huang1
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
qubit@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are extremely vulnerable to malicious
input data. As 3D data is increasingly used in vision tasks
such as robots, autonomous driving and drones, the internal
robustness of the classification models for 3D point cloud
has received widespread attention. In this paper, we propose a novel method named SPGA (Shape Prior Guided Attack) to generate adversarial point cloud examples. We use
shape prior information to make perturbations sparser and
thus achieve imperceptible attacks. In particular, we propose
a Spatially Logical Block (SLB) to apply adversarial points
through sliding in the oriented bounding box. Moreover, we
design an algorithm called FOFA for this type of task, which
further refines the adversarial attack in the process of breaking down complicated problems into sub-problems. Compared with the methods of global perturbation, our attack
method consumes significantly fewer computations, making
it more efficient. Most importantly of all, SPGA can generate
examples with a higher attack success rate (even in a defensive situation), less perturbation budget and stronger transferability.

Previous Works

Original Point Cloud

Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of attaching adversarial perturbation to
clean point clouds to fool the classifiers. The left part is a
clean point cloud. The upper part on the right comes from
one of the previous popular works. Our method generates
sparser perturbations in the bottom right.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning algorithms have made significant and rapid progress in solving a number of tasks involving complex raw data. It has achieved promising performance in speech recognition (Wang et al. 2020), object detection (Kong et al. 2020), image segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2020), etc. However, neural networks have been
verified to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Nguyen,
Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Cisse et al. 2017). Even slight
changes in the input data can result in a huge deviation in
the output results, although these minor changes are indistinguishable to the human perception. The research of neural network vulnerability stems from the work of Szegedy
et al. (2013) on 2D RGB images. Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy (2014) proposed the concept of adversarial example for the first time, and pointed out that the vulnerability
of deep model to adversarial example is mainly the existence
of internal linear part.
The current popular methods of attacking point cloud
classifiers are based on 2D image conversion. However, their

performance is not satisfactory on sensitive indicators, such
as perturbations budget and time consumption. Xiang, Qi,
and Li (2019) proposed the point cloud attack algorithm
named 3D-Adv firstly. They conducted attacks on point
cloud by generating adversarial points or adversarial point
perturbation. In fact, the earliest work 3D-Adv used an adversarial point cloud example to attack the objective model
(the victim model) when the success rate is close to 99%.
Later, Hamdi et al. (2020) presented a data-driven adversarial point cloud example generation method named AdvPC,
and for the first time studied the transferability of adversarial
point cloud examples.
As mentioned above, most of the previous works are
model-specific, yet the problem that we should also take into
account is the budget of perturbations and the consumption
of time. These important factors have received little attention in earlier works. The existence space of these perturbation points is just too big. In fact, this space can be reduced
even further. Moreover, there is no acceleration algorithm
specially designed for the extremely sparse structure of point

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8277

