The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Planning with Participation Constraints
Hanrui Zhang1 , Yu Cheng2 , Vincent Conitzer3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Illinois at Chicago
3
Duke University
hanruiz1@cs.cmu.edu, yucheng2@uic.edu, conitzer@cs.duke.edu
2

Abstract

likely to involve troublesome passengers (e.g., pick-up at a
bar at closing time). The company still wants to assign these
rides, but does not want the driver to become sufficiently unhappy that they sign off (stop participating) altogether.
It is therefore crucial to take into consideration drivers’
interests in planning task assignments, and provide enough
incentives for drivers to remain in the system even when
they receive less profitable or even unprofitable tasks. One
intuitive solution is to promise drivers who receive undesirable tasks high priority for receiving more profitable tasks
(or other perks) when they finish the current task. However,
implementing this solution in a way that is most beneficial
to the company can be challenging — incentivizing drivers
and maximizing profit can be in conflict with each other, and
it is not immediately clear how to balance them optimally.
In fact, the company faces a planning problem with participation constraints: the company as the planner (henceforth the principal) wants to compute and commit to a policy
that maximizes her cumulative reward, subject to the constraint that each driver (henceforth the agent) must be motivated to participate in the policy, and not just at the beginning but also from any point onward.2
In addition to ride-hailing, many other real-world scenarios can be modeled as planning with participation constraints. We provide a few such examples:

We pose and study the problem of planning in Markov decision processes (MDPs), subject to participation constraints
as studied in mechanism design. In this problem, a planner
must work with a self-interested agent on a given MDP. Each
action in the MDP provides an immediate reward to the planner and a (possibly different) reward to the agent. The agent
has no control in choosing the actions, but has the option to
end the entire process at any time. The goal of the planner is
to find a policy that maximizes her cumulative reward, taking
into consideration the agent’s ability to terminate.
We give a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for
this problem. En route, we present polynomial-time algorithms for computing (exact) optimal policies for important
special cases of this problem, including when the time horizon is constant, or when the MDP exhibits a “definitive decisions” property. We illustrate our algorithms with two different game-theoretic applications: the problem of assigning
rides in ride-sharing and the problem of designing screening
policies. Our results imply efficient algorithms for computing
(approximately) optimal policies in both applications.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the general problem of planning
in a Markov decision process (MDP), when the actions are
chosen by the planner, but must be taken by an agent that is
separate from the planner. The agent cannot choose the actions, but can refuse to participate at any time. To illustrate
the setting, consider the following scenario. A ride-hailing
company is designing a system to assign tasks to drivers. The
company monitors the location (or state) of each driver in
real-time via a mobile app. The company then has to choose
which ride to assign to a driver (the company’s choice of action), with each possible assignment resulting in some value
to the company. If drivers had no incentives of their own
(e.g., were self-driving vehicles belonging to the company),
this could be modeled straightforwardly as an MDP. However, the driver also obtains rewards from the rides, which
may be different. For example, drivers generally prefer not
to take rides that will lead them to isolated areas,1 or that are

• Financial services, such as automated investment platforms (“robo-advisors”) or traditional mutual funds. In
the case of robo-advisors, when a customer puts in
money, the platform automatically creates and maintains
a portfolio for the customer, and trades on behalf of the
customer without asking for confirmation. The customer
can see the trades and has the option to withdraw their
money (i.e., to quit) at any time. The customer wants to
make as much money as possible in a given amount of
time, while the platform wants to keep the customer and
optimize their own objective (which partially aligns with
2

Restricting the focus to policies under which no agent ever
drops out is without loss of generality by a revelation principle: if
the optimal policy involves an agent quitting at some point, since
the principal knows when the agent would quit, she can use an
equivalent policy where the agent is told that he will not have to do
anything else (e.g., take any further rides) at that point. (Throughout the paper, we use “she” for the principal and “he” for the agent.)

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Sometimes drivers can see the destination; sometimes they
cannot but may still suspect the destination based on the origin.

5260

