The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Gradient Temporal Difference with Momentum: Stability and Convergence
Rohan Deb, Shalabh Bhatnagar
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
rohandeb@iisc.ac.in, shalabh@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

A lot of literature is dedicated to studying the asymptotic
behaviour of SA algorithms starting from the work of (Robbins and Monro 1951). In recent times, the ODE method to
analyze asymptotic behaviour of SA (Ljung 1977; Kushner
and Clark 1978; Borkar 2008; Borkar and Meyn 2000) has
become quite popular in the RL community. The Gradient
TD methods were shown to be convergent using the ODE
approach. A generic one-timescale (One-TS) SA iterate has
the following form:

xn+1 = xn + a(n) h(xn ) + Mn+1 ,
(1)

Gradient temporal difference (Gradient TD) algorithms are
a popular class of stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms
used for policy evaluation in reinforcement learning. Here,
we consider Gradient TD algorithms with an additional heavy
ball momentum term and provide choice of step size and momentum parameter that ensures almost sure convergence of
these algorithms asymptotically. In doing so, we decompose
the heavy ball Gradient TD iterates into three separate iterates
with different step sizes. We first analyze these iterates under
one-timescale SA setting using results from current literature.
However, the one-timescale case is restrictive and a more general analysis can be provided by looking at a three-timescale
decomposition of the iterates. In the process we provide the
first conditions for stability and convergence of general threetimescale SA. We then prove that the heavy ball Gradient TD
algorithm is convergent using our three-timescale SA analysis.
Finally, we evaluate these algorithms on standard RL problems and report improvement in performance over the vanilla
algorithms.

where xn ∈ Rd1 , ∀n ≥ 0 are the iterates. The function
h : Rd1 → Rd1 is assumed to be Lipschitz continuous. Mn+1
is a Martingale difference noise sequence and a(n) is the
step-size at time-step n. Under some mild assumptions, the
iterate given by (1) converges (see Borkar 2008; Borkar and
Meyn 2000). When h is a linear map of the form b−Axn , the
matrix A is often called the driving matrix. The three Gradient
TD algorithms: GTD (Sutton, Maei, and Szepesvári 2009),
GTD2 and TDC (Sutton et al. 2009) consist two iterates of
the following form:
(1) 
xn+1 = xn + a(n) h(xn , yn ) + Mn+1 ,
(2)

(2)
yn+1 = yn + b(n) g(xn , yn ) + Mn+1 ,
(3)

Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal of the learner or the
agent is to maximize its long term accumulated reward by
interacting with the environment. One important task in most
of RL algorithms is that of policy evaluation. It predicts the
average accumulated reward an agent would receive from a
state (called value function) if it follows the given policy. In
model-free learning, the agent does not have access to the
underlying dynamics of the environment and has to learn the
value function from samples of the form (state, action, reward,
next-state). Two very popular algorithms in the model-free
setting are Monte-Carlo (MC) and temporal difference (TD)
learning (see Sutton and Barto (2018), Sutton (1988)). It
is a well known fact that TD learning diverges in the offpolicy setting (see Baird (1995)). A class of algorithms called
gradient temporal difference (Gradient TD) were introduced
in (Sutton, Maei, and Szepesvári 2009) and (Sutton et al.
2009) which are convergent even in the off-policy setting.
These algorithms fall under a larger class of algorithms called
linear stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms.

where xn ∈ Rd1 , yn ∈ Rd2 , ∀n ≥ 0. See the next section for
exact form of the iterates. The two iterates still form a Oneb(n)
TS SA scheme if limn→∞ a(n)
= c, where c is a constant
b(n)
and a two-timescale (Two-TS) scheme if limn→∞ a(n)
= 0.
Separately, adding a momentum term to accelerate the
convergence of iterates is a popular technique in stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). The two most popular schemes are
the Polyak’s Heavy ball method (Polyak 1964), and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method (Nesterov 1983). A lot
of literature is dedicated to studying momentum with SGD.
Some recent works include (Ghadimi, Feyzmahdavian, and
Johansson 2014; Loizou and Richtárik 2020; Gitman et al.
2019; Ma and Yarats 2019; Assran and Rabbat 2020). Momentum in the SA setting, which is the focus of the current
work, has limited results. Very few works study the effect
of momentum in the SA setting. A recent work by (Mou
et al. 2020) studies SA with momentum briefly and shows an
improvement of mixing rate. However, the setting considered

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6488

