The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Co-promotion Predictions of Financing Market and Sales Market: A
Cooperative-Competitive Attention Approach
Lei Zhang1 , Wang Xiang1 , Chuang Zhao2 ,
Hongke Zhao2 * , Rui Li1 , Runze Wu3
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and
Technology, Anhui University,
2
College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University,
3
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Games,
zl@ahu.edu.cn, e19201033@stu.ahu.edu.cn, {zhaochuang, hongke}@tju.edu.cn, ruili200009@126.com,
wurunze1@corp.netease.com
Abstract
Market popularity prediction has always been a hot research
topic, such as sales prediction and crowdfunding prediction.
Most of these studies put the perspective on isolated markets,
relying on the knowledge of certain market to maximize the
prediction performance. However, these market-specific approaches are restricted by the knowledge limitation of isolated markets and incapable of the complicated and potential relations among different markets, especially some with
strong dependence such as the financing market and sales
market. Fortunately, we discover potentially symbiotic relations between the financing market and the sales market,
which provides us with an opportunity to co-promote the popularity predictions of both markets. Thus, for bridgly learning the knowledge interactions between financing market and
sales market, we propose a cross-market approach, namely
CATN: Cooperative-competitive Attention Transfer Network,
which could effectively transfer knowledge of financing capability from the crowdfunding market and sales prospect
from the E-commerce market. Specifically, for capturing the
complicated relations especially the cooperation or complement of items and enhancing the knowledge transfer between
the two heterogeneous markets, we design a novel Cooperative Attention; meanwhile, for finely computing the relations
of items especially the competition in specific same market,
we further design Competitive Attentions for the two markets
respectively. Besides, we also distinguish aligned features
and unique features to adapt the cross-market predictions.
With the real-world datasets collected from Indiegogo and
Amazon, we construct extensive experiments on three types
of datasets from the two markets and the results demonstrate
the effectiveness and generalization of our CATN model.

Between Pro Wireless Earbuds

TOZO T6 Wireless Headphones

Unique Information

Unique Information

Goal
Days
Type
#Backer
…
Aligned Information
Title: World-first triple …
Comments:

...

Price
Rank
Color
Size
…

Dual-Target
Co-promotion

Aligned Information
Market Popularity
Transfer

A Crowdfunding Campaign

Title: True Wireless…
Comments:

...

An E-commerce Product

Figure 1: An illustration of crowdfunding and E-commerce.

and Reddy 2016). Studies on the area of E-commerce market pay more attention to the public praise and transaction
results, while the studies on crowdfunding emphasize the
process of funding and interacting with investors.
However, most of these studies put the perspective only on
isolated markets. Although they have achieved some excellent results, these market-specific approaches have brought
a limit or border to their effectiveness. Firstly, the knowledge limitation of isolated markets leads to the lack of external knowledge of items. As shown in Figure 1, the dotted
rectangle on the left represents a crowdfunding campaign
of producing headphone in Indiegogo1 , and the right dotted
rectangle is a relevant headphone selling in Amazon2 . Obviously, for newly released campaigns in the crowdfunding
market, the sales prospects of ventures are unknown. But it
can be inferred from the performance (e.g., the rating, reviews) of similar products in the sales market. Similarly, the
financing performance (e.g, funding amount) of campaigns
in the crowdfunding market is also valuable for estimating
the popularity of E-commerce market. Secondly, the complicated knowledge interactions of items between different
markets have not been well exploited. Specifically, the resonant items of financing and sales markets may have a copromoting cooperative relation in predicting popularity considering the market dependence, while there may be a com-

Introduction
With the popularity of the E-commerce market, predictions on market popularity have attracted widespread attention (Chatfield 2016; Li et al. 2020; Mills and Mills 2016;
Chen et al. 2019). Recently, some scholars are moving to
some emerging financing markets such as the crowdfunding (Xu and Cai 2021; Du, Wang, and Li 2020; Li, Rakesh,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

9040

https://www.Indiegogo.com/
https://www.Amazon.com/

