The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

REMOTE: Reinforced Motion Transformation Network for Semi-supervised 2D
Pose Estimation in Videos
Xianzheng Ma1,4 * , Hossein Rahmani2 , Zhipeng Fan3 , Bin Yang1 , Jun Chen1 , Jun Liu4†
1

Wuhan University

2

Lancaster University

3

New York University

Abstract

4

Singapore University of Technology and Design

the information is mainly based on local context without
considering global context in videos. More recently, the
work of (Zhang et al. 2020) proposed a key-frame identification module and a dynamic dictionary to first infer poses
for a subset of frames, and then interpolate the key poses
to the entire video sequence. However, this method could
suffer when the pose sequence to be interpolated becomes
complex as the pose dynamics-based dictionary formulation
will become challenging.
To effectively exploit the labeled frames and temporal
dynamic information in the sparsely annotated videos, in
this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised REinforced
MOtion Transformation nEtwork (REMOTE), which consists of three major modules: a Reinforcement Learning
(RL)-based Frame Selection Agent (FSA), a Pose Estimator (PE), and a Motion Transformer (MT). Specifically, we
design MT to conduct cross frame reconstruction based on
paired labeled and unlabeled frames from a video, in which
poses estimated by PE are used to guide the frame reconstruction process. Hence, MT learns to warp frames based
on the motion dynamics between the current pose and the
target pose, which thus enables PE to learn from both labeled frames and unlabeled frames. As a result, under the
direct supervision of the labeled frames and extra supervision from the video motion dynamics within the reconstruction process, the capability of PE is enhanced.
However, to enable MT to work effectively, the selected
two frames for performing cross reconstruction need to contain moderate variances. This is because if the two frames
are temporally too close in the video, the cross frame reconstruction will become trivial and thus MT will not be
able to learn motion dynamics sufficiently. In contrast, if
the two frames have overly large motion offsets, it may become infeasible for MT to perform effective reconstruction
for supervising PE. Therefore, we design an RL-based agent
(FSA), guided by a specific reward set, to select informative frame pairs for MT, in order to push our framework
towards exploring effective motion dynamics and continuously strengthening the pose estimation performance.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows: (1)
A novel REinforced MOtion Transformation nEtwork (REMOTE) is proposed to effectively exploit information from
both labeled frames and temporal variations in sparsely labeled videos, resulting in a robust and accurate Pose Estima-

Existing approaches for 2D pose estimation in videos often require a large number of dense annotations, which are
costly and labor intensive to acquire. In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised REinforced MOtion Transformation
nEtwork (REMOTE) to leverage a few labeled frames and
temporal pose variations in videos, which enables effective
learning of 2D pose estimation in sparsely annotated videos.
Specifically, we introduce a Motion Transformer (MT) module to perform cross frame reconstruction, aiming to learn
motion dynamic knowledge in videos. Besides, a novel reinforcement learning-based Frame Selection Agent (FSA) is
designed within our framework, which is able to harness informative frame pairs on the fly to enhance the pose estimator under our cross reconstruction mechanism. We conduct
extensive experiments that show the efficacy of our proposed
REMOTE framework.

Introduction
Human pose estimation, which aims to estimate human body
joint locations in image coordinates, is a challenging yet
fast-growing research area with wide applications in various fields. Nowadays, the explosive growth of online videos,
driven by the ubiquity of mobile devices and sharing activities on social media, demands effective and efficient pose estimation approaches (Nie et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020) that
can make use of information in videos in a data-driven manner. However, collecting a large scale video dataset with perframe human pose annotations is often labor intensive and
time consuming, limiting the practical scale of such datasets
and the development of deep learning-based models.
Instead of collecting fully-labeled videos, a possible remedy would be to craft algorithms to learn from limited labeled data, or more practically, sparsely labeled videos,
where temporal information could be additionally leveraged
to pass the supervision signal to the unlabeled frames for
training the pose estimation networks. PoseWarper (Bertasius et al. 2019) was proposed to propagate pose information
from labeled frames to neighboring unlabeled frames, which
greatly boosted the pose estimation performance. However,
* Work done as research intern in SUTD.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1944

