The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hierarchical Image Generation via Transformer-Based Sequential Patch Selection
Xiaogang Xu,1 Ning Xu 2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Adobe Research
xgxu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, nxu@adobe.com

Abstract

The retrieved crops from the retrieve stage should be mutually compatible for synthesizing an image and consistent
with the corresponding scene graph. To complete the retrieve
stage, existing retrieval-based image synthesis methods either employ pre-defined embeddings for retrieval (Li et al.
2019c) or proposes a differentiable retrieval process (Tseng
et al. 2020) to retrieve the image crop that is compatible with
the previously selected ones. However, they all neglect the
usage of the crops’ spatial information during the optimizing
of retrieve stage. In this paper, we reformulate the retrieve
stage and complete it as a novel sequential process. In our
process, the selection of the crop for each object in the scene
graph would be determined by spatial, style, and content features of crops that have already been chosen. To implement
such sequential selection, we propose to adopt a transformer
(Vaswani et al. 2017) structure that is trained with contrastive
learning (Oord, Li, and Vinyals 2018; Chen et al. 2020). In
the transformer, the candidate image crops for selection and
previously selected crops are embedded with two specific
heads and incorporated with spatial information via position
embedding. Iterative operations on the transformer can retrieve the image crops that are mutually compatible. This
is the first successful attempt to complete the crop retrieval
with self-supervised contrastive learning for image synthesis,
and experiments on public datasets demonstrate the superiority of our sequential selection strategy over existing retrieve
approaches.

To synthesize images with preferred objects and interactions,
a controllable way is to generate the image from a scene graph
and a large pool of object crops, where the spatial arrangements of the objects in the image are defined by the scene
graph while their appearances are determined by the retrieved
crops from the pool. In this paper, we propose a novel framework with such a semi-parametric generation strategy. First,
to encourage the retrieval of mutually compatible crops, we
design a sequential selection strategy where the crop selection
for each object is determined by the contents and locations of
all object crops that have been chosen previously. Such process is implemented via a transformer trained with contrastive
losses. Second, to generate the final image, our hierarchical
generation strategy leverages hierarchical gated convolutions
which are employed to synthesize areas not covered by any image crops, and a patch-guided spatially adaptive normalization
module which is proposed to guarantee the final generated images complying with the crop appearance and the scene graph.
Evaluated on the challenging Visual Genome and COCO-Stuff
dataset, our experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of our proposed method over existing state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
It is challenging to generate an image from a scene graph consists of several objects with sophisticated interactions. With
such a framework, users just need to provide flexible scene
descriptions to define the objects as well as their interactions,
and the framework would synthesize images, achieving a
user-controllable generation process. Current frameworks for
generating images from scene descriptions take advantage of
generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014). Compared with parametric models (Johnson, Gupta,
and Fei-Fei 2018) that solely lean upon the networks to model
the appearance of objects, semi-parametric approaches (Li
et al. 2019c; Tseng et al. 2020) have recently been proposed
and shown superior performance. Such methods first leverage a memory bank to retrieve image crops for objects in
the scene graph (called retrieve stage), and then synthesize
realistic images from scene graphs and retrieved crops (called
generation stage). In this work, we focus on the amelioration
of the semi-parametric model, improving the retrieve stage
as well as the generation stage.

Moreover, in this paper, we further propose a novel generator that generates realistic images from a scene graph
with selected image crops as the guidance. To synthesize the
realistic and high-resolution images, we design the generator with a hierarchical generation strategy, using hierarchical gated convolutions and proposing patch-guided spatially
adaptive normalization module. The patch-guided spatially
adaptive normalization module is designed to guarantee the
synthesized images highly respecting the selected crops. The
generator is trained with crops selected by our transformer,
boosting the performance of the generator in the inference
stage, and the generator boosts the mutual compatibility between the selected crops in the output image. Evaluated on
Visual Genome and COCO-Stuff dataset (including objective
analyses and a user study for subjective evaluation) , our proposed method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) generation approaches.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2938

