The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Interact, Embed, and EnlargE: Boosting Modality-Specific Representations for
Multi-Modal Person Re-identification
Zi Wang3 , Chenglong Li1,2,4 , Aihua Zheng1,2,4, ∗ , Ran He5 , Jin Tang1,2,3
1

Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University
5
NLPR, CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{ziwang1121, lcl1314, ahzheng214}@foxmail.com, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, tangjin@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract
Multi-modal person Re-ID introduces more complementary
information to assist the traditional Re-ID task. Existing
multi-modal methods ignore the importance of modalityspecific information in the feature fusion stage. To this end,
we propose a novel method to boost modality-specific representations for multi-modal person Re-ID: Interact, Embed,
and EnlargE (IEEE). First, we propose a cross-modal interacting module to exchange useful information between different modalities in the feature extraction phase. Second, we
propose a relation-based embedding module to enhance the
richness of feature descriptors by embedding the global feature into the fine-grained local information. Finally, we propose multi-modal margin loss to force the network to learn
modality-specific information for each modality by enlarging
the intra-class discrepancy. Superior performance on multimodal Re-ID dataset RGBNT201 and three constructed ReID datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method
compared with the state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: The proposed cross-modal interaction (in the gray
box), which exchanges information through the interaction
of different modalities.

to integrate the information of different scales and modalities. However, only the fixed fusion result participates in the
subsequent training, which significantly limits the sensitivity of the network to learn the independent modality-specific
information. To boost the modality-specific information
via incorporating the information of other modalities in
the fusing phase, we propose a cross-modal interacting
module. We argue to interact/absorb complementary information from other modalities while preserving independent/specific modality information instead of directly fusion,
as shown in Fig. 1. Meanwhile, we propose to introduce
channel-attention to boost the useful information of the feature from other branches during the interaction. Specifically,
we save the modality-specific information by retaining each
modal feature extracted by the backbone, and then merge
the features from the other modalities followed by channelattention to strengthen important regions. The fused feature
and the original feature are added in the final stage of interaction. It is worth noting that the three modality features are
still independent rather than fused into a single one. Each
modality branch will no longer affect the others after interaction while continuing independent training.
Second, the deeply-learned local feature has been successfully explored in both Re-ID (Sun et al. 2018; Wei et al.
2017; Yao et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2017) and other computer
vision tasks (Zhang et al. 2014; Cao et al. 2017). Representative local feature based Re-ID methods, including PCB (Sun
et al. 2018) and PL-Net (Yao et al. 2019) mainly emphasize
the local part feature learning and concat all part features to
form the final representation for Re-ID while overlooking

Introduction
With the development of infrared cameras in daily surveillance, RGB and near-infrared cross-modal Re-ID evolves
to a new branch in Re-ID, which can relieve the limitation
of the conventional visible single modality Re-ID in low
illuminations. However, it brings additional heterogeneous
challenge between modalities to person Re-ID. To overcome the imaging limitations of complex visual situations,
there emerges the attempt of RGB-NI-TI multi-modal ReID (Zheng et al. 2021) by providing complementary threemodality for each person sample.
The first issue of multi-modal Re-ID is to effectively fuse
the complementary information from the multi-modality
data. Existing multi-modal fusing schemes mainly fall into
three categories: 1) Early fusion, which generally fuses
information on image-level before the convolution operation (Wang et al. 2020; Li and Wu 2018). 2) Late fusion,
which merges different modality features into one fused feature in the middle or at the end of the network to enhance
the feature representation (Li et al. 2018; George and Marcel 2021). 3) Progressive fusion, which incorporates multimodal information in a progressive way (Zheng et al. 2021)
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2633

