The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

LUNA: Localizing Unfamiliarity Near Acquaintance for Open-Set Long-Tailed
Recognition
Jiarui Cai1 , Yizhou Wang1 , Hung-Min Hsu1 , Jenq-Neng Hwang1 , Kelsey Magrane2 , Craig Rose3
1

University of Washington
Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission (PSMFC)
3
FishNext Research
{jrcai, ywang26, hmhsu, hwang}@uw.edu, kelsey.magrane@noaa.gov, fishnextresearch@gmail.com
2

Abstract

system’s dynamic performance, reliability and scalability.
Back in the real world, the factual object samples are also
unevenly distributed, and the object classes are always openended. The state-of-the-art algorithms are either focused on
solving open-set issues (Bendale and Boult 2016; Scheirer,
Jain, and Boult 2014; Ge et al. 2017), or only aimed to classify the objects under a closed long-tail distribution (Kang
et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020). However, when there is a call
for implementing object recognition in daily life, the openset and long-tail challenges commonly coincide (Van Horn
et al. 2018; Wellmer and Becker-Platen 2000; dis 2019).
Separating them is twice the effort for half the result. To step
closer to reality, Liu et al. attempt to merge and deal with
the open-set long-tail recognition (OLTR) together by one
framework in 2019 and proposed the OLTR baseline (Liu
et al. 2019). However, existing OLTR approaches (Liu et al.
2019; Zhu and Yang 2020) still see some fundamental and
methodological gaps:

The predefined artificially-balanced training classes in object
recognition have limited capability in modeling real-world
scenarios where objects are imbalanced-distributed with unknown classes. In this paper, we discuss a promising solution to the Open-set Long-Tailed Recognition (OLTR) task
utilizing metric learning. Firstly, we propose a distributionsensitive loss, which weighs more on the tail classes to decrease the intra-class distance in the feature space. Building upon these concentrated feature clusters, a local-densitybased metric is introduced, called Localizing Unfamiliarity
Near Acquaintance (LUNA), to measure the novelty of a testing sample. LUNA is flexible with different cluster sizes and
is reliable on the cluster boundary by considering neighbors
of different properties. Moreover, contrary to most of the existing works that alleviate the open-set detection as a simple
binary decision, LUNA is a quantitative measurement with
interpretable meanings. Our proposed method exceeds the
state-of-the-art algorithm by 4-6% in the closed-set recognition accuracy and 4% in F-measure under the open-set on the
public benchmark datasets, including our own newly introduced fine-grained OLTR dataset about marine species (MSLT), which is the first naturally-distributed OLTR dataset revealing the genuine genetic relationships of the classes.

• No authentic collected open long-tail dataset to evaluate the OLTR methodology (Liu et al. 2019): existing
benchmarks are limited to artificially-sampled ones. The
generic relationship among objects are disrupted. For example, there are only 9 samples for truck while 516 samples for white shark in ImageNet-LT.
• Decoupling open set challenges with long-tailed distribution (Bendale and Boult 2016; Ge et al. 2017;
Júnior et al. 2017; Hassen and Chan 2020): when people
study the open set issues, models are designed based on
balanced sets (Deng et al. 2009; Zhou et al. 2017), which
reduce the utility and value of transferring the methodology to OLTR tasks.
• Exhaustively engage into the long-tail recognition and
ignore the open set issues (Cao et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2016; Lin et al. 2017; Cui et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020):
due to the hurdle of recognition of objects from the imbalanced set, the literature focus on improving the accuracy in the long-tailed distribution without considering
the open set scenario, which needs accommodations for
the actual OLTR tasks.

Introduction
There is a wide range of real-life object recognition tasks
that operates under the training-learning paradigm and can
be naturally modeled as the image classification task. Technical revolution sweeps various fields like species identification (Van Horn et al. 2018), medical imaging perception (Wang et al. 2020a), human face recognition (Deng
et al. 2019) and scene classification in autonomous driving
(Narayanan, Dwivedi, and Dariush 2019). However, the performances of the state-of-the-art object recognition methods
mostly bias on the sample-rich classes that have been seen
in the training set, with a limited ability on classifying the
sample-few classes, not to mention the new/novel classes of
objects (Kang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020).
The main culprit of this phenomenon is the simulation
scenario in the laboratory cannot fully model reality: the
conformity between training and testing sets determines the

The above three significant hurdles motivate us to research in the metric domain, which automates the feature
selection and learns task-specific distance functions to access similarity (Kulis et al. 2012). In this paper, we propose

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

131

