The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph Transplant: Node Saliency-Guided Graph Mixup
with Local Structure Preservation
Joonhyung Park* 1 , Hajin Shim* 1 , Eunho Yang 1,2
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
AITRICS
{deepjoon, shimazing, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

due to their context-agnostic nature. Furthermore, most of
the proposed graph augmentation strategies focus on node
classification tasks (Verma et al. 2019b; Rong et al. 2019),
which is difficult to apply directly to graph classification.
As another attractive option, we consider Mixup (Zhang
et al. 2017) which has become one of the standard data augmentations with its excellent performance in image classification (Yun et al. 2019), sentence classification (Guo,
Mao, and Zhang 2019a), model robustness (Hendrycks et al.
2019), etc. However, since existing Mixup variants (Verma
et al. 2019a; Yun et al. 2019; Guo, Mao, and Zhang 2019b;
Kim et al. 2021) are somewhat specific to image data or require data instances to lie in the same dimensional space,
they are inappropriate for the case of graph data where there
is usually no node correspondence, and even the number of
nodes may differ across graph instances.
In this paper, we propose Graph Transplant, a novel
Mixup-based data augmentation for graph classification
tasks that can be generally used for multiple-domain datasets
regardless of graph geometries. To make sense of mixing
graph instances with no node correspondence and the different number of nodes, Graph Transplant selects a subgraph
from each of the destination and source instances and transplants the subgraph of the source onto the destination whose
subgraph is removed. However, transplanting a subgraph
from one instance to another may not properly align the final product with the corresponding interpolated label if the
original charge of the subgraph is not reflected in the label.
To address this issue, we propose to utilize the node saliency
for selecting subgraphs and assigning labels. Specifically for
our purpose, we define the node saliency as `2 norm of the
gradient of classification loss with respect to the output of
the graph convolutional layer. It can be regarded as a measure of node’s contribution when the model classifies the
graph. Furthermore, the label for the mixed graph is determined as the ratio of the saliency between the source and
destination subgraphs. Instead of naı̈vely using the ratio of
the number of nodes in subgraphs, saliency-based label mixing describes the mixed graphs properly by weighting nodes
according to their importance. Another non-trivial challenge
in mixing graphs is to determine the connectivity between
subgraphs obtained from two different instances. To this
end, we suggest the two variants: 1) random connection under the constraint on the original node degree and 2) edge

Graph-structured datasets usually have irregular graph sizes
and connectivities, rendering the use of recent data augmentation techniques, such as Mixup, difficult. To tackle this challenge, we present the first Mixup-like graph augmentation
method at the graph-level called Graph Transplant, which
mixes irregular graphs in data space. To be well defined on
various scales of the graph, our method identifies the substructure as a mix unit that can preserve the local information. Since the mixup-based methods without special consideration of the context are prone to generate noisy samples,
our method explicitly employs the node saliency information to select meaningful subgraphs and adaptively determine
the labels. We extensively validate our method with diverse
GNN architectures on multiple graph classification benchmark datasets from a wide range of graph domains of different sizes. Experimental results show the consistent superiority of our method over other basic data augmentation baselines. We also demonstrate that Graph Transplant enhances
the performance in terms of robustness and model calibration.

1

Introduction

Graph classification plays a critical role in a variety of fields
from chemistry to social data analysis. In recent years, attempts to use graph neural networks (GNNs) to solve graph
classification tasks have been in the spotlight (Gilmer et al.
2017; Simonovsky and Komodakis 2017; Ying et al. 2018;
Errica et al. 2019; Meng and Zhang 2019) , as deep models
successfully learn from unstructured data in various domains
such as computer vision (CV) (He et al. 2016) or natural language processing (NLP) (Vaswani et al. 2017). However, the
challenge is that, like most deep models, in order for GNNs
to successfully generalize even for unseen graph data, we are
often required so much data that it is not practical.
To train these data-hungry neural networks more costefficiently, data augmentation techniques are commonly employed. Existing graph augmentation methods largely rely
on injecting structural noise such as edge manipulation
(Rong et al. 2019; Zhou, Shen, and Xuan 2020) or node
deletion (You et al. 2020) without considering the semantics of each graph data so that they can mislead the network
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7966

