The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contrastive Instruction-Trajectory Learning for Vision-Language Navigation
Xiwen Liang1 , Fengda Zhu2 , Yi Zhu3 , Bingqian Lin1 , Bing Wang4 , Xiaodan Liang1 *
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen
2
Monash University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Alibaba Group
liangxw29@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, fengda.zhu@monash.edu, zhu.yee@outlook.com, linbq6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
fengquan.wb@alibaba-inc.com, liangxd9@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

Zhu et al. 2020a; Ke et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2019a) improve
the agent with vision-language attention layers and auxiliary
tasks. Coupling with BERT-like methods (Devlin et al. 2019;
Lu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020), the navigation agent obtains
better generalization ability (Majumdar et al. 2020; Hong
et al. 2021). However, these VLN methods only use the context within an instruction-trajectory pair while ignoring the
knowledge across the pairs. For instance, they only recognize the correct actions that follow the instruction while ignoring the actions that do not follow the instruction. The
differences between the correct actions and the wrong actions contain extra knowledge for navigation. On the other
hand, previous methods do not explicitly exploit the temporal continuity inside an instruction, which may fail if the
agent focuses on a wrong sub-instruction. Thus, learning a
fine-grained sub-instruction representation by leveraging the
temporal continuity of sub-instructions could improve the
robustness of navigation.
Recently, self-supervised contrastive learning shows superior capacity in improving the instance discrimination
and generalization of vision models (Chen et al. 2020;
He et al. 2020; Xie et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Sun
et al. 2019). Inspired by the success of contrastive learning,
we propose our Contrastive Instruction-Trajectory Learning (CITL) framework to explore fine/coarse-grained knowledge of the instruction-trajectory pairs. Our CITL consists of
two coarse-grained trajectory-instruction contrastive objectives and a fine-grained sub-instruction contrastive objective
to learn from cross-instance trajectory-instruction pairs and
sub-instructions. Firstly, we propose coarse-grained contrastive learning to learn distinctive long-horizon representations for trajectories and instructions respectively. The
idea of coarse-grained contrastive learning is computing
inter-intra cross-instance contrast: enforcing embedding to
be similar for positive trajectory-instruction pairs and dissimilar for intra-negative and inter-negative ones. To obtain
positive samples, we propose data augmentation methods
for instructions and trajectories respectively. Intra-negative
samples are generated through changing the temporal information of the instruction and selecting longer sub-optimal
trajectories which deviate from the anchor one severely.
In contrast, inter-negative samples are different trajectoryinstruction pairs. In this way, the semantics of full trajectory observations and instructions can be captured for better

The vision-language navigation (VLN) task requires an
agent to reach a target with the guidance of natural language instruction. Previous works learn to navigate step-bystep following an instruction. However, these works may
fail to discriminate the similarities and discrepancies across
instruction-trajectory pairs and ignore the temporal continuity
of sub-instructions. These problems hinder agents from learning distinctive vision-and-language representations, harming
the robustness and generalizability of the navigation policy.
In this paper, we propose a Contrastive Instruction-Trajectory
Learning (CITL) framework that explores invariance across
similar data samples and variance across different ones to
learn distinctive representations for robust navigation. Specifically, we propose: (1) a coarse-grained contrastive learning
objective to enhance vision-and-language representations by
contrasting semantics of full trajectory observations and instructions, respectively; (2) a fine-grained contrastive learning objective to perceive instructions by leveraging the temporal information of the sub-instructions; (3) a pairwise
sample-reweighting mechanism for contrastive learning to
mine hard samples and hence mitigate the influence of data
sampling bias in contrastive learning. Our CITL can be easily integrated with VLN backbones to form a new learning paradigm and achieve better generalizability in unseen
environments. Extensive experiments show that the model
with CITL surpasses the previous state-of-the-art methods on
R2R, R4R, and RxR. Code is available at https://github.com/
liangcici/CITL-VLN.

Introduction
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) task (Anderson et al.
2018b) requires an agent to navigate following a natural language instruction. This task is closely connected to many
real-world applications, such as household robots and rescue robots (Zhu et al. 2021). The VLN task is challenging
since it requires an agent to acquire diverse skills, such as
vision-language alignment, sequential vision perception and
long-term decision making.
Early method (Anderson et al. 2018b) is developed upon
an encoder-decoder framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014). Later methods (Fried et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019b;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1592

