The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

UCTransNet: Rethinking the Skip Connections in U-Net from a Channel-Wise
Perspective with Transformer
Haonan Wang1,2 , Peng Cao1,2 * , Jiaqi Wang1,2 , Osmar R. Zaiane3
1

2

Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing in Medical Image of Ministry of Education, Northeastern University, China
3
Amii, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
haonan1wang@gmail.com, caopeng@mail.neu.edu.com, wjq010222@gmail.com, zaiane@cs.ualberta.ca
Abstract

Res Path

Most recent semantic segmentation methods adopt a U-Net
framework with an encoder-decoder architecture. It is still
challenging for U-Net with a simple skip connection scheme
to model the global multi-scale context: 1) Not each skip
connection setting is effective due to the issue of incompatible feature sets of encoder and decoder stage, even some
skip connection negatively influence the segmentation performance; 2) The original U-Net is worse than the one without any skip connection on some datasets. Based on our findings, we propose a new segmentation framework, named UCTransNet (with a proposed CTrans module in U-Net), from
the channel perspective with attention mechanism. Specifically, the CTrans (Channel Transformer) module is an alternate of the U-Net skip connections, which consists of a
sub-module to conduct the multi-scale Channel Cross fusion
with Transformer (named CCT) and a sub-module Channelwise Cross-Attention (named CCA) to guide the fused multiscale channel-wise information to effectively connect to the
decoder features for eliminating the ambiguity. Hence, the
proposed connection consisting of the CCT and CCA is able
to replace the original skip connection to solve the semantic
gaps for an accurate automatic medical image segmentation.
The experimental results suggest that our UCTransNet produces more precise segmentation performance and achieves
consistent improvements over the state-of-the-art for semantic segmentation across different datasets and conventional
architectures involving transformer or U-shaped framework.
Code: https://github.com/McGregorWwww/UCTransNet.

Res Path
Res Path

CTrans

Res Path

(a) U-Net

(b) UNet++

(c) MultiResUNet

(d) UCTransNet

Figure 1: Comparison of the skip connection scheme among
the proposed UCTransNet (d) and other models. The dash
lines denote the skip connections.

features and the decoder up-samples features to segmentation maps with per pixel class scores. U-Net (Ronneberger,
Fischer, and Brox 2015) is the most widely used encoderdecoder network architecture for medical image segmentation, since the encoder captures the low-level and high-level
features, and the decoder combines the semantic features to
construct the final result. The skip connection can help propagate the spatial information that gets lost during the pooling
operation to help recover the full spatial resolution through
the encoding-decoding process. To investigate it, we conduct
an in-depth study of U-Net and observe several major limitations according to our analysis on multiple datasets. We
find that it is still challenging for U-Net with a simple skip
connection scheme to model the global multi-scale context
for assisting the decoding process without considering the
semantic gap. It is necessary to find an effective way to
fuse features for precise medical image segmentation. There
essentially are two key issues for the extension of U-Net:
which layers of the features in the encoders are connected
to the decoders for modeling a global contexts through aggregating multi-scale features, and how to effectively fuse
the features with possible semantic gap instead of simply
concatenating? There exist two semantic gaps: semantic gap
among the multi-scale encoder features and between the
stages of the encoder and decoder, limiting the segmentation performance. To overcome this aforementioned limitation, a number of approaches have been introduced recently
to alleviate the discrepancy when fusing these two incompatible sets of features. One approach is to directly replace the
plain skip connections with the nested dense skip pathways
for medical image segmentation. The most representative

Introduction
Medical imaging is considered as a vital technique to assist
doctors to evaluate disease and to optimise prevention and
control measures. Segmentation and the subsequent quantitative assessment of target object in medical images provide
valuable information for the analysis of pathologies and are
important for planning of treatment strategies, monitoring
of disease progression and prediction of patient outcome.
Recent approaches (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Ni
et al. 2020; Wen, Xie, and He 2020) to semantic segmentation typically rely on convolutional encoder-decoder architectures where the encoder generates low-resolution image
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2441

