The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Fully Single Loop Algorithm for Bilevel Optimization without Hessian Inverse
Junyi Li,1 Bin Gu,2 Heng Huang1 *
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
junyili.ai@gmail.com, jsgubin@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

(such as SGD). This simple double loop algorithm is guaranteed to converge under mild assumptions and works well for
small scale problems. But when the inner problem is in large
scale, the double loop algorithm is very slow and becomes
impractical.
In fact, hyper-gradient evaluation is the major bottleneck
of bilevel optimization. The solution of the inner problem is
usually implicitly defined over the outer state, and naturally
its gradient w.r.t the outer variable is also implicitly defined.
To evaluate hyper-gradient, we need to approximate this implicit gradient via an iterative algorithm (the inner loop).
Various algorithms have been proposed for hyper-gradient
evaluation (Ferris and Mangasarian 1991; Ghadimi and Wang
2018; Grazzi et al. 2020; Lorraine and Duvenaud 2018; Liao
et al. 2018). These methods were designed from various perspectives and based on different techniques, thus they look
quite different on the first sight. However, we can use a general formulation to incorporate all these methods under one
framework. Roughly, the hyper-gradient evaluation can be
expressed as a finite sum of terms defined over a sequence
of inner states and momentum coefficients, and these states
and coefficients are chosen differently in distinct algorithms.
Our general formulation provides a new perspective to help
understand the properties of these classic methods. In particular, we derive a sufficient condition such that the general
formulation converges to the exact hyper-gradient.
One benefit of our general formulation is to inspire new
algorithms for bilevel optimization. Based on our general
formulation, we propose a new fully single loop algorithm
named as ‘FSLA’. Compared to previous single loop algorithms (Guo et al. 2021; Chen, Sun, and Yin 2021; Ji, Yang,
and Liang 2020; Khanduri et al. 2021; Huang and Huang
2021a), our FSLA does not require any inner loop. In literature (Ji, Yang, and Liang 2020; Khanduri et al. 2021),
the existing methods either reuse the last hyper-iteration’s
inner solution as a warm start of the current iteration, or
just alternatively update the inner and outer variables with
carefully designed learning rate schedule (Hong et al. 2020).
They also utilize the variance-reduction techniques to control
the variance (Khanduri et al. 2021). However, these methods
focus on solving the inner problem and pay little attention
to the hyper-gradient evaluation process which also requires
a loop. In our new algorithm, we introduce a new state vk
to keep track of the historical hyper-gradient information.

In this paper, we propose a novel Hessian inverse free Fully
Single Loop Algorithm (FSLA) for bilevel optimization problems. Classic algorithms for bilevel optimization admit a double loop structure which is computationally expensive. Recently, several single loop algorithms have been proposed with
optimizing the inner and outer variable alternatively. However, these algorithms not yet achieve fully single loop. As
they overlook the loop needed to evaluate the hyper-gradient
for a given inner and outer state. In order to develop a fully
single loop algorithm, we first study the structure of the hypergradient and identify a general approximation formulation of
hyper-gradient computation that encompasses several previous
common approaches, e.g. back-propagation through time, conjugate gradient, etc. Based on this formulation, we introduce
a new state variable to maintain the historical hyper-gradient
information. Combining our new formulation with the alternative update of the inner and outer variables, we propose an efficient fully single loop algorithm. We theoretically show that
the error generated by the new state can be bounded and our algorithm converges with the rate of O(−2 ). Finally, we verify
the efficacy our algorithm empirically through multiple bilevel
optimization based machine learning tasks. A long version of
this paper can be found in: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04660.

Introduction
In this paper, we study the bilevel optimization problem,
which includes two levels of optimization: an outer problem
and an inner problem. The outer problem depends on the
solution of the inner problem. Many machine learning tasks
can be formulated as a bilevel optimization problem, such as
hyper-parameter optimization (Lorraine and Duvenaud 2018),
meta learning (Franceschi et al. 2018), Stackelberg game
model (Ghadimi and Wang 2018), equilibrium model (Grazzi
et al. 2020), etc. However, Bilevel optimization is challenging
to solve. The gradient-based algorithm (Ghadimi and Wang
2018) requires a double loop structure. For each inner loop,
the inner problem is solved with the given outer state. In the
outer loop, the hyper-gradient (the gradient w.r.t the outer
variable) is evaluated based on the solution of the inner loop
and the outer state is updated with a gradient-based optimizer
* This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 1845666,
1852606, 1838627, 1837956, 1956002, IIA 2040588.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7426

