The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hypergraph Modeling via Spectral Embedding Connection:
Hypergraph Cut, Weighted Kernel k-means, and Heat Kernel
Shota Saito
Department of Computer Science, University College London
ssaito@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

from the discussion on graphs, it is natural to model realvalued data as hypergraphs for clustering. By looking at
multi-way relationships, we aim to gain better clustering results for general data as well as to model data that essentially
involves multi-way relationships, such as the examples above.
However, while heuristic modeling as hypergraphs has been
done in several domains (Govindu 2005; Sun et al. 2017; Yu
et al. 2018), we are yet to have a modeling framework that is
theoretically connected to hypergraph cut problems.
This paper proposes a hypergraph modeling and its spectral embedding framework for clustering, which we theoretically connect to the established hypergraph cut problems.
This framework models real-valued data as an even order
m-uniform hypergraphs, all of whose edges connect m vertices. For this purpose, we propose a biclique kernel, which
formulates multi-way similarity, by exploiting the kernel
function’s ability to model similarity but in a way where
we expand from pairs to multiplets. We give a theoretical
foundation to biclique kernel: a biclique kernel is equivalent
to semi-definite even-order tensor (Thm. 1). We show that
biclique kernel is theoretically connected to the established
hypergraph cut problems proposed by (Zhou, Huang, and
Schölkopf 2006; Saito, Mandic, and Suzuki 2018; Ghoshdastidar and Dukkipati 2015) via two problems, weighted
kernel k-means and heat kernels. We provide a spectral clustering algorithm for our formulation, which is faster than
existing ones (O(n3 ) vs. O(nm ), where n is the number of
data points). This speed-up allows us to model as an arbitrarily higher-order hypergraphs in a reasonable computational
time. We numerically demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms the existing graph and heuristic embedding methods.
Our empirical study also shows that by increasing order of a
hypergraph, the performance is gained until a certain point
but slightly drops from there. To our knowledge, it is first time
to obtain the behavior of performance of spectral clustering
using higher-order (say, m≥ 8) uniform hypergraph.
Our contributions are as follows; i) We provide a formulation to model real-valued data as an even order m-uniform
hypergraph. ii) We show that our formulation is theoretically linked to the established hypergraph cuts in two ways,
weighted kernel k-means and heat kernel. iii) We provide a
fast spectral clustering algorithm. iv) We numerically show
that our method outperforms the standard graph ones and existing heuristic embedding ones. All proofs are in Appendix

We propose a theoretical framework of multi-way similarity
to model real-valued data into hypergraphs for clustering via
spectral embedding. For graph cut based spectral clustering, it
is common to model real-valued data into graph by modeling
pairwise similarities using kernel function. This is because
the kernel function has a theoretical connection to the graph
cut. For problems where using multi-way similarities are more
suitable than pairwise ones, it is natural to model as a hypergraph, which is generalization of a graph. However, although
the hypergraph cut is well-studied, there is not yet established
a hypergraph cut based framework to model multi-way similarity. In this paper, we formulate multi-way similarities by
exploiting the theoretical foundation of kernel function. We
show a theoretical connection between our formulation and
hypergraph cut in two ways, generalizing both weighted kernel k-means and the heat kernel, by which we justify our
formulation. We also provide a fast algorithm for spectral clustering. Our algorithm empirically shows better performance
than existing graph and other heuristic modeling methods.

Introduction
Graphs are widely used data representations for data that
have pairwise relationships. One of the main aims for graph
machine learning is clustering vertices, and the graph cut
based spectral clustering is a popular method (Shi and Malik
1997; von Luxburg 2007). For clustering purposes, spectral
clustering is also useful for real-valued data. We model realvalued data as a graphs by forming a vertex from each data
point and an edge from pairwise similarity of each pair of
data points (Goyal and Ferrara 2018). One popular modeling
method uses kernel functions. The kernel has been theoretically justified; for example, dot product kernel is shown to
be linked to the normalized graph cut via weighted kernel kmeans (Dhillon, Guan, and Kulis 2004) and Gaussian kernel
is justified via heat kernel (Belkin and Niyogi 2003).
Hypergraphs generalize graphs (Berge 1984), and hence
are suitable to model data that have multi-way relationships, such as videos (Huang, Liu, and Metaxas 2009) and
cells (Klamt, Haus, and Theis 2009). For hypergraphs, cutbased spectral clustering has also been established (Zhou,
Huang, and Schölkopf 2006; Hein et al. 2013). Therefore,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8141

