The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Structural Landmarking and Interaction Modelling: A “SLIM” Network
for Graph Classification
Yaokang Zhu1 , Kai Zhang1 * , Jun Wang1 * , Haibin Ling2 , Jie Zhang3 , Hongyuan Zha4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Stony Brook University , New York, USA
3
Institute of Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
4
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
52184501026@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,{kzhang980, wongjun, haibin.ling, jzhang080}@gmail.com, zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

2020; Zhang, Cui, and Zhu 2020). However, due to the nonEuclidean and relational nature, important challenges still
exist using graph neural networks for graph-level predictive
tasks, such as graph classification. For example, in order to
generate a fixed-dimensional representation for graphs of arbitrary size, graph-pooling is typically adopted to summarize
the information of a graph. Though detailed choice varies,
majority of the graph-pooling methods end up with “squeezing” all the nodes of a graph into a single vector, blending
structural details for feature (dimension) compatibility.
Is such a “collapsing-style” graph pooling the only choice
for graph classification? Different perspectives may be taken.
From complex system’s view, properties of a complex system
arise largely from the interactions among its components, a
universal law underlying a great diversity of real-world systems (Hartwell et al. 1999; Debarsy et al. 2017; Cilliers 1998).
For example, properties of molecular drugs depend on functional modules and how they organize with each other (Stokes
et al. 2020). Epidemic spreading process in a social network
is affected by its community structures (Pastor-Satorras et al.
2015). In these regards, mixing all the component parts of
a system into one unit, as implemented through collapsingstyle graph pooling, obscures sub-structure identities and
their interactions. We speculate this could affect both systemlevel predictive performance, and model interpretability.
Motivated by this observation, we want to explore whether
the explicit modelling of graph parts and their interactions can
benefit graph classification, in contrast to pooling the parts
together. This is an interesting inductive bias to the design of
graph neural networks inspired by complex systems science.
There are two big challenges involved.

Graph neural networks are a promising architecture for learning and inference with graph-structured data. Yet, how to generate informative, fixed-dimensional graph-level features for
graphs with varying size and topology can still be challenging.
Typically, this is achieved through graph-pooling, which summarizes a graph by compressing all its nodes into a single vector after convolutional operations. Is such a “collapsing-style”
graph-pooling the only choice for graph classification? From
complex system’s point of view, properties of a complex system arise largely from the interaction among its components.
Therefore, we speculate that preserving the interacting relation
between parts, instead of pooling them together, could benefit
system-level prediction. To verify this, we propose SLIM, a
graph neural network model for Structural Landmarking and
Interaction Modelling. The main idea is to compute a set of
end-to-end optimizable sub-structure landmarks, so that any
input graph can be projected onto these (spatially) local structural representatives for a faithful, global characterization. By
doing this, explicit interaction between component parts of
a graph can be leveraged directly in generating useful graphlevel representations despite significant topological variations.
Encouraging results are observed on benchmark datasets for
graph classification, demonstrating the value of interaction
modelling in the design of graph neural networks.

Introduction
Complex systems are ubiquitous in natural and scientific disciplines, and how the relation between component parts gives
rise to global behaviour of a system is a central research topic
in many areas such as system biology (Camacho et al. 2018),
neural science (Kriegeskorte 2015), and drug and material
discoveries (Stokes et al. 2020; Schmidt et al. 2019). Recently,
graph neural networks emerge as a promising architecture
for representation learning on graphs – the structural abstraction of a complex system. State-of-the-art performances
are observed in various graph mining tasks (Bronstein et al.
2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Xu et al. 2019; Velickovic
et al. 2017; Morris et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Jie et al.

• How to manipulate the “parts” of a graph, or substructures1 ? Sub-structures provide a intermediate scale
for characterizing high-order information, and have drawn
considerable interest in motif discovery (Milo et al. 2002;
Alon 2007; Austin R. Benson 2016), graphlets (Shervashidze et al. 2009), graph kernels (Vishwanathan et al.
2010), and GNNs/graph-convolutions (Peng et al. 2020).
However, due to the discrete, combinatorial nature, diver-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Sub-structure in this paper means a connected subgraph and
will be used interchangably with it.

9251

