The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Offline Reinforcement Learning as Anti-exploration
Shideh Rezaeifar,1 Robert Dadashi,2 Nino Vieillard,2, 3 Léonard Hussenot,2,4 Olivier Bachem,2
Olivier Pietquin,2 Matthieu Geist 2
1
University of Geneva
Google Research, Brain Team
3
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, IECL, F-54000 Nancy, France
4
Université de Lille, CNRS, Inria, UMR 9189 CRIStAL
shideh.rezaeifar@unige.ch, dadashi@google.com, vieillard@google.com, hussenot@google.com, bachem@google.com,
pietquin@google.com, mfgeist@google.com
2

Abstract

In principle, off-policy algorithms (Ernst, Geurts, and Wehenkel 2005; Lagoudakis and Parr 2003; Mnih et al. 2013;
Lillicrap et al. 2016; Haarnoja et al. 2018) could be used to
learn from a fixed dataset. However, in practice, they perform
poorly without any feedback from the environment. This
issue persists even when the off-policy data comes from effective expert policies, which in principle should address any
exploration issue (Kumar et al. 2019). The main challenge
comes from the sensitivity to the data distribution. The distribution mismatch between the behavior policy and the learned
policy leads to an extrapolation error of the value function,
which can become overly optimistic in areas of state-action
space outside the support of the dataset. The extrapolation
error accumulates along the episode and results in unstable
learning and divergence (Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018;
Kumar et al. 2019, 2020; Levine et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2019;
Dadashi et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2020).
This work introduces a new approach to Offline RL, inspired by exploration. This may seem counter-intuitive. Indeed, in online RL, an exploring agent will try to visit stateaction pairs it has never experienced before, hence drifting
from the distribution in the dataset. This is exactly what
an Offline RL agent should avoid, so we frame it as an
anti-exploration problem. We focus on bonus-based exploration (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2002; Burda et al. 2019;
Pathak et al. 2017; Burda et al. 2018; Bellemare et al. 2016b).
The underlying principle, in these methods, is to add a bonus
to the reward function, this bonus being higher for novel/surprising state action-pairs (Barto, Mirolli, and Baldassarre
2013). The core idea of the proposed approach is to perform
anti-exploration by subtracting the bonus from the reward,
instead of adding it, effectively preventing the agent from
selecting actions of which the effects are unknown. Concurrently, Rashidinejad et al. (2021) proposed a theoretical
framework for subtracting an exploration bonus from the
reward that was applied only to the tabular setting. Similarly,
Jin, Yang, and Wang (2021) recently proposed a theoretical
pessimistic variant of the value iteration based on uncertainty
quantifier. However, they did not provide any practical deep
RL algorithm with empirical results. Under minimal assumptions, we relate this approach to the more common offline RL
idea of penalizing the learned policy for deviating from the
policy that supposedly generated the data. We also propose
a specific instantiation of this general idea, using TD3 (Fuji-

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims at learning an optimal control from a fixed dataset, without interactions with the
system. An agent in this setting should avoid selecting actions
whose consequences cannot be predicted from the data. This is
the converse of exploration in RL, which favors such actions.
We thus take inspiration from the literature on bonus-based exploration to design a new offline RL agent. The core idea is to
subtract a prediction-based exploration bonus from the reward,
instead of adding it for exploration. This allows the policy to
stay close to the support of the dataset, and practically extends
some previous pessimism-based offline RL methods to a deep
learning setting with arbitrary bonuses. We also connect this
approach to a more common regularization of the learned
policy towards the data. Instantiated with a bonus based on
the prediction error of a variational autoencoder, we show that
our simple agent is competitive with the state of the art on a
set of continuous control locomotion and manipulation tasks.

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved remarkable
success in a variety of tasks including robotics (Kober,
Bagnell, and Peters 2013; Thrun 1995; Benbrahim and
Franklin 1997; Bagnell and Schneider 2001; Endo et al.
2008), recommendation systems (Rojanavasu, Srinil, and
Pinngern 2005; Afsar, Crump, and Far 2021), and games
(Silver et al. 2018). Deep RL algorithms generally assume
that an agent repeatedly interacts with an environment and
uses the gathered data to improve its policy: they are said to
be online. Because actual interactions with the environment
are necessary to online RL algorithms, they do not comply
with most of real-world applications constraints. Indeed,
allowing an agent to collect new data may be infeasible such
as in healthcare (Murphy et al. 2001), autonomous driving
(Sallab et al. 2017; Grigorescu et al. 2020), or education
(Mandel et al. 2014). As an alternative, offline RL (Levine
et al. 2020) is a practical paradigm where an agent is trained
using a fixed dataset of trajectories, without any interactions
with the environment during learning. The ability to learn
from a fixed dataset is the crucial step towards scalable and
generalizable data-driven learning methods.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8106

