The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sparsification of Decomposable Submodular Functions
Akbar Rafiey,1 Yuichi Yoshida 2
1

Simon Fraser University
National Institute of Informatics
arafiey@sfu.ca, yyoshida@nii.ac.jp
2

Abstract

more efficiently. A novel class of submodular functions are
decomposable submodular functions. These are functions
that can be written as sums of several “simple” submodular functions, i.e.,

Submodular functions are at the core of many machine learning and data mining tasks. The underlying submodular functions for many of these tasks are decomposable, i.e., they are
sum of several simple submodular functions. In many data intensive applications, however, the number of underlying submodular functions in the original function is so large that we
need prohibitively large amount of time to process it and/or it
does not even fit in the main memory. To overcome this issue,
we introduce the notion of sparsification for decomposable
submodular functions whose objective is to obtain an accurate
approximation of the original function that is a (weighted)
sum of only a few submodular functions. Our main result is
a polynomial-time randomized sparsification algorithm such
that the expected number of functions used in the output is independent of the number of underlying submodular functions
in the original function. We also study the effectiveness of our
algorithm under various constraints such as matroid and cardinality constraints. We complement our theoretical analysis
with an empirical study of the performance of our algorithm.

F (S) =

N
X

fi (S)

∀S ⊆ E,

i=1

where each fi : 2E → R is a submodular function on the
ground set E with |E| = n.
Decomposable submodular functions encompass many of
the examples of submodular functions studied in the context of machine learning as well as economics. For example,
they are extensively used in economics in the problem of
welfare maximization in combinatorial auctions (Dobzinski
and Schapira 2006; Feige 2006; Feige and Vondrák 2006;
Papadimitriou, Schapira, and Singer 2008; Vondrák 2008).
Example 1 (Welfare maximization). Let E be a set of n
resources and a1 , . . . , aN be N agents. Each agent has an
interest over subsets of resources which is expressed as a
submodular function fi : 2E → R. The objective is to select a small subset of resources that maximizes the happiness
across all the agents, the “social welfare”. More formally, the
goal is to find a subset S ⊆ E of size at most k that maxiPN
mizes F (S) = i=1 fi (S), where k is a positive integer.

Introduction
Submodularity of a set function is an intuitive diminishing
returns property, stating that adding an element to a smaller
set helps gaining more return than adding it to a larger set.
This fundamental structure has emerged as a very beneficial property in many combinatorial optimization problems
arising in machine learning, graph theory, economics, game
theory, to name a few. Formally, a set function f : 2E → R
is submodular if for any S ⊆ T ⊆ E and e ∈ E \ T it holds
that

Decomposable submodular functions appear in various
machine learning tasks such as data summarization, where
we seek a representative subset of elements of small size.
This has numerous applications, including exemplar-based
clustering (Dueck and Frey 2007; Gomes and Krause
2010), image summarization (Tschiatschek et al. 2014), recommender systems (Parambath, Usunier, and Grandvalet
2016), and document and corpus summarization (Lin and
Bilmes 2011). The problem of maximizing decomposable
submodular functions has been studied under different constraints such as cardinality and matroid constraints in various data summarization settings (Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi 2016; Mirzasoleiman et al. 2016; Mirzasoleiman, Zadimoghaddam, and Karbasi 2016), and differential privacy settings (Chaturvedi, Nguyen, and Zakynthinou 2021; Mitrovic et al. 2017; Rafiey and Yoshida 2020).
In many of these applications, the number of underlying
submodular functions are too large (i.e., N is too large) to

f (S ∪ {e}) − f (S) ≥ f (T ∪ {e}) − f (T ).
Submodularity allows one to efficiently find provably
(near-)optimal solutions. In particular, a wide range of efficient approximation algorithms have been developed for
maximizing or minimizing submodular functions subject to
different constraints. Unfortunately, these algorithms require
number of function evaluations which in many data intensive applications are infeasible or extremely inefficient. Fortunately, several submodular optimization problems arising
in machine learning have structure that allows solving them
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10336

