The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepHardMark: Towards Watermarking Neural Network Hardware
Joseph Clements, Yingjie Lao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Clemson University
Clemson, South Carolina, 29634
jfcleme@g.clemson.edu, ylao@clemson.edu

Abstract

tions, watermarks secure the hardware designer’s profit incentives and support the field’s creative endeavors. Often,
conventional hardware watermarking operates on logic circuits by identifying unused states and embeds the signature
functionality in them (Cui et al. 2011; Abdel-Hamid, Tahar,
and Aboulhamid 2005). Recent works have explored the efficacy of intentionally injecting backdoors into DNN algorithmic IPs for use as a watermark embedded into DNN
weights (Adi et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018a; Doan et al.
2021; Doan, Lao, and Li 2021). Several other categories of
DNN watermarking methods have also been investigated,
which are all at the algorithmic level (Fan, Ng, and Chan
2019; Uchida et al. 2017). To the best of our knowledge,
watermarking techniques have not been applied to protect
DNN hardware IPs, and prior algorithmic approaches do not
translate into hardware modifications.
Motivated by a recent work that develops a hardware watermarking technique based on embedding intentional Trojans into hardware IPs (Shayan, Basu, and Karri 2019) and
recent studies for injecting hardware backdoors into DNN
through the accelerator (Clements and Lao 2019; Liu et al.
2020; Hu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2018), we present a framework for embedding hardware watermarks into deep learning hardware. The main concept leverages hardware backdoors to embed a signature into the hardware by modifications to its functional blocks that can be identified with
the owner’s key DNN and key samples. Note that hardware
watermarking is fundamentally different from DNN watermarking which protects the algorithmic IP. Typically DNN
watermarks are embedded into the model (i.e., by updating
the weights in memory), but hardware-assisted DNN watermarks are also seen. Our signature only alters the protected hardware and so serves as a strong proof of ownership over that hardware. We optimize the embedding using
a hardware-aware `p -ADMM algorithm that reduces the impact of the watermark’s hardware overhead. Our hardware
modifications are activated under rare input combinations
and produce a minimal impact on the design’s functionality. Our contributions are summarized below:

This paper presents a framework for embedding watermarks
into DNN hardware accelerators. Unlike previous works that
have looked at protecting the algorithmic intellectual properties of deep learning systems, this work proposes a methodology for defending deep learning hardware. Our methodology
embeds modifications into the hardware accelerator’s functional blocks that can be revealed with the rightful owner’s
key DNN and corresponding key sample, verifying the legitimate owner. We propose an `p -ADMM based algorithm
to co-optimize the watermark’s hardware overhead and impact on the design’s algorithmic functionality. We evaluate
the performance of the hardware watermarking scheme on
popular image classification models using various accelerator
designs. Our results demonstrate that the proposed methodology effectively embeds watermarks while preserving the original functionality of the hardware architecture. Specifically,
we can successfully embed watermarks into the deep learning
hardware and reliably execute a ResNet ImageNet classifier
with an accuracy degradation of only 0.009%.

Introduction
As deep neural networks (DNNs) continue to increase in
size and complexity, there are growing incentives to deploy machine learning systems to dedicated hardware platforms (Wang et al. 2020). While general-purpose processors are still widely utilized across the field (Jouppi et al.
2017), FPGA and ASIC solutions can provide superior performance and efficiency needed for critical commercial systems (Molanes et al. 2018). Nevertheless, modern horizontal
supply chains often outsource fabrication, production, and
distribution across multiple globalized corporations. Adversaries can take advantage of vulnerabilities in the supply
chain to overproduce, copy, or recycle hardware designs for
their own profit (Leonhard 2021). Therefore, it is critical
to provide a means for hardware developers to assure the
security of a design relinquished to the horizontal supply
chain (Yasin et al. 2019; Shamsi et al. 2019).
Hardware watermarking allows designers to place a signature into their hardware intellectual properties (IPs) that
verify rightful ownership (Dubey et al. 2020; Pundir, Jagannath, and Ganapathy 2019). Beyond the security implica-

• This paper explores, for the first time, the application
of hardware watermarking techniques on DNN accelerators. The work proposes a Trojan-inspired methodology
that is able to embed backdoor-based watermarks into
hardware rather than the model parameters.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4450

