The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Graph-Based Multi-View Clustering
Weixuan Liang,1 Xinwang Liu,1 * Sihang Zhou,2 Jiyuan Liu,1 Siwei Wang,1 En Zhu,1
1

2

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China.
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China.
{weixuanliang,xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn, sihangjoe@gmail.com, {liujiyuan13,wangsiwei13,enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

first constructs the base Laplacian matrices from different
graphs, then combines them into an optimal Laplacian matrix for clustering, in which the combination coefficients are
updated by the consensus clustering indicator matrix and basic Laplacian matrices. (Nie, Li, and Li 2017) learned a unified graph by minimizing the reconstruction error between
the optimal graph and the weighted basic graph combination. (Zhan et al. 2019) merges the information from different graphs by first learning the cluster indicating matrices
from individual views and then find their best linear combination to the similar matrix of a low rank Laplacian matrix.
Through a graph diffusion method, (Tang et al. 2020) obtains
a consensus graph that could effectively capture the complementary information from different views. By concatenating
different graphs to a tensor, (Wu, Lin, and Zha 2019) dramatically improves the clustering performance through the
tensor learning. Furthermore, (Wen et al. 2021) adjusts tensor framework to handle the datasets with incomplete views.
(Huang et al. 2021) assumes that each graph can be divided
into two parts, i.e., consistent part and divergent part. They
fuse all consistent parts into a unified graph, while adopting
the divergent parts to adjust the combination coefficients. In
a recent work (Pan et al. 2021), the authors provide a novel
algorithm by introducing contrastive learning for multi-view
clustering and achieve good performance.
Although large performance enhancement has been
achieved, we observe that the existing G-MVC algorithms
usually follow a non-convex formulation. More preciously,
the objective functions with multiple variables are not jointly
convex. This property causes that most of the existing algorithms in this field are solved with an iterative optimization
fashion, making them hard to guarantee the optimality of the
corresponding solution. As a consequence, the performance
of these algorithms are not fully exploited.
To solve the problem, this paper proposes a novel algorithm termed robust graph-based multi-view clustering (RGMVC). Specifically, we first design a novel min-max optimization formulation to adversarially optimize the ideal
consensus graph representation matrix and the graph combination coefficients in a unified framework. After that, we
reformulate the min-max formulation into a differentiable
and convex formulation and adopt the reduced gradient descent algorithm to solve the resulting optimization problem.
Thanks to the adversarial learning mechanism and the con-

Graph-based multi-view clustering (G-MVC) constructs a
graphical representation of each view and then fuses them to
a unified graph for clustering. Though demonstrating promising clustering performance in various applications, we observe that their formulations are usually non-convex, leading
to a local optimum. In this paper, we propose a novel MVC
algorithm termed robust graph-based multi-view clustering
(RG-MVC) to address this issue. In particular, we define a
min-max formulation for robust learning and then rewrite it
as a convex and differentiable objective function whose convexity and differentiability are carefully proved. Thus, we can
efficiently solve the resultant problem using a reduced gradient descent algorithm, and the corresponding solution is guaranteed to be globally optimal. As a consequence, although
our algorithm is free of hyper-parameters, it has shown good
robustness against noisy views. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets verify the superiority of the proposed
method against the compared state-of-the-art algorithms. Our
codes and appendix are available at https://github.com/wxliang/RG-MVC.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering (Yang and Wang 2018), which aims
to fuse multiple views and learn a consensus representation
for grouping unlabeled datasets into clusters, is an important
research topic in the field of clustering. According to the information fusion strategy that is adopted, the existing algorithms can be roughly divided into five categories, i.e. cotraining-based algorithms (Kumar, Rai, and Daume 2011),
kernel-based algorithms (Zhao, Kwok, and Zhang 2009;
Wang et al. 2021), subspace clustering-based algorithms
(Gao et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2020b,a), multi-task multi-view
clustering (Zhang et al. 2016) and multi-view graph learning
clustering (Nie, Li, and Li 2016). Among these methods,
the graph learning-based methods have achieved considerable attention of researchers due to their superior capability
of capturing the intrinsic cluster structure within data. The
method that we studied also belongs to this category.
In recent years, numerous graph-based multi-view clustering algorithms are proposed to achieve high-quality partition with different fusion mechanism. (Nie, Li, and Li 2016)
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7462

