The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Impossibility of Non-trivial Accuracy in Presence of Fairness Constraints
Carlos Pinzón,1,3 Catuscia Palamidessi,1,3 Pablo Piantanida2,4 and Frank Valencia2,3,5
1

Inria, Paris-Saclay, France
2
CNRS, France
3
Laboratoire d’informatique de l’École Polytechnique (LIX)
4
Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes (L2S), Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec
5
Pontificia Universidad Javeriana Cali, Colombia
carlos.pinzon@lix.polytechnique.fr
Abstract

2019). A non-trivial classifier is one that has higher accuracy than any constant classifier. Since constant classifiers
are independent of the input, trivial accuracy determines a
very low performance level that any correctly trained classifier should overcome. Yet, as shown in related works (Cummings et al. 2019; Agarwal 2020), under the simultaneous
constraints of differential privacy and equal-opportunity, it
is impossible to have non-trivially accurate classifiers.
In this paper, we strengthen the result of (Cummings et al.
2019; Agarwal 2020) by showing that, even without the assumption of differential-privacy, there are distributions for
which equal-opportunity implies trivial accuracy. In particular this is possible when the data source is probabilistic, i.e.,
the correct label for a given input is not necessarily unique.
Probability plays two different roles in this paper. On the
one hand, we allow classifiers to be probabilistic, i.e. we
allow the classification to be influenced by controlled randomness for some inputs. This is needed because satisfying
equal-opportunity typically requires a probabilistic predictor (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016), but also because it has a
practical justification. Namely, in some cases, randomness is
the only fair way to distribute an indivisible limited resource.
For instance, a parent with one candy and two children might
throw a coin to decide whom to give it. This principle is even
applied in decisions that have significant social impact such
as the Diversity Visa Program to qualify for a Green Card in
the United States (State.gov 2021), and the Beijing lottery
for getting a car license plate (Global Times 2018).
On the other hand, we consider probabilistic data sources.
This is motivated by two different reasons:

One of the main concerns about fairness in machine learning
(ML) is that, in order to achieve it, one may have to trade
off some accuracy. To overcome this issue, Hardt et al. proposed the notion of equality of opportunity (EO), which is
compatible with maximal accuracy when the target label is
deterministic with respect to the input features.
In the probabilistic case, however, the issue is more complicated: It has been shown that under differential privacy constraints, there are data sources for which EO can only be
achieved at the total detriment of accuracy, in the sense that a
classifier that satisfies EO cannot be more accurate than a trivial (random guessing) classifier. In our paper we strengthen
this result by removing the privacy constraint. Namely, we
show that for certain data sources, the most accurate classifier
that satisfies EO is a trivial classifier. Furthermore, we study
the trade-off between accuracy and EO loss (opportunity difference), and provide a sufficient condition on the data source
under which EO and non-trivial accuracy are compatible.

Introduction
During the last decade, the intersection between machine
learning and social discrimination has gained considerable
attention from the academia, the industry and the public in
general. A similar trend occurred before between machine
learning and privacy, and even the three fields have been
studied together recently (Pujol et al. 2020; Cummings et al.
2019; Kearns and Roth 2019; Agarwal 2020).
Fairness, has proven to be harder to conceptualize than
privacy, for which differential privacy has become the defacto definition. Fairness is subjective and laws vary between countries. Even in academia, depending on the application, the words fairness and bias have different meanings (Crawford 2017). The current general consensus is that
fairness can not be summarized into a unique universal definition; and for the most popular definitions, several tradeoffs, implementation difficulties and impossibility theorems
have been found (Kleinberg, Mullainathan, and Raghavan
2017; Chouldechova 2017). One such definition of fairness
is equal-opportunity (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016).
To contrast equal-opportunity (EO) with accuracy, we
borrow the notion of trivial accuracy from (Cummings et al.

1. It enables a more realistic and general representation of
reality: one in which the information in the input may
be insufficient to conclude definitely the yes-no decision,
or in which real-life constraints force the decision to be
different for identical inputs.
2. It provides a more general, yet simple, perspective for
understanding the trade-off between fairness and accuracy. Also, it can take into account that in practice, input
datasets are a noisy (thus probabilistic) approximation of
reality.
Our contributions are the following.
1. We prove that for certain probabilistic distributions, no
predictor can achieve EO and non-trivial accuracy simul-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7993

