The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast Monte-Carlo Approximation of the Attention Mechanism
Hyunjun Kim and JeongGil Ko
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University
hyunjun.kim@yonsei.ac.kr, jeonggil.ko@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

search has moved on to designing more computationally efficient attention mechanisms.
To alleviate the computational cost of self-attention mechanisms, two mainstream approaches have been taken in previous work, where each optimize the process in different dimensions. First is to improve the quadratic time complexity of vanilla dot-product attentions relative to the input sequence length. Since computing attention scores for an input
of n elements takes O(n2 ) time and memory (typical attention being bidirectional), applying Transformers to long input sequences can be a challenge. A number of techniques
have been proposed in this dimension of optimization, such
as leveraging fixed or learnable patterns to sparsify the attention matrix (Child et al. 2019; Beltagy, Peters, and Cohan
2020) and approximating attention matrices with mathematical methods (Wang et al. 2020b; Choromanski et al. 2021).
Second, there have also been efforts to reduce cost by
trimming the model itself to reduce the complexity of Transformers. Popular approaches include quantization (Shen
et al. 2020) and compression via knowledge distillation or
pruning (Sanh et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2020). Leveraging neural
architecture search to remove redundant operations (Chen
et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2019) is also a common strategy. The
efficiency benefits of these schemes are orthogonal to the
first approach; thus, can be applied in parallel.
We note that existing work on reducing attention complexity generally focuses on modifying weights or changing
its structure, where the optimization is essentially “model
driven”. Therefore, the performance and resource trade-off
can be considered static and tightly coupled to the model
or the optimization method themselves. In this work, we
present a novel dimension of attention optimization, with no
model weight or structure modifications, rather putting focus on the statistical characteristics of the attention matrix.
Specifically, we present the Monte-Carlo Attention (MCA),
as a flexible approach to reduce the computational cost of
self-attention. MCA is motivated by the observation that attention scores are highly divergent due to the softmax operation, which prompts the question: “why should we use equal
precision for encoding all input tokens?” By suppressing
computation for elements that minimally (if at all) affect the
final output, we can significantly reduce the attention complexity. MCA optimizes attention using randomized matrix
multiplication approximation by configuring different error

We introduce Monte-Carlo Attention (MCA), a randomized
approximation method for reducing the computational cost
of self-attention mechanisms in Transformer architectures.
MCA exploits the fact that the importance of each token in
an input sequence vary with respect to their attention scores;
thus, some degree of error can be tolerable when encoding
tokens with low attention. Using approximate matrix multiplication, MCA applies different error bounds to encode input
tokens such that those with low attention scores are computed
with relaxed precision, whereas errors of salient elements are
minimized. MCA can operate in parallel with other attention
optimization schemes and does not require model modification. We study the theoretical error bounds and demonstrate
that MCA reduces attention complexity (in FLOPS) for various Transformer models by up to 11× in GLUE benchmarks
without compromising model accuracy. Source code and appendix: https://github.com/eis-lab/monte-carlo-attention

Introduction
Attention mechanisms have become a predominant modeling paradigm for state-of-the-art deep neural networks.
Among many, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.
2017) is a major contribution that drove this success, which
demonstrated unprecedented performance in various domains such as neural machine translation (Chen et al. 2018),
question answering (Raffel et al. 2020), image classification (Parmar et al. 2019; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021), and timeseries forecasting (Lim et al. 2021).
A typical Transformer can be thought as a stack of selfattention layers. Self-attention can be viewed as an inductive bias with graph-like dependencies among input tokens,
where important elements hold stronger influence on the final output. On an algorithmic perspective, this is a three
step process: (i) computing bidirectional attention scores between input tokens, (ii) element-wise encoding of input token sequences, and (iii) computing the weighted sum of encoded sequences with respect to attention scores.
Recently, Transformer parameter sizes are ever-increasing
with current trends of exploiting self-supervised pre-training
using massive data. This has introduced significant computational cost when employing Transformers; thus, recent reCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7185

