The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Axiomatic Approach to Revising Preferences
Adrian Haret1 , Johannes P. Wallner2
1

Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC), University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Institute of Software Technology, Graz University of Technology, Austria
a.haret@uva.nl, wallner@ist.tugraz.at

Abstract
We study a model of preference revision in which a prior preference over a set of alternatives is adjusted in order to accommodate input from an authoritative source, while maintaining
certain structural constraints (e.g., transitivity, completeness),
and without giving up more information than strictly necessary. We analyze this model under two aspects: the first allows
us to capture natural distance-based operators, at the cost of
a mismatch between the input and output formats of the revision operator. Requiring the input and output to be aligned
yields a second type of operator, which we characterize using preferences on the comparisons in the prior preference.
Preference revision is set in a logic-based framework and using the formal machinery of belief change, along the lines
of the well-known AGM approach: we propose rationality
postulates for each of the two versions of our model and derive representation results, thus situating preference revision
within the larger family of belief change operators.

1

a

a

a

a

a

b

b

b

b

b

c
π

c
µ

c
π1

c
π2

c
π3

Figure 1: Revising π by µ can be thought of a choice between which comparisons to keep and which to give up.

here the new preference information µ): subjective versus
‘ethical’ preferences (Harsanyi 1955), lack of will, or akrasia (Jeffrey 1974), moral commitments (Sen 1977), secondorder volitions (Frankfurt 1988) and second-order preferences (Nozick 1994) all fall under this heading.
The same challenge can occur in technological applications, from updating CP-nets (Cadilhac et al. 2015) to changing the order in which search results are displayed on a page
in response to user provided specifications, as well as, more
generally, in issues related to the alignment problem (Russell 2019): an artificial agent dealing with humans will have
to learn their preferences, but as it cannot do so instantaneously, it must presumably do so in intermediate steps, revising along the way. The following example illustrates the
problem in its most basic form.

Introduction

Preferences play a central role in theories of decision making as part of the mechanism underlying rational choice:
they show up in economic models of rational agency (Sen
2017), as well as in formal models of artificial agents expected to interact with the world and each other (Domshlak et al. 2011; Rossi, Venable, and Walsh 2011; Pigozzi,
Tsoukiàs, and Viappiani 2016). Since such interactions take
place in dynamic environments, it can be expected that preferences change in response to new developments.
In this paper we are interested in preference change occurring when new preference information becomes available and has to be taken at face value, thereby prompting
a change in the prior preference. The change, we require,
should preserve as much useful information from the prior
preference as can be afforded. Preference change thus described is a pervasive phenomenon, arising in many contexts
spanning the realms of both human and artificial agency.
One prominent example is the distinguished tradition in
Economics and Philosophy looking at examples of conflict
between an agent’s subjective preference (what we call here
the prior preference π) and a second-order preference, often standing for a commitment or moral rule (what we call

Example 1. An online streaming service constructs a profile
tailored to a particular user, according to which the arthouse
movie (a) is preferred to the biopic (b), which is preferred to
the comedy (c), and thus displays them in this order, encoded
here with the preference statement π = (a≻b)∧(b≻c). When
the user volunteers information to the effect that they find
the comedy better than the arthouse movie, i.e., new information µ = (c≻a), the streaming service must revise its
model of the user’s preference: it has to place c before a
and, in order to display the alternatives in a neat linear
fashion, it must decide on a position to slot b into. Preferences π and µ, together with possible values for the revised
result, e.g., π1 = (c≻a)∧(a≻b), π2 = (c≻a)∧(b≻c) and
π3 = (c≻a)∧(c≻b)∧(b≻a), are depicted in Figure 1. Intuitively, π3 veers far (too far) away from the input preference
π, in that it does not keep any of the still permissible comparisons contained in π, and should arguably be excluded,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5676

