The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Discovering Interpretable Data-to-Sequence Generators
Boris Wiegand1,2 , Dietrich Klakow2 , Jilles Vreeken3
1

SHS – Stahl-Holding-Saar, Dillingen, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
boris.wiegand@stahl-holding-saar.de, dietrich.klakow@lsv.uni-saarland.de, jv@cispa.de

tuning, however, the resulting models are inherently difficult to interpret. As the key applications, such as optimizing planning, require interpretation, these solutions do not
suffice in practice. Surprisingly little work results in interpretable models being accurate and robust to noise.
In this paper, we take a different approach. We propose
to model the event sequences as a directed graph with classification rules on the meta data to determine which paths
to follow. Such an event-flow graph should fit the data well,
but at the same time have a low model complexity to increase interpretability by humans. We formalize the problem
in terms of the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle, by which we identify the best model as the one giving
the shortest lossless description of the data.
Due to NP-hardness of the resulting optimization problem, we propose the greedy method C ON S EQUENCE, which
first discovers a directed graph for a given set of event sequences and then finds classification rules on the meta data
for nodes with multiple successors. While in practice any
rule-based classifier can be plugged in, we propose the algorithm GERD, which uses a reliable rule effect estimator to
find compact and meaningful rules.
Through extensive experiments including a case study, we
show C ON S EQUENCE discovers compact, interpretable and
accurate models for the generation of event sequences from
data. Our method has low sample complexity, works well
under noise and deals with different real-world data.
The main contributions we make in this paper are
(a) formulate the problem of interpretable yet accurate prediction of event sequences from meta data with MDL,
(b) an efficient heuristic to discover event-flow graphs with
rules for sequence prediction
(c) an extensive empirical evaluation.
Our paper is structured as follows. Next, we define necessary
notation and concepts. In Section 3, we formally define the
problem, and propose our algorithmic solution in Section 4.
Before our experiments and a case study in Section 6, we
provide an overview of related work in Section 5. Eventually, we draw a conclusion and outline possible future work.
We provide detailed empirical results as well as details for
reproducibility in the supplementary. We make all code and
data publicly available.1

Abstract
We study the problem of predicting an event sequence given
some meta data. In particular, we are interested in learning
easily interpretable models that can accurately generate a sequence based on an attribute vector. To this end, we propose
to learn a sparse event-flow graph over the training sequences,
and statistically robust rules that use meta data to determine
which paths to follow. We formalize the problem in terms of
the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle, by which
we identify the best model as the one that compresses the data
best. As the resulting optimization problem is NP-hard, we
propose the efficient C ON S EQUENCE algorithm to discover
good event-flow graphs from data.
Through an extensive set of experiments including a case
study, we show that it ably discovers compact, interpretable
and accurate models for the generation and prediction of
event sequences from data, has a low sample complexity, and
is particularly robust against noise.

Introduction
Real-world event sequences are often accompanied by additional meta data. For example, event logs of manufacturing
processes contain sequences of production steps with product properties and attributes by the customer’s order. Usually, there is a relationship between these attributes and the
observed event sequence, like certain product groups require
different manufacturing activities. To gain a better understanding of the data generating process, we are often interested in uncovering this mechanism.
In a predictive scenario, for example, production planners
want to know the event sequence for a given product in advance, such that they can avoid bottlenecks and optimize the
process flow. Rules in production planning systems are often
hand-crafted and do not necessarily display the true complexity of the real process. Existing process models tend to
show idealized, high-level behavior and thus give a limited
picture of the real process (van der Aalst 2016, p. 30).
We are not the first to study sequence prediction based on
meta data. Existing neural network approaches (Taymouri,
La Rosa, and Erfani 2021; Camargo, Dumas, and GonzálezRojas 2019; Pasquadibisceglie et al. 2019) can achieve high
accuracy given sufficient training data and hyperparameter
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4237

http://eda.mmci.uni-saarland.de/prj/consequence

