The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Axiomatization of Aggregates in Answer Set Programming
Jorge Fandinno* , Zachary Hansen* , Yuliya Lierler*
University of Nebraska at Omaha
{jfandinno,zachhansen,ylierler}@unomha.edu

Abstract

intensional sets as first-class citizens into Quantified Equilibrium Logic (Pearce and Valverde 2005) with partial functions (Cabalar 2011) and provide a formalisation of aggregates that directly corresponds to the idea that aggregates are
functions that apply to sets. This approach is truly general: it
covers arbitrary aggregates including nested ones. The price
for the generality of this formalism is complexity.
Similar to the work by Cabalar et al. (2018), our approach
provides a direct formalisation of the idea that aggregates
are functions that apply to sets, but it aims to exclusively
use the language of classical logic (instead of adding intensional sets as a new construct in the language). To achieve
this goal, we assume two restrictions. First, aggregates cannot be nested and second, there cannot exist positive recursion through aggregates. Note that, in practice, solvers cannot process nested aggregates. Regarding the second restriction, solvers may process programs with recursion through
aggregates. Yet, different solvers may compute distinct answers for the same input program. For the sake of uncontroversial semantics, the ASP-Core-2 standard does not consider recursion through aggregates (Calimeri et al. 2012).
In this paper, we introduce a translation from logic programs to second-order logic formulas and define the semantics of aggregates using two equivalent characterizations.
The expressive power of the answer set semantics cannot
be captured by first-order logic, making second-order logic
the prime candidate for this task. The first characterization
uses a simpler language, where we restrict the considered
interpretations at the meta-logic level. The second characterization fixes the meaning of some symbols in this language by providing an axiomatization at the object-level.
The first characterization is easier to understand, while the
second provides greater mathematical precision. In many
cases we can replace second-order formulas by first-order
formulas (Ferraris, Lee, and Lifschitz 2011; Lee and Meng
2011). Here we show that for programs with aggregates that
apply to finite sets, we can replace the second-order axiomatization of aggregates by a first-order one. This paves the
way for using first-order theorem provers to reason about
programs with aggregates; to the best of our knowledge this
was not yet possible. The restriction to finite aggregates is
not a practical limitation as solvers cannot deal with infinite
sets. In the studied fragment, our semantics coincide with
the semantics of the solver clingo (Gebser et al. 2015).

The paper presents a characterization of logic programs with
aggregates based on a many-sorted generalization of operator SM that refers neither to grounding nor to fixpoints. This
characterization introduces new function symbols for aggregate operations and aggregate elements, whose meaning can
be fixed by adding appropriate axioms to the result of the SM
transformation. We prove that for programs without positive
recursion through aggregates our semantics coincides with
the semantics of the answer set solver clingo.

Introduction
Answer set programming (ASP; Lifschitz 2008) is a form
of declarative logic programming well-suited to solving
knowledge-intensive search problems. Its success relies on
the combination of a rich knowledge representation language with efficient solvers for finding solutions to problems
expressed in this language (Lifschitz 2019). One of the most
useful constructs of this language are aggregates: intuitively,
these are functions that apply to sets. The semantics of aggregates has been extensively studied in the literature (Simons, Niemelä, and Soininen 2002; Dovier, Pontelli, and
Rossi 2003; Pelov, Denecker, and Bruynooghe 2007; Son
and Pontelli 2007; Ferraris 2011; Faber, Pfeifer, and Leone
2011; Gelfond and Zhang 2014, 2019; Cabalar et al. 2019).
In most cases, papers rely on the idea of grounding — a
process in which all variables are replaced by variable-free
terms. Thus, first a program with variables is transformed
into a propositional one, then the semantics of the propositional program is defined. This makes reasoning about programs with variables cumbersome. For instance, it prohibits
using first-order theorem provers for verifying properties of
programs as advocated by Fandinno et al. (2020).
To the best of our knowledge, only two approaches
defined the semantics of aggregates without referring to
grounding. Lee, Lifschitz, and Palla (2008) translate certain count aggregates with a ground guard into an existentially quantified first-order formula. Yet, this approach is inapplicable to more general count aggregates as well as to
the common sum aggregates. Cabalar et al. (2018) introduce
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5634

