The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Leader Congestion Games with an Adversary
Tobias Harks1 , Mona Henle2 , Max Klimm3 , Jannik Matuschke4 , Anja Schedel1
1

University of Augsburg, 86159 Augsburg, Germany
University of Applied Sciences Augsburg, 86161 Augsburg, Germany
3
TU Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany
4
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
tobias.harks@math.uni-augsburg.de, mona.henle@hs-augsburg.de, klimm@math.tu-berlin.de,
jannik.matuschke@kuleuven.be, anja.schedel@math.uni-augsburg.de
2

Abstract

results with respect to the existence and computational complexity of equilibria are known. Note that the multi-leader
case applies to several scenarios, for example, in the analysis of deregulated electricity markets in which some of
the large energy producers are the leaders and the smaller
energy producers and independent system operator are the
followers; see Leyffer and Munson (2010) and references
therein. Also in the security domain related to transport and
communication networks, there are usually multiple leaders
that compete over the network resources subject to a followers’ response; see Kulkarni and Shanbhag (2015). One
well-known obstacle in the analysis of multi-leader games—
even in the realm of continuous formulations with convex
action spaces for the leaders and single-valuedness of the
followers’ response—is the inherent non-convexity of the
best-response correspondence that results in non-existence
of pure Nash equilibria; see Kulkarni and Shanbhag (2015).
In this paper, we consider a class of multi-leader singlefollower games on discrete strategy spaces that are motivated by security applications with congestion effects. Consider a standard singleton congestion game where multiple
users (leaders) choose one resource out of a set of resources.
After observing the realized loads, an adversary (singlefollower) attacks the resources with maximum loads, causing additional disutilities for the users on the attacked resources. The adversary may be thought of as either being a
malicious player attacking the resources in order to maximize the caused damage or as controls by a central authority
to counter tax or fare evasion; see Correa et al. (2017) for a
related mathematical model of fare evasion without any congestion or load balancing effects. In both applications it is
sensible to assume that the adversary has limited resources,
modeled by a fixed budget for his interventions that can be
distributed freely on the resources, and that he acts rationally, investing the budget only on resources with maximum
load. The users anticipate this strategy. From their perspective, every maximum-load resource is equally likely under
attack, that is, they assume the budget to be spent evenly
among the resources with maximum load (this can be interpreted as a randomized strategy of the adversary choosing the uniform distribution over maximum-load resources).
For the users, the additional cost term corresponds to the expected additional damage cost due to an attack.
This fundamental model has, to the best of our knowl-

We study a multi-leader single-follower congestion game
where multiple users (leaders) choose one resource out of a
set of resources and, after observing the realized loads, an
adversary (single-follower) attacks the resources with maximum loads, causing additional costs for the leaders. For the
resulting strategic game among the leaders, we show that pure
Nash equilibria may fail to exist and therefore, we consider
approximate equilibria instead. As our first main result, we
show that the existence of a K-approximate equilibrium can
always be guaranteed, where K ≈ 1.1974 is the unique solution of a cubic polynomial equation. To this end, we give a
polynomial time combinatorial algorithm which computes a
K-approximate equilibrium. The factor K is tight, meaning
that there is an instance that does not admit an α-approximate
equilibrium for any α < K. Thus α = K is the smallest possible value of α such that the existence of an α-approximate
equilibrium can be guaranteed for any instance of the considered game. Secondly, we focus on approximate equilibria of
a given fixed instance. We show how to compute efficiently a
best approximate equilibrium, that is, with smallest possible
α among all α-approximate equilibria of the given instance.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical leader-follower games have received considerable attention in the artificial intelligence community, especially, because several real-world applications related to the
protection of vulnerable systems can be modeled within this
framework. Applications include the security domain (Kiekintveld et al. 2009; Marchesi, Castiglioni, and Gatti 2019;
Sinha et al. 2018; Gan, Elkind, and Wooldridge 2018),
where a leader aims at protecting a set of valuable targets and
moves first by applying a defender strategy such as controls
or fortification of resources. The adversary acts as a follower
and, after observing the leader’s defensive strategy, chooses
a strategy incurring maximum damage. The leader anticipates the followers’ strategy. Thus, the computation of the
defender strategy takes the follower reaction into account.
While most works in this literature consider the case
of a single leader, the case of multiple leaders playing a
simultaneous-move strategic game subject to one or more
followers has received much less attention and only very few
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5068

