The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SCRIB: Set-Classifier with Class-Specific Risk Bounds for Blackbox Models
Zhen Lin1 , Lucas Glass2 , M. Brandon Westover3,4 , Cao Xiao5 , Jimeng Sun1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States
2
Analytics Center of Excellence - IQVIA, Boston, MA, United States
3
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States
4
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States
5
Amplitude, San Francisco, CA, United States
zhenlin4@illinois.edu, jimeng@illinois.edu

Abstract

rule, given an overall risk target (not a class-specific one),
(Geifman and El-Yaniv 2017) picks a confidence threshold
on the validation set. Alternative confidence measures were
also proposed by training separate models (Jiang et al. 2018;
Corbière et al. 2019).
However, existing works ignored that different classes
have different significance. The confidence score is almost always class-agnostic, and the rejection is binary, which means
there is no class-specific risk control. As a result, a difficult
class can have an extremely high rejection rate, where easy
classes are predicted all the time. In many applications such
as medicine, this class-agnostic rejection creates problems, as
difficult classes are often the most important ones that need
classification. For example, the N1 class in sleep staging is
challenging to classify but of great interest to the applications. It will currently be disproportionally rejected due to
the difficulty of achieving low overall risk.
In this work, we aim to incorporate class-specific risk
controls into classification with rejection. We propose Setclassifier with Class-specific RIsk Bounds (SCRIB), which
can output multiple labels to each example based on the predicted conditional probabilities by a black-box classifier in a
theoretically efficient way. Rejections happen naturally when
the output set contains more than one label1 . The multiple labels for each rejection also serve as an intuitive explanation of
the underlying ambiguity, helping human experts understand
the model behavior.
To construct the set classifier, SCRIB searches for the
optimal thresholds by minimizing a loss designed to control class-specific risks. This set classifier can be optimal in
some scenarios and naturally comes with a risk concentration bound. To the best of our knowledge, SCRIB is the first
class-specific risk control method for multi-class classification tasks. SCRIB has the following desirable properties:

Despite deep learning (DL) success in classification problems,
DL classifiers do not provide a sound mechanism to decide
when to refrain from predicting. Recent works tried to control
the overall prediction risk with classification with rejection
options. However, existing works overlook the different significance of different classes. We introduce Set-classifier with
Class-specific RIsk Bounds (SCRIB) to tackle this problem,
assigning multiple labels to each example. Given the output
of a black-box model on the validation set, SCRIB constructs
a set-classifier that controls the class-specific prediction risks.
The key idea is to reject when the set classifier returns more
than one label. We validated SCRIB on several medical applications, including sleep staging on electroencephalogram
(EEG) data, X-ray COVID image classification, and atrial
fibrillation detection based on electrocardiogram (ECG) data.
SCRIB obtained desirable class-specific risks, which are 35%88% closer to the target risks than baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning (DL) has demonstrated highly discriminative
power on classification tasks and has been successfully applied in many application areas, including healthcare(Hannun
et al. 2019; Esteva et al. 2017; Gulshan et al. 2016; Biswal
et al. 2018).
Impressive as DL is, we nevertheless hope to identify when
the model might fail and take actions accordingly, which is
especially important in healthcare applications. For example,
suppose we are to design an automated system using pretrained DL classifiers for sleep staging on EEG data (Biswal
et al. 2018), detecting diseases based on ECG data (Hong et al.
2019), or classifying X-ray images (Qiao et al. 2020). For
predictions to be reliable, the model should sometimes reject
the examples and yield them to human experts to decide. And
when the model does predict, we want the misclassification
risks to be low and controllable.
This leads to classification with a reject option, where the
rejection usually happens when the confidence score is low.
For example, when the base classifier’s prediction is the true
conditional probability, Maximum Class Probability (MCP)
is the optimal confidence score as it minimizes the rejection
rate for each risk level (Chow 1970). The actual decision

1. Flexible. It enforces class-specific risk controls by allowing different risk targets for different classes. It also works
with any black-box classifier without model retraining.
2. Fast. We propose an efficient optimization method to
choose the thresholds for the set classifier. Specifically, we
proposed a novel dynamic programming-based coordinate
1

We tackle multi-class classification where one class is assigned
to each example. This is different from multi-label classification
where multiple labels can be assigned to the same example.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7497

