The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Proximal PanNet: A Model-Based Deep Network for Pansharpening
Xiangyong Cao1,2 , Yang Chen3 , Wenfei Cao3?
2

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China.
Ministry of Education Key Lab For Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an 710049, China.
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China.
caoxiangyong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, yangchen9103@163.com, caowenf2015@snnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Representative methods include principal component analysis (PCA) (Shah, Younan, and King 2008), intensity–huesaturation (Carper, Lillesand, and Kiefer 1990), and
Gram–Schmidt spectral sharpening appoach (Laben and
Brower 2000). The CS-based methods are easy to implement
and can approximate the resolution of the HRMS image in
the spatial domain but result in spectral distortion (Vivone
et al. 2014). To alleviate this issue, some improved methods
have been presented, such as the spatial-detail approach with
the band-dependent property (BDSD) (Garzelli, Nencini,
and Capobianco 2007), the robust version of BDSD approach (Vivone 2019), and the adaptive CS approach with
partial replacement (Choi, Yu, and Kim 2010).
The MRA-based methods depend on injecting the spatial details captured by decomposing the PAN image in
a multiresolution way to the LRMS image. This type of
method can preserve spectral information but bring in spatial distortion. Typical methods include the intensity modulation with smooth filter (Liu 2000), the additive wavelet
luminance proportional (AWLP) (Otazu et al. 2005), the
Laplacian pyramid-based methods (Restaino et al. 2019;
Vivone, Marano, and Chanussot 2020; Vivone, Restaino,
and Chanussot 2018).
The VO-based techniques are adopted by formulating
pansharpening as a variational optimization problem, which
contains elegant mathematical derivation but often suffers
from a high computational burden. Typical approaches include the Bayesian methods (Wang et al. 2018), variational
approaches (Fang et al. 2013a,b; Deng et al. 2018; Deng,
Feng, and Tai 2019; Fu et al. 2019; Tian et al. 2021), and
compressed sensing approaches (Li and Yang 2010).
Recently, the DL-based approaches have been extensively
studied, and this type of method directly learns the mapping
from LRMS and PAN to HRMS by some stacked network
architectures. For example, Huang et al. (Huang et al. 2015)
firstly proposed a stacked modified sparse denoising autoencoder (S-MSDA) to train the relationship between highresolution (HR) and low-resolution (LR) image patches.
Masi et al. (Masi et al. 2016) designed a simple and effective three-layer convolutional neural network (CNN) for the
pansharpening problem. Further, a deeper network based on
the ResNet is built in (Yang et al. 2017; Fu et al. 2020) by focusing on the spectral and spatial preservations. A multiplescale and multiple-depth CNN is proposed in (Yuan et al.

Recently, deep learning techniques have been extensively
studied for pansharpening, which aims to generate a high resolution multispectral (HRMS) image by fusing a low resolution multispectral (LRMS) image with a high resolution
panchromatic (PAN) image. However, existing deep learningbased pansharpening methods directly learn the mapping
from LRMS and PAN to HRMS. These network architectures always lack sufficient interpretability, which limits further performance improvements. To alleviate this issue, we
propose a novel deep network for pansharpening by combining the model-based methodology with the deep learning
method. Firstly, we build an observation model for pansharpening using the convolutional sparse coding (CSC) technique
and design a proximal gradient algorithm to solve this model.
Secondly, we unfold the iterative algorithm into a deep network, dubbed as Proximal PanNet, by learning the proximal operators using convolutional neural networks. Finally,
all the learnable modules can be automatically learned in an
end-to-end manner. Experimental results on some benchmark
datasets show that our network performs better than other advanced methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Introduction
Pansharpening is an important task for remote sensing image processing. It aims at obtaining a HRMS image by fusing a PAN image with a LRMS image as shown in Figure 1.
With the satellite technology developing rapidly, the PAN
and LRMS images can be easily acquired simultaneously by
sensors equipped on the satellites, which requires handling
the pansharpening task efficiently. Recently, a large number
of approaches have been proposed, which can be roughly divided into four categories, i.e., component substitution (CS)
approaches, multiresolution analysis (MRA) methods, variational optimization (VO) techniques, and deep learning (DL)
approaches (Vivone et al. 2014).
The CS-based approaches rely on the concept of the projection of the LRMS image into a new domain, where the
spatial information can be easily separated into a component, usually called the intensity component. Then, the
PAN image can be substituted with the intensity component.
?

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

176

