The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Solving PDE-Constrained Control Problems Using Operator Learning
Rakhoon Hwang* † , 1 Jae Yong Lee* † , 2 Jin Young Shin* , 3 Hyung Ju Hwang‡ , 3
2

1
POSTECH Institute of Artificial Intelligence
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Natural Sciences, Korea Institute for Advanced Study
3
Department of Mathematics, Pohang University of Science and Technology
hrh0125@postech.ac.kr, jaeyong@kias.re.kr, {sjy6006, hjhwang}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

Tröltzsch 2010), and its variants have been applied to many
different areas of science. However, adjoint-based iterative
schemes, such as shooting methods, suffer from computational costs because of their trial-and-error nature. In addition, iterative schemes are often sensitive to the initial
guesses to the solutions.
Deep learning methods have recently derived major techniques for scientific computations, including PDEs or optimization problems (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis
2019). In particular, solving a family of parametrized PDEs
requires networks to approximate a function-to-function
mapping or operator. In (Li et al. 2020a), (Li et al. 2020b),
(Lu, Jin, and Karniadakis 2019), (Zhu and Zabaras 2018),
and (Zhu et al. 2019), the authors utilized neural networks to
learn a mapping from the parameters (e.g. initial or boundary) of a PDE to the corresponding solution. Such models
are used as a surrogate model to solve various problems such
as uncertainty quantification (Zhu and Zabaras 2018; Zhu
et al. 2019) and an inverse problem (Li et al. 2020a).
Recent studies have been conducted to solve PDEconstrained optimal control problems through a deep learning approach. In (Holl, Koltun, and Thuerey 2020), the authors proposed a predictor-corrector scheme for long-term
fluid dynamics control, combining neural networks with a
differentiable solver. In (Rabault et al. 2019), the authors experimentally showed that active flow control for vortex shedding and a drag reduction can be achieved through modelfree reinforcement learning. Model-free methods are often
known to require numerous interactions with the environment to search for an optimal policy. A hand-designed reward is necessary for each problem, which usually involves
deep prior knowledge of complex physical systems. In addition, this approach requires numerical solvers during every
iteration. These make such approaches inapplicable to realworld problems.
We propose an alternative framework to solve PDEconstrained optimal control problems. Our method is divided into two phases: solution operator learning for PDE
constraints (Phase 1) and searching for optimal control
(Phase 2). During Phase 1, a neural network with a reconstruction structure is trained to approximate the PDE solutions. The optimal control problem can then be solved using
the trained network with a reconstruction regularizer during
Phase 2. The proposed method has the following four main

The modeling and control of complex physical systems are
essential in real-world problems. We propose a novel framework that is generally applicable to solving PDE-constrained
optimal control problems by introducing surrogate models for
PDE solution operators with special regularizers. The procedure of the proposed framework is divided into two phases:
solution operator learning for PDE constraints (Phase 1) and
searching for optimal control (Phase 2). Once the surrogate
model is trained in Phase 1, the optimal control can be inferred in Phase 2 without intensive computations. Our framework can be applied to both data-driven and data-free cases.
We demonstrate the successful application of our method to
various optimal control problems for different control variables with diverse PDE constraints from the Poisson equation
to Burgers’ equation.

Introduction
The modeling of physical systems to support decision making and solve the optimal control problem is a key problem
in many industrial, economical, and medical applications.
Such systems can be described mathematically through partial differential equations (PDEs). In this regard, solving
PDE-constrained optimal control problems provides a control law for a complex system governed by PDEs. A PDEconstrained optimal control problem has been successfully
used in many applications: shape optimization (Haslinger
and Mäkinen 2003; Sokolowski and Zolésio 1992), mathematical finance (Bouchouev and Isakov 1999; Egger and
Engl 2005), and flow control (Gunzburger 2002).
As computing power increases and optimization technologies significantly improve, many researchers have studied algorithms and computational methods that are accurate, efficient, and applicable for complex physical systems.
In control theory, adjoint methods are some of the most
common approaches to handle this problem. Adjoint methods provide an efficient way to compute gradients that appear in optimization problems (Lions 1971; Pironneau 1974;
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work performed while at Pohang University of Science and
Technology.
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4504

