The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Choices Are Not Independent: Stackelberg Security Games with Nested Quantal
Response Models
Tien Mai, Arunesh Sinha
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
atmai@smu.edu.sg, aruneshs@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

model is natural in SSG when a human attacker faces numerous options with correlations, as the NL model posits that
the player partitions the choice set into nests, first chooses
a nest, and then an alternative within the chosen nest. The
model allows taking into consideration correlations between
alternatives that belong to the same nest. For example, in deployed applications of SSG for wildlife security (Fang et al.
2016) the adversary chooses where to attack in a large forest with the number of choices ranging in thousands; here,
intuitively, it is more natural that the adversary chooses a
sub-region (and choices within a sub-region are correlated)
and then chooses a specific place in that sub-region to attack. The NL model is also mathematically well-motivated
and derived using concepts from generalized extreme value
distributions (Train 2009). The resulting Stackelberg equilibrium problem with the NL model is quite challenging.
Our main result in this work is a tractable guaranteed approximation of the equilibrium computation in a SSG where
the follower employs a NL response model; we call this the
nested QR model in the context of SSG. We achieve this
overall result via a series of contributions that reveal interesting properties of the NL model in a game. Our first contribution is a result that shows that the main equilibrium computation optimization splits into a two level structure, with the
root optimization dependent on multiple sub-optimizations
at the lower level (a generalization of bi-level optimization).
The tree structure of the optimizations’ dependency reflects
the tree structure of the nests in the NL model. The overall defender resource budget is divided among the multiple
lower level optimizations, and the overall bound on budget
loosely couples the lower level optimizations.
Next, as our second contribution, we show that the lower
level optimizations can be transformed to an unconstrained
optimization in a single scalar variable but where the objective function can be evaluated only by solving yet another
multi-variable optimization (which is convex). We solve
each lower level optimization by performing a grid search
on the single variable, where the grid points are determined
adaptively by bounding the gradient at the prior explored
grid point. This provides a large computational saving over
a naive set of grid points constructed at regular intervals. We
also provide approximation bounds for this approach.
Our third contribution is a dynamic programming based
algorithm to solve the root optimization via a recursive for-

The quantal response (QR) model is widely used in Stackelberg security games (SSG) to model a bounded rational
adversary. The QR model is a model of human response
from among a large variety of prominent models known as
discrete choice models. QR is the simplest type of discrete
choice models and does not capture commonly observed phenomenon such as correlation among choices. We introduce
the nested QR adversary model (based on nested logit model
in discrete choice theory) in SSG which addresses shortcoming of the QR model. We present tractable approximation of
the resulting equilibrium problem with nested QR adversary.
We do so by deriving an interesting property of the equilibrium problem, namely a loosely coupled split into nested
problems that mirrors the nested decision making by the adversary in the nested QR model. We show that each separate
nested problem can be approximated efficiently and that the
loosely coupled overall problem can be solved approximately
by formulating it as a discretized version of a continuous dynamic program. Finally, we conduct experiments that show
the scalability and parallelizability of our approach, as well
as advantages of the nested QR model.

Introduction
Discrete choice models (Train 2009) are a prominent class
of models for modelling human response when faced with
choices over alternatives. Indeed, many prominent behavioral game models such as quantal responding players (McKelvey and Palfrey 1995) have origins in discrete
choice theory; the model adopted widely in the game theoretic works is the quantal response model (called multinomial logit (MNL) model in the discrete choice literature).
MNL (McFadden 1973) is the simplest class of discrete
choice models and suffers from deficiencies such as the inability to model correlations among alternatives and failure
to account for observed human behavior in the presence of
large number of choices. In this work, with the aim of addressing the aforementioned problems with MNL model, we
present a first work on employing the nested logit (NL) discrete choice model (Ben-Akiva 1973) in Stackelberg security games (Tambe 2011) and solving these efficiently.
As far as we know, there is no work on use of NL models
in Stackelberg security games (SSG). We argue that the NL
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5141

