The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

RID-Noise: Towards Robust Inverse Design
under Noisy Environments *
Jia-Qi Yang1 , Ke-Bin Fan2 , Hao Ma2 , De-Chuan Zhan1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Research Institute of Superconductor Electronics (RISE)
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
1
{yangjq,zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
2
kebin.fan@nju.edu.cn, mf20230071@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Robust Design

From an engineering perspective, a design should not only
perform well in an ideal condition, but should also resist
noises. Such a design methodology, namely robust design,
has been widely implemented in the industry for product
quality control. However, classic robust design requires a lot
of evaluations for a single design target, while the results
of these evaluations could not be reused for a new target.
To achieve a data-efficient robust design, we propose Robust
Inverse Design under Noise (RID-Noise), which can utilize
existing noisy data to train a conditional invertible neural network (cINN). Specifically, we estimate the robustness of a
design parameter by its predictability, measured by the prediction error of a forward neural network. We also define
a sample-wise weight, which can be used in the maximum
weighted likelihood estimation of an inverse model based
on a cINN. With the visual results from experiments, we
clearly justify how RID-Noise works by learning the distribution and robustness from data. Further experiments on several real-world benchmark tasks with noises confirm that our
method is more effective than other state-of-the-art inverse
design methods. Code and supplementary is publicly available at https://github.com/ThyrixYang/rid-noise-aaai22

𝐲𝐲𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭

Feedback
x is Robust ?

Refine

𝐱𝐱

Robust Inverse Design

Dataset D

RID-Noise
Training

Evaluate

𝐲𝐲𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭𝐭

Inverse Model

Yes

Robust 𝐱𝐱

Robust 𝐱𝐱

Figure 1: The classic robust design methodology requires
many evaluate-feedback loops to evaluate and improve the
robustness of a design parameter x towards a given design
target ytarget . We propose the robust inverse design setting
and the RID-Noise method that can learn the design parameter distributions as well as robustness from a dataset D,
which can be collected during past design tasks for different
targets. During inference, RID-Noise can output robust candidate x for a given target ytarget without further evaluation.

Introduction

For example, assuming a ball is moving along a potential
energy surface, the corresponding design target is to make
the velocity of the ball ytarget = 0, and the design parameter x is the position to put the ball. Typically, the ball can
stand still both on a local minimum x1 or on a saddle point
x2 in ideal conditions. However, the ball on a saddle point
can easily slide down with a tiny perturbation, resulting in
a large velocity ytarget ≫ 0; on the contrary, such a noise
is less likely to accelerate a ball lying on a local minimum.
Thus, x1 is more robust compared to x2 . The Hessian matrix
of the surface can be used as a criterion of robustness in this
example. The robust design routine builds upon an evaluatefeedback loop to improve the robustness, as depicted in the
upper panel of Figure 1. Therefore, the classic robust design methods are evaluation intensive since optimizing robustness requires a large number of iterations, and the data
generated from these evaluations could not be reused for a
new target (Freiesleben, Keim, and Grutsch 2020).

Robust design has been developed with the expectation that
an insensitive design can be obtained. That is, a product
designed by robust design should be insensitive to external
noises or tolerances. An insensitive design has more probability to obtain a target value, although there are uncertain
noises. (Park et al. 2006)
Pioneered by Taguchi (1985), robust design nowadays
has become an essential design concept in industry engineering (Arvidsson and Gremyr 2008). In a robust design
task, the objective is to find a design parameter x that can
stably achieve a design target ytarget under various noises.
* Jia-Qi Yang is the corresponding author. This work was supported by NSFC61773198, Recruitment Program for Young Professionals and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4654

