The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SFSRNet: Super-resolution for Single-Channel Audio Source Separation
Joel Rixen, Matthias Renz
Department of Computer Science, Kiel University, Germany
joelrixen@gmail.com, mr@informatik.uni-kiel.de

Abstract
The problem of single-channel audio source separation is to
recover (separate) multiple audio sources that are mixed in
a single-channel audio signal (e.g. people talking over each
other). Some of the best performing single-channel source
separation methods utilize downsampling to either make the
separation process faster or make the neural networks bigger and increase accuracy. The problem concerning downsampling is that it usually results in information loss. In this
paper, we tackle this problem by introducing SFSRNet which
contains a super-resolution (SR) network. The SR network is
trained to reconstruct the missing information in the upper
frequencies of the audio signal by operating on the spectrograms of the output audio source estimations and the input
audio mixture. Any separation method where the length of the
sequence is a bottleneck in speed and memory can be made
faster or more accurate by using the SR network.
Based on the WSJ0-2mix benchmark where estimations of
the audio signal of two speakers need to be extracted from the
mixture, in our experiments our proposed SFSRNet reaches a
scale-invariant signal-to-noise-ratio improvement (SI-SNRi)
of 24.0 dB outperforming the state-of-the-art solution SepFormer which reaches an SI-SNRi of 22.3 dB.

speaker1
estimated source1

.
.
.

mixture

Separation system

.
.
.

estimated sourceC

speakerC

Figure 1: Single-channel audio source separation.

lay in a given audio mixture x, s.t.

~x =

C
X

s~i

(1)

i=1

where the mixture and sources can be expressed as vectors
~x ∈ RD×1 and s~i ∈ RD×1 , respectively, with D being the
sequence length. Figure 1 illustrates the problem. The audio
source separation system takes the given audio mixture as its
input and outputs C estimations of the audio sources. Note,
in the reminder we will call the estimations of the recovered
audio sources simply estimations.

Introduction
In real-world environments, audio often contains parts
where multiple speakers talk over each other. This is known
as the cocktail party problem (Bronkhorst 2000; Haykin
and Chen 2005). Being able to accurately separate multiple speakers from a single-channel mixture is of interest to a
number of speech processing tasks (Narayanan and Wang
2014). One example of such a task is automatic speech
recognition (ASR). If the input audio consists of multiple
people speaking over each other, ASR methods typically
perform significantly worse (Lam et al. 2019; Luo, Chen,
and Yoshioka 2020). Therefore, to improve the accuracy
of ASR methods, it is advisable to separate the individual
speakers in mixed audio signals before applying ASR methods on each individual speaker audio signal.

Basic Idea
Latest solutions of audio separation systems have suggested
to downsample the input before the audio source separation
(Tzinis, Wang, and Smaragdis 2020; Subakan et al. 2021).
Downsampling has the advantages of speeding up and lowering the memory usage of the separation process. However,
the issue with downsampling the input signal is that the later
required upsampling process to get the original audio signal frequencies is unable to fully restore the information
that gets lost during the downsampling process. To solve
this problem, we propose a separate super-resolution (SR)
network to achieve better upsampling results. The proposed
SR network is different from common upsampling tasks as
follows. Since the goal of the upsampling in this case is to
return to the original audio signal frequency, it is not necessary to generate any new information. Instead, aside from
the downsampled estimations, the input audio mixture in its

Problem Definition
The problem of single-channel audio source separation is to
separate (recover) the C audio sources s1 , . . . , sc that overCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11220

