The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Leaping through Time with Gradient-Based Adaptation for Recommendation
Nuttapong Chairatanakul1,2 , Hoang NT1 , Xin Liu3,2,4 , Tsuyoshi Murata1,2
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
2
RWBC-OIL, AIST, Tokyo, Japan
3
AIRC, AIST, Tokyo, Japan
4
DigiARC, AIST, Tokyo, Japan
nuttapong.c@net.c.titech.ac.jp, hoangnt@net.c.titech.ac.jp, xin.liu@aist.go.jp, murata@c.titech.ac.jp

...

Abstract
OTL

Modern recommender systems are required to adapt to the
change in user preferences and item popularity. Such a
problem is known as the temporal dynamics problem, and
it is one of the main challenges in recommender system
modeling. Different from the popular recurrent modeling
approach, we propose a new solution named LeapRec to the
temporal dynamic problem by using trajectory-based metalearning to model time dependencies. LeapRec characterizes
temporal dynamics by two complement components named
global time leap (GTL) and ordered time leap (OTL). By
design, GTL learns long-term patterns by finding the shortest
learning path across unordered temporal data. Cooperatively,
OTL learns short-term patterns by considering the sequential
nature of the temporal data. Our experimental results show
that LeapRec consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods on several datasets and recommendation metrics.
Furthermore, we provide an empirical study of the interaction
between GTL and OTL, showing the effects of long- and
short-term modeling.

_

_
'

Gradient path
Optimized gradient path
Meta-parameter update

GTL

Neural
Recommender
GTL

+

_
_

OTL

'

predict

opt.

,

Figure 1: Left: Our proposed LeapRec consists of GTL
and OTL. Right: A Neural Recommender. LeapRec enables
any neural recommender to learn temporal dynamics by
T
T
.
optimizing the gradient paths {γi }ti=t
and {ωj }tj=t
1
1

Bengio 2013; Yu et al. 2019a); For example, the graph neural
network (GNN) is a promising model that has recently
become the state-of-the-art for recommendations on nontemporal datasets (Wang et al. 2019b; He et al. 2020).
Applying the recurrent architecture to a GNN would require
redesigning the whole neural network (Xu et al. 2019; Rossi
et al. 2020). Therefore, an interesting research question
arises: Is there a more versatile alternative solution than
RNNs to model temporal dynamics?
Drawing inspirations from the meta-learning literature,
which studies fast adaptation to new tasks (Vilalta and Drissi
2002), we hypothesize that meta-learning methods could
be useful to model temporal dynamics. Research on metalearning for differentiable models demonstrated the advantages of a gradient-based method named MAML (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017) over RNN-based models (Ravi
and Larochelle 2016; Santoro et al. 2016) in the few-shot
learning problem. This technique leverages the gradient
path of the optimization process to learn an initialization of
parameters, which allows fast adaptation to unseen tasks.
In this paper, we study the application of meta-learning
to model the temporal dynamics in recommender systems.
The overall approach is to consider the recommendation
problem on data from each time period as a separate task.
This approach implies that each time step is modeled as a sequence of gradient steps (a gradient path) in the optimization

Introduction
Recommender systems (Schafer, Konstan, and Riedl 1999;
Ricci, Rokach, and Shapira 2011; Aggarwal 2016) have
become essential tools in most real-world applications of
big data. These systems ease the users’ effort in selecting
suitable items for their needs (e.g., commercial products,
books, services) by finding common patterns of their preferences. In practice, the preferences of users and their opinions
of items frequently change over time (Koren 2009; Xiong
et al. 2010). It poses a challenge in designing recommender
systems: How to incorporate temporal dynamics into recommendation results?
Following the footsteps of sequential neural modeling,
recommender systems researchers have designed a wide
range of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to solve the
temporal dynamic challenge (Hidasi et al. 2016; Li et al.
2017; Zhu et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2020). The main idea of
these architectures is to capture the relationship between the
current and the past interactions using recurrent units (Wang
et al. 2019a). However, applying RNNs to new types of
learning models is often difficult (Pascanu, Mikolov, and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6141

