The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Scale Distillation from Multiple Graph Neural Networks
Chunhai Zhang1 , Jie Liu1,2 * , Kai Dang1 , Wenzheng Zhang1
1

College Of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
Cloopen AI Research, Beijing, China
{chzhang, dangkai, wzzhang}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, jliu@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

Message
Passing

Knowledge Distillation (KD), which is an effective model
compression and acceleration technique, has been successfully applied to graph neural networks (GNNs) recently. Existing approaches utilize a single GNN model as the teacher
to distill knowledge. However, we notice that GNN models
with different number of layers demonstrate different classification abilities on nodes with different degrees. On the one
hand, for nodes with high degrees, their local structures are
dense and complex, hence more message passing is needed.
Therefore, GNN models with more layers perform better.
On the other hand, for nodes with low degrees, whose local
structures are relatively sparse and simple, the repeated message passing can easily lead to over-smoothing. Thus, GNN
models with less layers are more suitable. However, existing
single-teacher GNN knowledge distillation approaches which
are based on a single GNN model, are sub-optimal. To this
end, we propose a novel approach to distill multi-scale knowledge, which learns from multiple GNN teacher models with
different number of layers to capture the topological semantic at different scales. Instead of learning from the teacher
models equally, the proposed method automatically assigns
proper weights for each teacher model via an attention mechanism which enables the student to select teachers for different local structures. Extensive experiments are conducted to
evaluate the proposed method on four public datasets. The
experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method over state-of-the-art methods. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/NKU-IIPLab/MSKD.

Figure 1: The performance of l-Layer GNN models on different Local Structures. Using PPI dataset as an illustrative
example, the line chart shows each model’s node classification F1-score on subsets of node with certain range of degree.
Zhai et al. 2016; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). By transferring the knowledge of a cumbersome teacher model to
a compact student model, the student is able to master the
expertise of the teacher and can be readily deployed.
Recently, KD has been successfully generalized to graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Yang et al. 2020; Yao et al. 2020;
Jing et al. 2021). Most existing approaches utilize a single
GNN model as the teacher to distill knowledge. However,
we notice that the node classification ability of GNN models with l hidden layers (l-layer GNN) varies on the nodes
with different degrees, as shown in figure 1. On the one
hand, l-layer GNN models with more layers perform better on nodes with high degrees, because their local structures are dense and complex, where hence more message
passing is helpful. On the other hand, l-layer GNN models
with less layers are more suitable for nodes with low degrees, since their local structures are relatively sparse and
simple. The repeated message passing can easily lead to
over-smoothing for such local structures. Therefore, the existing single-teacher knowledge distillation approaches are
sub-optimal when dealing with graphs consisting of various
local structures.

Introduction
Many large-scale deep models have been put forward and
achieved significant success in many fields. Nonetheless,
the huge computational complexity and massive storage requirements restrict their deployments when the computation
resource is limited. To address this problem, knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Romero
et al. 2014; Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018; Zhou et al. 2021)
has been widely investigated. It is one of the main streams
of model compression and acceleration technique (Wu et al.
2016; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015; Yu et al. 2017;
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4337

