The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Adaptive Imitation Learning: Learning Tasks with Delayed Rewards from
Sub-optimal Demonstrations
Zhuangdi Zhu,1 Kaixiang Lin, 1 Bo Dai, 2 Jiayu Zhou 1
1

Michigan State University
2
Google Brain
zhuzhuan@msu.edu, lkxcarson@gmail.com, bodai@google.com, jiayuz@msu.edu

Abstract

ing from coarse-grained supervision, such as human preference (Kupcsik, Hsu, and Lee 2018), is rather useful when
it is easy to recognize the desired behavior but difficult
to explain its rationale by designing delicate reward functions (Palan et al. 2019).
Recent advances of Imitation Learning (IL) can effectively provide remedies when the environment feedbacks are
delayed or even unavailable, by referencing expert demonstrations (Ho and Ermon 2016; Kostrikov et al. 2019;
Kostrikov, Nachum, and Tompson 2020) or policies (Ross,
Gordon, and Bagnell 2011; Sun et al. 2017). In spite of their
success, a major limitation of such IL approaches is that the
learned performance is bounded by the given expert. Consequently, when the provided demonstrations are sub-optimal,
which is a practical yet more challenging scenario, the IL approaches will induce a sub-optimal policy. In the meantime,
some work has been proposed for learning from sub-optimal
guidance in delayed rewarded tasks (Kang, Jie, and Feng
2018; Sun, Bagnell, and Boots 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2018). A shared rationale among
them is to augment the environment rewards with synthetic
rewards derived from the demonstrations, after which an
actor-critic algorithm can take over the policy learning. Although technically effective, these approaches are inherent
with twofold limitations. First, the sub-optimality of teacher
demonstrations has not been fully resolved. Once the learning agent reaches a reasonable performance, the demonstrations will become a bottleneck, leading to negative guidance
that contradicts environment feedbacks (Jing et al. 2020).
Second, the environment feedback is not well leveraged.
Learning a critic function relying on delayed environment
rewards can be sample costly, which may provide weak signals to compensate for the sub-optimal demonstrations.
In this paper, we formally consider a problem setting,
where an RL agent only has access to a limited number of
sub-optimal demonstrations in a task with highly delayed rewards. Our goal hence is to combine the merits of RL and IL,
by exploring the sub-optimal demonstrations that are easier
to access in practice, while preserving the chance to explore
for better policies guided by the coarse-grained environment
feedback.
Noticing the challenges of the proposed problem and limitations in prior arts, we propose Self-Adaptive Imitation
Learning (SAIL), an off-policy imitation learning approach

Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated its superiority in solving sequential decision-making problems. However, heavy dependence on immediate reward feedback impedes the wide application of RL. On the other hand, imitation learning (IL) tackles RL without relying on environmental supervision by leveraging external demonstrations. In
practice, however, collecting sufficient expert demonstrations
can be prohibitively expensive, yet the quality of demonstrations typically limits the performance of the learning policy.
To address a practical scenario, in this work, we propose SelfAdaptive Imitation Learning (SAIL), which, provided with a
few demonstrations from a sub-optimal teacher, can perform
well in RL tasks with extremely delayed rewards, where the
only reward feedback is trajectory-wise ranking. SAIL bridges
the advantages of IL and RL by interactively exploiting the
demonstrations to catch up with the teacher and exploring the
environment to yield demonstrations that surpass the teacher.
Extensive empirical results show that not only does SAIL significantly improve the sample efficiency, but it also leads to
higher asymptotic performance across different continuous
control tasks, compared with the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is notably advantageous in
learning sequential decision-making problems in simulated
environments, such as game-playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017), where massive samples with dense rewards
can be accessed at a negligible cost. However, it is challenging to upscale RL to real-world scenarios due to its dependence on immediate reward feedback. For practical applications where rewards are usually delayed in time and sparse in
value, RL agents may struggle with high sample complexity,
facing difficulties of connecting a long sequence of actions
to the feedback received in the far future.
In fact, the ability to learn from delayed feedback is crucial for realizing advanced artificial intelligence (Christiano
et al. 2017; Reddy, Dragan, and Levine 2019). On the one
hand, reducing the frequency of reward sampling contributes
to a lower interaction complexity for practical applications,
such as autonomous-driving (Pham et al. 2018) and UAV
navigation (Kiran et al. 2020). On the other hand, learnCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9269

