The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Defending Graph Convolutional Networks against Dynamic Graph Perturbations
via Bayesian Self-Supervision
Jun Zhuang, Mohammad Al Hasan
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, IN, USA
junz@iu.edu, alhasan@iupui.edu

Abstract

to adversarial attacks (Dai et al. 2018; Du et al. 2018) on
any nodes at any time. We denote such adversarial attacks as
Dynamic Graph Perturbations (DGP). Our objective in this
work is to safeguard GCNs’ performance in presence of Dynamic Graph Perturbations.
Extensive researches have been pursued to improve the
robustness of GCNs on node classification tasks (Sun et al.
2018). Such efforts can be categorized into four categories:
adversarial learning methods (Jin and Zhang 2019; Deng,
Dong, and Zhu 2019; Feng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019;
Zhang and Ma 2020; Liu et al. 2018), self-supervised learning methods (You et al. 2020a; Hassani and Khasahmadi
2020; Sun, Lin, and Zhu 2020), topological denoising methods (Rong et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2021), and mechanism designing methods (Zhang and Zitnik 2020; Geisler, Zügner,
and Günnemann 2020; Chen et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021;
Jin et al. 2021). The adversarial learning methods improve
the robustness of GCNs by training with adversarial samples. However, these methods can barely train a robust
model under the circumstance of extensive label scarcity. To
overcome label scarcity, a kind of self-supervised learning
method, namely pre-training (Galke, Vagliano, and Scherp
2019; Hu et al. 2019b, 2020; Qiu et al. 2020; Shang et al.
2019), is introduced, which constructs a pretext task to help
GCNs learn transferable graph representation through the
pre-training stage. Nevertheless, it is still a challenge to design a generalized pretext task that can be beneficial to arbitrary downstream tasks. Topological denoising methods
prune suspicious edges on the graph before feeding this
graph into GCNs. Nonetheless, such methods are not efficient on dynamic graphs as the graph structure is always
changing over time. Mechanism designing methods mainly
propose a message-passing mechanism, a.k.a. graph convolutional operator or node aggregator, to better classify the
nodes. Such a mechanism sometimes highly depends on
heuristics explorations.
Self-training (Sun, Zhu, and Lin 2019) is an extended
form of pre-training. It assigns self-generated pseudo-labels
to highly confident unlabeled nodes and then adds these
nodes to the set of labeled nodes for the next training iteration. Nonetheless, accurate assignment of such pseudolabels may suffer serious degradation when the graph is undergoing dynamic graph perturbations. Learning graph representation with noisy labels is a potential solution to miti-

In recent years, plentiful evidence illustrates that Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) achieve extraordinary accomplishments on the node classification task. However, GCNs
may be vulnerable to adversarial attacks on label-scarce dynamic graphs. Many existing works aim to strengthen the robustness of GCNs; for instance, adversarial training is used
to shield GCNs against malicious perturbations. However,
these works fail on dynamic graphs for which label scarcity
is a pressing issue. To overcome label scarcity, self-training
attempts to iteratively assign pseudo-labels to highly confident unlabeled nodes but such attempts may suffer serious
degradation under dynamic graph perturbations. In this paper,
we generalize noisy supervision as a kind of self-supervised
learning method and then propose a novel Bayesian selfsupervision model, namely GraphSS, to address the issue.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that GraphSS can not
only affirmatively alert the perturbations on dynamic graphs
but also effectively recover the prediction of a node classifier
when the graph is under such perturbations. These two advantages prove to be generalized over three classic GCNs across
five public graph datasets.

Introduction
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have been widely
ascertained to achieve extraordinary accomplishments on
various node classification tasks on large graphs (Kipf and
Welling 2016; Du et al. 2017; Bruna et al. 2013; Defferrard,
Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Wu et al. 2019a; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017). For example, GCN-based
node classification can be used for clustering users into different groups based on their interests and behavior in online social networks (OSNs), such as Facebook and Twitter. To do so, unlabeled nodes are annotated so that a supervised node classification model can be built, which can
subsequently be used for advertisement, product recommendation, etc. However, GCNs may be vulnerable to adversarial attacks on label-scarce dynamic graphs. The label-scarce
issue arises in a dynamic graph as new nodes appear, which
are not annotated; lacking annotated labels undermine the
training of robust GCNs (Hu et al. 2019a). Besides, temporal changes of the graph structure make GCNs vulnerable
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4405

