The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Input-Specific Robustness Certification for Randomized Smoothing
Ruoxin Chen1 , Jie Li1 * , Junchi Yan1 , Ping Li2 , Bin Sheng1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{chenruoxin, lijiecs, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, p.li@polyu.edu.hk, shengbin@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Although randomized smoothing has demonstrated high certified robustness and superior scalability to other certified defenses, the high computational overhead of the robustness certification bottlenecks the practical applicability, as it depends
heavily on the large sample approximation for estimating the
confidence interval. In existing works, the sample size for the
confidence interval is universally set and agnostic to the input
for prediction. This Input-Agnostic Sampling (IAS) scheme
may yield a poor Average Certified Radius (ACR)-runtime
trade-off which calls for improvement. In this paper, we propose Input-Specific Sampling (ISS) acceleration to achieve the
cost-effectiveness for robustness certification, in an adaptive
way of reducing the sampling size based on the input characteristic. Furthermore, our method universally controls the
certified radius decline from the ISS sample size reduction.
The empirical results on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet show that
ISS can speed up the certification by more than three times at a
limited cost of 0.05 certified radius. Meanwhile, ISS surpasses
IAS on the average certified radius across the extensive hyperparameter settings. Specifically, ISS achieves ACR=0.958
on ImageNet in 250 minutes, compared to ACR=0.917 by
IAS under the same condition. We release our code in https:
//github.com/roy-ch/Input-Specific-Certification.

Figure 1: ISS achieves a better ACR-time trade-off than IAS.
ISS − c1 − c2 denotes that ISS accelerates IAS − c1 at the
controllable certified radius decline (≤ c2 ). IAS − c1 denotes
that IAS accelerates IAS − 10, IAS − 20 by reducing the
sample size to c1 × 10, 000. ISS always surpasses IAS on
ACR in the same time cost. The results are evaluated on the
ImageNet (σ = 1.0) model trained by (Jeong and Shin 2020).

Despite these advances, randomized smoothing suffers
the costly robustness certification. Specifically, computing
a certified radius close to the exact value needs a relatively
tight lower bound of the top-1 label probability, which requires running forward passes on a large number of samples
(Salman et al. 2019; Jeong and Shin 2020). Such expensive
overheads make them less applicable to the real-world scenarios. Some works (Jia et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2020) proposed
to leverage the runner-up label probability in the certification,
but their performances may suffer from the inevitable loss
in the simultaneous confidence intervals. Traditionally, the
robustness certification is accelerated by reducing the sample
size used for estimating the lower bound (Cohen, Rosenfeld,
and Kolter 2019; Jia et al. 2020), but the vanilla sample size
reduction will lead to a poor ACR-runtime trade-off. It is
critical to develop a cost-effective certification method.
In this paper, we propose Input-Specific Sampling (ISS) to
speed up the certification for randomized smoothing, without hurting too much on the certification performance. The
idea behind ISS is to minimize the sample size for the given
input at the bounded cost of the certified radius decline, in-

Introduction
Neural networks are known susceptible to adversarial attacks
(Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015).
A line of empirical defenses (Buckman et al. 2018; Song et al.
2018) have been proposed to defend adversarial attacks, but
are often broken by the newly devised stronger attacks (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018). Existing certified defenses
(Wong et al. 2018; Raghunathan, Steinhardt, and Liang 2018;
Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019) provide the theoretical
guarantees for their robustness. In particular, Randomized
smoothing (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019) is one of the
few certified defenses that can scale to ImageNet-scale classification task, showing its great potential for wide application.
Moreover, randomized smoothing has shown high robustness
against various types of adversarial attacks, including normconstrained perturbations (e.g. `0 , `2 , `∞ norms) and image
transformations (e.g. rotations and image shift).
* Jie Li is the corresponding author. Email: lijiecs@sjtu.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6295

