The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CATN: Cross Attentive Tree-Aware Network for Multivariate Time Series
Forecasting
Hui He1 , Qi Zhang2,3 , Simeng Bai1 , Kun Yi1 , Zhendong Niu1,4 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
University of Technology Sydney
3
DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
4
University of Pittsburgh
{hehui617, zhangqi cs, baisimeng, yikun, zniu}@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
12

Modeling complex hierarchical and grouped feature interaction in the multivariate time series data is indispensable
to comprehending the data dynamics and predicting the future condition. The implicit feature interaction and highdimensional data make multivariate forecasting very challenging. Many existing works did not put more emphasis
on exploring explicit correlation among multiple time-series
data, and complicated models are designed to capture longand short-range patterns with the aid of attention mechanisms. In this work, we think that a pre-defined graph or a
general learning method is difficult due to its irregular structure. Hence, we present CATN, an end-to-end model of Cross
Attentive Tree-aware Network to jointly capture the interseries correlation and intra-series temporal patterns. We first
construct a tree structure to learn hierarchical and grouped
correlation and design an embedding approach that can pass
a dynamic message to generalize implicit but interpretable
cross features among multiple time series. Next in the temporal aspect, we propose a multi-level dependency learning
mechanism including global&local learning and cross attention mechanism, which can combine long-range dependencies, short-range dependencies as well as cross dependencies
at different time steps. The extensive experiments on different
datasets from real-world show the effectiveness and robustness of the method we proposed when compared with existing state-of-the-art methods.

17

3

15

Figure 1: Intuitive example: in left part, we select four sensors with their index 3, 15 (green marker), 17 and 12 (blue
marker) from real-world dataset on Google Map. The right
half shows the traffic flow of these four sensors in the raw
data from 1:15 A.M. to 10:15 A.M..
strain the prediction capacity to measure collective behavior
of important evolutions (Boroujeni et al. 2018; Salinas et al.
2019; Gao, Duru, and Yuen 2021).
Existing forecasting models are designed focusing on exploring intra-series temporal patterns, some short sequences
of consecutive characters with blocks occurring in the same
time interval or varying time delays, in hundreds or thousands of related time series (Zhuang, Li, and Wong 2014;
Huang et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Sen, Yu, and Dhillon
2019; Yang et al. 2020; Cao et al. 2020). However, many
high-dimension and real-world collections of time series exhibit complex hierarchical and grouped correlation (Mancuso, Piccialli, and Sudoso 2020; Rangapuram et al. 2021).
As an intuitive example, the occupancy rates of national
roads can be disaggregated into different provincial roads,
and the occupancy rates of provincial roads can be separated
into county roads. As shown in Figure 1, sensor 12 and sensor 17 are in similar branches and their traffic flow trends are
also similar (solid ellipse). Sensor 15 is located in the main
road and sensor 3 is located in the branch of sensor 15, so the
traffic flow of sensor 15 is mostly higher than that of sensor
3 (dotted ellipse). Hence, implicit or rare feature interaction
of inter-series data needs to be modeled explicitly.
There are some prior works on improving the latent spatial correlation between variables. Graph neural networks
(GNNs) have obtained great achievements in multivariate
time series forecasting viewed from a graph perspective to
capture inter-series correlation. However, the limit of these

Introduction
Time series forecasting is an essential component in countless domains including medical monitoring, e-learning, energy and smart grid management, economics and finance,
sensor network analysis and epidemic propagation (Faloutsos et al. 2019; Wan and Niu 2020). Of all the time-series
data mining tasks, it is one of the most tremendous applications of data-driven methods and arguably the most
challenging one. In the above scenarios, the prevailing approaches into the application today have been developed
in the background of extremely substantial time-series data
on historical behavior to forecast with complicated models
structured and adjusted by domain experts. However, with
the increasing dimensions of online, time-stamped activities
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4030

