The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MuMuQA: Multimedia Multi-Hop News Question Answering via
Cross-Media Knowledge Extraction and Grounding
Revanth Gangi Reddy1 , Xilin Rui2 , Manling Li1 , Xudong Lin3 , Haoyang Wen1 , Jaemin Cho4 ,
Lifu Huang5 , Mohit Bansal4 , Avirup Sil6 , Shih-Fu Chang3 , Alexander Schwing1 , Heng Ji1
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Tsinghua University
4
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 5 Virginia Tech
{revanth3,hengji}@illinois.edu
Abstract

Columbia University
IBM Research AI

multiple choice questions in VQA have been shown to have
explicit bias (Kazemi and Elqursh 2017; Manjunatha, Saini,
and Davis 2019), which can be taken advantage of by using
question understanding or answer option analysis.
To address this concern, more recently, Talmor et al.
(2021) introduce an extractive multi-hop QA dataset that involves reasoning across tables, text and images. However,
each image is associated with a Wikipedia entity, therefore
the reasoning over images essentially boils down to ranking the images based on the question and using the entities
corresponding to the top-ranked images. In contrast, questions about images in real life require cross-media reasoning
between images and text. Current multimedia benchmarks
cannot be used to solve this as they do not require to ground
images onto text when answering questions about images.
To bridge this gap, we introduce a new benchmark QA
evaluation task called ‘Multimedia Multi-hop Question Answering’ (M U M U QA) along with a corresponding dataset
of news articles. To succeed in this new M U M U QA task,
methods need to excel at both identifying objects being referred to in the question and leveraging news body text
to answer the question. Specifically, the task is formulated
as multi-hop extractive QA where questions focus on objects grounded in image-caption pairs. To enforce multihop reasoning, we ask information-seeking questions about
objects in the image by referring to them via their visual
attributes. The requirement for grounding between image
and text along with multi-hop reasoning makes M U M U QA
much more challenging than the tasks which are commonly
explored in the QA community so far.
Figure 1 illustrates the task and the data. Answering the
question in Figure 1a requires first identifying that “the person with the blue tie” is on the right in the image, which
needs to be grounded to “Benjamin Netanyahu” (in red) in
the caption. Subsequently, the news body text is needed to
extract the answer. Grounding between image-caption pairs
along with textual understanding and coreference resolution
is hence crucial. Note that the question cannot be answered
by a text-only model, since the text mentions two parties
(green and yellow highlight) that correspond to the two people in the image-caption pair (names in red and brown). Figure 1b is another example, with the image necessary to disambiguate that “people in the image” refers to opposition
supporters and not security forces.

Recently, there has been an increasing interest in building
question answering (QA) models that reason across multiple
modalities, such as text and images. However, QA using images is often limited to just picking the answer from a predefined set of options. In addition, images in the real world,
especially in news, have objects that are co-referential to the
text, with complementary information from both modalities.
In this paper, we present a new QA evaluation benchmark
with 1,384 questions over news articles that require crossmedia grounding of objects in images onto text. Specifically,
the task involves multi-hop questions that require reasoning
over image-caption pairs to identify the grounded visual object being referred to and then predicting a span from the
news body text to answer the question. In addition, we introduce a novel multimedia data augmentation framework,
based on cross-media knowledge extraction and synthetic
question-answer generation, to automatically augment data
that can provide weak supervision for this task. We evaluate
both pipeline-based and end-to-end pretraining-based multimedia QA models on our benchmark, and show that they
achieve promising performance, while considerably lagging
behind human performance hence leaving large room for future work on this challenging new task.

1

3
6

Introduction

To answer questions, humans seamlessly combine context
provided in the form of images, text, background knowledge
or structured data such as graphs and tables. Availability of a
similarly capable question answering (QA) model could increase information accessibility and allow quick understanding of news or scientific articles, where the main narrative is
enriched by images, charts and graphs with captions.
However, most QA research to date focuses on extracting
information from a single data modality, such as text (TextQA) (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Kwiatkowski et al. 2019), images (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017) or videos
(VideoQA) (Yang et al. 2003). Only recently, there have
been initial attempts to combine information from multiple
modalities (Kembhavi et al. 2017; Lei et al. 2018), which
often use questions in a multiple-choice setting. However,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
All the datasets, programs and tools will be made publicly
available here: https://github.com/uiucnlp/MuMuQA

11200

