The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Listwise Learning to Rank Based on
Approximate Rank Indicators
Thibaut Thonet1∗ , Yagmur Gizem Cinar2† , Eric Gaussier3 , Minghan Li3 , Jean-Michel Renders1
1

NAVER LABS Europe 2 Amazon UK 3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS
thibaut.thonet@naverlabs.com, cinary@amazon.com, eric.gaussier@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr,
minghan.li@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr, jean-michel.renders@naverlabs.com

Abstract

However, Calauzènes et al. (Calauzènes, Usunier, and Gallinari 2012; Calauzènes and Usunier 2020) have shown that
convex and consistent surrogate ranking losses do not always exist, as for example for the mean average precision
or the expected reciprocal rank. The second solution is to
identify differentiable approximations of the metrics considered. Typically, such approximations converge towards the
true metrics when an hyperparameter that controls the quality of the approximation tends to a given value. One of the
main advantages in using a differentiable approximation of
a metric is the fact that one directly approximates the true
loss, the quality of the approximation being controlled by an
hyperparameter and not the number of samples considered.
One of the main disadvantages of differentiable approximations is that the optimization problem obtained is in general
non-convex. That said, the recent success of deep learning
shows that solving non-convex optimization problems can
nonetheless lead to state-of-the-art systems.
We follow here this latter path and study differentiable
approximations of standard IR metrics. We focus on one ingredient at the core of ranking metrics: the rank indicator
function. We show how one can define high-quality, differentiable approximations of the rank indicator and how these
lead to good approximations of the losses associated with
standard IR metrics. Our contributions are thus three-fold:

We study here a way to approximate information retrieval
metrics through a softmax-based approximation of the rank
indicator function. Indeed, this latter function is a key component in the design of information retrieval metrics, as well
as in the design of the ranking and sorting functions. Obtaining a good approximation for it thus opens the door to differentiable approximations of many evaluation measures that
can in turn be used in neural end-to-end approaches. We first
prove theoretically that the approximations proposed are of
good quality, prior to validate them experimentally on both
learning to rank and text-based information retrieval tasks.

Introduction
Learning to rank (Liu 2011) is a sub-field of Machine Learning and Information Retrieval (IR) that aims at learning,
from some training data, functions able to rank a set of objects – typically a set of documents for a given query. Learning to rank is currently one of the privileged approaches to
build IR systems. This said, one important problem faced
with learning to rank is that the metrics considered to evaluate the quality of a system, and the losses they underlie,
are usually not differentiable. This is typically the case in
IR: popular IR metrics such as precision at K, mean average
precision or normalized discounted cumulative gain, are neither continuous nor differentiable. As such, state-of-the-art
optimization techniques, such as stochastic gradient descent,
cannot be used to learn systems that optimize their values.
To address this problem, researchers have followed two
main paths. The first one consists in replacing the loss associated with a given metric by a surrogate loss which is
easier to optimize. A surrogate loss typically upper bounds
the true loss and, if consistent, asymptotically (usually when
the number of samples tends to infinity) behaves like it.
One of the main advantages of surrogate losses lies in the
fact that it is sometimes possible to rely on an optimization
problem that is convex and thus relatively simple to solve.

• We introduce SmoothI (“smoothie”), a novel differentiable approximation of the rank indicator function that
can be used in various ranking metrics and losses.
• We furthermore show that this approximation, as well as
the differentiable IR metrics and losses derived from it,
converge towards their true counterpart with theoretical
guarantees.
• Lastly, we empirically illustrate the behavior of our proposal on both learning to rank features and standard, textbased features, and show that it is, in both cases, very
competitive compared to previous approaches.

Related Work

∗

Most of the work was done while the author was working at
Univ. Grenoble Alpes.
†
The work was done while the author was working at Univ.
Grenoble Alpes.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Listwise approaches are widely used in IR as they directly address the ranking problem (Cao et al. 2007; Xia
et al. 2008). A first category of methods developed for listwise learning to rank aimed at building surrogates for nondifferentiable loss functions based on a ranking of the ob8494

