The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Detect 3D Facial Landmarks via Heatmap Regression with Graph
Convolutional Network
Yuan Wang1,4 , Min Cao2 , Zhenfeng Fan3,4 * , Silong Peng1,4
2

1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, 215006 Suzhou, China.
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wangyuan2020, silong.peng}@ia.ac.cn, mcao@suda.edu.cn, fanzhenfeng@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

2018b; Deng et al. 2020) and heatmap-based methods (Bulat and Tzimiropoulos 2017; Wang, Bo, and Fuxin 2019;
Wang et al. 2020). The coordinate-based methods regress
the coordinates of landmarks directly with CNNs. However,
regressing coordinates directly from 2D images is a highly
nonlinear process due to the discrete locations of landmarks,
which reduces the generalization ability of the methods. The
heatmap-based methods predict the probability instead of
the location of each landmark on the image plane, and allow
the network to be fully convolutional. Since the heatmapbased methods make full use of the continuity of heatmaps
and capture the correlation between landmarks effectively,
they achieve better robustness and performance over the
coordinate-based methods in practice.
2D face alignment has achieved significant progress in
the literature but still encounters some bottlenecks for complex scenarios such as extreme illumination and head pose.
Meanwhile, 3D face alignment (Fan et al. 2016; Zhang et al.
2020) that locates the feature points on 3D images recently
raises increasing attention by computer vision communities
due to its robustness to illumination and pose variations. The
current development of commercial 3D sensors and data acquisition technologies seeks for urgent real-life applications.
Like the 2D case, 3D face alignment is also fundamental
to many downstream 3D face applications, such as 3D face
recognition (Soltanpour, Boufama, and Wu 2017), 3D face
animation (Zollhöfer et al. 2018), and statistical 3D face
modeling (Galteri et al. 2019). 3D facial data include additional geometry information compared with 2D images,
which is more tolerant of makeup, expression, and age. In
this paper, we denote 3D face alignment as landmark detection on 3D facial data, which differs from the current literature using a 3D face model to align 2D face (Gou et al. 2016;
Feng et al. 2018a; Guo et al. 2020).
3D face alignment is a challenging task for two main
reasons. Firstly, there is no feasible and effective network
for the learning of 3D landmarks. The well-known CNNs
are intrinsically designed on regular grid data such as the
2D image. However, 3D facial data such as point clouds
are composed of unordered vertices, which hinders the direct application of the state-of-the-art CNN backbone on 3D
face alignment. Secondly, there is a lack of effective postprocessing strategies to convert deep features to 3D landmark coordinates. Regressing coordinates directly from 3D

3D facial landmark detection is extensively used in many research fields such as face registration, facial shape analysis,
and face recognition. Most existing methods involve traditional features and 3D face models for the detection of landmarks, and their performances are limited by the hand-crafted
intermediate process. In this paper, we propose a novel 3D
facial landmark detection method, which directly locates the
coordinates of landmarks from 3D point cloud with a wellcustomized graph convolutional network. The graph convolutional network learns geometric features adaptively for 3D facial landmark detection with the assistance of constructed 3D
heatmaps, which are Gaussian functions of distances to each
landmark on a 3D face. On this basis, we further develop a
local surface unfolding and registration module to predict 3D
landmarks from the heatmaps. The proposed method forms
the first baseline of deep point cloud learning method for 3D
facial landmark detection. We demonstrate experimentally
that the proposed method exceeds the existing approaches by
a clear margin on BU-3DFE and FRGC datasets for landmark
localization accuracy and stability, and also achieves highprecision results on a recent large-scale dataset.

Introduction
Facial landmark detection aims to localize feature points on
2D images or videos with anatomical significance, such as
the nose tip, the eye corner, and the pupils. It is also referred
as 2D face alignment, which is fundamental to various facerelated applications such as face recognition (Taigman et al.
2014), expression analysis (Yang, Ciftci, and Yin 2018),
face animation (Cao et al. 2013), and 3D face reconstruction (Blanz and Vetter 1999; Liu et al. 2018a). 2D face alignment has experienced rapid development over the past few
decades, which can be traced back to the traditional handcrafted feature (Baker and Matthews 2004; Zhu and Ramanan 2012; Cao et al. 2014) and active-shape-based regression methods (Cootes, Edwards, and Taylor 2001; Xiong and
De la Torre 2013; Zhu et al. 2015). The recent progress in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has pushed the precision of 2D face alignment to a new milestone.
The CNNs-based studies can be mainly divided into
coordinate-based methods (Miao et al. 2018; Liu et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2595

