The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MultiplexNet: Towards Fully Satisfied Logical Constraints in Neural Networks
Nicholas Hoernle1 , Rafael Michael Karampatsis1 , Vaishak Belle1, 2 , Kobi Gal1, 3
1

University of Edinburgh
2
Alan Turing Institute
3
Ben-Gurion University
n.s.hoernle@sms.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

may require non-trivial and/or domain-specific engineering
(Goodfellow et al. 2016). An alternative approach is to express domain knowledge as logical constraints which can
then be used to train neural networks (Xu et al. 2018; Fischer
et al. 2019; Allen, Balažević, and Hospedales 2020). These
approaches compile the constraints into the loss function of
the training algorithm, by quantifying the extent to which
the output of the network violates the constraints. This is
appealing as logical constraints are easy to elicit from people.
However, the solution outputted by the network is designed
to minimize the loss function — which combines both data
and constraints — rather than to guarantee the satisfaction of
the domain constraints. Thus, representing constraints in the
loss function is not suitable for safety critical domains where
100% constraint satisfaction is desirable.
Safety critical settings are not the only application for domain constraints. Another common problem in the training of
large networks is that of data inefficiency. Deep models have
shown unprecedented performance on a wide variety of tasks
but these come at the cost of large data requirements.1 For
tasks where domain knowledge exists, learning algorithms
should also use this knowledge to structure a network’s training to reduce the data burden that is placed on the learning
process (Fischer et al. 2019).
This paper directly addresses these challenges by providing
a new way of representing domain constraints directly in the
output layer of a network that guarantees constraint satisfaction. The proposed approach represents domain knowledge
as a logical formula in disjunctive normal form (DNF). It
augments the output layer of an existing neural network to
include a separate transformation for each term in the DNF
formula. We introduce a latent Categorical variable that selects the best transformation that optimizes the loss function
of the data. In this way, we are able to represent arbitrarily
complex domain constraints in an automated manner, and
we are also able to guarantee that the output of the network
satisfies the specified constraints.
We show the efficacy of this MultiplexNet approach in
three distinct experiments. First, we present a density estimation task on synthetic data. It is a common goal in machine

We propose a novel way to incorporate expert knowledge into
the training of deep neural networks. Many approaches encode
domain constraints directly into the network architecture, requiring non-trivial or domain-specific engineering. In contrast,
our approach, called MultiplexNet, represents domain knowledge as a quantifier-free logical formula in disjunctive normal
form (DNF) which is easy to encode and to elicit from human
experts. It introduces a latent Categorical variable that learns
to choose which constraint term optimizes the error function
of the network and it compiles the constraints directly into
the output of existing learning algorithms. We demonstrate
the efficacy of this approach empirically on several classical
deep learning tasks, such as density estimation and classification in both supervised and unsupervised settings where
prior knowledge about the domains was expressed as logical
constraints. Our results show that the MultiplexNet approach
learned to approximate unknown distributions well, often requiring fewer data samples than the alternative approaches.
In some cases, MultiplexNet finds better solutions than the
baselines; or solutions that could not be achieved with the alternative approaches. Our contribution is in encoding domain
knowledge in a way that facilitates inference. We specifically
focus on quantifier-free logical formulae that are specified over
the output domain of a network. We show that this approach
is both efficient and general; and critically, our approach guarantees 100% constraint satisfaction in a network’s output.

Introduction
An emerging theme in the development of deep learning is to
provide expressive tools that allow domain experts to encode
their prior knowledge into the training of neural networks.
For example, in a manufacturing setting, we may wish to
encode that an actuator for a robotic arm does not exceed
some threshold (e.g., causing the arm to move at a hazardous
speed). Another example is a self-driving car, where a controller should be known to operate within a predefined set
of constraints (e.g., the car should always stop completely
at a stop street). In such safety critical domains, machine
learning solutions must guarantee to operate within distinct
boundaries that are specified by experts (Amodei et al. 2016).
One possible solution is to encode the relevant domain
knowledge directly into a network’s architecture which

1

For instance OpenAI’s GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020) was trained
on about 500 billion tokens and ImageNet-21k, used to train the ViT
network (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020), consists of 14 million images.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5700

