The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Close the Loop: A Unified Bottom-Up and Top-Down Paradigm
for Joint Image Deraining and Segmentation
Yi Li1 , Yi Chang1,2 * , Changfeng Yu1 , Luxin Yan1
1

National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Pengcheng Laboratory
{li yi, yichang, ycf, yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn
Image & Feature Domain

Abstract
In this work, we focus on a very practical problem: image segmentation under rain conditions. Image deraining is a classic low-level restoration task, while image segmentation is
a typical high-level understanding task. Most of the existing
methods intuitively employ the bottom-up paradigm by taking deraining as a preprocessing step for subsequent segmentation. However, our statistical analysis indicates that not only
deraining would benefit segmentation (bottom-up), but also
segmentation would further improve deraining performance
(top-down) in turn. This motivates us to solve the rainy image segmentation task within a novel top-down and bottomup unified paradigm, in which two sub-tasks are alternatively
performed and collaborated with each other. Specifically, the
bottom-up procedure yields both clearer images and rainrobust features from both image and feature domains, so as to
ease the segmentation ambiguity caused by rain streaks. The
top-down procedure adopts semantics to adaptively guide the
restoration for different contents via a novel multi-path semantic attentive module (SAM). Thus the deraining and segmentation could boost the performance of each other cooperatively and progressively. Extensive experiments and ablations demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the
state-of-the-art on rainy image segmentation.

Low-level Deraining

High-level Segmentation

Inter-task Cooperation

Category-aware Guidance

Input

Step 1
Intra-task Iterative Refinement

Step n

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed unified bottom-up and
top-down paradigm. The low-level deraining (including both
the image and feature domains) and high-level segmentation benefit from each other progressively, in which a better
deraining result facilitates better segmentation, meanwhile
a better segmentation offers better guidance for restoration.
Below is the visualization results of the image and feature
domain deraining, and segmentation in each iterative step.

Introduction
The image deraining (Fu et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2020) and
segmentation (Zhang et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018) have
made great progress during the past few years. The former
is a classic low-level restoration task, while the latter is a
typical high-level understanding task. Most of the previous
methods focus on one task and consider the two tasks separately. However, there are fewer works considering the practical problem: image segmentation under rain conditions.
To solve this problem, the relationship between degradation and segmentation has been preliminarily studied. On
one hand, a number of works analyze the influence of various degradations and their removal to high-level segmentation (Sakaridis, Dai, and Van Gool 2018; Pei et al. 2021). For
example, Kamann et al. (Kamann and Rother 2020) reached
a conclusion that segmentation models generalize well for

image noise/blur, however, not with respect to weather corruptions. On the other hand, pioneer works introduce highlevel tasks to evaluate the low-level restoration. For example, detection (Li et al. 2019) and recognition (Scheirer et al.
2020) are employed to evaluate deraining performance.
Consequently, the existing rainy image segmentation
methods can be mainly classified into three categories:
segmentation-oriented bottom-up methods, restorationoriented top-down methods, and multi-task parallel methods. The key idea of the bottom-up methods is to first get
rid of negative effects of the degradation, so as to improve
the feature discrimination for subsequent segmentation. The
degradation removal procedure can be explicit in image do-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1438

