The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Zero-Shot Out-of-Distribution Detection Based on the Pre-trained Model CLIP
Sepideh Esmaeilpour1 , Bing Liu1 , Eric Robertson2 , Lei Shu3 *
1

University of Illinois at Chicago
2
PAR Government
3
Amazon AWS AI
{sesmae2, liub}@uic.edu, eric robertson@partech.com, shulindt@gmail.com

Abstract

based on SVMs (Scheirer et al. 2012; Scheirer, Jain, and
Boult 2014; Fei and Liu 2016). Recent methods are mainly
based on deep learning (Shu, Xu, and Liu 2017, 2018; Xu
et al. 2019; Shu et al. 2021; Liang, Li, and Srikant 2017; Perera et al. 2020; Miller et al. 2021) and try to solve the problem from different perspectives. Some discriminative models perform the detection by calibrating the confidence of
the closed-world classifier built using seen or in-distribution
classes (Bendale and Boult 2016). Liang, Li, and Srikant
(2017) proposed to use temperature scaling on the softmax
score and perform post-processing on the test data to detect
the OOD data. Lee et al. (2017) proposed a special training
method for building closed-world classifiers that can also
detect OOD samples at inference (Lee et al. 2017). Some
generative models synthesize samples to represent possible
unseen classes (Neal et al. 2018). These samples are then
used to learn a K + 1 classifier where the space of unseen
is assumed to be enclosed in the extra class. Other generative methods also exist (Andrews, Morton, and Griffin 2016;
Chen et al. 2017), which detect OOD samples based on the
reconstruction error of the trained generative model for unseen samples. Perera et al. (2020) is a recent hybrid model
based on generative-discriminative features.
Regardless of the approaches, the results on OOD detection benchmarks indicate that the OOD detection performance is directly affected by the accuracy of the closedworld classifier. Particularly, when the closed-world classifier does not use pre-trained models, it is essential to train
an accurate classifier from scratch for a descent OOD detection performance. None of the aforementioned techniques
use pre-trained models as the backbone of their closed-world
classifiers. In fact, most of them essentially try to bound the
hidden space representing the in-distribution classes. Then,
the outer space can be considered as the OOD space.
This paper defines the zero-shot OOD detection problem
to take advantage of pre-trained models. Given a set of seen
class labels/names, Ys , the goal of zero-shot OOD detection
is to 1) classify each seen class test sample to one of the seen
classes and 2) detect samples that do not belong to any of the
seen classes. These are done based on only the names of the
seen classes in Ys . There is no given training data of the seen
classes and thus no closed-world classifier is built.
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) is a recently proposed pretrained language-vision model from OpenAI for zero-shot

In an out-of-distribution (OOD) detection problem, samples
of known classes (also called in-distribution classes) are used
to train a special classifier. In testing, the classifier can (1)
classify the test samples of known classes to their respective
classes and also (2) detect samples that do not belong to any
of the known classes (i.e., they belong to some unknown or
OOD classes). This paper studies the problem of zero-shot
out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, which still performs the
same two tasks in testing but has no training except using
the given known class names. This paper proposes a novel
and yet simple method (called ZOC) to solve the problem.
ZOC builds on top of the recent advances in zero-shot classification through multi-modal representation learning. It first
extends the pre-trained language-vision model CLIP by training a text-based image description generator on top of CLIP.
In testing, it uses the extended model to generate candidate
unknown class names for each test sample and computes a
confidence score based on both the known class names and
candidate unknown class names for zero-shot OOD detection. Experimental results on 5 benchmark datasets for OOD
detection demonstrate that ZOC outperforms the baselines by
a large margin.

Introduction
The primary assumption in conventional supervised learning is that the samples encountered at the test time are from
the same classes (called known or seen classes) that the
model has observed and learned during training. However,
this assumption, called the closed-world assumption (Fei
and Liu 2016), is often violated when a machine learning
model is deployed in the real world; i.e., in addition to
the seen classes, samples from unseen classes may appear
at test. The seen class samples are referred to as the indistribution samples while unseen class samples are called
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. It is crucial for an intelligent ML model to detect OOD samples specially in safetycritical applications such as autonomous driving or healthcare since detecting OOD samples as in-distribution ones in
such applications can have catastrophic consequences.
There are different directions in the literature tackling the
OOD detection problem. The earlier methods are mainly
* Work was done prior to joining Amazon.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6568

