The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Boosting the Transferability of Video Adversarial Examples
via Temporal Translation
Zhipeng Wei1,2 , Jingjing Chen1,2† , Zuxuan Wu1,2 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
zpwei21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chenjingjing, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

fool DNNs by adding small human-imperceptible perturbations on clean samples. The existence of adversarial examples incurs security concerns in real-world applications.
Thus, it has raised increasing attention over recent years.
According to threat models, adversarial attacks can be
divided into two categories: white-box attacks (Wei et al.
2019) and black-box attacks (Guo et al. 2021). In the whitebox setting, an adversary can fully control and access DNN
models, including model architectures as well as parameters.
While in the black-box setting, the adversary can only access
the outputs of DNNs. Hence attacking a model in the blackbox setting is much more challenging. As recent studies have
shown adversarial examples have a property of transferability, making it feasible to perform black-box attacks by using adversarial examples generated on a white-box model.
Therefore, several efforts have been made to boost the transferability of adversarial examples (Dong et al. 2018; Xie
et al. 2019), in order to achieve high success rates of blackbox attacks. Nevertheless, existing works focus on improving the transferability of image adversarial examples, while
the transferability of video adversarial examples has not yet
been explored.
This paper investigates the transferability of video adversarial examples to realize black-box attacks for video recognition models. The major challenge of this task comes from
the fact that generated adversarial examples are prone to
overfitting to white-box models and have poor transferability for other black-box models. Compared to images, videos
have an additional temporal dimension, endowing videos
with rich temporal information that describes the dynamic
cues (e.g., motion). To capture such rich temporal information, various of video recognition models (e.g., I3D (Carreira and Zisserman 2017), SlowFast (Feichtenhofer et al.
2019)) which are based on 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are designed. Intuitively, the discriminative
temporal patterns captured by video recognition models may
vary across different architectures. As generated adversarial
examples are highly correlated with such patterns or gradients of the white-box model, directly utilizing adversarial
video examples generated from the white-box model to attack other black-box video recognition models may lead to
unsatisfactory results.
To improve the transferability of video adversarial examples, this paper proposes a temporal translation method to

Although deep-learning based video recognition models have
achieved remarkable success, they are vulnerable to adversarial examples that are generated by adding humanimperceptible perturbations on clean video samples. As indicated in recent studies, adversarial examples are transferable,
which makes it feasible for black-box attacks in real-world
applications. Nevertheless, most existing adversarial attack
methods have poor transferability when attacking other video
models and transfer-based attacks on video models are still
unexplored. To this end, we propose to boost the transferability of video adversarial examples for black-box attacks
on video recognition models. Through extensive analysis, we
discover that different video recognition models rely on different discriminative temporal patterns, leading to the poor
transferability of video adversarial examples. This motivates
us to introduce a temporal translation attack method, which
optimizes the adversarial perturbations over a set of temporal translated video clips. By generating adversarial examples over translated videos, the resulting adversarial examples
are less sensitive to temporal patterns existed in the whitebox model being attacked and thus can be better transferred.
Extensive experiments on the Kinetics-400 dataset and the
UCF-101 dataset demonstrate that our method can significantly boost the transferability of video adversarial examples. For transfer-based attack against video recognition models, it achieves a 61.56% average attack success rate on the
Kinetics-400 and 48.60% on the UCF-101.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of deep learning techniques on a series of tasks (He et al. 2016; Liu et al.
2018; Feng et al. 2021), such as image recognition (He et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020b,a), Image segmentation (Jiao et al. 2021), object detection (Ren et al. 2016),
video recognition and retrieval (Wu et al. 2020c; Song et al.
2021). Therefore, DNNs have been widely applied in realworld applications, e.g., online recognition services, navigation robots, autonomous driving (Tian et al. 2018), etc. However, recent studies have identified that DNNs are vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Szegedy et al. 2013), which are carefully crafted to
†

Correspondence to: Jingjing Chen, Yu-Gang Jiang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2659

