The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adapt to Environment Sudden Changes by Learning a Context Sensitive Policy
Fan-Ming Luo,1 Shengyi Jiang,1 Yang Yu,1, 2 * Zongzhang Zhang,1, 3 Yi-Feng Zhang 1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Polixir Technologies, Nanjing 210038, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 310052, China
{luofm, jiangsy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {yuy, zzzhang}@nju.edu.cn, zhangyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Abstract

Dealing with real-world reinforcement learning (RL) tasks,
we shall be aware that the environment may have sudden
changes. We expect that a robust policy is able to handle such
changes and adapt to the new environment rapidly. Contextbased meta reinforcement learning aims at learning environment adaptable policies. These methods adopt a context encoder to perceive the environment on-the-fly, following which
a contextual policy makes environment adaptive decisions
according to the context. However, previous methods show
lagged and unstable context extraction, which are hard to handle sudden changes well. This paper proposes an environment sensitive contextual policy learning (ESCP) approach,
in order to improve both the sensitivity and the robustness
of context encoding. ESCP is composed of three key components: variance minimization that forces a rapid and stable encoding of the environment context, relational matrix
determinant maximization that avoids trivial solutions, and a
history-truncated recurrent neural network model that avoids
old memory interference. We use a grid-world task and 5
locomotion controlling tasks with changing parameters to
empirically assess our algorithm. Experiment results show
that in environments with both in-distribution and out-ofdistribution parameter changes, ESCP can not only better recover the environment encoding, but also adapt more rapidly
to the post-change environment (10× faster in the grid-world)
while the return performance is kept or improved, compared
with state-of-the-art meta RL methods.

Figure 1: An illustration of sudden changes in an environment. When a car is driving through a water puddle, the water reduces the friction of the road, and the dynamics of the
environment suddenly changes. Without the ability of fast
adaptation for the new dynamics, an RL trained driving policy will lose control (left). In contrast, we expect the policy
can adapt to the environment change rapidly and handle this
emergency (right).

ments are stationary within an episode. Specifically, transition function of such environments never changes within
an episode. However, this property is unlikely to hold in
real-world environments where the transition function can
switch from one to another at an arbitrary time step in an
episode due to external disturbances. For brevity, we call
such two kinds of environments stationary and changing
environments, respectively. Figure 1 illustrates a simple example of changing environment where the agent runs into a
puddle of water unexpectedly in an autonomous driving task.
To alleviate this risk, quick identification as well as adaptation are essential. A delayed response to the change will lead
to severe results (as shown in Figure 1 Left). On the contrary,
a fast adaptation ability can help the agent handle this emergency. In this paper, we aim at improving the fast adaptation
ability of the agents in the changing environment.
Context-based meta RL methods (Rakelly et al. 2019;
Yu et al. 2017) have the potential to solve this task. They
are usually composed of (1) a context encoder that extracts
environment-related information from the environment interactions and (2) a contextual policy makes decisions based
on the environment context. Since these two components are
functionally decoupled, the adaptation makes fast as long as
the context encoder identifies the changed context fast. However, previous context-based methods need many interactions with the changed environment to recognize its changes,
which results in a slow adaptation speed. Here, the adapta-

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998) is
powerful for sequential decision-making (Mnih et al. 2015;
Schrittwieser et al. 2020). It learns an optimal policy via
trial-and-errors in a given environment. Meta RL learns
adaptive policies and is able to adapt to unseen environments
within few steps of updates (Duan et al. 2016). In recent
years, meta RL has achieved significant success in the tasks
that have various scenarios (Kumar et al. 2021; Zhang, Yu,
and Zhou 2018).
Despite the fact that meta RL is able to adapt to diverse
environments, existing methods implicitly require intraepisode stationarity of the environments, i.e., the environ* Yang Yu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7637

