The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Undercover Boolean Matrix Factorization with MaxSAT
Florent Avellaneda,1,2 Roger Villemaire1
1

2

Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Montréal, Canada
Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
avellaneda.florent@uqam.ca, villemaire.roger@uqam.ca

Abstract

(Miettinen et al. 2008). For this reason, specific algorithms
dealing with the Boolean context must be developed.
In recent years, many different approaches have been applied to BMF (Miettinen and Neumann 2020). Representing BMF as a maximum a posteriori inference problem,
(Ravanbakhsh, Póczos, and Greiner 2016) presented a message passing algorithm “Message Passing”, while (Kovacs,
Günlük, and Hauser 2021) introduced the “CG” algorithm
that used mixed integer linear programming. This last paper
also presented a greedy algorithm called “k-greedy”. Still
widely used is also the greedy algorithm “ASSO” from (Miettinen et al. 2008). As for the “MEBF” algorithm of (Wan
et al. 2020), it used matrix permutations to approximate an
upper triangular-like matrix.
The quality of a BMF solution is usually evaluated in
terms of the reconstruction error, which is the proportion
of entries where A ◦ B differs from X. This considers erroneous 0’s and 1’s to be of equal importance. However, in
applications such as access control where an erroneous 1 in
A ◦ B would represent a spurious permission, incorrect 1’s
in A ◦ B must be avoided. In undercover BMF (also known
as from-below approximation BMF) one hence searches for
a solution A ◦ B whose 1-entries have this same value in X.
Unexpectedly, undercover BMF algorithms have been
shown to give good approximations compared to general BMF algorithms (Belohlavek and Trnecka 2015) even
though BMF allows more candidate factorizations. As for
BMF, different approaches have been applied to undercover
BMF. For instance, Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) has
been used by (Belohlavek and Trnecka 2015) to introduce
the ”GreEss” algorithm. This approach was later improved
upon with the ”IterEss” algorithm (Belohlavek, Outrata,
and Trnecka 2019). Also, the “Tiling” algorithm (Geerts,
Goethals, and Mielikäinen 2004) greedily searches for rectangular patterns (tiles). Building on the approach used with
“GreConD”, the “GRECOND+” algorithm (Belohlavek and
Trnecka 2018) adds a greedy step to minimize reconstruction error. However, this last step will usually not preserve
the undercovering property. Similarly, “PANDA+” (Lucchese, Orlando, and Perego 2013) is not strictly an undercover
BMF algorithm, but it first finds dense initial components
that overcover only a strictly limited amount of entries, before greedily extending without increasing recovery error.
The contribution of this paper is a MaxSAT approach to

The k-undercover Boolean matrix factorization problem aims
to approximate a m × n Boolean matrix X as the Boolean
product of an m × k and a k × n matrices A ◦ B such that
X is a cover of A ◦ B, i.e., no representation error is allowed on the 0’s entries of the matrix X. To infer an optimal and “block-optimal” k-undercover, we propose two exact methods based on MaxSAT encodings. From a theoretical standpoint, we prove that our method of inferring “blockoptimal” k-undercover is a (1 − 1e ) ≈ 0.632 approximation for the optimal k-undercover problem. From a practical standpoint, experimental results indicate that our “blockoptimal” k-undercover algorithm outperforms the state-ofthe-art even when compared with algorithms for the more
general k-undercover Boolean Matrix Factorization problem
for which only minimizing reconstruction error is required.

1

Introduction

The Boolean Matrix Factorization (BMF) problem consists,
for an m × n Boolean matrix X and an integer k ≤
min(n, m), of finding m × k and k × n Boolean matrices
A and B such that A ◦ B is equal to X for as many entries
as possible. The Boolean semiring operator ◦ is matrix multiplication where the product is logical “AND” and addition
logical “OR”.
When the rows of the matrix X represent instances and
the columns attributes, such a decomposition yields a matrix A that represents the same set of instances using only
k derived attributes and a matrix B that defines these new
attributes in terms of the original ones. Thus, since BMF
summarizes data in terms of these new k attributes, this
factorization has been applied to many areas such as rolebased access control (Vaidya, Atluri, and Guo 2007), multilabel classification (Wicker, Pfahringer, and Kramer 2012),
network pattern mining (Kocayusufoglu, Hoang, and Singh
2018) and functional interactions in brain networks (Haddad
et al. 2018).
Although many methods have been developed for the nonBoolean case, these methods fail to work in a Boolean context. For example, it is possible that the well-known Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) obtains a greater reconstruction error than a BMF for the same decomposition size
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3672

