The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Model Pixel-Embedded Affinity for
Homogeneous Instance Segmentation
Wei Huang1 , Shiyu Deng1 , Chang Chen1 , Xueyang Fu1 , Zhiwei Xiong1,2, *
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Raw/embedding

Abstract

Segmentation

Affinity

Homogeneous instance segmentation aims to identify each
instance in an image where all interested instances belong
to the same category, such as plant leaves and microscopic
cells. Recently, proposal-free methods, which straightforwardly generate instance-aware information to group pixels
into different instances, have received increasing attention
due to their efficient pipeline. However, they often fail to distinguish adjacent instances due to similar appearances, dense
distribution and ambiguous boundaries of instances in homogeneous images. In this paper, we propose a pixel-embedded
affinity modeling method for homogeneous instance segmentation, which is able to preserve the semantic information of
instances and improve the distinguishability of adjacent instances. Instead of predicting affinity directly, we propose a
self-correlation module to explicitly model the pairwise relationships between pixels, by estimating the similarity between embeddings generated from the input image through
CNNs. Based on the self-correlation module, we further design a cross-correlation module to maintain the semantic consistency between instances. Specifically, we map the transformed input images with different views and appearances
into the same embedding space, and then mutually estimate
the pairwise relationships of embeddings generated from the
original input and its transformed variants. In addition, to integrate the global instance information, we introduce an embedding pyramid module to model affinity on different scales.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the versatile and superior
performance of our method on three representative datasets.
Code and models are available at https://github.com/weih527/
Pixel-Embedded-Affinity.

(a) Groundtruth

(b) AL-Gao

(c) ML-De

(d) Ours

Figure 1: A visual example of representative methods for
homogeneous instance segmentation on the CVPPP A1
dataset. Affinity learning (AL-Gao) straightforwardly generates affinity but suffers from the absence of semantic instance information. Metric learning (ML-De) aims to push
all instances away from each other but ignores the spatial
information between instances. Our method better preserves
the semantic information of instances and pays more attention to the distinguishability of adjacent instances, producing superior segmentation results.

Wu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022). Due to the complex characteristics of homogeneous images, such as similar appearances, dense distribution and ambiguous boundaries of instances, this challenging task attracts sustained attention, especially for biomedical images (Wu et al. 2018; Yi et al.
2020, 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2019, 2020). With
powerful feature representation capabilities, deep learningbased methods have become the mainstream, and remarkable progress has been made in instance segmentation (Gu,
Deng, and Wei 2021; Hsieh et al. 2021; Vu, Kang, and Yoo
2021; Zhang et al. 2021). According to whether proposals
are required, these methods can be divided into two categories, i.e., proposal-based (He et al. 2017; Bolya et al.
2019) and proposal-free (Gao et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2020).

Introduction
Homogeneous instance segmentation, also referred to as
intra-class segmentation sometimes, identifies all interested
instances that belong to the same category in the target image. It has a wide range of applications, such as the phenotype measurement of cells (Yi et al. 2020) and plants
(Scharr et al. 2016), the spatial arrangement of cancer nuclei (Yang et al. 2021) and the 3D reconstruction of neurons and mitochondria in connectomics (Funke et al. 2019;
* Corresponding author: zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1007

