The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Solving Disjunctive Temporal Networks with Uncertainty under Restricted
Time-Based Controllability Using Tree Search and Graph Neural Networks
Kevin Osanlou1 , Jeremy Frank1 , Andrei Bursuc2 , Tristan Cazenave3 , Eric Jacopin4 , Christophe
Guettier5 and J. Benton1
1

NASA Ames Research Center, 2 Valeo.ai, 3 LAMSADE, Paris-Dauphine University, 4 CREC Saint-Cyr Coetquidan, 5 Safran
{kevin.osanlou, jeremy.d.frank, j.benton}@nasa.gov, andrei.bursuc@valeo.com, tristan.cazenave@lamsade.dauphine.fr,
christophe.guettier@safrangroup.com, eric.jacopin@st-cyr.terre-net.defense.gouv.fr
Fig. a: Two different
DTNUs

Abstract
Scheduling under uncertainty is an area of interest in artificial
intelligence. We study the problem of Dynamic Controllability (DC) of Disjunctive Temporal Networks with Uncertainty
(DTNU), which seeks a reactive scheduling strategy to satisfy
temporal constraints in response to uncontrollable action durations. We introduce new semantics for reactive scheduling:
Time-based Dynamic Controllability (TDC) and a restricted
subset of TDC, R-TDC. We present a tree search approach
to determine whether or not a DTNU is R-TDC. Moreover,
we leverage the learning capability of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) as a heuristic for tree search guidance. Finally,
we conduct experiments on a known benchmark on which
we show R-TDC to retain significant completeness with regard to DC, while being faster to prove. This results in the
tree search processing fifty percent more DTNU problems in
R-TDC than the state-of-the-art DC solver does in DC with
the same time budget. We also observe that GNN tree search
guidance leads to substantial performance gains on benchmarks of more complex DTNUs, with up to eleven times
more problems solved than the baseline tree search.

1

Fig. b: Detailed R-TDC strategy
for DTNU

Start time

[ 0, 2 ]

contingency

Schedule
DTNU

1

[0,1]
[ 1.5 , 3 ]

[0,1]

Wait until
occurs during
the wait]

[ 3, 6 ]

DTNU

contingency

2
Schedule
Problem solved

does not occur
during the wait]

4
Wait until

3
5

[6,6]

6

[8,8]
NO R-TDC STRATEGY
FOR

occurs
during the
wait]
Schedule
Problem
solved

Tree structure of the
R-TDC strategy

Figure 1: Two example DTNUs γ and γ ′ . Timepoints a1 and
a2 are controllable; u1 uncontrollable. Black arrows represent time constraints between timepoints; red arrows contingency links. A detailed R-TDC strategy is displayed for
γ. Squares below γ are sub-DTNUs; the ∨ sign lists transitional possibilities. Nodes Ni are R-TDC strategy nodes.

Introduction and Related Works

Temporal Networks (TN) are a common formalism to represent temporal constraints over a set of time points (e.g.
start/end of activities in a scheduling problem). The Simple
Temporal Network with Uncertainty (STNUs) introduced
by Vidal and Fargier (1999) explicitly incorporates qualitative uncertainty into temporal networks. Applications include control of robotic systems such as in Bhargava et al.
(2018) and Stegun, Chien, and Agrawal (2020), with limited
ethical concerns thus far. Considerable work has resulted in
algorithms to determine whether or not all timepoints can be
scheduled, either up-front or reactively, in order to account
for uncertainty (e.g. Morris and Muscettola (2005), Morris
(2014)). Dynamic Controllability (DC) is a form of scheduling in which a controller agent integrates observed events as
they unfold to adapt the scheduling reactively. In particular,
an STNU is said to be DC if there is a reactive scheduling
strategy in which controllable timepoints can be executed
either at a specific time, or after observing the occurrence

of an uncontrollable timepoint. Cimatti, Micheli, and Roveri
(2016) investigate the problem of DC for Disjunctive Temporal Networks with Uncertainty (DTNUs), which generalize STNUs. Figure 1a shows two DTNUs γ and γ ′ on the
left side; ai are controllable timepoints, uj are uncontrollable timepoints. Timepoints are variables which can take on
any value in R. Constraints between timepoints characterize
a minimum and maximum time distance separating them,
likewise valued in R. The key difference between STNUs
and DTNUs lies in the disjunctions that yield more choice
points for consistent scheduling, especially reactively (e.g. if
an uncontrollable timepoint occurs early, a given constraint
could be satisfied, if it occurs late, another one, linked by a
disjunction, could be).
DC-checking for STNUs is O(N 3 ) (Morris (2014)), however, it is P SP ACE-complete for DTNUs (Bhargava and

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9877

