The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Automating Model Explanations with Certified Robustness Guarantees
Mengdi Huai1 , Jinduo Liu2 , Chenglin Miao3 , Liuyi Yao4 , Aidong Zhang1
1
University of Virginia
Beijing University of Technology
3
University of Georgia
4
Alibaba Group
1
2
{mh6ck, aidong}@virginia.edu, jinduo@bjut.edu.cn, 3 cmiao@uga.edu, 4 yly287738@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract

2018) demonstrates that given identical feature-based explanations, human can confidently find evidence for completely
contradicting conclusions. In addition, the feature-based explanation methods are not necessarily the most intuitive explanations for human understanding, especially when using
low-level features (e.g., the raw pixels). In contrast, human
reasoning often comprises “concept-based thinking” by extracting similarities from numerous samples and grouping
them semantically based on their resemblance (Yeh et al.
2019b). As a consequence, recent research has focused on
designing concept-based explanation methods to interpret
how ML models use high-level human-understandable concepts in arriving at decisions (Kim et al. 2018; Ghorbani
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019b; Goyal et al. 2019; Wu et al.
2020; Koh et al. 2020; Yeh et al. 2019b; Mincu et al. 2021).
However, an obstacle to the large-scale adoption of these
concept-based explanation methods is that they require significant human effort and resource expenditure. The reason
is that existing concept-based explanation methods implicitly follow a two-stage procedure with manual intervention.
Specifically, they first need human to manually define concepts by using a set of input examples for the ML model
under inspection (Ghorbani et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2018;
Koh et al. 2020), and then manually compute the importance
score of each pre-defined concept in a post-hoc way. For
example, to define the concept of “curly”, (Ghorbani et al.
2019) needs a human subject to go over all the given images
of this concept and extract meaningful segmentations. Then,
(Ghorbani et al. 2019) manually computes each extracted
concept’s importance score via the directional derivative
method (Kim et al. 2018). However, identifying humaninterpretable concepts and checking for the semantic meaningfulness require a large effort from human experts due to
manual annotations and computation. Thus, how to automatically provide concept-based explanations without human
intervention still remains a fundamental challenge.
Our goal in this paper is to automatically generate the intrinsic concept-based explanations from the input data without human intervention. To achieve this goal, we propose to
inject the concept-based explanations into the learning loop:
whenever asking the user to label an incoming sample, the
model can simultaneously provide the predicted label for
this sample and the corresponding concept-based explanations on interpreting this predicted label. However, the chal-

Providing model explanations has gained significant popularity recently. In contrast with the traditional feature-level
model explanations, concept-based explanations can provide
explanations in the form of high-level human concepts. However, existing concept-based explanation methods implicitly
follow a two-step procedure that involves human intervention. Specifically, they first need the human to be involved to
define (or extract) the high-level concepts, and then manually
compute the importance scores of these identified concepts
in a post-hoc way. This laborious process requires significant
human effort and resource expenditure due to manual work,
which hinders their large-scale deployability. In practice, it is
challenging to automatically generate the concept-based explanations without human intervention due to the subjectivity of defining the units of concept-based interpretability. In
addition, due to its data-driven nature, the interpretability itself is also potentially susceptible to malicious manipulations.
Hence, our goal in this paper is to free human from this tedious process, while ensuring that the generated explanations
are provably robust to adversarial perturbations. We propose
a novel concept-based interpretation method, which can not
only automatically provide the prototype-based concept explanations but also provide certified robustness guarantees for
the generated prototype-based explanations. We also conduct
extensive experiments on real-world datasets to verify the desirable properties of the proposed method.

Introduction
Recently, interpreting and understanding the behaviors of
black-box machine learning (ML) models has drawn significant attention (Ghorbani et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2018;
Koh et al. 2020; Pedapati et al. 2020; Jeyakumar et al.
2020; Heskes et al. 2020; O’Shaughnessy et al. 2020; Heskes et al. 2020; Huai et al. 2019; Yao et al. 2021). The most
commonly-used explanation method is to explain an ML
model’s predictions in terms of the input features (e.g., pixels and word-vectors) (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016;
Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Štrumbelj and
Kononenko 2014; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Chen et al.
2018; Koh and Liang 2017; Huai et al. 2020c,a). However, these feature-based interpretations suffer from several
drawbacks (Ghorbani et al. 2019). For example, (Kim et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6935

