The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Rethinking the Optimization of Average Precision:
Only Penalizing Negative Instances before Positive Ones is Enough
Zhuo Li1,2 * , Weiqing Min1,2† , Jiajun Song1,2 , Yaohui Zhu1,2 , Liping Kang3 ,
Xiaoming Wei3 , Xiaolin Wei3 and Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Meituan, Beijing, China
{zhuo.li, jiajun.song, yaohui.zhu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {minweiqing,sqjiang}@ict.ac.cn,
{kangliping, weixiaoming, weixiaolin02}@meituan.com
Abstract
Optimising the approximation of Average Precision (AP) has
been widely studied for image retrieval. Limited by the definition of AP, such methods consider both negative and positive
instances ranking before each positive instance. However, we
claim that only penalizing negative instances before positive
ones is enough, because the loss only comes from these negative instances. To this end, we propose a novel loss, namely Penalizing Negative instances before Positive ones (PNP), which
can directly minimize the number of negative instances before
each positive one. In addition, AP-based methods adopt a fixed
and sub-optimal gradient assignment strategy. Therefore, we
systematically investigate different gradient assignment solutions via constructing derivative functions of the loss, resulting
in PNP-I with increasing derivative functions and PNP-D with
decreasing ones. PNP-I focuses more on the hard positive instances by assigning larger gradients to them and tries to make
all relevant instances closer. In contrast, PNP-D pays less attention to such instances and slowly corrects them. For most realworld data, one class usually contains several local clusters.
PNP-I blindly gathers these clusters while PNP-D keeps them
as they were. Therefore, PNP-D is more superior. Experiments
on three standard retrieval datasets show consistent results
with the above analysis. Extensive evaluations demonstrate
that PNP-D achieves the state-of-the-art performance. Code is
available at https://github.com/interestingzhuo/PNPloss

Figure 1: The functional image of AP-based loss LAP :
R(i, SP ) and R(i, SN ) are the number of positive and negative instances before the instance i, respectively, where SP
is the similarity set between the query and positive instances
and SN is the similarity set between the query and negative
instances. Arrows are the optimal path of positive instances.

However, there are two problems for AP-based methods:
(1) Redundancy exists in the optimization of AP. Fig. 1
shows the functional image of AP-based loss LAP . As shown
in Fig. 1, the goal of minimizing LAP is equivalent to minimize R(i, SN ), because LAP = 0 only when R(i, SN ) =
0. Therefore, the computation of R(i, SP ) is redundant. (2)
Sub-optimal gradient assignment strategy. Limited by the
definition of AP, AP-based methods only adopt one specific
gradient assignment strategy. Specifically, AP-based losses
assign smaller gradient to larger R(i, SN ), as shown in Fig. 1.
Different gradient assignment strategies may result in different performance. Therefore, it leaves room for us to systematically explore different gradient assignment solutions to find
potential better ones.
For the first problem, we propose a novel loss, namely
Penalizing Negative instances before Positive ones (PNP),
which directly minimizes the number of negative instances
before each positive one. Therefore, each negative instance
will receive penalties from all positive ones after it. In terms
of each negative instance, if it ranks before more positive
ones, it will receive more penalties and be corrected more
quickly. As shown in Fig. 2, image (a) will receive more
penalty because there are more positive instances after it

Introduction
Image retrieval (Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2019; Min et al.
2020) refers to finding all images containing relevant content
with the query from the database. One important issue is to
design the training objective. Recently, some works propose
to directly optimize the Average Precision (AP) (Revaud et al.
2019; Brown et al. 2020; Cakir et al. 2019) to achieve endto-end training. Considering AP is non-differentiable and
can’t be directly optimized by the gradient descent, these
works leverage some transformations to approximate AP to
make it differentiable. These methods greatly promote the
development of retrieval.
* Work done during an internship at Meituan.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1518

