The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Image-Adaptive YOLO for Object Detection in Adverse Weather Conditions
†

Wenyu Liu1,2 * , Gaofeng Ren 3 , Runsheng Yu 4 , Shi Guo 5 , Jianke Zhu 1,2 , Lei Zhang 3,5
1

Colleage of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5
The HongKong Polytechnic University
{liuwenyu.lwy, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, {gaof.ren, runshengyu}@gmail.com, {csshiguo, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Though deep learning-based object detection methods have
achieved promising results on the conventional datasets, it is
still challenging to locate objects from the low-quality images
captured in adverse weather conditions. The existing methods either have difficulties in balancing the tasks of image
enhancement and object detection, or often ignore the latent
information beneficial for detection. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel Image-Adaptive YOLO (IA-YOLO)
framework, where each image can be adaptively enhanced for
better detection performance. Specifically, a differentiable image processing (DIP) module is presented to take into account
the adverse weather conditions for YOLO detector, whose
parameters are predicted by a small convolutional neural network (CNN-PP). We learn CNN-PP and YOLOv3 jointly in
an end-to-end fashion, which ensures that CNN-PP can learn
an appropriate DIP to enhance the image for detection in a
weakly supervised manner. Our proposed IA-YOLO approach
can adaptively process images in both normal and adverse
weather conditions. The experimental results are very encouraging, demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed IAYOLO method in both foggy and low-light scenarios. The
source code can be found at https://github.com/wenyyu/ImageAdaptive-YOLO.

(a) YOLO II (Baseline)

(b) IA-YOLO (Ours)

Figure 1: In the real-world foggy condition, our method can
adaptively output clearer images with sharper edges around
objects’ boundary, and consequently produce higher confidence detection results with fewer missing instances.

is mainly caused by the interaction between weather-specific
information and objects, which leads to poor detection performance. Fig. 1 shows an example of object detection in
foggy conditions. One can see that if the image can be properly enhanced with respect to the weather condition, more
latent information about the original blurred objects and the
misidentified objects can be recovered.
To tackle this challenging problem, Huang, Le, and Jaw
(2020) employed two subnetworks to jointly learn visibility enhancement and object detection, where the impact of
image degradation is reduced by sharing the feature extraction layers. However, it is hard to tune the parameters to
balance the weights between detection and restoration during training. Another approach is to dilute the influence of
weather-specific information by preprocessing the image with
existing methods such as image defogging (Hang et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2019) and image enhancement (Guo et al. 2020).
However, complicated image restoration networks have to
be included in these methods, which need to be trained separately with pixel-level supervision. This requires to manually
label the images for restoration. This problem can also be
treated as an unsupervised domain adaptation task (Chen
et al. 2018; Hnewa and Radha 2021). Compared with training
detectors with clear images (source image), it is assumed that
images captured under adverse weathers (target image) have
a distribution shift. These methods mostly adopt the domain
adaptation principles and focus on aligning the features of
two distributions, and the latent information which can be
obtained in the process of weather-based image restoration is

Introduction
CNN-based methods have become prevailed in object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon and Farhadi 2018). They not
only have achieved promising performance on benchmark
datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Everingham et al. 2010; Lin et al.
2014) but also have been deployed in the real-world applications such as autonomous driving (Wang et al. 2019). Due
to the domain shift in input images (Sindagi et al. 2020),
general object detection models trained by high quality images often fail to achieve satisfactory results under adverse
weather conditions (e.g., foggy and dark light). Narasimhan
and Nayar (2002) and You et al. (2015) suggested that an image captured under adverse weather can be decomposed into
a clean image and its corresponding weather-specific information, and the image quality degradation in adverse weather
* This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a

research intern.
†
corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1792

