The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Context-Specific Representation Abstraction for Deep Option Learning
Marwa Abdulhai1,2 , Dong-Ki Kim1,2 , Matthew Riemer2,3 , Miao Liu2,3 ,
Gerald Tesauro2,3 , Jonathan P. How1,2
1

MIT LIDS
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
IBM Research
abdulhai@mit.edu, dkkim93@mit.edu, mdriemer@us.ibm.com, miao.liu1@ibm.com,
gtesauro@us.ibm.com, jhow@mit.edu
2

Abstract

Our key insight in this work is that OC suffers from these
problems at least partly because it considers the entire state
space during option learning and thus fails to reduce problem complexity as intended. For example, consider the partially observable maze domain in Figure 1. The objective in
this domain is to pick up the key and unlock the door to reach
the green goal. A non-HRL learning problem in this setting
can be viewed as a search over the space of deterministic
policies: |A||B| , where |A| and |B| denote the size of the action space and belief state space, respectively. Frameworks
such as OC consider the entire state space or belief state
when learning options, which can be viewed themselves as
policies over the entire state space, naively resulting in an
increased learning problem size of |Ω|(|A||B| ), where |Ω|
denotes the number of options. Note that this has not yet
considered the extra needed complexity for learning policies to select over and switch options. Unfortunately, because |Ω| ≥ 1, learning options in this way can then only
increase the effective complexity of the learning problem.
To address the problem complexity issue, we propose to
consider both temporal abstraction, in the form of high-level
skills, and context-specific abstraction over factored belief
states, in the form of latent representations, to learn options
that can fully benefit from hierarchical learning. Considering
the maze example again, the agent does not need to consider
the states going to the goal when trying to get the key (see
Option 1 in Figure 1). Similarly, the agent only needs to consider states that are relevant to solving a specific sub-task.
Hence, this context-specific abstraction leads to the desired
reduction in problem complexity, and an agent can mutually
benefit from having both context-specific and temporal abstraction for hierarchical learning.

Hierarchical reinforcement learning has focused on discovering temporally extended actions, such as options, that can
provide benefits in problems requiring extensive exploration.
One promising approach that learns these options end-to-end
is the option-critic (OC) framework. We examine and show in
this paper that OC does not decompose a problem into simpler sub-problems, but instead increases the size of the search
over policy space with each option considering the entire state
space during learning. This issue can result in practical limitations of this method, including sample inefficient learning. To
address this problem, we introduce Context-Specific Representation Abstraction for Deep Option Learning (CRADOL),
a new framework that considers both temporal abstraction
and context-specific representation abstraction to effectively
reduce the size of the search over policy space. Specifically,
our method learns a factored belief state representation that
enables each option to learn a policy over only a subsection of
the state space. We test our method against hierarchical, nonhierarchical, and modular recurrent neural network baselines,
demonstrating significant sample efficiency improvements in
challenging partially observable environments.

Introduction
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) provides a principled framework for decomposing problems into natural
hierarchical structures (Flet-Berliac 2019). By factoring a
complex task into simpler sub-tasks, HRL can offer benefits
over non-HRL approaches in solving challenging large-scale
problems efficiently. Much of HRL research has focused on
discovering temporally extended high-level actions, such as
options, that can be used to improve learning and planning
efficiency (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Precup and Sutton 2000). Notably, the option-critic (OC) framework has
become popular because it can learn deep hierarchies of
both option policies and termination conditions from scratch
without domain-specific knowledge (Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017; Riemer, Liu, and Tesauro 2018). However, while
OC provides a theoretically grounded framework for HRL,
it is known to exhibit common failure cases in practice including lack of option diversity, short option duration, and
large sample complexity (Kamat and Precup 2020).

where Bω ⊂ B denotes the subset of the belief state space
for each option (or sub-policy) ω and |Bω | < |B|. We further
illustrate this idea in the tree diagram of Figure 1, where
each option maps to only a subset of the state space.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Contribution. With this insight, we introduce a new option learning framework: Context-Specific Representation

Remark 1 With context-specific abstraction for each option, the learning problem size can be reduced such that:
X
|A||Bω | < |A||B| < |Ω|(|A|)|B| ,
(1)
ω∈Ω

5959

