The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Achieving Zero Constraint Violation for Constrained Reinforcement Learning via
Primal-Dual Approach
Qinbo Bai,1 Amrit Singh Bedi,2 Mridul Agarwal,1 Alec Koppel,3 Vaneet Aggarwal,1
1

Purdue University
US Army Research Laboratory
3
Supply Chain Optimization Technologies, Amazon
bai113@purdue.edu, amrit0714@gmail.com, agarw180@purdue.edu, alec.e.koppel.civ@mail.mil, vaneet@purdue.edu
2

Abstract

2012), etc.). The standard MDP equipped with the cost function for the constraints is called constrained Markov Decision process (CMDP) framework (Altman 1999). It is well
known by (Altman 1999) that the resulting CMDP problem
can be equivalently written as a linear program (LP) and
hence efficient algorithms are available in the literature. But
to solve the LP, one needs access to the transition probabilities of the environment, which is not available in realistic environment, and thus efficient approaches to develop
model-free algorithms for CMDP are required.
Various algorithms are proposed in the literature to solve
the CMDP problem without apriori knowledge of the transition probability (See Table 1 for comparisons). The performance of these algorithms is measured by the number of
samples (number of state-action-state transitions) required
to achieve -optimal (objective sub-optimality) -feasible
(constraint violations) policies. An -feasible policy means
that the constraints are not completely satisfied by the obtained policy. However, in many applications, such as in
power systems (Vu et al. 2020) or autonomous vehicle control (Wen et al. 2020), violations of constraint could be catastrophic in practice. Hence, achieving optimal objective guarantees without constraint violation is an important problem
and is the focus of the paper. More precisely, we ask the
question, “Is it possible to achieve the optimal sublinear
convergence rate for the objective while achieving zero constraint violations for CMDP problem without apriori knowledge of the transition probability?”
We answer the above question in affirmative in this work.
We remark that the sample complexity result in this work
exhibit tight dependencies on the cardinality of state and action spaces (cf. Table 1 in Appendix). The key contributions
can be summarized as follows:
• To best of our knowledge, this work is the first attempt
to solve CMDPs to achieve optimal sample complexity
with zero constraint violation. There exist one exception
in the literature which achieves the
 zero constraint violation but at the cost of Õ 1/5 sample complexity to
achieve  optimal policy (Wei, Liu, and Ying 2021). In
contrast, we 
are able to achieve zero constraint violation
with Õ 1/2 sample complexity1 .
• We utilized the idea of conservative constraints in the dual
domain to derive the zero constraint violations. Conservative constrains were used recently for showing zero con-

Reinforcement learning is widely used in applications where
one needs to perform sequential decisions while interacting
with the environment. The problem becomes more challenging when the decision requirement includes satisfying some
safety constraints. The problem is mathematically formulated
as constrained Markov decision process (CMDP). In the literature, various algorithms are available to solve CMDP problems in a model-free manner to achieve -optimal cumulative
reward with  feasible policies. An -feasible policy implies
that it suffers from constraint violation. An important question here is whether we can achieve -optimal cumulative reward with zero constraint violations or not. To achieve that,
we advocate the use of randomized primal-dual approach
to solve the CMDP problems and propose a conservative
stochastic primal-dual
algorithm (CSPDA) which is shown to

exhibit Õ 1/2 sample complexity to achieve -optimal cumulative reward with zero constraint violations . In the prior
works, the best available sample complexity for the -optimal
policy with zero constraint violation is Õ 1/5 . Hence, the
proposed algorithm provides a significant improvement as
compared to the state of the art.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning framework which learns to perform a task by repeatedly interacting with the environment. This framework is widely utilized
in a wide range of applications such as robotics, communications, computer vision, autonomous driving, etc. (Arulkumaran et al. 2017; Kiran et al. 2021). The problem is mathematically formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
which constitute of a state, action, and transition probabilities of going from one state to the other after taking a particular action. On taking an action, a reward is achieved and the
overall objective is to maximize the sum of discounted rewards. However, in various realistic environments, the agent
needs to decide action where certain constraints need to be
satisfied (e.g., average power constraint in wireless sensor
networks (Buratti et al. 2009), queue stability constraints
(Xiang et al. 2015), safe exploration (Moldovan and Abbeel
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The detailed proof can be found in Appendix in (Bai et al.
2021)

3682

