The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Covered Information Disentanglement: Model Transparency via Unbiased
Permutation Importance
João P. B. Pereira1,2 , Erik S.G. Stroes1 , Aeilko H. Zwinderman1 , Evgeni Levin1,2
1

Amsterdam University Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Horaizon, Marshallaan 2 2625 GZ, Delft, The Netherlands
{j.p.belopereira, e.levin}@amsterdamumc.nl

Abstract

neighborhood of each instance. While this achieves higher
prediction transparency for each data point, in this work,
we are mainly concerned with a more holistic view of
importance, which may be more appropriate to guide
new research directions and unravel disease mechanisms.
Tree-based methods are very commonly selected for this
purpose because they compute the impurity or Gini
importance (Breiman 2001). The impurity importance is
biased in favor of variables with many possible split
points; i.e. categorical variables with many categories or
continuous variables (Strobl et al. 2007). A generally
accepted alternative to computing the Gini importance
is the permutation importance (Breiman 2001), which
benchmarks the baseline performance against permuted
data. There is, however, the issue of multicollinearity.
When features are highly correlated, feature permutation
will underestimate the individual importance of at least
one of the features, since a great deal of the information
provided by this feature is “covered” by its covariates. One
option is to permute correlated features together (Toloşi and
Lengauer 2011). However, this implies choosing an arbitrary
correlation grouping threshold. Most importantly, it misses
the differentiation between each feature’s contribution to
the final prediction. Motivated by the idea that there
is an information overlap between different features, we
develop Covered Information Disentanglement (CID),1 an
information-theoretic approach to disentangle the shared
information and scale the permutation importance values
accordingly. We demonstrate how CID can recover the right
importance ranking on artificial data and discuss its efficacy
on the Cardiovascular Risk Prediction dataset (Hoogeveen
et al. 2020).

Model transparency is a prerequisite in many domains and
an increasingly popular area in machine learning research. In
the medical domain, for instance, unveiling the mechanisms
behind a disease often has higher priority than the diagnostic
itself since it might dictate or guide potential treatments
and research directions. One of the most popular approaches
to explain model global predictions is the permutation
importance where the performance on permuted data is
benchmarked against the baseline. However, this method and
other related approaches will undervalue the importance of a
feature in the presence of covariates since these cover part of
its provided information. To address this issue, we propose
Covered Information Disentanglement (CID), a framework
that considers all feature information overlap to correct the
values provided by permutation importance. We further show
how to compute CID efficiently when coupled with Markov
random fields. We demonstrate its efficacy in adjusting
permutation importance first on a controlled toy dataset and
discuss its effect on real-world medical data.

Introduction
Understanding the biological underpinnings of disease is
at the core of medical research. Model transparency and
feature relevance are thus a top priority to discover new
potential treatments or research directions. One of the
current most popular methods to explain local model
predictions is SHAP (Lipovetsky and Conklin 2001;
Štrumbelj and Kononenko 2014; Lundberg and Lee 2017),
a game-theoretic approach that considers the features as
“players” and measures their marginal contributions to all
possible feature subset combinations. SHAP has also been
generalized in SAGE (Covert, Lundberg, and Lee 2020)
to compute global feature importance. However, recent
work by Kumar et al. (Kumar et al. 2020) exposes some
mathematical issues with SHAP and concludes that this
framework is ill-suited as a general solution to quantifying
feature importance. Other local-based methods such as
LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and its variants
(see e.g. (Singh, Ribeiro, and Guestrin 2016; Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2018.; Guidotti et al. 2018; Pereira
et al. 2019)) build weak yet explainable models on the

Notation We denote matrices, 1-dimensional arrays, and
scalars/functions with capital bold, bold, and regular text,
respectively (e.g. X, x, α/f ). Given a dataset XM ×N , we
will denote its random variables by capital regular text with
a subscript and the values using lowercase (e.g. Xi and xi ),
while the joint density/mass will be represented as p(x). The
PM
1
expected loss of a function given by: M
i=1 l [y, f (xi )]

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We make an implementation of CID publicly available at:
https://github.com/JBPereira/CID.

Methodology

7984

