The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Computation of Necessary and Sufficient Explanations
Adnan Darwiche, Chunxi Ji
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
darwiche@cs.ucla.edu, jich@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

referred to as abductive explanations (Ignatiev, Narodytska,
and Marques-Silva 2019a).1 Two related notions we discuss
later are contrastive explanations as formalized in (Ignatiev
et al. 2020) and counterfactual explanations as formalized
in (Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020).2
(Darwiche and Hirth 2020) introduced the complete reason for a decision as a Boolean formula that characterizes
why a decision was made, and showed how it can be used
to gather insights about the decision. This includes generating explanations, determining decision bias and evaluating
counterfactual queries. For example, it was shown that sufficient reasons correspond to the prime implicants of the complete reason. Hence, if one has access to the complete reason
behind a decision, then one can abstract the computation of
sufficient reasons away from the classifier and its encoding
or compilation. Consider a classifier for admitting applicants
to an academic program based five Boolean features (Darwiche and Hirth 2020): passing the entrance exam (E), being a first time applicant (F ), having good grades (G), having work experience (W ) and coming from a rich hometown
(R). The positive instances of this classifier are specified by
the following Boolean formula: ∆ = (e ∨ g) ∧ (e ∨ r) ∧ (e ∨
w)∧(f ∨r)∧(f¯∨g∨w). Luna (δ) passed the entrance exam,
has good grades and work experience, comes from a rich
hometown but is not a first time applicant (δ = e, f¯, g, r, w).
The classifier will admit Luna. The complete reason for this
decision is: Γ = (e ∨ g) ∧ (e ∨ w) ∧ (r) ∧ (f¯ ∨ g ∨ w). There
are four prime implicants of Γ: {e, g, r}, {e, r, w}, {e, f¯, r}
and {g, r, w}. Each is a minimal subset of instance δ which
is sufficient to trigger the admit decision. Even though the

The complete reason behind a decision is a Boolean formula
that characterizes why the decision was made. This recently
introduced notion has a number of applications, which include generating explanations, detecting decision bias and
evaluating counterfactual queries. Prime implicants of the
complete reason are known as sufficient reasons for the decision and they correspond to what is known as PI explanations and abductive explanations. In this paper, we refer to the
prime implicates of a complete reason as necessary reasons
for the decision. We justify this terminology semantically and
show that necessary reasons correspond to what is known as
contrastive explanations. We also study the computation of
complete reasons for multi-class decision trees and graphs
with nominal and numeric features for which we derive efficient, closed-form complete reasons. We further investigate
the computation of shortest necessary and sufficient reasons
for a broad class of complete reasons, which include the derived closed forms and the complete reasons for Sentential
Decision Diagrams (SDDs). We provide an algorithm which
can enumerate their shortest necessary reasons in output polynomial time. Enumerating shortest sufficient reasons for this
class of complete reasons is hard even for a single reason. For
this problem, we provide an algorithm that appears to be quite
efficient as we show empirically.

Introduction
Reasoning about the behavior of AI systems has been receiving significant attention recently, particularly the decisions made by machine learning classifiers. Some methods operate directly on classifiers, e.g., (Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016, 2018) while others operator on symbolic
encodings of their input-output behavior, e.g., (Narodytska
et al. 2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019a)
which may be compiled into tractable circuits (Chan and
Darwiche 2003; Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018b, 2019; Shi
et al. 2020; Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020; Huang
et al. 2021a). When explaining decisions, the notion of a sufficient reason has been well investigated. This is a minimal
subset of an instance that is sufficient to trigger the decision and can therefore be used to explain why it was made.
Sufficient reasons were introduced in (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018b) under the name of PI explanations and later

1

See, e.g., (Choi, Xue, and Darwiche 2012; Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2018; Wang, Khosravi, and den Broeck 2021) for some
approaches that can be viewed as approximating sufficient reasons
and (Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva 2019b) for a study
of the quality of some of these approximations.
2
There is an extensive body of work in philosophy, social science and AI that discusses contrastive explanations and counterfactual explanations; see, e.g., (Garfinkel 1982; Lewis 1986; Temple 1988; Lipton 1990; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017;
van der Waa et al. 2018; Miller 2019; Mittelstadt, Russell, and
Wachter 2019; Goyal et al. 2019; Verma, Dickerson, and Hines
2020; Mothilal, Sharma, and Tan 2020). While the definitions of
these notions are sometimes variations or refinements on one another, they are not always compatible.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5582

