The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Content-Variant Reference Image Quality Assessment via
Knowledge Distillation
Guanghao Yin1 * , Wei Wang2† , Zehuan Yuan2 , Chuchu Han3 ,
Wei Ji4 , Shouqian Sun1 , Changhu Wang2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
Bytedance Inc, China, 3 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China,
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore
{ygh zju, ssq}@zju.edu.cn, {wangwei.frank, yuanzehuan,changhu.wang}@bytedance.com, hcc@hust.edu.cn,
jiwei@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

Our CVRKD-IQA

Generally, humans are more skilled at perceiving differences
between high-quality (HQ) and low-quality (LQ) images than
directly judging the quality of a single LQ image. This situation also applies to image quality assessment (IQA). Although recent no-reference (NR-IQA) methods have made
great progress to predict image quality free from the reference image, they still have the potential to achieve better performance since HQ image information is not fully exploited.
In contrast, full-reference (FR-IQA) methods tend to provide
more reliable quality evaluation, but its practicability is affected by the requirement for pixel-level aligned reference
images. To address this, we firstly propose the content-variant
reference method via knowledge distillation (CVRKD-IQA).
Specifically, we use non-aligned reference (NAR) images to
introduce various prior distributions of high-quality images.
The comparisons of distribution differences between HQ and
LQ images can help our model better assess the image quality. Further, the knowledge distillation transfers more HQ-LQ
distribution difference information from the FR-teacher to
the NAR-student and stabilizing CVRKD-IQA performance.
Moreover, to fully mine the local-global combined information, while achieving faster inference speed, our model directly processes multiple image patches from the input with
the MLP-mixer. Cross-dataset experiments verify that our
model can outperform all NAR/NR-IQA SOTAs, even reach
comparable performance with FR-IQA methods on some occasions. Since the content-variant and non-aligned reference
HQ images are easy to obtain, our model can support more
IQA applications with its relative robustness to content variations. Our code and more detail elaborations of supplement
are available: https://github.com/guanghaoyin/CVRKD-IQA.

Teacher

LQ

(a) NR-IQA

LQ

FR

(b) FR/RR-IQA

KD

Student
LQ

NAR with
similar content

(c) NAR-IQA (content-similar)

LQ

NAR with
variant content

(d) NAR-IQA (content-variant)

Figure 1: Based on the way of using HQ reference images,
previous IQA methods are divided into (a) NR-IQA, (b)
FR/RR-IQA, (c) NAR-IQA (content-similar). We propose
the CVRKD-IQA method, which firstly uses the knowledge
distillation to transfer HQ-LQ distribution difference information from (b) FR-IQA to (d) NAR-IQA (content-variant).
cessing, such as image restoration (Banham and Katsaggelos 1997), super-resolution (Dong et al. 2015), etc.
Recent studies on the human visual system (Sheikh and
Bovik 2006; Ponomarenko et al. 2009) have shown that humans tend to compare images than directly judging an image. Provided with a high-quality (HQ) reference image, humans can make a more accurate and consistent evaluation
about the quality of the distorted image (Ponomarenko et al.
2009). Based on the way of using HQ reference images,
IQA methods are generally divided into three types: noreference (NR) IQA, reduced-reference (RR) IQA, and fullreference (FR) IQA. Specifically, NR-IQA methods (Bosse
et al. 2017; Su et al. 2020) (Fig. 1(a)) only use LQ images as input to directly measure image quality. FR/RRIQA methods (Rehman and Wang 2012; Cheon et al. 2021)
(Fig. 1(b)) utilize the complete or partial information of
the pixel-aligned HQ reference images. Moreover, previous
DCNN (Liang et al. 2016) uses the non-aligned image for
IQA reference (NAR-IQA), which have similar contents but
are not pixel-aligned with the LQ image (Fig. 1(c)).
Recently, there are several different attempts for NR-IQA
methods to achieve promising performance, such as involv-

Introduction
The target of objective image quality assessment (IQA) is
to quantify the visual distortion and produce the perceptive
quality score of the image. The accurate IQA method is quite
important to guide many downstream tasks of image pro* This work was performed while Guanghao Yin worked as an

intern at ByteDance.
†
Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3134

