The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimization for Classical Machine Learning Problems on the GPU
Sören Laue1, 2 , Mark Blacher1 , Joachim Giesen1
1

Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Germany
2
Data Assessment Solutions GmbH
{soeren.laue, mark.blacher, joachim.giesen}@uni-jena.de

Abstract

method involves an inherently sequential Cauchy point computation that determines the variables that will be modified
in the current iteration. The Cauchy point is computed by
minimizing a quadratic approximation over the gradient projection path, resulting in a large number of sequential scalar
computations, which means that all but one core on a multicore processor will be idle. This problem is aggrevated on
modern GPUs that feature a few orders of magnitude more
cores than a standard CPU, e.g., 2304 instead of 18.

Constrained optimization problems arise frequently in classical machine learning. There exist frameworks addressing
constrained optimization, for instance, CVXPY and GENO.
However, in contrast to deep learning frameworks, GPU support is limited. Here, we extend the GENO framework to
also solve constrained optimization problems on the GPU.
The framework allows the user to specify constrained optimization problems in an easy-to-read modeling language. A
solver is then automatically generated from this specification.
When run on the GPU, the solver outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches like CVXPY combined with a GPU-accelerated
solver such as cuOSQP or SCS by a few orders of magnitude.

Let us substantiate this issue by the following example (see the appendix for details). On a non-negative least
squares problem, the L-BFGS-B algorithm needs 4.9 seconds in total until convergence, where 0.6 seconds are spent
in the Cauchy point subroutine. When run on a modern
GPU, the same code needs 5.2 seconds in total while 4.6 seconds are spent in the Cauchy point subroutine. It can be seen
that while all other parts of the L-BFGS-B algorithm can
be parallelized nicely on a GPU, the inherently sequential
Cauchy point computation does not and instead, dominates
the computation time on the GPU; as a result, the L-BFGS-B
method is not faster on a GPU than on a CPU, rendering the
benefits of the GPU moot.

Introduction
Training classical machine learning models typically means
solving an optimization problem. Hence, the design and implementation of solvers for training these models has been
and still is an active research topic. While the use of GPUs
is standard in training deep learning models, most solvers
for classical machine learning problems still target CPUs.
Easy-to-use deep learning frameworks like TensorFlow or
PyTorch can be used to solve unconstrained problems on the
GPU. However, many classical problems entail constrained
optimization problems. So far, deep learning frameworks do
not support constrained problems, not even problems with
simple box constraints, that is, bounds on the variables. Optimization frameworks for classical machine learning like
CVXPY (Agrawal et al. 2018; Diamond and Boyd 2016) can
handle constraints but typically address CPUs. Here, we extend the GENO framework (Laue, Mitterreiter, and Giesen
2019) for constrained optimization to also target GPUs.
Adding GPU support to an optimization framework for
classical machine learning problems is not straightforward. An efficient algorithmic framework could use the
limited-memory quasi-Newton method L-BFGS-B (Byrd
et al. 1995) that allows to solve large-scale optimization
problems with box constraints. More general constraints
can then be addressed by the augmented Lagrangian approach (Hestenes 1969; Powell 1969). However, porting the
L-BFGS-B method to the GPU does not provide any efficiency gain for the following reason: In each iteration the

Here, we present a modified L-BFGS-B method that runs
efficiently on the GPU, because it avoids the sequential
Cauchy point computation. For instance, on the same problem as above, it needs 0.8 seconds in total on the GPU. We
integrate an implementation of this method into the GENO
framework for constrained optimization. Experiments on
several classical machine learning problems show that our
implementation outperforms state-of-the-art approaches like
the combination of CVXPY with GPU-accelerated solvers
such as cuOSQP or SCS by several orders of magnitude.
Contributions. The contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows:
1. We design a provably convergent L-BFGS-B algorithm
that can handle box constraints on the variables and runs efficiently on the GPU.
2. We combine our algorithm with an Augmented Lagrangian approach for solving constrained optimization
problems.
3. We integrate our approach into the GENO framework for
constrained optimization. It outperforms comparable stateof-the-art approaches by several orders of magnitude.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7300

