The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Invariant Action Effect Model for Reinforcement Learning
Zheng-Mao Zhu1,2 * , Shengyi Jiang1 , Yu-Ren Liu1 , Yang Yu1,2 , Kun Zhang 3
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University,Pittsburgh, PA, United States
{zhuzm, jiangsy, liuyr, yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract

Such advantages motivate learning an abstract representation by encoding high-dimensional states into compressed
representations while retaining the most important information for learning tasks (Biza et al. 2020).
Recent works (Srinivas, Laskin, and Abbeel 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020b) use self-supervised methods to learn abstract
states of visual observations, which can be divided into two
major categories: reconstruction-based and dynamics-based
approaches. Reconstruction-based approaches learn representations by restoring the raw observations, but such representations can be easily distracted by large amounts of
irrelevant information in observations(Higgins et al. 2017).
Dynamics-based approaches (Biza et al. 2020) filter the irrelevant information by grouping states that are indistinguishable w.r.t state sequences given any action sequences
tested. However, in the causal perspective, the causation between the action and its effect is ignored since those approaches learn action effects on each state individually. This
causation implies the underlying relations of action effects
in the representation space, which benefits the sample efficiency and generalizability.
Based on the intuition that the same action always causes
similar effects among different states, we propose IAEM (Invariant Action Effect Model) to utilize this causation in the
form of an invariance relation between action effects into
learning latent dynamics, where the effect of an action is
represented as the residual between the representations of
neighboring states. IAEM learns the invariance property for
RL environments with two components: (1) A new contrastive loss by viewing the action effect from the same action as the positive samples and others as negative samples.
We show that with this contrastive loss, the invariance of the
action effect can be preserved in the residuals of the state
representations. (2) An individual action effect and a learnable weight for using the invariant action effect in practice,
which can reduce the discrepancy between the ideal invariance property and the non-invariance in some marginal conditions (e.g., when an agent moves towards a barrier, it will
stay put instead of moving through the barrier).
In summary, this paper makes the following key contributions:

Good representations can help RL agents perform concise
modeling of their surroundings, and thus support effective
decision-making in complex environments. Previous methods learn good representations by imposing extra constraints
on dynamics. However, in the causal perspective, the causation between the action and its effect is not fully considered in
those methods, which leads to the ignorance of the underlying
relations among the action effects on the transitions. Based on
the intuition that the same action always causes similar effects
among different states, we induce such causation by taking
the invariance of action effects among states as the relation.
By explicitly utilizing such invariance, in this paper, we show
that a better representation can be learned and potentially improves the sample efficiency and the generalization ability of
the learned policy. We propose Invariant Action Effect Model
(IAEM) to capture the invariance in action effects, where the
effect of an action is represented as the residual of representations from neighboring states. IAEM is composed of two
parts: (1) a new contrastive-based loss to capture the underlying invariance of action effects; (2) an individual action effect and provides a self-adapted weighting strategy to tackle
the corner cases where the invariance does not hold. The extensive experiments on two benchmarks, i.e. Grid-World and
Atari, show that the representations learned by IAEM preserve the invariance of action effects. Moreover, with the invariant action effect, IAEM can accelerate the learning process by 1.6x, rapidly generalize to new environments by finetuning on a few components, and outperform other dynamicsbased representation methods by 1.4x in limited steps.

Introduction
Despite recent progress on deep reinforcement learning,
sample-efficiency and generalization ability are still big
challenges in achieving a satisfactory performance, especially in environments with high-dimensional observation
space (Mnih et al. 2013, 2015). It has been proved both theoretically and empirically that learning policies from lowdimensional features can be much more sample-efficient
than directly learning. A good representation can also improve generalizability (Silver et al. 2016; Tassa et al. 2018).
* This work is supported by National Key Research and
Development Program of China (2020AAA0107200), and
NSFC(61876077).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The IAEM is the first to learns an action effect disentangled representation, which forming a better representation for learning policies and interpretability.
9260

