The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Locality Matters: A Scalable Value Decomposition Approach
for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Roy Zohar1 , Shie Mannor2 , Guy Tennenholtz2
1

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Nvidia Research, Technion Institute of Technology
roy.zohar@mail.huji.ac.il, shie@ee.technion.ac.il, guytenn@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
faces significant scalability issues due to state and action
spaces that are exponentially large in the number of agents.
As environments grow in size, effective credit assignment
becomes increasingly harder and often results in infeasible
learning times. Still, in many real-world settings, there exist simplified underlying dynamics that can be leveraged for
more scalable solutions. In this work, we exploit such locality
structures effectively whilst maintaining global cooperation.
We propose a novel, value-based multi-agent algorithm called
LOMAQ, which incorporates local rewards in the Centralized Training Decentralized Execution paradigm. Additionally, we provide a direct reward decomposition method for
finding these local rewards when only a global signal is provided. We test our method empirically, showing it scales well
compared to other methods, significantly improving performance and convergence speed.

1

Figure 1: A visualization of training MARL for a graph of
agents with local rewards vs. with global rewards. The colored regions represent the feedback that the agents exhibit
during training

spaces. As the environment scales, coordination becomes increasingly difficult, rendering centralized training impractical. Still, in many real-world settings, there exist simplified
underlying dynamics that can help tackle this problem.
In this paper, we utilize local rewards, a principal component of our work. While local rewards are often used in competitive settings (i.e., where every agent attempts to maximize its own local reward), in most cooperative approaches,
cooperation is weakly enforced through a shared global reward that all agents aim to maximize (Rashid et al. 2018;
Lowe et al. 2017). A visualization of this paradigm is depicted in Figure 1
Local rewards are critical for effective learning in scalable settings. As an example, consider the problem of coaching a large soccer team. If a certain player loses the ball
to the other team, punishing that player directly (and possibly neighboring players) with targeted feedback, may be
far more effective than punishing the entire team with general feedback. The latter will often leave players confused,
believing they should have acted differently.
Despite the effectiveness of local rewards, naively training with local rewards may result in greedy agents that
fail to cooperate. Concurrent approaches that aim to exploit local reward structures for our setting often pay a
price in terms of cooperation and usually resort to training
with global rewards (Lowe et al. 2017). This is particularly
true for the value decomposition approach for cooperative
MARL, which has become increasingly popular in recent

Introduction

The field of Reinforcement Learning (RL) is concerned with
an agent taking actions in an environment in order to maximize a cumulative reward. Recent work has witnessed major
success in various tasks, including Atari games (Mnih et al.
2015), and Go (Silver et al. 2016). A popular extension of
RL is cooperative multi-agent RL (cooperative MARL), in
which a group of agents attempts to interact with an environment together. Research on MARL has gained much attention in recent years, with examples in the Star-Craft multiagent challenge (Vinyals et al. 2019) and traffic control (Chu
et al. 2019).
A common paradigm used in cooperative MARL is Centralized Training Decentralised Execution (CTDE, Kraemer
and Banerjee (2016)). In this approach, agents are trained simultaneously by a centralized controller. Decentralized policies are then derived from the training process and used
for execution. Centralized training can be highly beneficial, granting access to additional global information, which
helps agents coordinate their actions. Nevertheless, utilizing such information effectively is a challenging problem
for cooperative MARL, due to exponential state and action
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9278

