The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Saving Stochastic Bandits from Poisoning Attacks
via Limited Data Verification
Anshuka Rangi 1 , Long Tran-Thanh 2 , Haifeng Xu 3 , Massimo Franceschetti 1
1

University of California San Diego
2
University of Warwick, UK
3
University of Virginia, USA
arangi@ucsd.edu, long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk, hx4ad@virginia.edu, massimo@ece.ucsd.edu
Abstract

systems (Rangi and Franceschetti 2018). The distributed nature of these applications makes these algorithms prone to
third party attacks. For example, in web services decision
making critically depends on reward collection, and this is
prone to attacks that can impact observations and monitoring, delay or temper rewards, produce link failures, and
generally modify or delete information through hijacking
of communication links (Agarwal et al. 2016) (Cardenas,
Amin, and Sastry 2008). Making these systems secure requires an understanding of the regime where the systems
can be attacked, as well as designing ways to mitigate these
attacks. In this paper, we study both of these aspects in a
stochastic MAB setting.
We consider a data poisoning attack, also referred as man
in the middle (MITM) attack. In this attack, there are three
agents: the environment, the learner (MAB algorithm), and
the attacker. At each discrete time-step t, the learner selects an action it among K choices, the environment then
generates a reward rt (it ) ∈ [0, 1] corresponding to the selected action, and attempts to communicate it to the learner.
However, an adversary intercepts rt (it ) and can contaminate it by adding noise t (it ) ∈ [−rt (it ), 1 − rt (it )]. It
follows that the learner observes the contaminated reward
rto (it ) = rt (it ) + t (it ), and rto (it ) ∈ [0, 1]. Hence, the adversary acts as a “man in the middle” between the learner
and the environment. We present an upper bound on both
the amount of contamination, which is the total amount of
additive noise injected by the attacker, and the number of
attacks, which is the number of times the adversary contaminates the observations, sufficient to ensure that the regret
of the algorithm is Ω(T ), where T is the total time of interaction between the learner and the environment. Additionally, we establish that this upper bound is order-optimal by
providing a lower bound on the number of attacks and the
amount of contamination.
A typical way to protect a distributed system from a
MITM attack is to employ a secure channel between the
learner and the environment (Asokan, Niemi, and Nyberg
2003; Sieka and Kshemkalyani 2007; Callegati, Cerroni, and
Ramilli 2009). These secure channels ensure the CIA triad:
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (Ghadeer 2018;
Doddapaneni et al. 2017; Goyal and Mathew 2019). Various ways to establish these channels have been explored in
the literature (Asokan, Niemi, and Nyberg 2003; Sieka and

This paper studies bandit algorithms under data poisoning
attacks in a bounded reward setting. We consider a strong
attacker model in which the attacker can observe both the
selected actions and their corresponding rewards, and can
contaminate the rewards with additive noise. We show that
any bandit algorithm with regret O(log T ) can be forced
to suffer a regret Ω(T ) with an expected amount of contamination O(log T ). This amount of contamination is also
necessary, as we prove that there exists an O(log T ) regret
bandit algorithm, specifically the classical Upper Confidence
Bound (UCB), that requires Ω(log T ) amount of contamination to suffer regret Ω(T ). To combat such poisoning attacks, our second main contribution is to propose verification
based mechanisms, which use limited verification to access
a limited number of uncontaminated rewards. In particular,
for the case of unlimited verifications, we show that with
O(log T ) expected number of verifications, a simple modified version of the Explore-then-Commit type bandit algorithm can restore the order optimal O(log T ) regret irrespective of the amount of contamination used by the attacker. We
also provide a UCB-like verification scheme, called SecureUCB, that also enjoys full recovery from any attacks, also
with O(log T ) expected number of verifications. To derive
a matching lower bound on the number of verifications, we
also prove that for any order-optimal bandit algorithm, this
number of verifications Ω(log T ) is necessary to recover the
order-optimal regret. On the other hand, when the number
of verifications is bounded above by a budget B, we propose a novel algorithm,√Secure-BARBAR, which provably
achieves Õ(min{C, T / B}) regret with high probability
against weak attackers (i.e., attackers who have to place the
contamination before seeing the actual pulls of the bandit algorithm), where C is the total amount of contamination by
the attacker, which breaks the known Ω(C) lower bound of
the non-verified setting if C is large.

1

Introduction

Multi Armed Bandits (MAB) algorithms are often used in
web services (Agarwal et al. 2016; Li et al. 2010), sensor
networks (Tran-Thanh, Rogers, and Jennings 2012), medical
trials (Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Slivkins 2018; Rangi,
Franceschetti, and Tran-Thanh 2019), and crowdsourcing
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8054

