The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Pre-training for Protein Embeddings Using Tertiary Structures
Yuzhi Guo1 , Jiaxiang Wu2 , Hehuan Ma1 , Junzhou Huang1 *
1

University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, 518057, China

Abstract

structure decoys can be generated via various prediction protocols, which raises the question on how to find out the most
accurate prediction, i.e. protein structure quality assessment
(QA) (Olechnovič and Venclovas 2017; Baldassarre et al.
2021). As structure decoys produced by different protocols
can be highly diverse and non-i.i.d., it is critical to obtain
universal embeddings for protein structures. To conclude,
protein structure embeddings are crucial in many proteinrelated applications, but non-trivial to obtain due to limited
data and/or potential bias of data distributions.
Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP)
demonstrate that large-scale self-supervised pre-training
models can be highly effective in various downstream tasks
(Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019). Similar idea has
been adopted to train large-scale language models for proteins, with either amino-acid sequences or multiple sequence
alignments (MSAs). In (Rao et al. 2019; Rives et al. 2021),
LSTM and Transformer models are trained to predict randomly masked-out amino-acids in FASTA sequences, so
as to formulate inter-residue interactions within proteins.
Sturmfels et al. (Sturmfels et al. 2020) propose to predict profiles derived from multiple sequence alignments, instead of randomly masked amino-acids. In (Rao et al. 2021),
Transformer models are trained to predict masked-out position in multiple sequence alignments (rather than FASTA
sequences), which better cooperates the co-evolution information embedded in MSAs. All these sequence-based pretraining models have been proved to be effective in learning
meaningful embeddings for amino-acid types and providing
critical features for secondary structure and contact predictions.
However, such sequence-based pre-training models do
not utilize protein tertiary structures, which could be crucial to structure-related downstream tasks mentioned above.
Additionally, the computational complexity of large-scale
language models are often prohibitively high, and it usually
takes weeks or even months to train such models on highperformance GPU clusters (Rao et al. 2021).
To address above issues, we propose a pre-training model
for learning structure embeddings from protein tertiary
structures. The model is optimized with a self-supervised
loss function, which only relies on protein structures and
does not require any additional supervision. Specifically, native protein structures are randomly perturbed with Gaus-

The protein tertiary structure largely determines its interaction with other molecules. Despite its importance in various
structure-related tasks, fully-supervised data are often timeconsuming and costly to obtain. Existing pre-training models mostly focus on amino-acid sequences or multiple sequence alignments, while the structural information is not
yet exploited. In this paper, we propose a self-supervised
pre-training model for learning structure embeddings from
protein tertiary structures. Native protein structures are perturbed with random noise, and the pre-training model aims
at estimating gradients over perturbed 3D structures. Specifically, we adopt SE(3)-invariant features as the model inputs
and reconstruct gradients over 3D coordinates with SE(3)equivariance preserved. Such a paradigm avoids the usage of
sophisticated SE(3)-equivariant models, and dramatically improves the computational efficiency of pre-training models.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our pre-training model
on two downstream tasks, protein structure quality assessment (QA) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) site prediction. Hierarchical structure embeddings are extracted to enhance corresponding prediction models. Extensive experiments indicate that such structure embeddings consistently
improve the prediction accuracy for both downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

The biological functions of a protein, as well as its possible interaction with other molecules, are largely determined
by its 3-dimensional structure (Berg et al. 2002). For various protein-related applications, e.g. structure-based drug
design (SBDD) (Śledź and Caflisch 2018; Batool, Ahmad,
and Choi 2019) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) prediction (Sun et al. 2017; Zeng et al. 2020), protein tertiary structures are one of the most critical features. However, it is time-consuming and costly to collect 3D structures for protein-ligand complex and multi-protein complex
via experimental structure determination. As a result, the
performance of SBDD and PPI models is often restrained
by the limited structure data. On the other hand, computational methods for protein structure prediction have attracted
increasing attention for many decades. A large number of
* Corresponding author: jzhuang@uta.edu
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6801

