The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Controlling Underestimation Bias in Reinforcement Learning
via Quasi-median Operation
Wei Wei, Yujia Zhang, Jiye Liang* , Lin Li, Yuze Li
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, P.R. China
weiwei@sxu.edu.cn, 342564535@qq.com, ljy@sxu.edu.cn, lilynn1116@sxu.edu.cn, 202022407033@email.sxu.edu.cn

Abstract

the continuous control tasks. The overestimation problem is
caused by inaccurate function estimation or maximization
operation executed by Q-learning or its variants. Due to the
positive bias resulting from overestimation, it is difficult for
an agent to learn high-quality policy in many tasks (Thrun
and Schwartz 1993; Szita and Lőrincz 2008; Strehl, Li, and
Littman 2009).
Recently, some improved Q-learning methods have been
proposed to alleviate the overestimation problem on discrete
tasks. G-learning (Fox, Pakman, and Tishby 2016) regularizes the estimated values by penalizing deterministic policies at the beginning of the learning process. AveragedDQN (Anschel, Baram, and Shimkin 2017) solves the overestimation problem by averaging the estimated values generated by multiple critics as the target state-action value
to reduce the estimation error. Softmax Q-learning (Song,
Parr, and Carin 2019) and Weighted Q-learning (D’Eramo,
Restelli, and Nuara 2016) obtain more accurate target stateaction value by weighting operation. The softmax operation
and Gaussian approximation are adopted to weight multiple estimated values, respectively. However, for a limited
number of action-value functions, the operations in these
algorithms will never wholly eliminate the overestimation
problem since the combination of several overestimation biases is always positive. Therefore, some methods address
the overestimation problem by leveraging the decoupling or
minimization operation on the discrete and continuous control settings.
Double Q-learning (van Hasselt 2010) and DDQN (van
Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016) are two typical applications
of the decoupling operation. They eliminate the overestimation problem by decoupling the two steps of selecting
the greedy action and calculating the state-action value, respectively. Double Q-learning and DDQN solve the overestimation problem on the discrete action tasks, but they
cannot be directly applied to the continuous control tasks.
To solve this problem, Fujimoto et al. (Fujimoto, van Hoof,
and Meger 2018) introduce a model-free reinforcement algorithm called Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient (TD3), which successfully solves the overestimation
problem in continuous control settings by taking the minimization operation on dual critics. Moreover, TD3 takes
delayed policy update and target policy smoothing to reduce the error of each update. Similar to TD3, Maxmin Q-

How to get a good value estimation is one of the key problems
in reinforcement learning (RL). Current off-policy methods,
such as Maxmin Q-learning, TD3, and TADD, suffer from
the underestimation problem when solving the overestimation problem. In this paper, we propose the Quasi-Median
Operation, a novel way to mitigate the underestimation bias
by selecting the quasi-median from multiple state-action values. Based on the quasi-median operation, we propose QuasiMedian Q-learning (QMQ) for the discrete action tasks and
Quasi-Median Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (QMD3) for the continuous action tasks. Theoretically,
the underestimation bias of our method is improved while
the estimation variance is significantly reduced compared to
Maxmin Q-learning, TD3, and TADD. We conduct extensive
experiments on the discrete and continuous action tasks, and
results show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
As a widespread research problem in artificial intelligence,
deep reinforcement learning has received increasing attention since its inception. Currently, deep reinforcement learning can solve many previously intractable problems, such as
learning how to play video games directly from raw pixels
(Lample and Chaplot 2017; Mnih et al. 2015), autonomous
navigation (Liu et al. 2021), gaming (Tesauro 1994; Baxter,
Tridgell, and Weaver 2000; Silver et al. 2016, 2017; Vinyals
et al. 2019), recommendation (Xiao and Wang 2021; Xie
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2018), and other fields.
The preliminary workload of deep reinforcement learning
is significantly reduced by using powerful function approximators, such as multi-layer neural networks. However, the
use of function approximators brings about estimation bias,
which degrades the performance of reinforcement learning
algorithms and hinders further extension of reinforcement
learning to a broader range of domains. Overestimation is
a common function approximation problem in reinforcement learning algorithms, such as Q-learning (Watkins and
Dayan 1992) on the discrete action tasks and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al. 2016) on
* Corresponding author: Jiye Liang. Email: ljy@sxu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8621

