The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Maximizing Nash Social Welfare in 2-Value Instances
Hannaneh Akrami,1 Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury,2 Martin Hoefer,3 Kurt Mehlhorn,4 Marco
Schmalhofer,3 Golnoosh Shahkarami,1 Giovanna Varricchio,3 Quentin Vermande,5 Ernest van
Wijland5
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Graduiertenschule Informatik, Universität des Saarlandes
2
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Department of Computer Science
3
Goethe University Frankfurt, Institute for Computer Science
4
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Universität des Saarlandes
5
École Normale Supérieure, Paris
{hakrami, mehlhorn, gshahkar}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, braycha@illinois.edu, {mhoefer, varricchio,
schmalhofer}@em.uni-frankfurt.de , {quentin.vermande, ernest.van.wijland}@ens.fr
Abstract

assume all functions to be non-negative, monotone, and normalized to vi (∅) = 0. For convenience, we assume every vi
maps into the rational numbers. The goal is to find an allocation of the goods A = (A1 , . . . , An ) to maximize the Nash
social welfare, i.e., the geometric mean of the valuations
!1/n
n
Y
NSW(A) =
vi (Ai )
.

We consider the problem of maximizing the Nash social welfare when allocating a set G of indivisible goods to a set N of
agents. We study instances, in which all agents have 2-value
additive valuations: The value of every agent i ∈ N for every
good j ∈ G is vij ∈ {p, q}, for p, q ∈ N, p ≤ q. In this work,
we design an algorithm to compute an optimal allocation in
polynomial time if p divides q, i.e., when p = 1 and q ∈ N
after appropriate scaling. The problem is NP-hard whenever
p and q are coprime and p ≥ 3.
In terms of approximation, we present positive and negative
results for general p and q. We show that our algorithm obtains an approximation ratio of at most 1.0345. Moreover, we
prove that the problem is APX-hard, with a lower bound of
1.000015 achieved at p/q = 4/5.

i=1

Of particular interest are the instances admitting strictly positive NSW; clearly, in this case, an allocation that maximizes the NSW is Pareto-optimal. By maximizing the NSW,
we strike a balance
between maximizing the utilitarian soP
cial welfare i vi (Ai ) and the egalitarian social welfare
mini vi (Ai ). Notably, optimality and approximation ratio
for NSW are invariant to scaling each valuation vi (Ai ) by an
agent-specific parameter ci > 0. This is yet another property
that makes NSW an attractive objective function for allocation problems. It allows a further normalization – we can
assume every vi : 2G → N0 maps into the natural numbers.
Finding desirable approximation algorithms for maximizing the NSW has become an active field of research
only recently.
P For instances with additive valuations, where
vi (A) =
j∈A vij for every i ∈ N , in a series of papers (Cole et al. 2017; Cole and Gkatzelis 2018; Anari
et al. 2017; Barman, Krishnamurthy, and Vaish 2018a) several algorithms with constant approximation factors were
obtained. The currently best factor is e1/e ≈ 1.445 (Barman, Krishnamurthy, and Vaish 2018a). The algorithm uses
prices and techniques inspired by competitive equilibria,
along with suitable rounding of valuations to guarantee polynomial running time.
Even for identical additive valuations, (i.e., vij = vj for
all i ∈ N , j ∈ G,) the problem is NP-hard, and a greedy algorithm with factor of 1.061 (Barman, Krishnamurthy, and
Vaish 2018b) as well as a PTAS (Nguyen and Rothe 2014)
were obtained. In terms of inapproximability,
the best known
p
lower bound for additive valuations is 8/7 ≈ 1.069 (Garg,
Hoefer, and Mehlhorn 2018). Notably, this lower bound applies even in the case when the additive valuation is composed of only three values with one of them being 0 (i.e.,

Introduction
Fair division is an important area at the intersection of economics and computer science. While fair division with divisible goods is relatively well-understood in many contexts,
the case of indivisible goods is significantly more challenging. Recent work in fair division has started to examine extensions of standard fairness concepts such as envy-freeness
to notions such as EF1 (envy-free up to one good) (Lipton
et al. 2004) or EFX (envy-free up to any good) (Caragiannis
et al. 2016), most prominently in the case of non-negative,
additive valuations of the agents. In this additive domain,
notions of envy-freeness are closely related to the Nash social welfare (NSW), which is defined by the geometric mean
of the valuations. An allocation maximizing the Nash social
welfare is Pareto-optimal, satisfies EF1 (Caragiannis et al.
2016) and in some cases even EFX (Amanatidis et al. 2020).
An important question is, thus, if we can efficiently compute
or approximate an allocation that maximizes NSW. This is
the question we study in this paper.
More formally, we consider an allocation problem with a
set N of n agents and a set G of m indivisible goods. Each
agent i ∈ N has a valuation function vi : 2G → Q≥0 . We
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4760

