The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Complexity of Proportionality Degree in Committee Elections
Łukasz Janeczko, Piotr Faliszewski
AGH University, Kraków, Poland
{ljaneczk,faliszew}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract

one of the group’s members. In other words, such a group,
known as an `-cohesive group, deserves at least ` candidates,
but it suffices that a single member of the group approves
them. If this condition holds, then we say that the committee
provides extended justified representation (provides EJR; if
we restrict our attention to ` = 1, then we speak of providing justified representation, JR). The key to the success
of this notion is that committees providing EJR always exist
and are selected by voting rules designed to provide proportional representation, such as the proportional approval
voting rule (PAV) of Thiele (1895). Thus many researchers
followed Aziz et al. (2017) either in defining new variants
of the justified representation axioms (Sánchez-Fernández
et al. 2017; Peters, Pierczynski, and Skowron 2020) or in
analyzing and designing rules that would provide committees satsifying these properties (Aziz et al. 2018; SánchezFernández et al. 2021; Brill et al. 2017). Others study these
notions experimentally (Bredereck et al. 2019).
Yet, JR and EJR are somewhat unsatisfying. After all, to
provide them it suffices that a single member of each cohesive group approves enough committee members, irrespective of all the other voters. To address this issue, Aziz
et al. (2018) introduced the notion of proportionality degree
(PD). They said that the satisfaction of a voter is equal to
the number of committee members that he or she approves
and they considered average satisfactions of the voters in
cohesive groups. More precisely, they said that a committee has PD f , where f is a function from positive integers
to nonnegative reals, if for each `-cohesive group, the average satisfaction of the voters in this group is at least f (`).
So, establishing the PD of a rule gives quantitative understanding of its proportionality, whereas JR and EJR only
give qualitative information. That said, Aziz et al. (2018)
did show that if a committee provides EJR then it has PD at
least f (`) = `−1/2, so the two notions are related. Further,
they showed that PAV committees have PD f (`) = ` − 1
and Skowron (2021) established good bounds on the PDs of
numerous other proportionality-oriented rules. In particular,
their results allow one to order these rules according to their
theoretical guarantees, from those providing strongest guarantees to those providing the weakest.
We extend this line of work by studying the complexity of
problems pertaining to the proportionality degree:

Over the last few years, researchers have put significant effort into understanding of the notion of proportional representation in committee election. In particular, recently they
have proposed the notion of proportionality degree. We study
the complexity of computing committees with a given proportionality degree and of testing if a given committee provides a
particular one. This way, we complement recent studies that
mostly focused on the notion of (extended) justified representation. We also study the problems of testing if a cohesive
group of a given size exists and of counting such groups.

1

Introduction

If we consider a parliamentary election where about 45%
voters support party A, 30% support party B, and the
remaining 25% support party C, then there are wellunderstood ways of assigning seats to the parties in a proportional manner. However, if instead of naming the supported parties the voters can approve each candidate individually, e.g., depending on non-partisan agendas, the situation
becomes less clear. While such free-form elections are not
popular in political settings, they do appear in the context of
artificial intelligence. For example, they can be used to organize search results (Skowron et al. 2017), assure fairness
in social media (Chakraborty et al. 2019), help design online
Q&A systems (Israel and Brill 2021), or suggest movies to
watch (Gawron and Faliszewski 2022). As a consequence,
seeking formal understanding of proportionality in multiwinner elections is among the most active branches of computational social choice (Lackner and Skowron 2020). In
this paper we extend this line of work by analyzing the computational complexity of one of the recent measures of proportionality, the proportionality degree (Aziz et al. 2018).
We consider the model of elections where, given a set of
candidates, each of the n voters specifies which candidates
he or she approves, and the goal is to choose a size-k subset
of the candidates, called the winning committee. Since the
committee is supposed to represent the voters proportionally, Aziz et al. (2017) proposed the following requirement:
For each positive integer ` and each group of ` · n/k voters
who agree on at least ` common candidates, the committee should contain at least ` candidates approved by at least
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1. We show that, in general, deciding if a committee with
5092

