The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Task Assignment Problems with Reusable Resources
Hanna Sumita,1 Shinji Ito,2 Kei Takemura,2 Daisuke Hatano,3 Takuro Fukunaga,4
Naonori Kakimura,5 Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi 6
1

Tokyo Institute of Technology
2
NEC Corporation
3
RIKEN AIP
4
Chuo University
5
Keio University
6
National Institute of Informatics
sumita@c.titech.ac.jp, {kei takemura, i-shinji}@nec.com, daisuke.hatano@riken.jp, fukunaga.07s@chuo-u.ac.jp,
kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp, k keniti@nii.ac.jp
Abstract

a rider in a rideshare platform and language skills required
to complete a task in a crowdsourcing platform. An edge
(u, v) ∈ E means that u has ability to process an online
task v. In the problem, the set U of agents is known in advance (offline vertices), while we are given a vertex with
a type v ∈ V (an online vertex) at each time, randomly
according to a time-dependent distribution Dt over V . We
identify an online vertex with its type v. On arrival of v,
we immediately and irrevocably either assign some agents
to v, or discard the chance of processing v. Then we obtain
a profit produced by an assigned agent if she completes a
task. The goal is to design an online algorithm that maximizes the total profit. We here assume that Dt is known in
advance, which is called a Known Adversarial Distribution
(KAD) model (Dickerson et al. 2021); see also (Alaei, Hajiaghayi, and Liaghat 2012). If Dt is the same for all t, it is
called a Known I.I.D. (KIID) model.
Motivated by practical applications, it has been studied
to generalize the online task assignment problem with additional specific conditions. An example is reusability of
agents (Dickerson et al. 2021). In the standard online task
assignment problem, when an agent is assigned a task, she
will leave immediately from the market. However, if agents
are reusable, an agent comes back to the market after completing the task, and she can be matched to a new task
again. Such situation especially arises in a rideshare platform with drivers and riders. Another example is rejections
by agents (Nanda et al. 2020). It is natural that an agent is allowed to reject an assigned task if it is not satisfactory. Moreover, each agent may have an upper bound on the number of
rejections, that is, when she rejects an assigned task ∆ times,
then she must leave from the market. It should be noted that
the previous work mentioned above studied the online bipartite matching where only one agent can be assigned to
an online task, and it is not straightforward to extend1 the
results to the online task assignment problem.

We study online task assignment problem with reusable resources, motivated by practical applications such as ridesharing, crowdsourcing and job hiring. In the problem, we are
given a set of offline vertices (agents), and, at each time, an
online vertex (task) arrives randomly according to a known
time-dependent distribution. Upon arrival, we assign the task
to agents immediately and irrevocably. The goal of the problem is to maximize the expected total profit produced by completed tasks. The key features of our problem are (1) an agent
is reusable, i.e., an agent comes back to the market after completing the assigned task, (2) an agent may reject the assigned
task to stay the market, and (3) a task may accommodate multiple agents. The setting generalizes that of existing work in
which an online task is assigned to one agent under (1).
In this paper, we propose an online algorithm that is 1/2competitive for the above setting, which is tight. Moreover, when each agent can reject assigned tasks at most ∆
times, the algorithm is shown to have the competitive ratio
∆/(3∆ − 1) ≥ 1/3. We also evaluate our proposed algorithm with numerical experiments.

Introduction
Online task assignment problem has attracted extensive attention recently in combinatorial optimization and artificial
intelligence. The problem models practical situations that
assign agents to tasks arriving online. For example, in a
rideshare platform (Dickerson et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2021;
Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2020; Nanda et al.
2020) such as Uber and Lyft, we match drivers to riders
where requests from riders arrive one by one. Other applications include crowdsourcing (Assadi, Hsu, and Jabbari 2015;
Ho and Vaughan 2012; Xu et al. 2017) and job hiring (Anagnostopoulos et al. 2018; Dickerson et al. 2019).
In this paper, we study online task assignment problem
under known adversarial distributions. In the problem, we
are given a time horizon T and a bipartite graph G =
(U, V ; E), where U corresponds to a set of agents and V
represents types of tasks. A type of a task is usually defined
by attributes of the task, e.g., pick-up/drop-off locations of

1

We can consider a simple reduction that replaces an online
vertex v with capacity bv as bv vertices with capacity 1 arriving
sequentially. Such reduction, however, would not work in the KIID/KAD model because an online vertex is chosen independently
at each time.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5199

