The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How General-Purpose Is a Language Model?
Usefulness and Safety with Human Prompters in the Wild
Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares1 , Bao Sheng Loe2 , John Burden3 , Sean hEigeartaigh3,4 ,
José Hernández-Orallo4,5
1 Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain
2 The Psychometrics Centre, Cambridge Judge Business School, UK

3 Centre for the Study of Existential Risk, University of Cambridge, UK
4 Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence, University of Cambridge, UK

5 Valencian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence (VRAIN), Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain

pabloamo@ucm.es, a.loe@jbs.cam.ac.uk, jjb205@cam.ac.uk, so348@cam.ac.uk, jorallo@upv.es
Abstract

A song for a two-year-old child
about a bird in a cage
and a little mouse goes like this:

The new generation of language models is reported to solve
some extraordinary tasks the models were never trained for
specifically, in few-shot or zero-shot settings. However, these
reports usually cherry-pick the tasks, use the best prompts,
and unwrap or extract the solutions leniently even if they are
followed by nonsensical text. In sum, they are specialised results for one domain, a particular way of using the models and
interpreting the results. In this paper, we present a novel theoretical evaluation framework and a distinctive experimental
study assessing language models as general-purpose systems
when used directly by human prompters—in the wild. For a
useful and safe interaction in these increasingly more common conditions, we need to understand when the model fails
because of a lack of capability or a misunderstanding of the
user’s intents. Our results indicate that language models such
as GPT-3 have limited understanding of the human command;
far from becoming general-purpose systems in the wild.

"I’m a bird in a cage,
and I’d like to fly away.
And the more I say I want to,
the more they say I can’t".

You need to write a song
for a two-year-old child about
a cat skateboarding
and a dog playing with a ball.
This is your chance
to be creative!

Figure 1: Two prompts (in blue) and continuations (in green)
generated by GPT-3. The example of the right shows that
getting a language model to do what you want requires more
than raw capabilities: ‘understanding’ the command is important in making these systems useful and reliable.
property of these models: direct model prompting is the closest scenario today to a general-purpose AI system.
This flexibility comes with many risks. Because of this,
we see an ongoing debate on whether non-expert users
should interact freely with language models (Solaiman et al.
2019). However, the reality is that these systems are now
widely available1 . Second, AI researchers and companies
have favoured controlled scenarios for a narrow domain
because these systems can be optimised towards the best
prompt in terms of intended results (Xu et al. 2020; Izacard
and Grave 2020; Hendrycks et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Qin
and Eisner 2021). The search for the best prompt includes
hyperparameters such as ‘temperature’ or the unwrapping
of results, known as the ‘decoding strategy’ (Perez, Kiela,
and Cho 2021). Unfortunately, even small variations of the
prompt make the results much worse (Zhao et al. 2021).
It is only then through direct use of these models for a
wide range of tasks—in the wild—, where we can really see
the potential of general-purpose AI systems and their risks.
In particular, we can properly evaluate when these systems

Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress in language models such
as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), T5 (Raffel et al. 2019), GPT
(Brown et al. 2020) and PanGu-𝛼 (Zeng et al. 2021) has
consolidated a new way of interacting with them through
‘prompts’: small pieces of text the user supplies for the model
to continue. No fine-tuning is required; the model can be used
out-of-the-box in new tasks, provided an appropriate prompt
(Xu et al. 2020; Izacard and Grave 2020; Hendrycks et al.
2020). A particularly interesting setting is called few-shot
inference, where the prompt includes illustrative examples
(Brown et al. 2020; Reynolds and McDonell 2021; Scao and
Rush 2021; Schick and Schütze 2020; Bragg et al. 2021).
But even with zero-shot prompts, amazing applications are
reported. For instance, Fig 1 (left) shows a prompt and a useful continuation given by a language model. In Fig 1 (right),
however, the model makes a plausible continuation, but it
does not understand the ‘command’.
A careful design of prompts for a particular task can extract the full potential from these models with some control
of the unintended behaviours. However, it also limits the key

Supplementary material and experimental data can be found in
https://github.com/PabloAMC/LM_AAAI22.
1
Through
code
(https://github.com/lucidrains/DALLEpytorch), initiatives such as BigScience (https://bigscience.
huggingface.co/) (Hao 2021), GPT-NeoX (https://github.
com/EleutherAI/gpt-neox/), and available demos or APIs
such as Eleuther (https://6b.eleuther.ai/), AI21 (https:
//studio.ai21.com/docs/api/) or CogView (Ding et al. 2021).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5295

