The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On Causally Disentangled Representations
Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy, Benin Godfrey L, Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
cs19resch11002@iith.ac.in, benin.godfrey@cse.iith.ac.in, vineethnb@iith.ac.in

Abstract

an observed data distribution, and is an important problem
to address given its applications to generalization (Montero
et al. 2021), data generation (Zhu et al. 2020), explainability (Gilpin et al. 2018), fairness (Creager et al. 2019), etc.
The generative processes underlying observational data often contain complex interactions among generative factors.
Treating such interactions as independent causal mechanisms (Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017) is essential to
many real-world applications including the development of
learning algorithms that learn transferable mechanisms from
one domain to another (Schölkopf et al. 2021).
The study of disentanglement in unsupervised settings,
with independence assumptions on the generative factors,
has been the dominant topic of study for some time in
recent literature (Higgins et al. 2017; Kumar, Sattigeri,
and Balakrishnan 2017; Kim and Mnih 2018; Chen et al.
2018). Considering the limitations of unsupervised disentanglement (Locatello et al. 2019) and potentially unrealistic nature of the independence assumptions, a few semisupervised and weakly supervised disentanglement methods
have also been developed more recently (Locatello et al.
2020; Chen and Batmanghelich 2020; Dittadi et al. 2021;
Träuble et al. 2021). None of the above mentioned methods,
however, take a causal view on the underlying data generative process while studying disentanglement. We study
disentanglement from a causal perspective in this work,
grounding ourselves on the very little work along this direction (Suter et al. 2019). Since causal generative processes
can be complex with arbitrary depth and width in their
graphical representations, we restrict ourselves to two-level
causal generative processes of the form shown in Figure 1
as these, by itself, can model many real-world settings with
confounding (Pearl 2009), and have not been studied before
either in the context of disentanglement or representation
learning. We then also study how well-known latent variable models – e.g., β-VAE (Higgins et al. 2017) – perform
disentanglement in the presence of confounders.
To this end, based on the definition of a disentangled
causal process by (Suter et al. 2019), we look at three essential properties of causal disentanglement and propose evaluation metrics that are grounded on the principles of causality to study the level of causal disentanglement achieved by
a generative latent variable model. The analysis in (Suter
et al. 2019) focused on a metric for interventional robust-

Representation learners that disentangle factors of variation
have already proven to be important in addressing various
real world concerns such as fairness and interpretability. Initially consisting of unsupervised models with independence
assumptions, more recently, weak supervision and correlated
features have been explored, but without a causal view of the
generative process. In contrast, we work under the regime of
a causal generative process where generative factors are either independent or can be potentially confounded by a set of
observed or unobserved confounders. We present an analysis
of disentangled representations through the notion of disentangled causal process. We motivate the need for new metrics
and datasets to study causal disentanglement and propose two
evaluation metrics and a dataset. We show that our metrics
capture the desiderata of disentangled causal process. Finally,
we perform an empirical study on state of the art disentangled
representation learners using our metrics and dataset to evaluate them from causal perspective.

Introduction
Humans implicitly tend to use causal reasoning while learning and explaining real-world concepts. Deep learning models, however, are considered to be black-box (Lipton 2018)
and also correlational, thus, we cannot directly rely on their
decisions in safety-critical domains such as medicine, defence, aerospace, etc. Consequently, there has been a surge
in using the ideas of causality to improve the learning and
explanation capabilities of deep learning models in recent
years (O' Shaughnessy et al. 2020; Suter et al. 2019; Goyal
et al. 2019a,b; Chattopadhyay et al. 2019; Janzing 2019;
Zmigrod et al. 2019; Pitis, Creager, and Garg 2020; Zhu,
Ng, and Chen 2020; Schölkopf et al. 2021). Deep learning
models that learn the underlying causal structures in data
not only avoid this problem of learning purely correlational
input-output relationships, but also help in providing causal
explanations. In this work, we choose disentangled representation learning as a tool to study the usefulness of applying
causality in machine learning.
Disentangled representation learning (Bengio, Courville,
and Vincent 2013; Schölkopf et al. 2021) aims to identify the
underlying independent generative factors of variation given
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8089

