The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Feature Distillation Interaction Weighting Network for
Lightweight Image Super-resolution
Guangwei Gao1† , Wenjie Li1† , Juncheng Li2 * , Fei Wu1 , Huimin Lu3 , Yi Yu4
1

Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Kyushu Institute of Technology
4
National Institute of Informatics
{csggao,cvjunchengli}@gmail.com, liwj0824@163.com, wufei 8888@126.com, luhuimin@ieee.org, yiyu@nii.ac.jp
Abstract

texture details. In 2014, Dong et al. introduced the deep
learning technology into SISR and proposed the first CNNbased SISR model, named SRCNN (Dong et al. 2015). Although SRCNN has only three convolutional layers, its performance has far surpassed traditional methods and achieved
state-of-the-art results at the time. Now, we know that
deeper and more complex networks can achieve better performance (Lim et al. 2017; Ahn, Kang, and Sohn 2018;
Haris, Shakhnarovich, and Ukita 2018; Zhang et al. 2018a,b;
Li et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020b). However, their parameters and calculations are also huge and
are difficult to be used on mobile devices. To address this
issue, many lightweight SISR models have also been proposed. For instance, CARN (Ahn, Kang, and Sohn 2018) is
a lightweight residual network composed of multiple residual connections. ECBSR (Zhang, Zeng, and Zhang 2021)
is a lightweight and efficient network whose features are
extracted in multiple paths. The purpose of these models
is to reduce the complexity of the model and facilitate the
application in the real world. The demand for lightweight
practical models motivates us to propose the Feature Distillation Interaction Weighted Network (FDIWN). The computational costs of FDIWN are lower than most existing
lightweight SISR models, but it is not inferior to them in
terms of performance.

Convolutional neural networks based single-image superresolution (SISR) has made great progress in recent years.
However, it is difficult to apply these methods to real-world
scenarios due to the computational and memory cost. Meanwhile, how to take full advantage of the intermediate features
under the constraints of limited parameters and calculations
is also a huge challenge. To alleviate these issues, we propose a lightweight yet efficient Feature Distillation Interaction Weighted Network (FDIWN). Specifically, FDIWN utilizes a series of specially designed Feature Shuffle Weighted
Groups (FSWG) as the backbone, and several novel mutual
Wide-residual Distillation Interaction Blocks (WDIB) form
an FSWG. In addition, Wide Identical Residual Weighting
(WIRW) units and Wide Convolutional Residual Weighting
(WCRW) units are introduced into WDIB for better feature distillation. Moreover, a Wide-Residual Distillation Connection (WRDC) framework and a Self-Calibration Fusion
(SCF) unit are proposed to interact features with different
scales more flexibly and efficiently. Extensive experiments
show that our FDIWN is superior to other models to strike
a good balance between model performance and efficiency.
The code is available at https://github.com/IVIPLab/FDIWN.

Introduction
Due to the huge computational overhead of traditional superresolution, it is difficult to be applied to mobile devices with
limited computing capabilities. The main goal of lightweight
single-image super-resolution (SISR) is to reconstruct superresolution (SR) images from the low-resolution (LR) one
with fewer parameters and calculations (Yao et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2020a; Hou, Zhou, and Feng 2021). In the past ten
years, deep learning has made amazing achievements in various computer vision tasks, which also greatly promoted the
development of SISR.
Recently, many convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
based SISR methods have been proposed (Dong et al. 2015;
Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Dong, Loy, and Tang 2016;
Tian et al. 2020; He et al. 2019). Compared with the traditional methods, CNN-based SISR methods are more versatile and can reconstruct higher-quality SR images with more

As we know, as the depth of the network increases, information will be lost during transmission. Therefore, under the constraints of parameters and calculations, how to
prevent information loss, and how to make full use of intermediate features is important. To achieve this, we introduce Wide-residual Distillation Interaction Blocks (WDIB)
in the Feature Shuffle Weighted Group (FSWG) for pairwise feature fusion, and then the features are shuffled and
weighted. This operation can improve model performance
while only increasing a small amount of computational cost
since the wide-residual attention weighting units are extensively used in WDIB, including Wide Identical Residual
Weighting (WIRW) units and Wide Convolutional Residual Weighting (WCRW) units. WIRW and WCRN allow
more features to pass and be activated, thereby increasing
the transmission and utilization of the features. Meanwhile,
the carefully designed Self-Calibration Fusion (SCF) unit
integrates different levels of features by the jump splicing

* Corresponding author, †Equal contributions.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

661

