The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contact-Distil: Boosting Low Homologous Protein Contact Map Prediction by
Self-Supervised Distillation
Qin Wang134† , Jiayang Chen 2† , Yuzhe Zhou 134 , Yu Li 2 , Liangzhen Zheng 5 , Sheng Wang 5 , Zhen
Li134* , Shuguang Cui 134
3

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong(Shenzhen) 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Future Network of Intelligence Institute (FNii) 4 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 5 Shanghai Zelixir Biotech
{qinwang1@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn, realbigws@gmail.com

Rich MSA

Abstract

Poor MSA

MG R V T S G T MR F G V T F R E V
M S K - H S G T MR F A - TWR D V
M - K - S S G S MR F - V T Y R E MC K - TW - TML V P - T F K E ML RV HWG T - L F E L T - K E V
- G R I S L - TM- V G - T F S D - I K - H L G T F K F T L TWS E V

Accurate protein contact map prediction (PCMP) is essential
for precise protein structure estimation and further biological
studies. Recent works achieve significant performance on this
task with high quality multiple sequence alignment (MSA).
However, the PCMP accuracy drops dramatically while only
poor MSA (e.g., absolute MSA count less than 10) is available. Therefore, in this paper, we propose the Contact-Distil
to improve the low homologous PCMP accuracy through
knowledge distillation on a self-supervised model. Particularly, two pre-trained transformers are exploited to learn the
high quality and low quality MSA representation in parallel
for the teacher and student model correspondingly. Besides,
the co-evolution information is further extracted from pure
sequence through a pretrained ESM-1b model, which provides auxiliary knowledge to improve student performance.
Extensive experiments show Contact-Distil outperforms previous state-of-the-arts by large margins on CAMEO-L dataset
for low homologous PCMP, i.e., around 13.3% and 9.5%
improvements against Alphafold2 and MSA Transformer respectively when MSA count less than 10.

MSA
Representation
Learning

MG R V T S G T MR F G V T F R E V
M S K - H S G T MR F A - T WR D V
MC K - TW - TML V P - T F K E - G R I S L - TM- V G - T F S D - I K - H L G T F K F T L TWS E V

MSA
Representation
Learning
Student Branch

Teacher Branch

Rich Contact Map

Poor Contact Map

Teach

Laerg-scale Fasta
Representation
Learning

Fasta

Figure 1: Contact-Distil for low homologous PCMP. The
model is trained in a self-supervised manner. The teacher
branch accepts rich MSA and student branch takes downsampled poor MSA as the input. Each branch adopts a pretained representation learning model to provide co-evolution
features. Knowledge distillation loss aims to align the poor
features from the student to the teacher rich ones. Besides,
the student branch exploits pseudo knowledge from largescale pretrained ESM-1b to compensate for the extremely
low homologous proteins with poor MSAs.

Introduction
Protein structure estimation shows the great importance
of drug design, vaccine development and other biological function studies. The problem of obtaining highly accurate 3D protein folding remains challenging. Nowadays,
there are two major routes to obtain the structure prediction which are experimental method and computer-aid algorithm. For instance, in experimental approaches, (Noble,
Endicott, and Johnson 2004; Wuthrich 1989; Wang et al.
2015) utilize X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to
solve this issue. However, those biology practical methods
are either time consummation or labor-intensive. Tremendous economic cost further limits the development of those
approaches especially for cryo-EM. Therefore, to get rid of
those limitations, computer-aid approach (Mandell and Kortemme 2009) is attracted by researchers’ attention. Take advantage of deep learning algorithm development, (Li and
Yu 2016; Wang et al. 2016; Zhou and Troyanskaya 2014)

resolve protein structure by exploiting finely designed neural networks. Nevertheless, the accurate protein contact map
prediction (PCMP) is the key to massive improvement of
the folding accuracy in (Källberg et al. 2014). Particularly,
PCMP represents whether contact or not for any two-residue
pair in the 3D protein folding space. In (Tegge et al. 2009),
NNcon is proposed to resolve PCMP by 2D-recursive neural
networks. To further improve PCMP performance, (Wang
et al. 2017) proposes a very deep residual model to achieve
the protein contact map which exploits multiple 2D residual
convolution layers to learn from 1D sequential features.
Recently, MSA transformer (Rao et al. 2021) extracts the
embedding features from representation learning as the auxiliary features to improve the downstream PCMP accuracy.

* Corresponding author. † Equal first authorship.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4620

