The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Scene Graph Classification by Exploiting Knowledge from Texts
Sahand Sharifzadeh1 * , Sina Moayed Baharlou1 * † , Martin Schmitt2 ,
Hinrich Schütze2 , Volker Tresp 1,3
2

1
Department of Informatics, LMU Munich, Germany
Center for Information and Language Processing (CIS), LMU Munich, Germany
3
Siemens AG, Munich, Germany
sahand.sharifzadeh@gmail.com, sina.baharlou@gmail.com

Abstract

scene graph (SG) classification. The goal of SG classification
is to classify objects and their relations in an image. One of
the challenges in SG classification is collecting annotated image data. Most approaches in this domain rely on thousands
of manually labeled and curated images. In this paper, we
investigate whether the SG classification models can be finetuned from textual scene descriptions (similar to the “dressed
cow” example above).
We consider a classification pipeline with two major parts:
a feature extraction backbone, and a relational reasoning
component (Figure 1). The backbone is typically a convolutional neural network (CNN) that detects objects and extracts
an image-based representation for each. On the other hand,
the relational reasoning component can be a variant of a recurrent neural network [Xu et al. 2017, Zellers et al. 2018] or
graph convolutional networks [Yang et al. 2018, Sharifzadeh,
Baharlou, and Tresp 2021]. This component operates on an
object level by taking the latent representations of all the
objects in the image and propagating them in the graph.
Note that, unlike the feature extraction backbone that requires images as input, the relational reasoning component
operates on graphs with the nodes representing objects and
the edges representing relations. The distinction between
the input to the backbone (images) and the relational reasoning component (graphs) is often overlooked. Instead, the
scene graph classification pipeline is treated as a network
that takes only images as inputs. However, one can also train
or fine-tune the relational reasoning component directly by
injecting it with relational knowledge. For example, Knowledge Graphs (KGs) contain curated facts that indicate the
relations between a head object and a tail object in the
form of (head, predicate, tail) e.g., (Person,
Rides, Horse). The facts in KGs are represented by
symbols whereas the inputs to the relational reasoning component are image-based embeddings. In this work, we map
the triples to image-grounded embeddings as if they are coming from an image. We then use these embeddings to finetune the relational reasoning component through a denoising
graph autoencoder scheme.
Note that the factual knowledge is not always available
in a well-structured form, specially in domains where the
knowledge is not stored in the machine-accessible form of
KGs. In fact, most of the collective human knowledge is only

Training scene graph classification models requires a large
amount of annotated image data. Meanwhile, scene graphs
represent relational knowledge that can be modeled with symbolic data from texts or knowledge graphs. While image annotation demands extensive labor, collecting textual descriptions
of natural scenes requires less effort. In this work, we investigate whether textual scene descriptions can substitute for
annotated image data. To this end, we employ a scene graph
classification framework that is trained not only from annotated images but also from symbolic data. In our architecture,
the symbolic entities are first mapped to their correspondent
image-grounded representations and then fed into the relational reasoning pipeline. Even though a structured form of
knowledge, such as the form in knowledge graphs, is not always available, we can generate it from unstructured texts
using a transformer-based language model. We show that by
fine-tuning the classification pipeline with the extracted knowledge from texts, we can achieve ∼8x more accurate results
in scene graph classification, ∼3x in object classification, and
∼1.5x in predicate classification, compared to the supervised
baselines with only 1% of the annotated images.

Introduction
Relational reasoning is one of the essential components of
intelligence; humans explore their environment by grasping
the entire context of a scene rather than studying each item
in isolation from the others. Furthermore, we expand our
understanding of the world by educating ourselves about
novel facts through reading or listening. For example, we
might have never seen a “cow wearing a dress” but might
have read about Hindu traditions of decorating cows. While
we already have a robust visual system that can extract basic
visual features such as edges and curves from a scene, the
description of a “cow wearing a dress” refines our visual
understanding of relations on an object level and enables us
to recognize a dressed cow when seeing it.
Relational reasoning is gaining growing popularity in the
Computer Vision community and especially in the form of
* These authors contributed equally.
†
S. M. Baharlou contributed to this project while he was a visiting researcher at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2189

