The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Aligned Cross-Modal Representation
for Generalized Zero-Shot Classification
Zhiyu Fang, Xiaobin Zhu* , Chun Yang, Zheng Han, Jingyan Qin, Xu-Cheng Yin
School of Computer & Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
{mr.fangzy, han970421, qinjingyanking}@foxmail.com, {zhuxiaobin, chunyang, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn

Attributes

Image

Abstract
Learning a common latent embedding by aligning the latent
spaces of cross-modal autoencoders is an effective strategy
for Generalized Zero-Shot Classification (GZSC). However,
due to the lack of fine-grained instance-wise annotations, it
still easily suffer from the domain shift problem for the discrepancy between the visual representation of diversified images and the semantic representation of fixed attributes. In
this paper, we propose an innovative autoencoder network
by learning Aligned Cross-Modal Representations (dubbed
ACMR) for GZSC. Specifically, we propose a novel VisionSemantic Alignment (VSA) method to strengthen the alignment of cross-modal latent features on the latent subspaces
guided by a learned classifier. In addition, we propose a novel
Information Enhancement Module (IEM) to reduce the possibility of latent variables collapse meanwhile encouraging
the discriminative ability of latent variables. Extensive experiments on publicly available datasets demonstrate the stateof-the-art performance of our method.

Common
Embedding Space
Feature
encoder

Latent Subspace
ACMR

stripes
furry
toughskin
big
lean
hooves
paws
longneck
tail
chewteech

Figure 1: Illustration of the overall concept of our method.
Our ACMR strengthens the alignment of cross-modal latent
features on latent subspaces guided by a learned classifier.

Introduction

mapped the class-level semantic features into a redundancyfree feature space constructed from visual features. Some
other methods (Yu and Lee 2019; Vyas, Venkateswara, and
Panchanathan 2020; Gao et al. 2020; Yue et al. 2021) try
to generate synthetic training samples of unseen classes for
GZSL. Vyas et al. (Vyas, Venkateswara, and Panchanathan
2020) proposed a semantic regularized loss for conditional
WGAN to generate visual features for bridging the distribution gap between seen and unseen classes. However, because the distribution of visual features in seen and unseen
classes are generally distinguished, unidirectional mappings
can easily induce the domain shift problem (Fu et al. 2015;
Zhu, Wang, and Saligrama 2019).
To alleviate the domain shift problem, some methods
(Xian et al. 2016; Tsai, Huang, and Salakhutdinov 2017;
Verma et al. 2018) try to learn common latent spaces by
cross-modal alignment restriction. In this paradigm, Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) based architectures are popular
for the capability of fitting data distribution in latent space.
Schonfeld et al. (Schönfeld et al. 2019) employed two VAEs
to learn the joint reconstruction between visual features and
semantic features in the common latent space. Ma et al.
(Ma and Hu 2020) incorporated a deep embedding network
and modified variational autoencoder to learn a latent space
shared by both image features and class embeddings. Li et

Zero-Shot learning (ZSL) (Larochelle, Erhan, and Bengio
2008; Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2018; Wang et al. 2018;
Wei, Deng, and Yang 2020) aims to recognize entirely new
classes without additional data labeling, which is an important issue for learning and recognition in open environments.
Conventional ZSL methods try to establish the connection
between the visual and semantic space by seen classes, and
only the images in unseen classes are available in the testing phase. As an extension, Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) removes the constraint in conventional ZSL by
allowing images from either seen or unseen classes in the
testing phase, which is a more reasonable yet challenging
for real-world recognition.
Recently, GZSL has received ever-increasing attention in
research and industrial communities. Many GZSL methods
(Chen et al. 2018; Jia et al. 2020; Han, Fu, and Yang 2020;
Huynh and Elhamifar 2020) try to learn a mapping between
visual features of images and their class embeddings for
knowledge transfer. Huynh and Elhamifar (Huynh and Elhamifar 2020) adopted an attention mechanism to align attribute embeddings with local visual features. Han et al.
* Correspondence author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6605

