The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Categorical Neighbour Correlation Coefficient (CnCor) for Detecting
Relationships between Categorical Variables
Lifeng Zhang, Shimo Yang, Hongxun Jiang*
School of Information, Renmin University of China
86, Zhongguancun Street, Haidian, Beijing, P.R.China, 100872
l.zhang@ruc.edu.cn, shimo@ruc.edu.cn, jianghx@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

KSG estimator (MKSG) to provide a better handling of
discrete-continuous mixtures. Zeng, Xia, and Tong(2018)
proposed a Jackknife version of kernel estimation of MI
to free the estimation from bandwidth selection. Distance
correlation (dCor) (Székely et al. 2007; Székely and Rizzo
2009) has a compact representation analogous to Cor, but
enables detecting various nonlinear relationships. Randomized dependence coefficient (RDC) is proposed based on
the Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Renyi maximum correlation coefficient (Lopez-Paz, Hennig, and Scholkopf 2013), and can
capture a variety of complex associations between random variables of arbitrary dimension. Other approaches include kernel canonical correlation analysis (KCCA) (Bach
and Jordan 2003), principal curve based methods (Delicado
2001; Delicado and Smrekar 2009), Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al. 2005), and nonlinear spectral correlation (Liu, Sohn, and Jeon 2017). Recently, (Zhang 2020) introduced an order statistics based association detection method called the neighbour correlation
coefficient (nCor). Since association detection is a basic
primitive in machine learning, it is useful in many learning
tasks. Various MI estimators and correlation measures have
been widely used as selection criteria for constructing filter
type feature selection (FS) algorithms (Fleuret 2004; Brown
et al. 2012; Shishkin et al. 2016). From the other point of
view, assisting in FS has been also commonly considered as
a way to evaluate the performance of association measures
(Lopez-Paz, Hennig, and Scholkopf 2013; Gao et al. 2017).

Categorical data is common and, however, special in that its
possible values exist only on a nominal scale so that many
statistical operations such as mean, variance, and covariance
become not applicable. Following the basic idea of the neighbour correlation coefficient (nCor), in this study, we propose
a new measure named the categorical nCor (CnCor) to examine the association between categorical variables through
using indicator functions to reform the distance metric and
product-moment correlation coefficient. The proposed measure is easy to compute, and enables a direct test of statistical dependence without the need of converting the qualitative
variables to quantitative ones. Compared with previous approaches, it is much more robust and effective in dealing with
multi-categorical target variables especially when highly nonlinear relationships occur in the multivariate case. We also
applied the CnCor to implementing feature selection by the
scheme of backward elimination. Finally, extensive experiments performed on both synthetic and real-world datasets
are conducted to demonstrate the outstanding performance of
the proposed methods, and draw comparisons with state-ofthe-art association measures and feature selection algorithms.

Introduction
Detecting the associations between variables is one of the
most important issue in data analysis and machine learning.
In the past decades, a number of association measures have
been proposed to enable capturing a wide range of complex data relationships. These methods, however, may sometimes exhibit less detection power when dealing with certain
types of data. Developing more powerful association detection methods has been a challenging research.
One of the most widely used measures is mutual information (MI), which detects the dependence between variables
in the context of information theory. A number of techniques
have been proposed to estimate the score of MI, such as
kernel density estimation (KDE) (Sohan and Prı́ncipe 2009;
Wang, Shen, and Zhang 2005), k-nearest neighbor distances
(kNN) (Darbellay and Vajda 1999; Kraskov, Stögbauer, and
Grassberger 2004), and bining (partitioning) (Reshef et al.
2011; Heller et al. 2016). Gao et al.(2017) proposed a

To maximize the effectiveness, these measures are usually
restricted to certain types of data such as continuous, discrete, or binary. Categorical (qualitative) data, mainly multilevel categorical data, is always difficult to analyze because
its possible values are incomparable, and have no significance beyond simply providing a convenient label for a particular value. In such a situation, the data is not appropriate
to apply many statistical methods such as mean, variance,
and covariance. In many cases, it needs to be converted to
quantitative data in order to be able to analyze the data. This
conversion can usually be achieved by coding the categorical
values into high-dimensional vector spaces, and however inevitably leads to a redundancy of data dimensionality while
no additional information is gained. It is clearly that all the
product-moment correlation based approaches become inapplicable when dealing with categorical data since they are all

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9048

