The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How Does Knowledge Graph Embedding Extrapolate
to Unseen Data: A Semantic Evidence View
Ren Li,1, 2 Yanan Cao,1, 2 Qiannan Zhu,3, 4 Guanqun Bi,1, 2 Fang Fang,1, 2 * Yi Liu,5 Qian Li 6
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
5
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team/Coordination Center of China
6
University of Technology Sydney
{liren, caoyanan, biguanqun, fangfang0703}@iie.ac.cn,
zhuqiannan@ruc.edu.cn, liuyi@cert.org.cn, Qian.Li@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract

as recommendation system (Wang et al. 2018), question answering (Yasunaga et al. 2021) and text generation (Zhang
et al. 2020), etc. KGs store graph-structured knowledge
in triple form (h, r, t). To integrate symbolic knowledge
into numerical down-stream applications, Knowledge Graph
Embedding (KGE) technique that attempts to encode the relations and entities into low-dimensional embeddings, has
attracted increasing attention. The core idea of KGE is to design triple modeling function f (h, r, t), that can predict correct tail entity t from (h, r, ?), or head entity h from (?, r, t),
by scoring high for positive triple (h, r, t), and low for negative triples (h0 , r, t) and (h, r, t0 )1 .
Many KGE models have been proposed and can be categorized into three families (Wang et al. 2017; Arora 2020),
which are Translational Distance Models like TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), RotatE (Sun et al. 2019); Semantic Matching Models like DistMult (Yang et al. 2015), ComplEx
(Trouillon et al. 2016), ConvE (Dettmers et al. 2018); and
GNN-based Models like R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018),
CompGCN (Vashishth et al. 2020b). Most of these KGE
models have gained great success, especially on extrapolation scenarios, which is that given an unseen triple
(h, r, t), a well trained model can still correctly predict t
from (h, r, ?) or h from (?, r, t), such ability is impressive.
However, most existing KGE works focus on the design of
delicate triple modeling function, but explains little about
why the methods can extrapolate to unseen data, and what
are the important factors to help KGE extrapolate. Therefore
in this work, we attempt to, from a data relevant view, study
KGE extrapolation of two problems: 1. How does KGE extrapolate to unseen data? 2. How to design the KGE model
with better extrapolation ability?
For the problem 1, for an unseen triple (h, r, t), we treat
the prediction from (h, r, ?) to t with a semantic matching
idea. For a good extrapolative matching, (h, r, ?) and t must
have obtained some semantic relatedness during training,
and we consider the relatedness may come from three lev-

Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) aims to learn representations for entities and relations. Most KGE models have
gained great success, especially on extrapolation scenarios.
Specifically, given an unseen triple (h, r, t), a trained model
can still correctly predict t from (h, r, ?), or h from (?, r, t),
such extrapolation ability is impressive. However, most existing KGE works focus on the design of delicate triple modeling function, which mainly tells us how to measure the plausibility of observed triples, but offers limited explanation of
why the methods can extrapolate to unseen data, and what
are the important factors to help KGE extrapolate. Therefore in this work, we attempt to study the KGE extrapolation
of two problems: 1. How does KGE extrapolate to unseen
data? 2. How to design the KGE model with better extrapolation ability? For the problem 1, we first discuss the impact
factors for extrapolation and from relation, entity and triple
level respectively, propose three Semantic Evidences (SEs),
which can be observed from train set and provide important
semantic information for extrapolation. Then we verify the
effectiveness of SEs through extensive experiments on several typical KGE methods. For the problem 2, to make better use of the three levels of SE, we propose a novel GNNbased KGE model, called Semantic Evidence aware Graph
Neural Network (SE-GNN). In SE-GNN, each level of SE
is modeled explicitly by the corresponding neighbor pattern,
and merged sufficiently by the multi-layer aggregation, which
contributes to obtaining more extrapolative knowledge representation. Finally, through extensive experiments on FB15k237 and WN18RR datasets, we show that SE-GNN achieves
state-of-the-art performance on Knowledge Graph Completion task and performs a better extrapolation ability. Our code
is available at https://github.com/renli1024/SE-GNN.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) like Freebase (Bollacker et al.
2008) and WordNet (Miller 1995) are significant resources
to support numerous artificial intelligence applications, such

1

This prediction process is also called Knowledge Graph Completion task, which shares many common concepts with Knowledge Graph Embedding.

* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5781

