The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NumHTML: Numeric-Oriented Hierarchical Transformer Model
for Multi-Task Financial Forecasting
Linyi Yang,1,2 Jiazheng Li,4 Ruihai Dong,3 Yue Zhang,1,2 Barry Smyth3
1

Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Westlake University
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick
linyi.yang, yue.zhang@westlake.edu.cn, ruihai.dong, barry.smyth@insight-centre.org, jiazheng.li@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract

reports (Duan et al. 2018; Kogan et al. 2009) to real-time social media (Xu and Cohen 2018; Feng et al. 2018) — which
may lead to be effective forecasting predictions. Of particular relevance to this paper is the earnings call data (Kimbrough 2005; Wang and Hua 2014; Qin and Yang 2019)
that typically accompany the (quarterly) earnings reports of
publicly traded companies. The multi-modal data associated
with these reports include the textual data of the report itself plus the audio of the so-called earnings call where the
report is presented to relevant parties, including a questionand-answer session with relevant company executives. The
intuition is that the content of such a report and the nature
of the presentation and Q&A may encode valuable information to determine how a company may perform in the coming quarter and, more immediately relevant, how the market
will respond to the earning report.
Previous work on using earnings conference calls has
mostly considered the volatility prediction (Qin and Yang
2019; Yang et al. 2020; Sawhney et al. 2020; Ye, Qin, and
Xu 2020), to predict the subsequent stock price fluctuation
over a specified period (e.g., three days or seven days) after
the earnings call (Bollerslev, Patton, and Quaedvlieg 2016;
Rekabsaz et al. 2017). An even more challenging, yet potentially more valuable signal, especially when it comes to optimizing a real-world trading strategy, is the predicted stock
return. While this has been explored by using financial news
data (Ding et al. 2014, 2015; Chang et al. 2016; Duan et al.
2018; Yang et al. 2019; Du and Tanaka-Ishii 2020) and analyst reports (Kogan et al. 2009; Loughran and McDonald
2011; Chen, Huang, and Chen 2021b), the use of earnings
call data remains largely unexplored. One notable exception is Sawhney et al. (2020), which considers stock movement prediction as an auxiliary task for enhancing the financial risk predictions. In particular, they show that multi-task
learning is useful for improving volatility prediction at the
expense of lower price movement prediction accuracy.
The main objective of this work is to explore the use of
earnings calls data for stock movement prediction. The starting point for this work is the multi-task learning approach
described by (Yang et al. 2020), which leverages textual and
audio earnings call data with additional vocal features extracted by Praat (Boersma and Van Heuven 2001). We quantify the effectiveness of textual and vocal information from
earnings calls to predict stock movement using this baseline

Financial forecasting has been an important and active area
of machine learning research because of the challenges it
presents and the potential rewards that even minor improvements in prediction accuracy or forecasting may entail. Traditionally, financial forecasting has heavily relied on quantitative indicators and metrics derived from structured financial statements. Earnings conference call data, including text
and audio, is an important source of unstructured data that
has been used for various prediction tasks using deep earning and related approaches. However, current deep learningbased methods are limited in the way that they deal with
numeric data; numbers are typically treated as plain-text tokens without taking advantage of their underlying numeric
structure. This paper describes a numeric-oriented hierarchical transformer model (NumHTML) to predict stock returns,
and financial risk using multi-modal aligned earnings calls
data by taking advantage of the different categories of numbers (monetary, temporal, percentages etc.) and their magnitude. We present the results of a comprehensive evaluation
of NumHTML against several state-of-the-art baselines using
a real-world publicly available dataset. The results indicate
that NumHTML significantly outperforms the current stateof-the-art across a variety of evaluation metrics and that it has
the potential to offer significant financial gains in a practical
trading context.

Introduction
It is the very nature of the stock market that even the most
modest of advantages (e.g. speed of trade) can be parlayed
into significant financial rewards, and thus traders have long
been attracted to the idea of using historical data to predict
future stock market trends. However, the stochastic nature of
the stock market has proved to be very challenging when it
comes to provide accurate future forecasts, especially when
relying on pricing data alone (Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen
2012; Kristjanpoller, Fadic, and Minutolo 2014; Manela and
Moreira 2017; Zheng et al. 2019; Pitkäjärvi, Suominen, and
Vaittinen 2020). However, recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) and deep learning (DL) introduce
novels sources of data — textual data in the form of financial news (Ding et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2018;
Chen et al. 2019a; Du and Tanaka-Ishii 2020) and financial
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11604

