The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Homomorphisms of Lifted Planning Tasks:
The Case for Delete-Free Relaxation Heuristics
Rostislav Horčı́k1 , Daniel Fišer1,2 , Álvaro Torralba3
1

Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Prague, Czech Republic
2
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
Aalborg University, Denmark
xhorcik@fel.cvut.cz, danfis@danfis.cz, alto@cs.aau.dk
Abstract

Heuristics for lifted planning can be obtained by lifting existing algorithms computing heuristics on the grounded representation, as was done for hadd and hmax by Corrêa et al.
(2021). An approximation of the Fast Forward (FF) and
causal graph heuristics was done by Ridder and Fox; Ridder (2014; 2014). Second, we might try to transform a given
PDDL task P into a smaller one P0 which can be grounded
and compute any heuristic in the grounded version of P0 . It is
clear that such a transformation must preserve the existence
of a plan and, for optimal planning, the cost of optimal plans
in P0 must be the same or smaller. The second approach
was applied by Lauer et al. (2021), over-approximating nary predicates by conjunctions of unary predicates. In this
paper, we investigate an alternative way of transforming the
task.
We introduce PDDL homomorphisms as maps between
PDDL tasks preserving plans and their costs. PDDL homomorphisms generalize PDDL endomorphisms introduced
by Horčı́k and Fišer (2021). We employ PDDL homomorphisms similarly as abstractions are used in pattern
databases (Edelkamp 2001) or merge-and-shrink heuristics
(Helmert et al. 2014). On the propositional level, the large
underlying labelled transition system of a planning task is
succinctly represented via facts (i.e., ground atomic formulas). Consequently, abstractions on the propositional level
are defined in terms of facts. Our approach goes even lower
to the level of objects. PDDL tasks are defined over a set of
objects B serving as values to be substituted for the variables
during the grounding process. So we formulate our abstractions in terms of objects instead of facts.
We look for PDDL homomorphisms mapping the original PDDL task P over a set of objects B into a PDDL task
P0 over a sufficiently small set of objects B 0 ⊆ B. Consequently, we use the standard grounding process on P0 and
compute an (admissible) heuristic. To construct P0 , we consider maps σ : B → B with a small image σ(B) serving
as the set of objects B 0 of P0 . Depending on the definition
of P0 , the map σ : B → B has to satisfy several conditions
which we formulate in the definition of PDDL homomorphisms. Since this is an introductory paper on PDDL homomorphisms, we investigate rather simple and naive methods
defining the abstract PDDL task P0 and σ, and show that they
can be used to guide lifted search effectively. Since the most
complicated condition in the definition of PDDL homomor-

Classical planning tasks are modelled in PDDL which is a
schematic language based on first-order logic. Most of the
current planners turn this lifted representation into a propositional one via a grounding process. However, grounding may
cause an exponential blowup. Therefore it is important to investigate methods for searching for plans on the lifted level.
To build a lifted state-based planner, it is necessary to invent
lifted heuristics. We introduce maps between PDDL tasks
preserving plans allowing us to transform a PDDL task into a
smaller one. We propose a novel method for computing lifted
(admissible) delete-free relaxed heuristics via grounding of
the smaller task and computing the (admissible) delete-free
relaxed heuristics there. This allows us to transfer the knowledge about relaxed heuristics from the grounded level to the
lifted level.

Introduction
Classical planning tasks are usually modelled in the standard PDDL language based on first-order logic (McDermott
2000). Nevertheless, a vast majority of planners do not work
with this first-order (lifted) representation but with a simpler
one based on propositional logic (i.e., grounded representation); usually either STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson 1971) or
SAS+ (Bäckström and Nebel 1995). In order to translate the
PDDL representation into a propositional one, one has to
go through the so-called grounding process where the firstorder action schemata are translated into propositional ones
by substituting all possible combinations of objects for the
variables. This typically results in an exponentially larger
representation than the original PDDL representation.
There are several approaches to address this problem. The
most common ones try to prune the resulting grounded representation, e.g., by a relaxed reachability analysis (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001; Helmert 2009), or by detection of
unreachable and dead-end actions (Fišer 2020). Another approach is to avoid the grounding process altogether and work
directly with the PDDL representation. To do this one needs
two ingredients: a sufficiently fast algorithm computing successor states in the search (Corrêa et al. 2020), and (admissible) lifted heuristics that help to navigate in the search space.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9767

