The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Homography Decomposition Networks for Planar Object Tracking
Xinrui Zhan1 , Yueran Liu1 , Jianke Zhu1,2* , Yang Li3*
2

1
Zhejiang University
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
3
East China Normal University
{xrzhan, liuyueran97, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, yli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Planar object tracking plays an important role in AI applications, such as robotics, visual servoing, and visual SLAM.
Although the previous planar trackers work well in most scenarios, it is still a challenging task due to the rapid motion
and large transformation between two consecutive frames.
The essential reason behind this problem is that the condition number of such a non-linear system changes unstably
when the searching range of the homography parameter space
becomes larger. To this end, we propose a novel Homography Decomposition Networks (HDN) approach that drastically reduces and stabilizes the condition number by decomposing the homography transformation into two groups.
Specifically, a similarity transformation estimator is designed
to predict the first group robustly by a deep convolution
equivariant network. By taking advantage of the scale and
rotation estimation with high confidence, a residual transformation is estimated by a simple regression model. Furthermore, the proposed end-to-end network is trained in a
semi-supervised fashion. Extensive experiments show that
our proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art planar
tracking methods at a large margin on the challenging POT,
UCSB and POIC datasets. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/zhanxinrui/HDN.

Figure 1: A comparison of our approach with state-of-theart trackers. Our method HDN obtains the robust tracking results comparing to the keypoint-based method (SIFT,
LISRD) and direct approach (GOP-ESM).

tional feature detector SIFT (LoweDavid 2004) often fails
in the case of large perspective transformation. The deep
learning-based methods such as LISRD (Pautrat et al. 2020)
and GIFT (Liu et al. 2019) introduce the invariant descriptors to tackle this problem, which still suffer from the issue
of insufficient keypoints to rebuild the homography. On the
other hand, the appearance-based approaches are able to take
full advantage of information from the whole image. However, it is easy to get stuck in the local optima. Although the
gradient-based method such as GOP-ESM (Chen et al. 2019)
can deal with the illumination changes, they are not robust
to motion blurs. In addition, large displacements may lead
to the fractional sampled object patches, which are harmful
to the minimization-based approaches.
In contrast to the conventional approaches, the deep
learning-based method becomes the promising direction for
planar object tracking. (DeTone, Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2016; Nguyen et al. 2018) directly regress the corners’ offsets of the rectangular region, however, it cannot
accommodate the large transformation. Specifically, directly
estimating the homography parameterized by corner offsets
with eight coefficients, the condition number of the system
becomes extremely large (up to 5e7 ), which makes the system very unstable. Therefore, any perturbation may lead to
tracking failure, especially with large displacement. It can be
found that the condition number becomes lower with fewer
parameters to be estimated. To predict four transformation
parameters of an object, (Black and Jepson 2004; Li et al.

Introduction
Planar object tracking is a fundamental problem in many AI
applications, which aims at estimating the transformation of
a planar object in videos. A reliable planar tracker is usually employed as a reasonable surrogate for 3D structure
tracking methods, such as augmented reality, visual servoing, and robotics. Despite the encouraging progress (Chen
et al. 2019; Wang and Ling 2018; Pautrat et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2019) has been made in past decades, tracking planar
object robustly is still a challenging problem due to the appearance changes and large displacements between the consecutive video frames.
Matching the salient keypoints between two images is
typically employed to recover the homography, which is
widely used in planar object tracking. Since the keypointsbased method cannot make full use of the whole image, jitters commonly occur during tracking. Moreover, the conven* corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3234

