The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GNN-Retro: Retrosynthetic Planning with Graph Neural Networks
†

Peng Han* 1,2,3 , Peilin Zhao* 4 , Chan Lu4 , Junzhou Huang4 , Jiaxiang Wu4, , Shuo Shang 1 , Bin Yao5 ,
†
Xiangliang Zhang 6,2
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
3
Aalborg University
4
Tencent AI Lab
5
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
University of Notre Dame
peng.han@kaust.edu.sa, masonzhao@tencent.com, sherryllu@tencent.com, joehhuang@tencent.com,
jonathanwu@tencent.com, jedi.shang@gmail.com, yaobin@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, xzhang33@nd.edu
Abstract
Retrosynthetic planning plays an important role in the field
of organic chemistry, which could generate a synthetic route
for the target product. The synthetic route is a series of reactions which are started from the available molecules. The
most challenging problem in the generation of the synthetic
route is the large search space of the candidate reactions. Estimating the cost of candidate reactions has been proved effectively to prune the search space, which could achieve a higher
accuracy with the same search iteration. And the estimation
of one reaction is comprised of the estimations of all its reactants. So, how to estimate the cost of these reactants will
directly influence the quality of results. To get a better performance, we propose a new framework, named GNN-Retro, for
retrosynthetic planning problem by combining graph neural
networks (GNN) and the latest search algorithm. The structure of GNN in our framework could incorporate the information of neighboring molecules, which will improve the estimation accuracy of our framework. The experiments on the
USPTO dataset show that our framework could outperform
the state-of-the-art methods with a large margin under the
same settings.

Available Molecule

Target Molecule

Intermediate Molecule

Reaction

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of one synthetic route

numbers of the candidate reactions will bring exponential
growth for the search space.
Estimating the cost of candidate reactions has been proved
effectively (Chen et al. 2020) to prune the search space,
which could achieve a higher success rate with the same
search iteration. And the estimation of one reaction is comprised of the estimations of all its reactants. So, how to estimate the cost of these reactants will directly influence the
quality of results. The difficulty of the estimation is that the
data space of all molecules is extremely large and the existing training dataset can only cover a small part of it.
Graph neural network (GNN) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Yang et al. 2021) is popular recently, for its high performance in the task of semi-supervision. The main difference
between the computation of GNN and the computation of
traditional neural networks is that, GNN will directly and explicitly incorporate the information of neighbors in the training and testing process. The computation of GNN could reduce the data sparsity problem when the connection between
samples is relevant to their labels.

Introduction
Retrosynthetic planning (Schreck, Coley, and Bishop 2019;
Segler and Waller 2017; Zheng et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020;
Schwaller et al. 2020; Mao et al. 2021; Yan et al. 2020) plays
an important role in the filed of chemical applications (Wang
et al. 2021), which could generate a synthetic route for the
target molecule. The synthetic route is a series of reactions
which are based on available molecules. The example in
Fig. 1 shows the components of one synthetic route, where
one target molecule or intermediate molecule is obtained by
one reaction and one reaction contains multiple molecules.
The most challenging problem in the generation of the synthetic route is the huge numbers of candidate reactions for
the target product and intermediate products. Because larger
* Equal Contribution. This work is done when Peng Han works

as an intern in Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4014

