The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improved Text Classification via Contrastive Adversarial Training
Lin Pan1 , Chung-Wei Hang1 , Avi Sil2 , Saloni Potdar1
IBM Watson1
IBM Research AI2
{panl, hangc, avi, potdars}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We propose a simple and general method to regularize the
fine-tuning of Transformer-based encoders for text classification tasks. Specifically, during fine-tuning we generate adversarial examples by perturbing the word embedding matrix
of the model and perform contrastive learning on clean and
adversarial examples in order to teach the model to learn noiseinvariant representations. By training on both clean and adversarial examples along with the additional contrastive objective,
we observe consistent improvement over standard fine-tuning
on clean examples. On several GLUE benchmark tasks, our
fine-tuned BERTLarge model outperforms BERTLarge baseline by 1.7% on average, and our fine-tuned RoBERTaLarge
improves over RoBERTaLarge baseline by 1.3%. We additionally validate our method in different domains using three intent
classification datasets, where our fine-tuned RoBERTaLarge
outperforms RoBERTaLarge baseline by 1–2% on average. For
the challenging low-resource scenario, we train our system
using half of the training data (per intent) in each of the three
intent classification datasets, and achieve similar performance
compared to the baseline trained with full training data.

Introduction
Adversarial training (AT) introduced in Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy (2015) provides an effective means of regularization and improving model robustness against adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al. 2014) for computer vision (CV)
tasks such as image classification. In AT of this form, a small,
gradient-based perturbation is added to the original example,
and a model is trained on both clean and perturbed examples.
Due to the discrete nature of textual data, this method is not
directly applicable to NLP tasks. Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow (2017) extend this method to NLP and propose to apply
perturbation to the word embeddings of an LSTM-based
model (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) on text classification tasks. Since the word embeddings after perturbation
do not map to new words in the vocabulary, the method is
proposed exclusively as a means of regularization.
In this work, we present CAT, contrastive adversarial
training for text classification. We build upon Miyato, Dai,
and Goodfellow (2017) to regularize the fine-tuning of
Transformer-based (Vaswani et al. 2017) encoders on text
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11130

classification tasks. Instead of applying perturbation to word
embeddings, we make a small change and apply it to the
word embedding matrix of Transformer encoders and observe slightly better result in our experiments. Additionally,
we encourage the model to learn noise-invariant representations by introducing a contrastive objective (van den Oord,
Li, and Vinyals 2019) that pushes clean examples and their
corresponding perturbed examples close to each other in
the representation space, while pushing apart examples not
from the same pair. We evaluate our method on a range of
natural language understanding tasks including the standard
GLUE (Wang et al. 2019) benchmark as well as three intent
classification tasks for dialog systems.
On GLUE tasks, we compare our fine-tuning method
against strong baselines of fine-tuning BERTLarge (Devlin
et al. 2019) and RoBERTaLarge (Liu et al. 2019b) on clean examples with the cross-entropy loss. Our method outperforms
BERTLarge by 1.7% on average and RoBERTaLarge by 1.3%.
On intent classification tasks, our fine-tuned RoBERTaLarge
outperforms RoBERTaLarge baseline by 1% on the full test
sets and 2% on the difficult test sets. We further perform sample efficiency tests, where we use only half of the training
data (per intent) and achieve near identical accuracy compared to the baseline trained using full training data.

Related Work
Adversarial Training
Adversarial Training (AT) has been explored in many supervised classification tasks that include object detection (Chen
et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2017), object segmentation (Arnab, Miksik, and Torr 2018; Xie et al. 2017) and
image classification (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015;
Papernot et al. 2016; Su, Vargas, and Sakurai 2019).
AT can be defined as the process in which a system is
trained to defend against malicious “attacks” and increase
network robustness, by training the system with adversarial
examples and optionally with clean examples. Typically these
attacks are produced by perturbing the input (clean) examples, which makes the system predict the wrong class label
(Chakraborty et al. 2018; Yuan et al. 2019). In this paper,
we limit our discussion to white-box adversarial attacks, i.e.,
assuming access to model architecture and parameters.
Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow (2017) extend the Fast Gra-

