The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph Structure Learning with Variational Information Bottleneck
Qingyun Sun123 , Jianxin Li12 , Hao Peng1 , Jia Wu4 , Xingcheng Fu12 , Cheng Ji12 , Philip S. Yu5
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Shenyuan Honors College, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
{sunqy, lijx, penghao, fuxc, jicheng}@act.buaa.edu.cn, jia.wu@mq.edu.au, psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

are mainly determined by some critical structures rather than
the whole graph (Sun et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021). Furthermore, many graph enhanced applications (e.g., text classification (Li et al. 2020) and vision navigation (Gao et al.
2021)) may only have data without graph-structure and require additional graph construction to perform representation learning. The above issues pose a great challenge for applying GNNs to real-world applications, especially in some
risk-critical scenarios. Therefore, learning a task-relevant
graph structure is a fundamental problem for graph representation learning.
To adaptively learn graph structures for GNNs, many
graph structure learning methods (Zhu et al. 2021;
Franceschi et al. 2019; Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2020) are proposed, most of which optimize the adjacency matrix along
with the GNN parameters toward downstream tasks with
assumptions (e.g., community) or certain constraints (e.g.,
sparsity, low-rank, and smoothness) on the graphs. However,
these assumptions or explicit certain constraints may not be
applicable to all datasets and tasks. There is still a lack of a
general framework that can mine underlying relations from
the essence of representation learning.
Recalling the above problems, the key of structure learning problem is learning the underlying relations invariant to task-irrelevant information. Information Bottleneck
(IB) principle (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000) provides
a framework for constraining such task-irrelevant information retained at the output by trading off between prediction
and compression. Specifically, the IB principle seeks for a
representation Z that is maximally informative about target
Y (i.e., maximize mutual information I(Y ; Z)) while being
minimally informative about input data X (i.e., minimize
mutual information I(X; Z)). Based on the IB principle, the
learned representation is naturally more robust to data noise.
IB has been applied to representation learning (Kim et al.
2021; Jeon et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2020; Bao 2021; Dubois
et al. 2020) and numerous deep learning tasks such as model
ensemble (Sinha et al. 2020), fine-tuning (Mahabadi, Belinkov, and Henderson 2021), salient region discovery (Zhmoginov, Fischer, and Sandler 2020).
In this paper, we advance the IB principle for graph to
solve the graph structure learning problem. We propose
a novel Variational Information Bottleneck guided Graph
Structure Learning framework, namely VIB-GSL. VIB-

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown promising results on a broad spectrum of applications. Most empirical
studies of GNNs directly take the observed graph as input,
assuming the observed structure perfectly depicts the accurate and complete relations between nodes. However, graphs
in the real-world are inevitably noisy or incomplete, which
could even exacerbate the quality of graph representations.
In this work, we propose a novel Variational Information
Bottleneck guided Graph Structure Learning framework,
namely VIB-GSL, in the perspective of information theory.
VIB-GSL is the first attempt to advance the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle for graph structure learning, providing
a more elegant and universal framework for mining underlying task-relevant relations. VIB-GSL learns an informative
and compressive graph structure to distill the actionable information for specific downstream tasks. VIB-GSL deduces
a variational approximation for irregular graph data to form a
tractable IB objective function, which facilitates training stability. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the superior effectiveness and robustness of VIB-GSL.

Introduction
Recent years have seen a significant growing amount of interest in graph representation learning (Zhang et al. 2018;
Tong et al. 2021), especially in efforts devoted to developing more effective graph neural networks (GNNs) (Zhou
et al. 2020). Despite GNNs’ powerful ability in learning
graph representations, most of them directly take the observed graph as input, assuming the observed structure perfectly depicts the accurate and complete relations between
nodes. However, these raw graphs are naturally admitted
from network-structure data (e.g., social network) or constructed from the original feature space by some pre-defined
rules, which are usually independent of the downstream
tasks and lead to the gap between the raw graph and the optimal graph for specific tasks. Moreover, most of graphs in
the real-word are noisy or incomplete due to the error-prone
data collection (Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2020), which could
even exacerbate the quality of representations produced by
GNNs (Zügner, Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018; Sun
et al. 2018). It’s also found that the properties of a graph
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4165

