The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Complexity of Learning Approval-Based Multiwinner Voting Rules
Ioannis Caragiannis, Karl Fehrs
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Åbogade 34, 8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
{iannis, karl}@cs.au.dk

Abstract

of voting rules is a very natural approach. The goal is to
derive a voting rule from a set of known preferences with
the hope that the rule is equally well-suited to more general
preferences. The current paper aims to study the potentials
and limitations of this approach.
We focus on multiwinner voting rules (Faliszewski et al.
2017), which on input the preferences of n voters over m
available candidates, return as outcome one or more committees of candidates of fixed size k. In particular, we study
approval-based voting (Laslier and Sanver 2010; Lackner
and Skowron 2021a), where the preference of a voter is simply the set of candidates she approves. And, more concretely,
we consider the class of approval-based committee scoring
(ABCS) rules, defined by Lackner and Skowron (2021b). An
ABCS rule follows a common format. It employs a scoring function, according to which each voter awards a score
to each committee of k candidates. This score depends on
the ballot size (the number of candidates the voter approves)
and the size of its intersection with the committee. Different
scoring functions define different voting rules.
Deciding on the best ABCS rule depends on the application at hand. For example, under a rule that favours individual excellence, each voter assigns to each committee a score
that is equal to the number of candidates in the committee
the voter approves. Another rule could give just one point
to each committee that has non-empty intersection with the
voter’s ballot; such a rule would promote representation of
voters. In practice, situations with such a clear objective for
a voting rule are extremely rare. Instead, it is usually easier
to derive the characteristics of the desired rule from available data, in the form of preference profiles and corresponding desired winning committees. Arguably, the best rule for
the particular application should at least agree with these
data points, and, ideally, produce desirable outcomes for unknown preference profiles. Can such a data-driven selection
of an ABCS rule be effective?
We explore this question using the PAC (probably approximately correct) learning framework. We follow a similar
methodological approach with Procaccia et al. (2009), who
addressed the same question for single-winner voting rules.
In the terminology of PAC learning, we would like to determine the sample complexity of the class of ABCS rules. How
many samples (profiles and corresponding winning committees) are necessary and sufficient so that an ABCS rule that

We study the PAC learnability of multiwinner voting, focusing on the class of approval-based committee scoring (ABCS)
rules. These are voting rules applied on profiles with approval
ballots, where each voter approves some of the candidates.
According to ABCS rules, each committee of k candidates
collects from each voter a score, that depends on the size
of the voter’s ballot and on the size of its intersection with
the committee. Then, committees of maximum score are the
winning ones. Our goal is to learn a target rule (i.e., to learn
the corresponding scoring function) using information about
the winning committees of a small number of sampled profiles. Despite the existence of exponentially many outcomes
compared to single-winner elections, we show that the sample
complexity is still low: a polynomial number of samples carries enough information for learning the target rule with high
confidence and accuracy. Unfortunately, even simple tasks
that need to be solved for learning from these samples are
intractable. We prove that deciding whether there exists some
ABCS rule that makes a given committee winning in a given
profile is a computationally hard problem. Our results extend
to the class of sequential Thiele rules, which have received
attention due to their simplicity.

1

Introduction

Voting has been used for centuries to aggregate individual
preferences into a common decision. In addition to its traditional use for electing governments or for decision making in management boards, it has also been proved useful
in novel applications where individual ratings need to be
summarized as collective knowledge. But, is there a general recipe on how preferences should be aggregated? Fortunately, there is no “golden” voting rule and this has led
social choice theory —and, in particular, its modern computational branch (Brandt et al. 2016)— onto exciting research
endeavours.
A popular approach has aimed, quite successfully, to evaluate voting rules in terms of desirable axioms they must
satisfy. Well-known impossibilities, e.g., see Arrow (1951),
showcase the limitations of this approach. Deviating from
this axiomatic treatment, recent works view voting rules as
optimized decision making methods, perhaps tailored to particular applications. In this context, the data-driven design
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4925

