The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Predict 3D Lane Shape and Camera Pose from a Single Image via
Geometry Constraints
Ruijin Liu, 1 Dapeng Chen, 2 Tie Liu, 3 Zhiliang Xiong, 4 Zejian Yuan 1
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
College of Information Engineering, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China
4
Shenzhen Forward Innovation Digital Technology Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, China
lrj466097290@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, dapengchenxjtu@yahoo.com, liutiel@163.com, leslie.xiong@forward-innovation.com,
yuan.ze.jian@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

2017; Brahmbhatt et al. 2018)) to provide an accurate camera pose steadily during driving (pandiii 2021; Guo et al.
2020)
Instead of utilizing the ground truth camera pose, we propose to learn camera pose online to perform view transform
for 3D lane detection and impose geometry consistency constraints to improve the pose results. Specifically, we utilize a
two-stage framework to learn from different viewpoints. The
first stage aims at learning camera pose from perspectiveview images. To improve the camera pose, we introduce geometry constraints. The constraints are based on an auxiliary network branch that predicts the 3D lanes. With the predicted camera pose, the predicted 3D lanes are projected to
the camera plane and the virtual flat ground plane, which can
be supervised by the ground truth lanes of the two planes.
The second stage uses transformed top-view images based
on learned camera pose to detect ultimate 3D lanes. In the
top-view, lanes have a similar appearance along a longitudinal direction which is crucial for deciphering 3D lanes,
especially in distant areas. The 3D lanes are modeled by two
polynomials: one approximates the lateral variations, and
the other expresses undulation changes along longitudinal
positions. To better capture lanes’ long and thin structures,
both stages utilize transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) to aggregate non-local context.
Our method is evaluated on the only public synthetic 3D
lane detection benchmark and a self-collected real-world
dataset which will be released. Without utilizing the ground
truth camera poses, our method outperforms previous stateof-the-art methods that need ground truth camera poses. Furthermore, our approach has a light model size, few computation costs, and quite fast speed, showing great potential in
real driving applications. The main contributions are summarized as follows:

Detecting 3D lanes from the camera is a rising problem for
autonomous vehicles. In this task, the correct camera pose is
the key to generating accurate lanes, which can transform an
image from perspective-view to the top-view. With this transformation, we can get rid of the perspective effects so that
3D lanes would look similar and can accurately be fitted by
low-order polynomials. However, mainstream 3D lane detectors rely on perfect camera poses provided by other sensors,
which is expensive and encounters multi-sensor calibration
issues. To overcome this problem, we propose to predict 3D
lanes by estimating camera pose from a single image with
a two-stage framework. The first stage aims at the camera
pose task from perspective-view images. To improve pose estimation, we introduce an auxiliary 3D lane task and geometry constraints to benefit from multi-task learning, which enhances consistencies between 3D and 2D, as well as compatibility in the above two tasks. The second stage targets the 3D
lane task. It uses previously estimated pose to generate topview images containing distance-invariant lane appearances
for predicting accurate 3D lanes. Experiments demonstrate
that, without ground truth camera pose, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art perfect-camera-pose-based methods and has the fewest parameters and computations. Codes
are available at https://github.com/liuruijin17/CLGo.

Introduction
Compared with 2D lane detection, image-based 3D lane detection is beneficial to perceiving a real-world driving environment, which is crucial for intelligent cruise control, high
definition map construction, and traffic accident reduction in
autonomous driving (Homayounfar et al. 2018; Efrat et al.
2020). Unlike the 2D lane detection that relies on the flat
ground plane assumption, the 3D method is more flexible to
handle complex road undulations. It usually requires a camera pose to transform the image/features of the perspective
view to the top-view by inverse perspective mapping. The
current methods utilize the ground truth camera pose provided by the benchmark to estimate the accurate top-view
feature. Such a strategy is potentially expensive in realistic driving applications because it needs an additional thirdparty tool (inertial sensor or SfM algorithm (Clark et al.

• We design a two-stage framework that firstly predicts the
camera pose, then utilizes the camera pose to generate a
top-view image for accurate 3D lane detection.
• We propose geometry constraints to assist in estimating
camera pose, which enforces the consistency between the
predicted 3D poses and lanes with the ground truth lanes
on the 2D plane.
• We employ polynomials to model the 3D lane, which
preserves the lanes’ local smoothness and global shape

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1765

