The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Recurrent Neural Network Controllers Synthesis with Stability Guarantees for
Partially Observed Systems
Fangda Gu∗1 , He Yin∗1 , Laurent El Ghaoui1 , Murat Arcak1 , Peter Seiler2 , Ming Jin3
1

University of California, Berkeley, 2594 Hearst Ave, Berkeley, California 94720
2
University of Michigan, 500 S State St, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
3
Virginia Tech, 1185 Perry Street 453 Whittemore (0111), Blacksburg, Virginia 24061

Abstract

diverging trajectory is acceptable. However, the set of parameters corresponding to stabilizing controllers is in general
nonconvex even in the simple setting of linear systems with
linear controllers (Fazel et al. 2018), which poses significant computational challenges for neural network controllers
under the general setting of nonlinear systems.
Thanks to recent robustness studies of deep learning, we
have seen attempts on giving stability certificates and/or ensuring stability at test time for fully-observed systems controlled by neural networks. Yet stability problems for neural
network controlled partially observed systems remain open.
Unlike fully-observed control systems where the plant states
are fully revealed to the controller, most real-world control
systems are only partially observed due to modeling inaccuracy, sensing limitations, and physical constraints (Braziunas
2003). Here, sensible estimates of the full system state usually depend on historical observations (Callier and Desoer
2012). Some partially observed systems are modeled using
partially observed Markov decision process (POMDP) (Monahan 1982) where an optimal solution is NP hard in general
(Mundhenk et al. 2000).
Paper contributions. In the paper, we propose a method
to synthesize recurrent neural network (RNN) controllers
with exponential stability guarantees for partially observed
systems. We derive a convex inner approximation to the
non-convex set of stable RNN parameters based on integral quadratic constraints (Megretski and Rantzer 1997),
loop transformation (Sastry 2013, Chap. 4) and a sequential
semidefinite convexification technique, which guarantees exponential stability for both linear time invariant (LTI) systems
and general nonlinear uncertain systems. A novel framework
of projected policy gradient is proposed to maximize some
unknown/complex reward function and ensure stability in the
online setting where a guaranteed-stable RNN controller is
synthesized and iteratively updated while interacting with
and controlling the underlying system, which differentiates
our works from most post-hoc validation methods. Finally,
we carry out comprehensive comparisons with policy gradient, and demonstrate that our method effectively ensures the
closed-loop stability and achieves higher reward on a variety
of control tasks, including vehicle lateral control and power
system frequency regulation.
Paper outline. In Section 2, we outline related works on
addressing partial observability, and enforcing stability in

Neural network controllers have become popular in control
tasks thanks to their flexibility and expressivity. Stability is a
crucial property for safety-critical dynamical systems, while
stabilization of partially observed systems, in many cases, requires controllers to retain and process long-term memories of
the past. We consider the important class of recurrent neural
networks (RNN) as dynamic controllers for nonlinear uncertain partially-observed systems, and derive convex stability
conditions based on integral quadratic constraints, S-lemma
and sequential convexification. To ensure stability during the
learning and control process, we propose a projected policy
gradient method that iteratively enforces the stability conditions in the reparametrized space taking advantage of mild
additional information on system dynamics. Numerical experiments show that our method learns stabilizing controllers
while using fewer samples and achieving higher final performance compared with policy gradient.

1

Introduction

Neural network decision making and control has seen a huge
advancement recently accompanied by the success of reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018). In particular, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved superhuman performance with neural network policies (also referred to as controllers in control tasks) in various domains
(Mnih et al. 2015; Lillicrap et al. 2016; Silver et al. 2016).
Policy gradient (Sutton et al. 1999) is one of the most
important approaches to DRL that synthesizes policies for
continuous decision making problems. For control tasks, policy gradient method and its variants have successfully synthesized neural network controllers to accomplish complex
control goals (Levine et al. 2018) without solving potentially
non-linear planing problems at test time (Levine et al. 2016).
However, most of these methods focus on maximizing the
reward function which only indirectly enforce desirable properties. Specifically, global stability of the closed-loop system
(Sastry 2013) guarantees convergence to the desired state of
origin from any initial state and therefore is a very important property for safety critical systems (e.g. aircraft control
(Chakraborty, Seiler, and Balas 2011)) where not a single
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5385

