The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

6DCNN with Roto-Translational Convolution Filters for Volumetric Data
Processing
Dmitrii Zhemchuzhnikov,Ilia Igashov, Sergei Grudinin
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
Dmitrii.Zhemchuzhnikov@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr, Ilia.Igashov@epfl.ch, Sergei.Grudinin@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Abstract

This work proposes a set of novel operations with the
corresponding architecture based on six-dimensional (6D)
roto-translational convolutional filters. For the first time,
thanks to the polynomial expansions in the Fourier space,
we demonstrate the feasibility of the 6D roto-translationalbased convolutional network with the leading complexity
of O(N 2 M 4 ) operations. We tested our method on simulated data and also on protein structure prediction datasets,
where the overall accuracy of our predictions is on par with
the state-of-the-art methods. Proteins play a crucial role in
most biological processes. Despite their seeming complexity, structures of proteins attract more and more attention
from the data science community (Senior et al. 2020; Jumper
et al. 2021; Laine et al. 2021). In particular, the task of protein structure prediction and analysis raises the challenge of
constructing rotational and translational equivariant architectures.

In this work, we introduce 6D Convolutional Neural Network
(6DCNN) designed to tackle the problem of detecting relative positions and orientations of local patterns when processing three-dimensional volumetric data. 6DCNN also includes
SE(3)-equivariant message-passing and nonlinear activation
operations constructed in the Fourier space. Working in the
Fourier space allows significantly reducing the computational
complexity of our operations. We demonstrate the properties
of the 6D convolution and its efficiency in the recognition of
spatial patterns. We also assess the 6DCNN model on several
datasets from the recent CASP protein structure prediction
challenges. Here, 6DCNN improves over the baseline architecture and also outperforms the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Methods of deep learning have recently made a great leap
forward in the spatial data processing. This domain contains various tasks from different areas of industry and natural sciences, including three-dimensional (3D) data analysis.
For a long time, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) remained the main tool in this domain. CNNs helped to solve
many real-world challenges, especially in computer vision.
However, these architectures have rather strict application
restrictions. Unfortunately, real-world raw data rarely have
standard orientation and size, which limits the efficiency of
translational convolutions. This circumstance has created an
increased interest in the topic of SE(3)-equivariant operations in recent years. While most of SE(3)-equivariant methods are focused on learning relations between rotational invariants, this paper addresses the problem of recognition
of arbitrarily-positioned and -oriented volumetric patterns
by reusing some theory already developed in computational
physics and crystallography.
A volumetric pattern in 3D has six degrees of freedom
(DOFs), three to define a rotation, and three for a translation. Thus, a classical convolution technique would require
scanning through all these six DOFs and scale as O(N 3 M 6 )
if a brute-force computation is used, where N is the linear
size of the volumetric data, and M is the linear size of the
pattern.

Related Work
Equivariant operations. The first attempt of learning
rotation-equivariant representations was made in Harmonic
Networks (Worrall et al. 2017) in application to 2D images. Further, this idea was transferred to the 3D space
with the corresponding architecture known as 3D Steerable
CNNs (Weiler et al. 2018). In Spherical CNNs (Cohen et al.
2018), the authors introduced a correlation on the rotation
group and proposed a concept of rotation-equivariant CNNs
on a sphere. Spherical harmonics kernels that provide rotational invariance have also been applied to point-cloud data
(Poulenard et al. 2019). A further effort on leveraging compact group representations resulted in the range of methods based on Clebsh-Gordan coefficients (Kondor 2018;
Kondor, Lin, and Trivedi 2018; Anderson, Hy, and Kondor
2019). This approach was finally generalized in Tensor field
networks (Thomas et al. 2018), where rotation-equivariant
operations were applied to vector and tensor fields. Later,
SE(3)-Transformers (Fuchs et al. 2020) were proposed to
efficiently capture the distant spatial relationships. More recently, (Hutchinson et al. 2021) continued to develop the theory of equivariant convolution operations for homogeneous
spaces and proposed Lie group equivariant transformers, following works on the general theory of group equivariant operations in SO(2) (Romero et al. 2020; Romero and Cordonnier 2021) and SO(3) (Cohen, Geiger, and Weiler 2018).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4707

