The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Domain Empirical Risk Minimization for
Unbiased Long-Tailed Classification
Beier Zhu1 , Yulei Niu1 * , Xian-Sheng Hua2 , Hanwang Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University 2 Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
beier002@e.ntu.edu.sg, yn.yuleiniu@gmail.com, xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

truly “improved”. Figure 1 (a.1) and (b.1) show an evidence.
Regardless of the test distributions, balanced or imbalanced,
an imbalanced model (vanilla cross-entropy trained, XE, orange line) always predicts the class distribution shaped as its
own model prior, which is long-tailed. As a comparison, a
balanced model (a SOTA method TDE (Tang, Huang, and
Zhang 2020), blue line) always predicts the distribution to
cater the tail. This observation implies that both of them
are biased: the imbalanced model is “head” biased; the balanced one is “tail” biased, which merely replaces the “head”
bias with the “tail” bias. Therefore, we expect an “unbiased”
model’s prediction to treat each class fairly and respects both
test distributions, i.e., the prediction distribution follows the
shape of the ground-truth one (e.g., green line). Figure 1 (a.2)
and (b.2) provide another evidence based on the true positive
(TP) and the false positive (FP) statistics. We observe that the
balanced model TDE tends to predict more samples as tail
classes. On the contrary, the imbalanced model XE prefers
to predict more samples as head classes. The preference on
head or tail classes comes with a large number of FP samples,
which lowers the precision score. In contrast, our xERM has
no significant preference between head and tail classes, which
achieves high precision under both test distributions. Only
through the above unbiasedness, we can diagnose whether
a model truly improves long-tailed classification, but not by
playing a “prior flipping” game.

We address the overlooked unbiasedness in existing longtailed classification methods: we find that their overall improvement is mostly attributed to the biased preference of “tail”
over “head”, as the test distribution is assumed to be balanced;
however, when the test is as imbalanced as the long-tailed
training data—let the test respect Zipf’s law of nature—the
“tail” bias is no longer beneficial overall because it hurts the
“head” majorities. In this paper, we propose Cross-Domain Empirical Risk Minimization (xERM) for training an unbiased
model to achieve strong performances on both test distributions, which empirically demonstrates that xERM fundamentally improves the classification by learning better feature
representation rather than the “head vs. tail” game. Based on
causality, we further theoretically explain why xERM achieves
unbiasedness: the bias caused by the domain selection is removed by adjusting the empirical risks on the imbalanced
domain and the balanced but unseen domain.

Introduction
When the training data distribution is long-tailed, e.g., thousands of samples per “head” class vs. just a few samples per
“tail” class, the resultant classification model will inevitably
downplay the minor “tail” and overplay the major “head”.
Therefore, to lift up the “tail” performance, recent methods
focus on the trade-off between the “head” and “tail” contributions, e.g., sample re-weighting (Cui et al. 2019; Lin et al.
2017), balanced training loss (Kang et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2021b), and “head” causal effect removal (Tang, Huang, and
Zhang 2020). As you may expect, the “tail” rise costs the
“head” fall; but fortunately, the overall gain is still positive.
The reasons are two-fold. First, thanks to the abundant “head”
training samples, the strong “head” features can afford the
trade-off, making the “head” performance drop much less
significant than the “tail” rise. Second, the test distribution is
often assumed to be balanced, i.e., “head” and “tail” have the
same number of samples, so the “head” fall is not amplified
by the balanced sample number.
We conjecture that the above “overall improvement” on
the balanced test may cover up the fact that today’s longtailed classification methods are still biased and far from

In fact, it is challenging to achieve unbiasedness across
the two completely different test distributions due to the domain selection issue (Pearl and Bareinboim 2011): the two
distributions would never co-exist in training — once one
is observed, the other is gone — let alone adjusting a fair
prior for both of them. In this paper, we propose a novel
training paradigm called Cross-Domain Empirical Risk Minimization (xERM) to tackle this challenge. xERM consists
of two ERM terms, which are the cross-entropy losses with
different supervisions: one is the ground-truth label from the
seen imbalanced domain, and the other is the prediction of
a balanced model. The imbalanced domain empirical risk
encourages the model to learn from the ground-truth annotations from the imbalanced distribution, which favors the
head classes. The balanced domain empirical risk encourages
the model to learn from the prediction of a balanced model,
which imagines a balanced distribution and prefers the tail
classes. These two risks are weighted to take advantage of

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3589

