The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Rethinking the Two-Stage Framework for Grounded Situation Recognition
Meng Wei1 * , Long Chen2 * † , Wei Ji1† , Xiaoyu Yue3 , Tat-Seng Chua1
1

Sea-NExT Joint Lab, National University of Singapore
2
Columbia University
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{kellymeng0427, zjuchenlong, yuexiaoyu002}@gmail.com, jiwei@nus.edu.sg, chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Grounded Situation Recognition (GSR), i.e., recognizing the
salient activity (or verb) category in an image (e.g., buying)
and detecting all corresponding semantic roles (e.g., agent
and goods), is an essential step towards “human-like” event
understanding. Since each verb is associated with a specific
set of semantic roles, all existing GSR methods resort to a
two-stage framework: predicting the verb in the first stage
and detecting the semantic roles in the second stage. However, there are obvious drawbacks in both stages: 1) The
widely-used cross-entropy (XE) loss for object recognition
is insufficient in verb classification due to the large intraclass variation and high inter-class similarity among daily
activities. 2) All semantic roles are detected in an autoregressive manner, which fails to model the complex semantic
relations between different roles. To this end, we propose a
novel SituFormer for GSR which consists of a Coarse-toFine Verb Model (CFVM) and a Transformer-based Noun
Model (TNM). CFVM is a two-step verb prediction model:
a coarse-grained model trained with XE loss first proposes a
set of verb candidates, and then a fine-grained model trained
with triplet loss re-ranks these candidates with enhanced verb
features (not only separable but also discriminative). TNM
is a transformer-based semantic role detection model, which
detects all roles parallelly. Owing to the global relation modeling ability and flexibility of the transformer decoder, TNM
can fully explore the statistical dependency of the roles. Extensive validations on the challenging SWiG benchmark show
that SituFormer achieves a new state-of-the-art performance
with significant gains under various metrics. Code is available
at https://github.com/kellyiss/SituFormer.

VERB

buying

AGENT

woman

GOODS

book

PAYMENT

cash

SELLER

man

PLACE

store

(a)
buying
(agent, goods, …)

Verb
Model

Image

Noun Model

CNN
RNN

buying

woman

book

cash

man

store

(b)
Figure 1: (a) An example of GSR. Given this image, a GSR
model needs to not only predict the verb category buying,
but also detect (i.e., classify and ground) all corresponding
semantic roles for buying event, such as agent, goods,
and payment. (b) An overview of the existing two-stage
GSR framework, which consists of a verb model and an
RNN-based noun model to detect all roles autoregressively.

such as “SOMEONE DO SOMETHING WITH SOME - TOOL
AT SOMEPLACE ”. Hence, the task Situation Recognition
(SR) (Yatskar, Zettlemoyer, and Farhadi 2016) is proposed
for comprehensive event extraction. As the example in Figure 1 (a), SR not only recognize the salient activity(or verb)
in the image (e.g., buying), but also recognize all semantic
roles (e.g., agent is woman, place is store). To further
ground the semantic roles in the image, a more challenging
task Grounded Situation Recognition (GSR) (Pratt et al.
2020) was proposed (cf. bounding boxes in Figure 1 (a)). By
describing activities with verb and grounded semantic roles,
GSR provides a visually-grounded structure representation
(named verb frame) for the activity, which benefits many
downstream scene understanding tasks, such as image-text

Introduction
Understanding activities in images is one of the core tasks
for computer vision. With the maturity of action recognition (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Wang et al. 2016)
and object detection (Ren et al. 2015), today’s computers can recognize action or object categories well. However, “human-like” activity understanding goes beyond
action-centric or object-centric recognition. A more crucial step is to identify how objects participate in activities,
* Work started when M. Wei and L. Chen at Tencent AI Lab.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2651

