The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Incomplete Multi-View Clustering via Mining Cluster Complementarity
Jie Xu1 , Chao Li1 , Yazhou Ren1∗ , Liang Peng1 , Yujie Mo1 , Xiaoshuang Shi1∗ , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen 518000, China
jiexuwork@outlook.com, lichao.cfm@gmail.com, yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn, larrypengliang@gmail.com,
moyujie2017@gmail.com, xsshi2013@gmail.com, seanzhuxf@gmail.com
Abstract

data (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014; Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015). For
example, different medical tests of a patient can be treated as
different views, where cheap medical tests are easily available and expensive ones are often missing due to price. Images and texts are two views to describe scenes, but only
some images have textual captions. The incomplete multiview data inevitably makes existing multi-view clustering
methods limited and inapplicable. To this end, an increasing attention is paid to partial multi-view clustering or incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) problems (Rai et al.
2016; Wang et al. 2018; Ye et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2020).
In the literature, existing IMVC methods can be categorized into two groups, i.e., traditional methods and deep
methods. Traditional IMVC methods usually adopt zero or
mean values to pad missing data (Wen et al. 2021) firstly, and
then design specific machine learning techniques to conduct
multi-view clustering, such as non-negative matrix factorization methods (Li, Jiang, and Zhou 2014; Hu and Chen
2019), subspace learning methods (Kang et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2021a), kernel methods (Guo and Ye 2019; Liu et al.
2021b), and graph methods (Rai et al. 2016; Li, Wan, and He
2021). Nevertheless, traditional IMVC methods are limited
in their representation capability and high complexity (Guo
and Ye 2019). Recently, deep IMVC methods have gradually
been attracting attentions due to their powerful generalization capability and scalability. Deep IMVC methods often
utilize the imputation strategies to infer the possible values
for missing data before conducting multi-view clustering.
For instance, (Xu et al. 2019a; Wang et al. 2021) proposed
to take advantage of generative adversarial networks to generate desired data for the missing data. (Lin et al. 2021) designed to recover the missing data with contrastive learning.
Although existing IMVC methods achieve important
progress by padding missing data with imputation strategies,
they have at least two issues. On the one hand, the effectiveness of imputation strategies depends on the quality of
imputed data. It is difficult to correctly estimate the missing
data based on the observed data, especially when the number of missing data is large. Moreover, it is also knotty to
measure the quality of the imputation as the ground truth
of the missing data is unknown. On the other hand, existing
IMVC methods usually explore the complementary information among multi-view data by the fusion process. For instance, (Guo and Ye 2019) excavated the complementary in-

Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) is an important unsupervised approach to group the multi-view data containing
missing data in some views. Previous IMVC methods suffer from the following issues: (1) the inaccurate imputation
or padding for missing data negatively affects the clustering
performance, (2) the quality of features after fusion might
be interfered by the low-quality views, especially the inaccurate imputed views. To avoid these issues, this work presents
an imputation-free and fusion-free deep IMVC framework.
First, the proposed method builds a deep embedding feature learning and clustering model for each view individually.
Our method then nonlinearly maps the embedding features
of complete data into a high-dimensional space to discover
linear separability. Concretely, this paper provides an implementation of the high-dimensional mapping as well as shows
the mechanism to mine the multi-view cluster complementarity. This complementary information is then transformed
to the supervised information with high confidence, aiming
to achieve the multi-view clustering consistency for the complete data and incomplete data. Furthermore, we design an
EM-like optimization strategy to alternately promote feature
learning and clustering. Extensive experiments on real-world
multi-view datasets demonstrate that our method achieves superior clustering performance over state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Data often has multiple views collected from diverse sources
in practical applications, such as classification (Liu, Li, and
Zhang 2016), community detection (Cao et al. 2019), dimensionality reduction (Liu et al. 2017), and cross-modal
retrieval (Xu et al. 2020; Wei et al. 2021). Multi-view clustering is an important unsupervised approach, aiming to improve the model effectiveness by mining the complementary information hidden in multi-view data. Recently, many
multi-view clustering methods have been proposed (Tao
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2019; Tang et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021b).
These methods mainly deal with the complete multi-view
data, where the information of all views is observed.
However, the information of multi-view data might be incomplete in some views, as known as incomplete multi-view
∗

Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8761

