The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Preemptive Image Robustification for Protecting Users
against Man-in-the-Middle Adversarial Attacks
Seungyong Moon* 1 , Gaon An* 1 , Hyun Oh Song†12
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
DeepMetrics, Seoul, Korea
{symoon11, white0234, hyunoh}@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep neural networks have become the driving force of modern image recognition systems. However, the vulnerability of
neural networks against adversarial attacks poses a serious
threat to the people affected by these systems. In this paper,
we focus on a real-world threat model where a Man-in-theMiddle adversary maliciously intercepts and perturbs images
web users upload online. This type of attack can raise severe
ethical concerns on top of simple performance degradation.
To prevent this attack, we devise a novel bi-level optimization
algorithm that finds points in the vicinity of natural images
that are robust to adversarial perturbations. Experiments on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet show our method can effectively
robustify natural images within the given modification budget.
We also show the proposed method can improve robustness
when jointly used with randomized smoothing.

User

Web Application

Attacker

Adversarial Attack

Preemptive Robustification

User

Web Application
“Dog”

Introduction
Recent progress in deep neural networks has enabled substantial performance gains in various computer vision tasks,
including image classification, object detection, and semantic
segmentation. Leveraging this advance, more practitioners
are deploying neural network-based image recognition systems in real-world applications, such as image tagging or
face recognition. However, neural networks are vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013), minute input
perturbations intentionally designed to mislead networks to
yield incorrect predictions. These adversarial examples can
significantly degrade the performance of the network models,
raising security concerns about their deployment.
When these image recognition systems are deployed to
applications where users freely upload images from local
machines to remote storage, such as social media, this vulnerability can pose another serious threat, especially to the
individual application users. Consider there exists a manin-the-middle (MitM) adversary that can intercept and add
perturbations to the images web users upload during transmission (Figure 1). Then, this adversary can easily vandalize neural network-based web services such as image auto-tagging

Attacker

Adversarial Attack

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed method. Without protection, a MitM adversary can easily perturb the user’s image to
be misclassified by the web application (top). Our proposed
method preemptively robustifies the user’s image, securing
the image from adversarial attack (bottom).
in social media apps by perturbing the images to be misclassified. This type of attack can severely deteriorate user
experience, especially as the adversary can further use this
attack to insult the uploaders beyond simple misclassification.
Even though the MitM attack is one of the most lethal cyber
threats (Desmedt 2011; Li et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019),
protecting neural networks from this type of attack has been
much less studied in adversarial machine learning literature.
In this work, we develop a new defense framework to protect web users from MitM attacks. To provide more effective
protection measures for the users, we focus on the fact that
users hold control of their images before the adversary, unlike
in conventional adversarial attack scenarios. Based on this
observation, we ask the following question:

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Can we preemptively manipulate images slightly to be
robust against MitM adversarial attacks?
7823

