The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast Sparse Decision Tree Optimization via Reference Ensembles
Hayden McTavish1,3 * , Chudi Zhong2 * , Reto Achermann1 , Ilias Karimalis1 , Jacques Chen1 ,
Cynthia Rudin2 , Margo Seltzer1
1

University of British Columbia
2
Duke University
3
University of California, San Diego
hmctavish@ucsd.edu, {chudi.zhong, cynthia.rudin}@duke.edu, {achreto, mseltzer}@cs.ubc.ca, iliaskar@students.cs.ubc.ca,
jacquesc@student.ubc.ca
Abstract

decision trees remains one of the most fundamental problems
in machine learning (ML).
Full decision tree optimization is NP-hard (Laurent and
Rivest 1976), leading to challenges in searching for optimal
trees in a reasonable time, even for small datasets. Major
advances have been made recently using either mathematical programming solvers (e.g., Verwer and Zhang 2019) or
customized branch-and-bound with dynamic programming
(Aglin, Nijssen, and Schaus 2020; Lin et al. 2020; Demirović
et al. 2020), showing us that there is hope. However, these
methods are frequently unable to find the optimal tree within
a reasonable amount of time, or even if they do find the optimal solution, it can take a long time to prove that the tree is
optimal or close-to-optimal.
Ideally, we would like an algorithm that, within a few
minutes, produces a sparse decision tree that is as accurate as
a black box machine learning model. Also, we wish to have a
guarantee that the model will have performance close to that
of the black box. We present a practical way to achieve this
by introducing a set of smart guessing techniques that speed
up sparse decision tree computations for branch-and-bound
methods by orders of magnitude.
The key is to guess in a way that prunes the search space
without eliminating optimal and near-optimal solutions. We
derive those smart guesses from a black box tree-ensemble
reference model whose performance we aim to match. Our
guesses come in three flavors. The first type of guess reduces
the number of thresholds we consider as a possible split on
a continuous feature. Here, we use splits generated by black
box ensembles. The second type of guess concerns the maximum depth we might need for an optimal tree, where we
relate the complexity of a tree ensemble to the depth of an
equivalently complex class of individual trees. The third type
of guess uses the accuracy of black box models on subsets
of the data to guess lower bounds on the loss for each subproblem we encounter. Our guesses are guaranteed to predict
as well or better than the black box tree-ensemble reference
model: taking the sparsest decision tree that makes the same
predictions as the black box, our method will find this tree, an
equivalently good tree, or an even better one. Together, these
guesses decrease the run time by several orders of magnitude,
allowing fast production of sparse and interpretable trees that
achieve black box predictive performance.

Sparse decision tree optimization has been one of the most fundamental problems in AI since its inception and is a challenge
at the core of interpretable machine learning. Sparse decision
tree optimization is computationally hard, and despite steady
effort since the 1960’s, breakthroughs have been made on
the problem only within the past few years, primarily on the
problem of finding optimal sparse decision trees. However,
current state-of-the-art algorithms often require impractical
amounts of computation time and memory to find optimal or
near-optimal trees for some real-world datasets, particularly
those having several continuous-valued features. Given that the
search spaces of these decision tree optimization problems are
massive, can we practically hope to find a sparse decision tree
that competes in accuracy with a black box machine learning
model? We address this problem via smart guessing strategies
that can be applied to any optimal branch-and-bound-based
decision tree algorithm. The guesses come from knowledge
gleaned from black box models. We show that by using these
guesses, we can reduce the run time by multiple orders of
magnitude while providing bounds on how far the resulting
trees can deviate from the black box’s accuracy and expressive
power. Our approach enables guesses about how to bin continuous features, the size of the tree, and lower bounds on the
error for the optimal decision tree. Our experiments show that
in many cases we can rapidly construct sparse decision trees
that match the accuracy of black box models. To summarize:
when you are having trouble optimizing, just guess.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are one of the leading forms of interpretable
AI models. Since the development of the first decision tree
algorithm (Morgan and Sonquist 1963), a huge number of
algorithms have been proposed to improve both accuracy and
run time. However, major approaches are based on decision
tree induction, using heuristic splitting and pruning (e.g.,
Breiman et al. 1984; Quinlan 1993). Growing a tree in a
greedy way, though fast, leads to suboptimal models with no
indication of how far away the solution is from optimality.
The generated trees are usually much more complicated than
they need to be, hindering interpretability. Optimizing sparse
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9604

