The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Category-Specific Nuance Exploration Network for Fine-Grained Object Retrieval
Shijie Wang1 , Zhihui Wang1,2 , Haojie Li 1,2∗ , Wanli Ouyang3
1

International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, China
3
Sense Time Computer Vision Research Group, The University of Sydney, Australia
wangsj@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zhwang, hjli}@dlut.edu.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Employing additional prior knowledge to model local features as a final fine-grained object representation has become
a trend for fine-grained object retrieval (FGOR). A potential
limitation of these methods is that they only focus on common parts across the dataset (e.g., head, body, or even leg) by
introducing additional prior knowledge, but the retrieval of
a fine-grained object may rely on category-specific nuances
that contribute to category prediction. To handle this limitation, we propose an end-to-end Category-specific Nuance
Exploration Network (CNENet) that elaborately discovers
category-specific nuances that contribute to category prediction, and semantically aligns these nuances grouped by subcategory without any additional prior knowledge, to directly
emphasize the discrepancy among subcategories. Specifically, we design a Nuance Modelling Module that adaptively
predicts a group of category-specific response (CARE) maps
via implicitly digging into category-specific nuances, specifying the locations and scales for category-specific nuances.
Upon this, two nuance regularizations are proposed: 1) semantic discrete loss that forces each CARE map to attend
to different spatial regions to capture diverse nuances; 2) semantic alignment loss that constructs a consistent semantic
correspondence for each CARE map of the same order with
the same subcategory via guaranteeing each instance and its
transformed counterpart to be spatially aligned. Moreover, we
propose a Nuance Expansion Module, which exploits context
appearance information of discovered nuances and refines the
prediction of current nuance by its similar neighbors, leading
to further improvement on nuance consistency and completeness. Extensive experiments validate that our CNENet consistently yields the best performance under the same settings
against most competitive approaches on CUB Birds, Stanford
Cars, and FGVC Aircraft datasets.

Figure 1: Motivation of CNENet. (a) are visually similar images (S, SN ) from different subcategories as inputs. The yellow and blue circles in (b)(d)(e)(g) denote the selected nuances, and the values in (c)(f) represent the cosine similarity
(Cos) between (S, SN ). We can see that although part-based
works discover common parts of head and tail across subcategories by introducing additional prior knowledge (i.e., key
points, etc.), the similarity (c) between the extracted features
from selected parts with different subcategories is large. Our
CNENet discards additional prior knowledge and designs
the nuance regularizations to discover category-specific nuances which do not have to be common parts, thus emphasizing the discrepancy among subcategories.

to FGOR lies in picking out nuances buried in the local regions to address the aforementioned challenge of FGOR.
Recently, quite a few approaches (Zheng et al. 2018; Shen
et al. 2017; Moskvyak et al. 2021) have been proposed for
exploring nuances, which primarily brings together representation learning, and fine-grained object auxiliary information into a framework to consider the nuances of a finegrained object. However, these works require extra prior
knowledge (i.e., object location, key points, or object parsing information) for discovering and aligning common parts
across all subcategories, while neglecting the fact that these
common parts are not always discriminative, and accordingly degrades the retrieval performance. For example, visually similar birds can be retrieved using their categoryspecific nuances that contribute to category prediction in
Fig. 1, but previous part-based works select the common
parts (e.g., head and tail) across all subcategories by the
guidance of additional prior knowledge, making the selected

Introduction
Fine-grained object retrieval (FGOR) aims at retrieving images belonging to various subcategories of a certain metacategory and returning images with the same subcategory as
the query image. It is a more challenging problem than general image retrieval due to the inherently subtle inter-class
object variances among subcategories. As a result, the key
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2513

