The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

VECA: A New Benchmark and Toolkit for General Cognitive Development
Kwanyoung Park* , Hyunseok Oh* , Youngki Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea
william202@snu.ac.kr, ohsai@snu.ac.kr, youngkilee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The developmental approach, simulating a cognitive development of a human, arises as a way to nurture a humanlevel commonsense and overcome the limitations of datadriven approaches. However, neither a virtual environment
nor an evaluation platform exists for the overall development of core cognitive skills. We present the VECA(Virtual
Environment for Cognitive Assessment), which consists of
two main components: (i) a first benchmark to assess the
overall cognitive development of an AI agent, and (ii) a novel
toolkit to generate diverse and distinct cognitive tasks. VECA
benchmark virtually implements the cognitive scale of Bayley
Scales of Infant and Toddler Development-IV(Bayley-4), the
gold-standard developmental assessment for human infants
and toddlers. Our VECA toolkit provides a human toddlerlike embodied agent with various human-like perceptual features crucial to human cognitive development, e.g., binocular vision, 3D-spatial audio, and tactile receptors. We compare several modern RL algorithms on our VECA benchmark
and seek their limitations in modeling human-like cognitive
development. We further analyze the validity of the VECA
benchmark, as well as the effect of human-like sensory characteristics on cognitive skills.

Introduction

Figure 1: We present our VECA benchmark, a novel benchmark to assess the overall cognitive development of an AI
agent. Our VECA benchmark virtually implements the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development-IV, a goldstandard developmental test for early human infancy. VECA
benchmark is built upon our VECA toolkit, that can easily
develop diverse domains of cognitive tasks with controllable
difficulties. To bridge the perception and interaction gap of
human toddler and AI agent, VECA toolkit provides a human toddler-like multisensory embodied agent.

Building a cognitive intelligent agent with human-like commonsense is a milestone of artificial intelligence (Zhu et al.
2020). Human cognition is an interpretable and sampleefficient general intelligence, encompassing diverse abilities
like information processing, intuitive psychology, and goal
setting (Lake et al. 2017; Sloman 1999). These core cognitive skills naturally construct in an early stage of human
development, often with limited experiences. Hence one of
the emerging paths towards such mental capabilities is to
mimic such cognitive development of a human, i.e., a developmental approach. (Doya and Taniguchi 2019; Silver et al.
2021) The goal of the developmental approach is to simulate a human’s neuro-cognitive developmental process and
enable continual life-long learning with active interactions.
However, the developmental approach currently lacks
both the assessment for cognitive development and the

general environment to simulate the development. Several
benchmarks only target specific cognitive skills of an AI
agent, such as intuitive physics (Bakhtin et al. 2019) or intuitive psychology (Shu et al. 2021). None of them covers the overall development of distinct cognitive skills like
object-relatedness, memory, and sensorimotor development.
Embodied agent simulators are the closest thing to mimic
human biological features, since they give realistic egocen-

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

38

