The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hierarchical Cross-Modality Semantic Correlation Learning Model
for Multimodal Summarization
Litian Zhang,† Xiaoming Zhang,* Junshu Pan†
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{litianzhang, yolixs, junshupan}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Source Images:

Multimodal summarization with multimodal output (MSMO)
generates a summary with both textual and visual content.
Multimodal news report contains heterogeneous contents,
which makes MSMO nontrivial. Moreover, it is observed that
different modalities of data in the news report correlate hierarchically. Traditional MSMO methods indistinguishably handle different modalities of data by learning a representation
for the whole data, which is not directly adaptable to the heterogeneous contents and hierarchical correlation. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical cross-modality semantic correlation learning model (HCSCL) to learn the intra- and intermodal correlation existing in the multimodal data. HCSCL
adopts a graph network to encode the intra-modal correlation. Then, a hierarchical fusion framework is proposed to
learn the hierarchical correlation between text and images.
Furthermore, we construct a new dataset with relevant image
annotation and image object label information to provide the
supervision information for the learning procedure. Extensive
experiments on the dataset show that HCSCL significantly
outperforms the baseline methods in automatic summarization metrics and fine-grained diversity tests.

HCSCL Output:

Source Text:
…… Robben broke through to the small penalty
area and shot the ball. Mascherano lunged to
block the shot …… He bent down and looked
painful ……

Mascherano was injured
to block Robben's shot in
the World Cup semi-final.

Traditional Model Output:
Mascherano was injured in
the World Cup semi-final.

Correlation in objects and words： Correlation in scenes and sentences：
Robben broke through to the small
Robben
He
penalty area and shot the ball.
Mascherano

ball

Mascherano lunged to block the
shot.

Figure 1: An example of the cross-modality semantics correlation in multimodal data.

multimodal input models may decrease summarization metric scores compared to text-only input models. Our experiments also show that some multimodal input model methods perform worse than traditional text-only input models.
Therefore, one of the core problems of MSMO is how to effectively learn from each other modalities of data to obtain
high-quality summaries.
Meanwhile, the correlation between the visual content
and text article presents unique characteristics, providing
clues to learning the important information from the two
modalities complementarily to improve MSMO. As shown
in Figure 1, the low-level objects in an image constitute
the high-level semantics called scenes through the interaction between them. Therefore, by analyzing the objects and
hence the scenes, we can know what the image describes
from different levels. In the other data space, words are also
the basic textual information in an article, while the combination of words, called sentences, present more abstract
semantics information. Besides the intra-modal correlation,
the semantics objects in the image and article are correlated
in different levels. For example, in Figure 1, each person
in the image may be related to a name in the article, and
the football sport in the image is also described by a sentence in the article. By learning the inter-modal correlation,
it can be known what is the important information in both

Introduction
With the rapid development of multimedia data on the Internet, multimodal summarization is a research direction
worthy of attention and has broad development prospects.
Therefore, some researches (Zhu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020b;
Zhu et al. 2020) focus on studying multimodal summarization with multimodal output (MSMO) to help readers improve reading efficiency and satisfaction. However, these approaches abstract the summary from the raw data directly,
which is ineffective in learning the latent and vital information from both the text and image content.
Usually, the visual image and text article have heterogeneous structures. Directly mapping visual input and textual
input as global vectors (Zhu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020b; Zhu
et al. 2020) is not effective to learn the important information
for both modalities from each other, and even noisy information is added to decrease the performance of summarization. Previous experiments (Zhu et al. 2018) have shown that
* Corresponding author.
†

Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11676

