The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Zero-Shot Commonsense Question Answering with Cloze Translation and
Consistency Optimization
Zi-Yi Dou, Nanyun Peng
University of California, Los Angeles
{zdou,violetpeng}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Swap the first two
children of “SQ”

Commonsense question answering (CQA) aims to test if
models can answer questions regarding commonsense knowledge that everyone knows. Prior works that incorporate external knowledge bases have shown promising results, but
knowledge bases are expensive to construct and are often
limited to a fixed set of relations. In this paper, we instead
focus on better utilizing the implicit knowledge stored in pretrained language models. While researchers have found that
the knowledge embedded in pre-trained language models can
be extracted by having them fill in the blanks of carefully
designed prompts for relation extraction and text classification, it remains unclear if we can adopt this paradigm in CQA
where the inputs and outputs take much more flexible forms.
To this end, we investigate four translation methods that can
translate natural questions into cloze-style sentences to better solicit commonsense knowledge from language models,
including a syntactic-based model, an unsupervised neural
model, and two supervised neural models. In addition, to
combine the different translation methods, we propose to encourage consistency among model predictions on different
translated questions with unlabeled data. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our methods on three CQA datasets in zeroshot settings. We show that our methods are complementary
to a knowledge base improved model, and combining them
can lead to state-of-the-art zero-shot performance. Analyses
also reveal distinct characteristics of the different cloze translation methods and provide insights on why combining them
can lead to great improvements. Code/dataset is available at
https://github.com/PlusLabNLP/zero shot cqa.

Inverse
wh-movement
Replace wh-word
with the mask token

Figure 1: An example of natural-to-cloze translation with
our syntactic-based method. ‘SQ’ is defined as the subconstituent of questions excluding wh-word or wh-phrase.

relies on inference over implicit commonsense knowledge
that is not given in the QA contexts.
To tackle this problem, researchers have attempted to
construct commonsense knowledge bases (Vrandečić and
Krötzsch 2014; Speer, Chin, and Havasi 2017; Sap et al.
2019a), which can be integrated into downstream models (Bosselut, Le Bras, and Choi 2019). However, knowledge bases are often limited to a pre-defined set of relations
and are expensive to construct. On the other hand, language
models (LMs; e.g. Devlin et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2019); Lan
et al. (2019)) pre-trained on large textual corpora are easy to
extend to more data and allow users to query about an open
class of relations. In addition, it has been demonstrated that
pre-trained LMs contain a certain amount of world knowledge implicitly (Roberts, Raffel, and Shazeer 2020; Talmor
et al. 2020) which can be extracted by having LMs fill in the
blanks of carefully designed prompts (Petroni et al. 2019;
Zhou et al. 2020; Jiang et al. 2020). However, these previous work only focuses on the settings where there is a
fixed set of relations or output classes, thus knowledge can
be induced by designing a limited amount of hand-crafted
or automatically-generated rules. For example, to obtain a
birthplace of one person X, we can just have an LM fill in
the blank of ‘X was born in ’. In contrast, natural questions
are much more flexible and it is non-trivial to design general rules to transform different natural questions into cloze
forms. How to better solicit implicit knowledge in the pretrained LMs for CQA is an open question and no previous
work has explored cloze translation for CQA to our knowl-

Introduction
Commonsense knowledge consists of widely known facts
that humans use to reason and react to everyday situations.
Recently, empowering machines with such commonsense
reasoning abilities has become an active research topic (Lin
et al. 2019; Bosselut et al. 2019; Lv et al. 2020) and various commonsense question answering (CQA) benchmarks
have been constructed (Zellers et al. 2018; Sap et al. 2019a;
Zellers et al. 2019). Different from other types of QA tasks,
CQA usually does not require domain-specific knowledge
and sophisticated natural language understanding. Rather, it
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10572

