The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Locally Fair Partitioning
Pankaj K. Agarwal, Shao-Heng Ko, Kamesh Munagala, Erin Taylor
Department of Computer Science, Duke University
{pankaj, sk684, kamesh, ect15}@cs.duke.edu

anced, i.e., has roughly the same number of individuals.1
A final consideration, and one that will be the focus of this
paper, is fairness. If society has a large fraction of blue voters,
the districts should not be drawn so that most representatives
end up being red.
In this paper, we consider a local and strong notion of fairness. Let us say that a voter is unhappy if she is in a majority
blue (resp. red) district, but her party is red (resp. blue). We
say that a given set of districts is locally fair if no subset of
unhappy voters of the same party can deviate and form a feasible district (nicely shaped and balanced) so that they are the
majority in that district. In other words, these deviating voters
have a justified complaint – there was a different hypothetical
district where they could have been happy. This notion is
akin to that of the core from cooperative game theory (Scarf
1967). As such, if a partition is locally fair, then it is as fair
as possible to the relevant parties – there are no groups could
potentially form a region and do better.
There are examples in which a group of voters have argued
they have a justified complaint regarding the redistricting. In
the 2012 election in North Carolina, 13 House seats were
allocated, 4 to Democrats and 9 to Republicans. In contrast,
the percentage of voters who voted for a Democrat candidate
was 50.60%. The U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that two of
the districts’ boundaries in this map were unconstitutional
due to gerrymandering and required new maps to be drawn.
Considering this map, it is clear there exist compact potential
districts which could be considered a deviating group with
respect to the districting. This case (Cooper v. Harris (2017))
is just one in a long line of judgements on the fairness of
districting plans in the U.S.2 The exhibition of deviating
groups may help a political group or group of voters justify
their complaint that a redistricting is unfair, and it may be
effectively used in auditing proposed plans.
In contrast, some input instances may exhibit “natural
gerrymandering”, when the distribution of the population
prevents redistricting plans from being representative to all
groups (Borodin et al. 2018). For example, if the minority
party had 40% of the vote in total but the voters are uni-

Abstract
We model the societal task of redistricting political districts
as a partitioning problem: Given a set of n points in the plane,
each belonging to one of two parties, and a parameter k, our
goal is to compute a partition Π of the plane into regions so
that each region contains roughly σ = n/k points. Π should
satisfy a notion of “local” fairness, which is related to the
notion of core, a well-studied concept in cooperative game
theory. A region is associated with the majority party in that
region, and a point is unhappy in Π if it belongs to the minority
party. A group D of roughly σ contiguous points is called a
deviating group with respect to Π if majority of points in D
are unhappy in Π. The partition Π is locally fair if there is no
deviating group with respect to Π.
This paper focuses on a restricted case when points lie in
1D. The problem is non-trivial even in this case. We consider
both adversarial and “beyond worst-case” settings for this
problem. For the former, we characterize the input parameters
for which a locally fair partition always exists; we also show
that a locally fair partition may not exist for certain parameters.
We then consider input models where there are “runs” of red
and blue points. For such clustered inputs, we show that a
locally fair partition may not exist for certain values of σ, but
an approximate locally fair partition exists if we allow some
regions to have smaller sizes. We finally present a polynomialtime algorithm for computing a locally fair partition if one
exists.

Introduction
Redistricting is a common societal decision making problem.
In its basic form, there are two parties, say red and blue, and
a parliament with some k representatives. Each individual
(or voter) in the geographic region is aligned with one of the
two parties. The goal is to divide the region into k parts –
called districts – so that each part elects one representative to
the parliament. It is typically assumed that each district does
majority voting, so that if a district has more red voters than
blue voters, then the chosen representative will be red.
The societal question then is how should these districts
be drawn? One natural constraint is that the district is a connected region and, more preferably, has a compact shape.
Another consideration is that each district is population bal-

1
US courts have ruled that districts be population balanced,
compact, and contiguous; see, e.g., https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/
Reynolds v. Sims.
2
See also, Benisek v. Lamone (2018), Gill v. Whitford (2018),
Rucho v. Common Cause (2019), etc.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4752

