The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Device Scheduling with Multi-Job Federated Learning
Chendi Zhou1† , Ji Liu2† * , Juncheng Jia1 , Jingbo Zhou2 , Yang Zhou3 , Huaiyu Dai4 , Dejing Dou2
1

Soochow University, 2 Baidu Inc., China, 3 Auburn University, 4 North Carolina State University, United States

Abstract

data, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017a), which
does not transfer raw data, emerges as an effective approach.
FL was first introduced to collaboratively train a global
model with non-Independent and Identically Distributed
(non-IID) data distributed on mobile devices (McMahan
et al. 2017a). During the training process of FL, the raw
data is kept decentralized without being moved to a single
server or a single data center (Kairouz et al. 2019; Yang et al.
2019). FL only allows the intermediate data to be transferred
from the distributed devices, which can be the weights or
the gradients of a model. FL generally exploits a parameter server architecture (Smola and Narayanamurthy 2010),
where a server (or a group of servers) coordinates the training process with numerous devices. To collaboratively train
a global model, the server selects (schedules) a number of
devices to perform local model updates based on their local
data, and then it aggregates the local models to obtain a new
global model. This process is repeated multiple times so as
to generate a global model of high accuracy.
While current FL solutions (McMahan et al. 2017a; Pilla
2021) focus on a single-task job or a multi-task job (Smith
et al. 2017), FL with multiple jobs (Han et al. 2020) remains
an open problem. The major difference between the multitask job and multiple jobs is that the tasks of the multi-task
job share some common parts of the model, while the multiple jobs do not have interaction between each other in terms
of the model. The multi-job FL deals with the simultaneous
training process of multiple independent jobs. Each job corresponds to multiple updates during the training process of
a global model with the corresponding decentralized data.
While the FL with a single job generally chooses a portion
of devices to update the model, the other devices remain
idle, and the efficiency is low. The multi-job FL can well exploit diverse devices for multiple jobs simultaneously, which
brings high efficiency. The available devices are generally
heterogeneous (Li et al. 2020, 2021), i.e., the computing and
communication capability of each device is different, and
the data in each device may also differ. During the training
process of multiple jobs, the devices need to be scheduled to
each job. At a given time, a device can be scheduled to only
one job. However, only a portion of the available devices
is scheduled to one job in order to reduce the influence of
stragglers (McMahan et al. 2017a). Powerful devices should
be scheduled to jobs in order to accelerate the training pro-

Recent years have witnessed a large amount of decentralized
data in multiple (edge) devices of end-users, while the aggregation of the decentralized data remains difficult for machine
learning jobs due to laws or regulations. Federated Learning (FL) emerges as an effective approach to handling decentralized data without sharing the sensitive raw data, while
collaboratively training global machine learning models. The
servers in FL need to select (and schedule) devices during the
training process. However, the scheduling of devices for multiple jobs with FL remains a critical and open problem. In this
paper, we propose a novel multi-job FL framework to enable
the parallel training process of multiple jobs. The framework
consists of a system model and two scheduling methods. In
the system model, we propose a parallel training process of
multiple jobs, and construct a cost model based on the training time and the data fairness of various devices during the
training process of diverse jobs. We propose a reinforcement
learning-based method and a Bayesian optimization-based
method to schedule devices for multiple jobs while minimizing the cost. We conduct extensive experimentation with multiple jobs and datasets. The experimental results show that
our proposed approaches significantly outperform baseline
approaches in terms of training time (up to 8.67 times faster)
and accuracy (up to 44.6% higher).

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a large amount of decentralized data over various Internet of Things (IoT) devices, mobile devices, etc. (Liu et al. 2021), which can be exploited
to train machine learning models of high accuracy for diverse artificial intelligence applications. Since the data contain sensitive information of end-users, a few stringent legal
restrictions (Official Journal of the European Union 2016;
CCL 2018; CCP 2018; Chik 2013) have been put into practice to protect data security and privacy. In this case, it is difficult or even impossible to aggregate the decentralized data
into a single server or a data center to train machine learning models. To enable collaborative training with distributed
†

C. Zhou and J. Liu contributed equally to the paper. This work
was done when C. Zhou was an intern at Baidu Inc.
* Corresponding author (liuji04@baidu.com).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9971

