The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Quality-Aware Representation for Multi-Person Pose Regression
Yabo Xiao,1, * Dongdong Yu, 2, * Xiao Juan Wang, 1,† Lei Jin, 1 Guoli Wang, 3 Qian Zhang 4
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
ByteDance Inc.
3
Tsinghua University
4
Horizon Robotics
{xiaoyabo, wj2718, jinlei}@bupt.edu.cn, yudongdong@bytedance.com, wangguoli1990@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,
qian01.zhang@horizon.ai
(a)

Abstract
Off-the-shelf single-stage multi-person pose regression methods generally leverage the instance score (i.e., confidence of
the instance localization) to indicate the pose quality for selecting the pose candidates. We consider that there are two
gaps involved in existing paradigm: 1) The instance score is
not well interrelated with the pose regression quality. 2) The
instance feature representation, which is used for predicting
the instance score, does not explicitly encode the structural
pose information to predict the reasonable score that represents pose regression quality. To address the aforementioned
issues, we propose to learn the pose regression quality-aware
representation. Concretely, for the first gap, instead of using
the previous instance confidence label (e.g., discrete {1,0}
or Gaussian representation) to denote the position and confidence for person instance, we firstly introduce the Consistent
Instance Representation (CIR) that unifies the pose regression quality score of instance and the confidence of background into a pixel-wise score map to calibrates the inconsistency between instance score and pose regression quality.
To fill the second gap, we further present the Query Encoding Module (QEM) including the Keypoint Query Encoding
(KQE) to encode the positional and semantic information for
each keypoint and the Pose Query Encoding (PQE) which explicitly encodes the predicted structural pose information to
better fit the Consistent Instance Representation (CIR). By
using the proposed components, we significantly alleviate the
above gaps. Our method outperforms previous single-stage
regression-based even bottom-up methods and achieves the
state-of-the-art result of 71.7 AP on MS COCO test-dev set.

Confidence of Instance localization (b)
Discrete {1,0}
or Gaussian

Keypoint Regression
Conf. : 0.89
OKS： 0.63

Discrete {1,0}

Supervision

Confidence of Instance localization

CIR
Encode the structural pose
Keypoint Regression
Conf. : 0.85
OKS： 0.87

Conf. : 0.92
OKS： 0.52

Gaussian

CIR

Figure 1: (a) Off-the-shelf single-stage pose regression
pipeline and the predicted human pose with high instance
score (Conf.) and inferior pose quality (wrong localization
for leg area) when using discrete {1,0} or Gaussian kernel
to supervise the instance score. (b) Our proposed pipeline
predicts the pose with high instance score (Conf.) and superior pose regression quality. The pose regression quality is
quantified as OKS.
Yu et al. 2018b; Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018; Su et al. 2019)
and bottom-up pipeline (Cao et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2020;
Kreiss, Bertoni, and Alahi 2019; Papandreou et al. 2018;
Newell, Huang, and Deng 2017). The top-down methods
firstly detect the region of person instance via object detector (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018; Law and Deng 2018; Tian
et al. 2019), then perform single person pose estimation on
the cropped human body regions. Generally, the top-down
pipeline is limited by the detection-first paradigm which
leads to high computation and memory cost. The bottomup methods firstly locate the keypoints of all persons in an
image simultaneously and then assign the keypoints to individuals via a grouping process. However, the additional
grouping process is computationally complex.
By contrast, recent practices (Nie et al. 2019; Tian, Chen,
and Shen 2019) deliver a single-stage solution via pixel-wise
keypoint regression, which is more straightforward and bypasses the above drawbacks of previous methods. In particular, it decomposes the pose estimation task into person instance localization and corresponding keypoint regression.

Introduction
Given an input RGB image, multi-person pose estimation
aims to detect the keypoint positions for all persons. With
the prevalence of deep learning (Deng et al. 2009; Newell,
Yang, and Deng 2016; Ren et al. 2015), it has attracted much
attention since it plays as an important role in many computer vision tasks such as pose tracking (Xiao, Wu, and Wei
2018; Yu et al. 2018a), activity recognition (Li et al. 2019;
Shi et al. 2019), human re-identification and so on.
Most existing multi-person pose estimation methods follow top-down pipeline (Chen et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018;
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2822

