The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Amortized Relational Model
with Group-Wise Hierarchical Generative Process
Huafeng Liu1,2 , Tong Zhou1 , Jiaqi Wang1
1

Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
{huafeng, tong zhou, jiaqi.wang, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Deep amortized Relational Model
(DaRM) with group-wise hierarchical generative process for
community discovery and link prediction on relational data
(e.g., graph, network). It provides an efficient neural relational model architecture by grouping nodes in a group-wise
view rather than node-wise or edge-wise view. DaRM simultaneously learns what makes a group, how to divide nodes
into groups, and how to adaptively control the number of
groups. The dedicated group generative process is able to
sufficiently exploit pair-wise or higher-order interactions between data points in both inter-group and intra-group, which
is useful to sufficiently mine the hidden structure among
data. A series of experiments have been conducted on both
synthetic and real-world datasets. The experimental results
demonstrated that DaRM can obtain high performance on
both community detection and link prediction tasks.

Figure 1: The Group-wise generative process of DaRM.

els can be roughly divided into two categories: finite probabilistic relational model and infinite probabilistic relational
model [Cohen 1982; Teh et al. 2006]. In recent years, finite probabilistic relational models have been increasingly
applied in unsupervised graph learning problems with the
aid of deep neural networks. The most relevant research is
that of deep generative relational models [Kipf and Welling
2016; Hu, Rai, and Carin 2017; Fan et al. 2019], where
neural networks are trained to predict the states of latent
variables given observations in a deep generative model or
probabilistic program [Sohn, Lee, and Yan 2015]. A finite
relation model with a fixed number of groups may fit the
given dataset well, however, it may be sub-optimal to use the
same number of groups if more data comes under a slightly
changed distribution. It would be ideal if probabilistic relational model can figure out the unknown number of groups.
Alternatively, infinite probabilistic relational model is
the application of nonparametric Bayesian techniques to
group modeling, which allows for the automatic determination of an appropriate number of groups. The prior distribution can be specified in terms of a relation sequential
process called Dirichlet process (e.g., Chinese Restaurant
Process (CRP) [Kemp et al. 2006], India Buffet Process
(IBP) [Miller, Jordan, and Griffiths 2009]), where the number of group can arbitrarily grow to better accommodate
data as needed. To approximate the corresponding infinite
relational posterior, recently, deep generative latent feature
relational model [Mehta, Duke, and Rai 2019] is proposed
in a black-box fashion. Specifically, it makes use of neural
networks for amortized inferring the group assignments and
parameters, which is flexible to define the groups. To adaptively determine the number of groups, however, they have
to construct the non-parametric prior, which largely depends
on the sequential node or edge modeling. For large-scale
datasets, this process will be time-consuming and difficult
to converge.

Introduction
Relational models, which describe the pairwise interaction
between nodes in a network (graph), have gained tremendous attention in recent years, with numerous methods developed to model the complex dependencies within relational data; in particular, probabilistic Bayesian methods.
Aside from it usefulness in many downstream tasks, probabilistic relational model is an important tool for visualizing
and understanding the underlying structure of datasets, as
well as a model for categorization inn cognitive science. A
plethora of relational models have been developed and successfully employed in various fields, including computer vision [Mehta, Duke, and Rai 2019], natural language processing [Larsen and Aone 1999], social network analysis [Fortunato 2010], and medical informatics [Masulli and Schenone
1999]. Among various relational models, probabilistic relational model have been widely concerned because of its flexibility and adaptivity [Zhu et al. 2017].
Probabilistic relational models [Nowicki and Snijders
2001] are a staple of statistical modeling in which a discrete
latent variable is introduced for each observation, indicating its latent structures. These latent structures help discover
the underlying groups in the network, as well as in predicting potential links between nodes. These generative modCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7550

