The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online Influence Maximization with Node-Level Feedback
Using Standard Offline Oracles
Zhijie Zhang,1,2 Wei Chen,3 Xiaoming Sun,1,2 Jialin Zhang1,2,∗
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{zhangzhijie,sunxiaoming,zhangjialin}@ict.ac.cn, weic@microsoft.com
Abstract

ones are the independent cascade (IC) model and the linear threshold (LT) model (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos
2003). A corresponding optimization problem, known as influence maximization (IM), asks how to maximize the influence spread, under a specific diffusion model, by selecting
a limited number of “good” seeds. The problem has found
enormous applications, including advertising, viral marketing, news transmission, etc.
In the canonical setting, the IM problem takes as input
a social network, which is formulated as an edge-weighted
directed graph. The problem is NP-hard but can be wellapproximated (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003). For
the past decade, more efficient and effective algorithms have
been designed (Borgs et al. 2014; Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014;
Tang, Shi, and Xiao 2015), leading to an almost complete
resolution of the problem. However, the canonical IM is
sometimes difficult to apply in practice, as edge parameters of the network are often unknown in many scenarios.
A possible way to circumvent such difficulty is to learn
the edge parameters from past observed diffusion cascades,
and then maximize the influence based on the learned parameters. The learning task is referred to as network inference, and has been extensively studied in the literature (Gomez-Rodriguez, Leskovec, and Krause 2010; Myers and Leskovec 2010; Gomez-Rodriguez, Balduzzi, and
Schölkopf 2011; Du et al. 2012; Netrapalli and Sanghavi
2012; Abrahao et al. 2013; Daneshmand et al. 2014; Du et al.
2013, 2014; Narasimhan, Parkes, and Singer 2015; PougetAbadie and Horel 2015; He et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2021).
However, this approach does not take into account the cost of
the learning process and fails to balance between exploration
and exploitation when future diffusion cascades come. This
motivates the study of online influence maximization (OIM)
problem considered in this paper.
In OIM, the learner faces an unknown social network and
runs T rounds in total. At each round, the learner chooses
a seed set to generate cascades, observes the cascade feedback, and receives the influence value as a reward. The goal
is to maximize the influence values received over T rounds,
or equivalently, to minimize the cumulative regret compared
with the optimal seed set that generates the largest influence. The most widely studied feedback in the literature
is the edge-level feedback (Chen, Wang, and Yuan 2013;
Chen et al. 2016; Wang and Chen 2017; Wen et al. 2017;

We study the online influence maximization (OIM) problem
in social networks, where in multiple rounds the learner repeatedly chooses seed nodes to generate cascades, observes
the cascade feedback, and gradually learns the best seeds that
generate the largest cascade. We focus on two major challenges in this paper. First, we work with node-level feedback
instead of edge-level feedback. The edge-level feedback reveals all edges that pass through information in a cascade,
whereas the node-level feedback only reveals the activated
nodes with timestamps. The node-level feedback is arguably
more realistic since in practice it is relatively easy to observe
who is influenced but very difficult to observe from which relationship (edge) the influence comes. Second, we use standard offline oracles instead of offline pair-oracles. To compute a good seed set for the next round, an offline pair-oracle
finds the best seed set and the best parameters within the confidence region simultaneously, and such an oracle is difficult
to compute due to the combinatorial core of the OIM problem. So we focus on how to use the standard offline influence maximization oracle which finds the best seed set given
the edge parameters as input. In this paper, we resolve these
challenges for the famous independent cascade (IC) diffusion
model. The past research only √
achieves edge-level feedback,
while we present the first e
O( T )-regret algorithm for the
node-level feedback. For the first challenge above, we apply a novel adaptation of the maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE) approach to learn the graph parameters and its confidence region (a confidence ellipsoid). For the second challenge, we adjust the update procedure to dissect the confidence ellipsoid into confidence intervals on each parameter,
so that the standard offline influence maximization oracle is
enough.

Introduction
Social networks have gained great attention in the past
decades as a model for describing relationships between humans. Typically, researchers show great interest in how information, ideas, news, influence, etc spread over social networks, starting from a small set of nodes called seeds. To
this end, a variety of diffusion models are proposed to formulate the propagation in reality, and the most well-known
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9153

