The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Formal Semantics and Formally Verified Validation for Temporal Planning
Mohammad Abdulaziz1,2 and Lukas Koller1
1

Techniche Universität München, Germany
King’s College London, United Kingdom

2

Abstract

for most planning competitions, VAL (Howey, Long, and
Fox 2004), is implemented in C++. Another challenge to
plan validation is that the semantics of planning languages
have ambiguities, which lead to different interpretations of
what constitutes a correct plan. E.g. there are multiple interpretations of sub-typing using “Either” in PDDL.
In this work we address the aforementioned challenges
using an interactive theorem prover (ITP). In particular, we
use the ITP Isabelle/HOL (Nipkow, Paulson, and Wenzel
2002), which implements a formal mathematical system
combining higher-order logic (HOL) and simple type theory. Our first contribution is that we formally specify an
abstract syntax for the temporal fragment of PDDL 2.1 in
Isabelle/HOL and, based on that, formalise its semantics.
Compared to a pen-and-paper semantics, this has the advantage that it removes any room for ambiguity. Furthermore,
during formalising this fragment of PDDL, we found that
certain parts of the semantics as specified by Fox and Long
could be simplified. As our second contribution, we implement an executable plan validator for the temporal part of
PDDL2.1 and we formally verify, using Isabelle/HOL, that
it correctly implements the semantics which we formalised.
Our validator checks (i) if a given problem and the candidate
plan are well-formed, and (ii) if the candidate plan is indeed
a solution to the problem. Lastly, we experimentally show
that this validator is practical and compare it with VAL.

We present a simple and concise semantics for temporal planning. Our semantics are developed and formalised in the
logic of the interactive theorem prover Isabelle/HOL. We derive from those semantics a validation algorithm for temporal planning and show, using a formal proof in Isabelle/HOL,
that this validation algorithm implements our semantics. We
experimentally evaluate our verified validation algorithm and
show that it is practical.

Introduction
Although, performance-wise, planning algorithms and systems are very scalable and efficient, as shown by different
planning competitions (Long et al. 2000; Coles et al. 2012;
Vallati et al. 2015), there is still to be desired when it comes
to their trustworthiness, which is crucial to their wide adoption. Consequently, there have been substantial efforts to
improve the trustworthiness of planning systems (Howey,
Long, and Fox 2004; Fox, Howey, and Long 2005; Eriksson,
Röger, and Helmert 2017; Abdulaziz, Norrish, and Gretton
2018; Abdulaziz and Lammich 2018; Cimatti, Micheli, and
Roveri 2017; Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish 2019). A basic task when it comes to the trustworthiness of planning
systems is that of plan validation. In its most basic form,
this task is solved by a plan validator, which is a program
that, given a planning problem and a candidate plan, confirms whether the candidate plan indeed solves the problem.
This boosts the trustworthiness of a plan chiefly because the
plan validator should be a simple piece of software that can
be more easily inspected than the planning system that computed the plan and, accordingly, less likely to have mistakes.
One challenge to plan validation is that the semantics of
planning languages and formalisms can be too complicated.
This makes the validator a rather complicated piece of software defeating the trustworthiness appeal of the whole approach. This is especially the case for advanced planning
formalisms, like temporal planning (Fox and Long 2003),
hybrid planning, and planning problems with processes and
events (Fox and Long 2002). This problem is further exacerbated by the low-level languages in which plan validators are
usually implemented, e.g. the plan validation system used

Background
In this work we build upon previous work by Abdulaziz and
Lammich. In their work, they formalised the syntax and semantics of the STRIPS fragment of PDDL in Isabelle/HOL.
The syntax was based on a grammar by Kovacs. Their semantics have two parts: (i) a part defining what it means for a
PDDL domain, instance or plan to be well-formed and (ii) a
part defining the execution semantics of PDDL. The most
interesting aspect of well-formedness has to do with typing: since the grammar of PDDL allows for Either-supertype
specifications of the form ‘obj - Either obj1 obj2· · · ’, this
leads to ambiguities in interpreting the sub-typing relation
when, for instance, instantiating a parameter with an Eithertype by an object of an Either-type. In this situation, they
took the interpretation that this is a valid substitution if each
of the object types is reachable, in the sub-typing relation,
from at least one of the parameter types. For the execution

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9635

