The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

First Order Rewritability in Ontology-Mediated Querying
in Horn Description Logics
David Toman and Grant Weddell
Cheriton School of CS, University of Waterloo, Canada
{david,gweddell}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract

Earlier work on OMQ for the FunDL family of DLs has
presented what was called a combined combined approach
to OMQ, and has shown that it is essential to preserve
tractability of OMQ in the presence of (limited) value restrictions (Toman and Weddell 2013; St. Jacques, Toman,
and Weddell 2016; McIntyre et al. 2019). Based on this approach, we study FO rewritability of OMQ for the particular cases in which the underlying DL is Horn-SHIQ in the
ALC family, and when it is Horn-DLFD in the FunDL family. More specifically, for these dialects, we show how the
combined combined approach, with the help of Beth definability (Beth 1953) applied on the Clark’s completion (Clark
1977) of the Datalog program used for the completion of the
explicit data in the knowledge base, can be used to characterize FO rewritability of OMQs. We also show how Craig interpolation (Craig 1957) can then be used to construct such
an FO rewriting, when it exists.
The existence of such a rewriting enables an OMQ frontend to a relational data source that underlies an ABox to
operate entirely by a more refined query reformulation of
a given user query. This yields an SQL query directly executable over a backend relational data source, with no requirement to update tables beforehand.
Our contributions are as follows.

We consider first-order (FO) rewritability for query answering in ontology-mediated querying (OMQ) in which ontologies are formulated in Horn fragments of description logics
(DLs). In general, OMQ approaches for such logics rely on
non-FO rewriting of the query and/or on non-FO completion of the data, called an ABox. Specifically, we consider
the problem of FO rewritability in terms of Beth definability, and show how Craig interpolation can then be used to
effectively construct the rewritings, when they exist, from
the Clark’s completion of Datalog-like programs encoding a
given DL TBox and optionally a query. We show how this approach to FO rewritability can also be used to (a) capture integrity constraints commonly available in backend relational
data sources, (b) capture constraints inherent in mapping such
sources to an ABox, and (c) can be used as an alternative to
deriving so-called perfect rewritings of queries in the case of
DL-Lite ontologies.

1

Introduction

We consider first-order (FO) rewritability for query answering in the setting of ontology-mediated querying (OMQ)
over a knowledge base (KB). The KB is assumed to be
formulated in terms of underlying Horn description logics
(DLs) in the FunDL family (McIntyre, Toman, and Weddell
2019) as well as in the ALC family. Dialects in the FunDL
family are unusual in that they forgo roles and instead adopt
features that are interpreted as partial functions.
Typical OMQ approaches generally rely on either reformulating a given query by incorporating the KB’s terminological knowledge (Calvanese et al. 2005, 2007) and then
executing the reformulated query over the explicit data in
the KB as a relational query, or, for more expressive logics,
on a Datalog completion of the explicit data with respect to
the KB’s terminological knowledge over which the OMQ is
answered (Kontchakov et al. 2010, 2011; Lutz et al. 2013;
Lutz, Toman, and Wolter 2009a). In the latter case, data
completion can always be expressed as a Datalog program.
This then raises the FO rewritability problem: determining
if a particular OMQ instance can be equivalently expressed
as an FO query over the explicit data in the knowledge base.

1. We show how to decide uniform FO rewritability of
OMQ in Horn-SHIQ and in Horn-DLFD via Clark’s
completion of Datalog programs and Beth definability;
2. We show how our framework extends to query specific
OMQ by extending existing results for Horn-DLFD;
and
3. We show how a variant of the perfect rewriting approach
to OMQ can be synthesized by appeal again to Beth definability and Craig interpolation.
This paper integrates earlier preliminary work that was the
first to consider FO rewritability of OMQ via Beth definability and Clark’s completion for ALC and FunDL dialects of
DLs (Toman and Weddell 2020, 2021). FO rewritability for
Horn logics in the ALC family has also been studied by others, e.g., see (Bienvenu et al. 2016, 2014). This other work
has also developed algorithms for generating such rewritings
efficiently for logics in the EL family (Hansen et al. 2015).
Our approach seems to provide an alternative path to detecting rewritability and to generating rewritings. A feature

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5897

