The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

STEM: Unsupervised STructural EMbedding for Stance Detection
Ron Korenblum Pick1 , Vladyslav Kozhukhov2 , Dan Vilenchik2 , Oren Tsur1
1

Department of Software and Information Science Engineering
2
Department of Communication Systems Engineering
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
{ronpi,kozhukho}@post.bgu.ac.il, {vilenchi, orentsur}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Stance detection is an important task, supporting many downstream tasks such as discourse parsing and modeling the propagation of fake news, rumors, and science denial. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework for stance detection. Our framework is unsupervised and domain-independent. Given a claim
and a multi-participant discussion – we construct the interaction network from which we derive topological embedding for
each speaker. These speaker embedding enjoy the following
property: speakers with the same stance tend to be represented
by similar vectors, while antipodal vectors represent speakers with opposing stances. These embedding are then used
to divide the speakers into stance-partitions. We evaluate our
method on three different datasets from different platforms.
Our method outperforms or is comparable with supervised
models while providing confidence levels for its output. Furthermore, we demonstrate how the structural embedding relate
to the valence expressed by the speakers. Finally, we discuss
some limitations inherent to the framework.

Introduction
Stance detection is the task of classifying the approval level
expressed by an individual toward a claim or an entity. Stance
detection differs from sentiment analysis in its opaqueness.
A favorable stance toward a target opinion or an entity E can
be expressed using a negative sentiment without any explicit
mention of E. For example, the utterance “I did not like the
movie because of its stereotypical portrayal of the heroine as
a helpless damsel in distress” bears a negative sentiment (“I
did not like...”), while one can conjecture that the speaker’s
stance toward feminism and women’s rights is favorable.
Understanding the stance of participants in a conversation
is expected to play a crucial role in conversational discourse
parsing, e.g., (Zakharov et al. 2021). Stance detection is used
in studying the propagation of fake news (Thorne et al. 2017;
Tsang 2020), unfounded rumors (Zubiaga et al. 2016; Derczynski et al. 2017), and unsubstantiated science related to,
e.g., global warming (Luo, Card, and Jurafsky 2021) and the
COVID-19 vaccine (Tyagi and Carley 2020).
Recent models for stance detection rely on the textual
content provided by the speaker, sometimes within some
social or conversational context (see Section ). These models
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11174

are supervised, requiring a significant annotation effort. The
dependence on language (text) as the primary, if not the sole,
input, and the need for a domain (topic)-specific annotation,
severely impairs the applicability of the models to broader
domains and other languages (Hanselowski et al. 2018; Xu,
Mohtarami, and Glass 2019).
Online discussions tend to unfold in a tree structure. Assuming a claim E is laid at the root of the tree, each further
node is a direct response to a previous node (utterance). This
tree structure can be converted into an interaction network G,
where the nodes of G are speakers, and edges correspond to
interactions. The edges may be weighted, reflecting the intensity of the interaction between the specific pair of speakers
(see Section ).
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for stance
detection. Our method is unsupervised, domain-independent,
and computationally efficient. The premise of our approach
is that the conversation structure, emerging naturally in many
online discussion boards and social platforms, can be used
for stance detection. In fact, we postulate that the structure of
a conversation, often ignored in NLP tasks, should be studied
and leveraged within the language processing framework.
Contribution The main contribution of this paper is threefold: (i) We introduce an efficient unsupervised and domainindependent algorithm for stance classification, based on
structural speaker embedding (ii) We show how multi-agent
conversational structure corresponds to speakers’ stance and
correlates with the valence expressed in the discussion, and
(iii) The speaker embedding induces a soft classification of
speakers’ stances, which can be rounded to a discrete output,
e.g., “pro”, “con”, and “neutral”, but can also be used to derive other interesting parameters such as the confidence level
of the result, which we discuss in Section .
We evaluate our model on three annotated datasets: 4forums, ConvinceMe, and CreateDebate. These datasets differ
in various aspects, from the number of speakers and discussions to the variety of the topics discussed and the culture and
norms shaping the conversational dynamics. Further details
about the datasets are provided in Section . Despite these
differences, our method consistently outperforms or is comparable with supervised models that were studied in other
papers and were benchmarked on these datasets.

