The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fully Adaptive Framework: Neural Computerized Adaptive Testing
for Online Education
Yan Zhuang1 , Qi Liu1 * , Zhenya Huang1 , Zhi Li1 , Shuanghong Shen1 , Haiping Ma2
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Data Science &
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Anhui University
{zykb, zhili03, closer}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, huangzhy}@ustc.edu.cn, hpma@ahu.edu.cn
Step 1 Step 2

Abstract

Step

Step

…

Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT) refers to an efficient
and personalized test mode in online education, aiming to
accurately measure student proficiency level on the required
subject/domain. The key component of CAT is the “adaptive”
question selection algorithm, which automatically selects the
best suited question for student based on his/her current estimated proficiency, reducing test length. Existing algorithms
rely on some manually designed and pre-fixed informativeness/uncertainty metrics of question for selections, which is
labor-intensive and not sufficient for capturing complex relations between students and questions. In this paper, we propose a fully adaptive framework named Neural Computerized
Adaptive Testing (NCAT), which formally redefines CAT as a
reinforcement learning problem and directly learns selection
algorithm from real-world data. Specifically, a bilevel optimization is defined and simplified under CAT’s application
scenarios to make the algorithm learnable. Furthermore, to
address the CAT task effectively, we tackle it as an equivalent reinforcement learning problem and propose an attentive
neural policy to model complex non-linear interactions. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness and robustness of NCAT compared with several
state-of-the-art methods.

…

Student

(1) Cognitive
Diagnosis Model

Proficiency
Estimate

(2) Selection
Algorithm

Figure 1: Illustration of a typical CAT procedure.
step of the test (index by t), (1) CDM first estimates a student’s current proficiency based on previous responses. The
most famous is item response theory (IRT):
P (ai,j = 1) = σ [αj (θi − βj )] ,

(1)

where σ[·] is the logistic function and ai,j is student i’s response to question j (1 indicates a correct response). Each
question is represented as two pre-calibrated parameters
α, β ∈ R, called discrimination and difficulty respectively
(Embretson and Reise 2013). IRT represents student’s responses with a latent proficiency θ ∈ R, called ability. Recently, deep learning-based CDM (Wang et al. 2020a) uses
more informative multidimensional vector to represent this
proficiency θ. (2) The selection algorithm then selects the
next question, guided by her current proficiency estimate θ̂it
from CDM. Most of algorithms are model-specific, which
are specially designed by experts according to the characteristics of different CDMs. E.g. (Chang 2015) proposed Maximum Fisher Information (MFI) specially designed for IRT,
where the question with high-discrimination and whose difficulty is close to student’s proficiency estimate tends to be
selected (i.e., higher α and β = θ in Eq.(1)).
However, the adaptability in such selection algorithms is
limited in three aspects:
• For students, the selection algorithm’s efficiency heavily
relies on the accuracy of current estimate θ̂. Thus, it lacks
robustness and may cause severe loss of information using single θ to summarize complex interactions between
student and question (DiBello, Roussos, and Stout 2007).
• For CDM, we have to understand how a specific CDM
works in detail to design the matched selection algorithms (i.e., model-specific). Although many active learn-

Introduction
Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT) is a novel and
promising testing mode, which provides an efficient way to
accurately measure student ability/proficiency level of a particular domain (e.g., Mathematics) by providing few questions. In contrast to traditional paper-and-pencil tests, CAT
has much higher efficiency through tailoring a personalized
test procedure for each examinee (Cheng 2009; Wang et al.
2016). Therefore, it has been widely used in various standardized tests, e.g., GRE. The “adaptive” in CAT refers to
selecting the best suited question for each student, based on
her current estimated proficiency.
To realizing such adaptability, CAT commonly requires
two core components that work alternately: (1) Cognitive
Diagnosis Model (CDM) and (2) Selection Algorithm.
Figure 1 illustrates a toy example of a typical CAT. At each
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4734

