The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Attacking Video Recognition Models with Bullet-Screen Comments
Kai Chen, Zhipeng Wei, Jingjing Chen† Zuxuan Wu, Yu-Gang Jiang†
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
{kaichen20, chenjingjing, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, zpwei21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent research has demonstrated that Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial patches which introduce
perceptible but localized changes to the input. Nevertheless,
existing approaches have focused on generating adversarial
patches on images, their counterparts in videos have been less
explored. Compared with images, attacking videos is much
more challenging as it needs to consider not only spatial cues
but also temporal cues. To close this gap, we introduce a novel
adversarial attack in this paper, the bullet-screen comment
(BSC) attack, which attacks video recognition models with
BSCs. Specifically, adversarial BSCs are generated with a
Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework, where the environment is set as the target model and the agent plays the role of
selecting the position and transparency of each BSC. By continuously querying the target models and receiving feedback,
the agent gradually adjusts its selection strategies in order to
achieve a high fooling rate with non-overlapping BSCs. As
BSCs can be regarded as a kind of meaningful patch, adding
it to a clean video will not affect people’s understanding of
the video content, nor will arouse people’s suspicion. We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the
proposed method. On both UCF-101 and HMDB-51 datasets,
our BSC attack method can achieve about 90% fooling rate
when attacking three mainstream video recognition models,
while only occluding <8% areas in the video. Our code is
available at https://github.com/kay-ck/BSC-attack.

Figure 1: An illustration of adversarial BSC attacks. Given
a video, it can successfully fool the video recognition model
by adding BSCs.

world applications. Therefore, it has attracted increasing research interest in recent years (Wei et al. 2021b,c, 2020).
Nevertheless, most of the existing works focus on
perturbation-based attacks, which introduce imperceptible
changes to the clean input samples. The perturbations are
constrained to have a small Lp norm and applied to the
whole input. While perturbation-based attacks have been
demonstrated to be effective in attacking the video recognition models, they are typically difficult to apply in the physical world. In contrast, patch-based attacks generate adversarial patches by modifying the pixels within a restricted region without any limitations on the range of changes. Therefore, patch-based attacks are stronger and more effective in
the physical world. Nevertheless, existing works on patchbased attacks are mostly focused on images, patch-based attacks on videos have seldom been explored.
This paper investigates patch-based attacks on videos in
the black-box setting, where the adversary can only access
the output of the target model. The challenges of this task
mainly come from two aspects. First, a video is a sequence
of images on which the adjacent frames are closely correlated. If selecting several frames in the video as in the
case of perturbation-based video attacks (Wei et al. 2020)
to add adversarial patches, it will increase the perceptibility
of the attack. Second, compared to images, the dimension
of videos is much higher. If attaching adversarial patches
to each frame of the video, it will significantly increase the

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated superior performance in various video-related tasks (Song et al.
2021; Su et al. 2020; Han et al. 2021; Wang, Chen, and Jiang
2021), like video recognition (Karpathy et al. 2014; Carreira
and Zisserman 2017; Wu et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2021),
video caption (Yang, Han, and Wang 2017; Liu, Ren, and
Yuan 2020) and video segmentation (Nilsson and Sminchisescu 2018; Wang et al. 2019), etc. However, recent works
have shown that DNNs are extremely vulnerable to video
adversarial examples which are generated by applying negligible perturbations to clean input samples (Wei et al. 2019).
The existence of video adversarial examples leads to security concerns of Deep Learning-based video models in real†

Correspondence to: Jingjing Chen, Yu-Gang Jiang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

312

