The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Modal Coherence for Text-to-Image Retrieval
Malihe Alikhani1 * , Fangda Han2 * , Hareesh Ravi2 * , Mubbasir Kapadia2 ,
Vladimir Pavlovic2 , Matthew Stone2
1

University of Pittsburgh

2

Rutgers University

The start of the race.

Abstract
Common image-text joint understanding techniques presume
that images and the associated text can universally be characterized by a single implicit model. However, co-occurring
images and text can be related in qualitatively different ways,
and explicitly modeling it could improve the performance of
current joint understanding models. In this paper, we train a
Cross-Modal Coherence Model for text-to-image retrieval task.
Our analysis shows that models trained with image–text coherence relations can retrieve images originally paired with target text more often than coherence-agnostic models. We also
show via human evaluation that images retrieved by the proposed coherence-aware model are preferred over a coherenceagnostic baseline by a huge margin. Our findings provide
insights into the ways that different modalities communicate
and the role of coherence relations in capturing commonsense
inferences in text and imagery.

CMCA

CMCM

Figure 1: Example retrieved image by the proposed CrossModal Coherence Model (right) vs Cross-Modal Coherence
Agnostic model (left) for input caption (top).

Introduction
When using text to retrieve an image, humans often rely on
commonsense inference. Text and imagery can be related
in obvious explicit ways, yet the matter of a caption that
accompanies an image frequently only indirectly overlaps
with the content of the image. The text, for instance, can
describe quantities that complement what is depicted in the
image (e.g., add two cups of water) or a subjective reaction to
what is depicted in an image (e.g., fantastic view). Retrieving
imagery is therefore not just finding an image that portrays
the text content but discovering an image that coherently fits
with text to convey an integrated message.
These commonsense inferences can be modeled using
representations and algorithms informed by approaches to
natural language discourse, particularly coherence relations
(Hobbs 1985; Asher and Lascarides 2003; Taboada and Mann
2006). Coherence relations characterize the inferential links
(such as temporal, causal, and logical) that connect the content of text and imagery.
Clues from text and from the typical relations of text and
imagery provide important evidence about what kinds of
visual content is coherent. Therefore, coherence agnostic
* These authors contributed equally. Author names ordered alphabetically based on last name.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10427

methods don’t necessarily deliver images that fit naturally
with text. By modeling coherence in text and imagery, we
can supply images to text that human raters prefer by a large
margin. This paper describes models of these broader associations between text and imagery for the task of image
retrieval.
We hypothesize that bringing in coherence relations
(Alikhani et al. 2020) into the retrieval process, in contrast to
personalities defined in (Shuster et al. 2019), should better
improve the performance of text-to-image retrieval in a more
generalizable way. We build on Salvador et al. (2017) and
Chen et al. (2018) and introduce a new framework that integrates coherence relations in text-to-image retrieval task by
extracting features for each modality separately then building a lower-dimensional common representation space. Our
proposed framework introduces a Coherence Aware Module1
that learns to predict coherence relations that characterize an
input image–text pair during training, and predictions from
the module are applied during testing through a Selective Similarity Refinement technique to further improve the retrieval
performance.
The examples of Figure 1 illustrate our approach. They contrast the output of our baseline Cross-Modal Coherence Agnostic model (CMCA) taken from Han, Guerrero, and Pavlovic
(2020) and that of the proposed Cross-Modal Coherence
Model (CMCM) trained on image-text pairs with Story co1
Code, contact and data: https://github.com/klory/Cross-ModalCoherence-for-Text-to-Image-Retrieval

