The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Nested Hierarchical Transformer: Towards Accurate, Data-Efficient and
Interpretable Visual Understanding
Zizhao Zhang1 , Han Zhang2 , Long Zhao2 , Ting Chen2 , Sercan Ö. Arık1 , Tomas Pfister1
1

Google Cloud AI
Google Research
{zizhaoz,zhanghan,longzh,iamtingchen,soarik,tpfister}@google.com
2

Abstract

Lack of inductive bias such as locality and translation
equivariance, is one explanation for the data inefficiency of
ViT models. Cordonnier, Loukas, and Jaggi (2020) discovered that transformer models learn locality behaviors in a
deformable convolution manner (Dai et al. 2017): bottom
layers attend locally to the surrounding pixels and top layers favor long-range dependency. On the other hand, global
self-attention between pixel pairs in high-resolution images
is computationally expensive. Reducing the self-attention
range is one way to make the model training more computationally efficient (Beltagy, Peters, and Cohan 2020). These
type of insights align with the recent structures with local self-attention and hierarchical transformer (Han et al.
2021; Vaswani et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021). Instead of
holistic global self-attention, these perform attention on local image patches. To promote information communication
across patches, they propose specialized designs such as the
“haloing operation” (Vaswani et al. 2021) and “shifted window” (Liu et al. 2021). These are based on modifying the
self-attention mechanism and often yields in complex architectures. Our design goal on the other hand keeping the attention as is, and introducing the design of the aggregation
function, to improve the accuracy and data efficiency, while
bringing interpretability benefits.
The proposed NesT model stacks canonical transformer
blocks to process non-overlapping image blocks individually. Cross-block self-attention is achieved by nesting these
transformers hierarchically and connecting them with a proposed aggregation function. Fig. 1 illustrates the overall architecture and the simple pseudo code to generate it. Our
contributions can be summarized as:

Hierarchical structures are popular in recent vision transformers, however, they require sophisticated designs and massive
datasets to work well. In this paper, we explore the idea of
nesting basic local transformers on non-overlapping image
blocks and aggregating them in a hierarchical way. We find
that the block aggregation function plays a critical role in
enabling cross-block non-local information communication.
This observation leads us to design a simplified architecture that requires minor code changes upon the original vision transformer. The benefits of the proposed judiciouslyselected design are threefold: (1) NesT converges faster and
requires much less training data to achieve good generalization on both ImageNet and small datasets like CIFAR;
(2) when extending our key ideas to image generation, NesT
leads to a strong decoder that is 8 times faster than previous transformer-based generators; and (3) we show that decoupling the feature learning and abstraction processes via
this nested hierarchy in our design enables constructing a
novel method (named GradCAT) for visually interpreting the
learned model. Source code is available https://github.com/
google-research/nested-transformer.

Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) model
and its variants have received significant interests recently
due to their superior performance on many core visual applications (Cordonnier, Loukas, and Jaggi 2020; Liu et al.
2021). ViT first splits an input image into patches, and then
patches are treated in the same way as tokens in NLP applications. Following, several self-attention layers are used
to conduct global information communication to extract
features for classification. Recent work (Dosovitskiy et al.
2021; Cordonnier, Loukas, and Jaggi 2020) shows that ViT
models can achieve better accuracy than state-of-the-art convnets (Tan and Le 2019; He et al. 2016) when trained on
datasets with tens or hundreds of millions of labeled samples. However, when trained on smaller datasets, ViT usually
underperforms its counterparts based on convolutional layers. Addressing this data inefficiency is important to make
ViT applicable to other application scenarios, e.g. semisupervised learning (Sohn et al. 2020) and generative modeling (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2019).

1. We demonstrate integrating hierarchically nested transformers with the proposed block aggregation function can outperform previous sophisticated (local) selfattention variants, leading to a substantially-simplified
architecture and improved data efficiency. This provides a novel perspective for achieving effective crossblock communication.
2. NesT achieves impressive ImageNet classification accuracy with a significantly simplified architectural design. E.g., training a NesT with 38M/68M parameters
obtains 83.3%/83.8% ImageNet accuracy.The favorable data efficiency of NesT is embodied by its fast

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3417

