The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Safe Subgame Resolving for Extensive Form Correlated Equilibrium
Chun Kai Ling, Fei Fang
Carnegie Mellon University
chunkail@cs.cmu.edu, feif@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

of the game tree. This is a significant barrier towards solving large games: for example, storing an EFCE for a game
of Battleship (Farina et al. 2019a) with a grid size of 3 × 2
requires a vector with more than 108 entries.
Over the last decade, a technique known as subgame resolving has gathered much attention amongst those looking to solve large games. The idea behind subgame resolving is to adopt a simple blueprint strategy at the beginning,
and to compute refinements of the strategy in an online
manner only when the game has entered a subgame. This
means that one need not compute strategies in branches of
the game which were never reached in actual play, just like
with limited-depth search in perfect information games like
chess. Rising into prominence because of the successes of
superhuman-level poker bots such as Libratus (Brown and
Sandholm 2017, 2018), subgame resolving has since been
studied from other angles (Zhang and Sandholm 2021), extended to other equilibrium concepts (Ling and Brown 2021)
and applied in practice to, multiplayer games like Hanabi
(Lerer et al. 2020) and Diplomacy (Gray et al. 2021). However, subgame resolving has primarily been applied to the
zero-sum or cooperative settings, with few inroads in the
correlated setting, where the objective is to get players to
coordinate despite potentially having misaligned interests.
In this paper, we introduce subgame resolving for EFCE.
Instead of announcing the full correlation plan that specifies
the probability of recommending different actions at each
decision point, the mediator computes the EFCE strategies
online. Conceptually, it can be viewed as having the mediator publish the algorithm of choosing recommended actions,
and the algorithm is designed in a way such that the rational
players will have no incentive to deviate from the recommended actions. Our contributions are twofold. First, we lay
out the framework for safe subgame resolving for EFCE in
terms of the exploitability of a correlation plan with respect
to a correlation blueprint. Second, we show that for games
without chance, the structure of the polytope of correlation
plans contains a sufficient level of independence between
subgames to facilitate independent solving. Third, we provide two refinement algorithms, the first based on a modification of the linear program (LP) of Von Stengel and Forges
(2008), and the second utilizing a recent and more efficient
method based on regret minimization (Farina et al. 2019b).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first instance of sub-

Correlated Equilibrium is a solution concept that is more general than Nash Equilibrium (NE) and can lead to outcomes
with better social welfare. However, its natural extension to
the sequential setting, the Extensive Form Correlated Equilibrium (EFCE), requires a quadratic amount of space to solve,
even in restricted settings without randomness in nature. To
alleviate these concerns, we apply subgame resolving, a technique extremely successful in finding NE in zero-sum games
to solving general-sum EFCEs. Subgame resolving refines a
correlation plan in an online manner: instead of solving for
the full game upfront, it only solves for strategies in subgames
that are reached in actual play, resulting in significant computational gains. In this paper, we (i) lay out the foundations to
quantify the quality of a refined strategy, in terms of the social
welfare and exploitability of correlation plans, (ii) show that
EFCEs possess a sufficient amount of independence between
subgames to perform resolving efficiently, and (iii) provide
two algorithms for resolving, one using linear programming
and the other based on regret minimization. Both methods
guarantee safety, i.e., they will never be counterproductive.
Our methods are the first time an online method has been applied to the correlated, general-sum setting.

Introduction
Correlation between players is a powerful tool in game theory. The Correlated Equilibrium (CE) is an equilibrium that
allows for players to coordinate actions with the aid of a mediator or a randomized correlation device, and is known to
allow for outcomes which lead to a significantly higher social welfare as compared to solution concepts which require
independent play, such as Nash Equilibrium (NE), on top of
being computationally more tractable. In a CE, the mediator
recommend actions privately to the players according to a
probability distribution over joint actions that is known to all
players, and the players have no incentive to deviate from the
recommended action if they are perfectly rational. A natural
extension of CE to extensive form games (EFG) is the Extensive Form Correlated Equilibrium (EFCE), where players
are recommended actions at each decision point (Von Stengel and Forges 2008). Unfortunately, solving and storing an
EFCE typically requires space that is quadratic in the size
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5116

