The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning from Mistakes - a Framework for Neural Architecture Search
Bhanu Garg1 * , Li Zhang2 * , Pradyumna Sridhara1 , Ramtin Hosseini1 ,
Eric Xing3,4 , Pengtao Xie1
1

University of California, San Diego, USA
2
Zhejiang University, China
3
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
bgarg@ucsd.edu, liz042@ucsd.edu, prsridha@ucsd.edu, rhossein@eng.ucsd.edu, epxing@cs.cmu.edu, p1xie@eng.ucsd.edu
Abstract

draws inspiration from human learning skills and can be applied to any differentiable architecture search algorithm. We
also explore the efficacy of our learning method on NAS.
In our framework, the model consists of two sets of network weights sharing a common learnable architecture, a
learnable data encoder, and a coefficient vector - representing different components of the learner. The two sets of network weights correspond to two parts of the main task learning faculties of the learner. The learnable architecture corresponds to skill learning faculty of the learner. The data
encoder and coefficient vector correspond to auxiliary faculties of the learner, helping it to recognise and summarize
the information respectively. We propose a multi-level optimization framework that uses the above sets of parameters
to learn better neural architectures.
We begin by training the first set of network weights on
a training dataset. We then see what mistakes our model
makes while predicting on the validation set. Then, for each
training example, we assign specific weights based on the
mistakes made by the model and the similarity of this example to an incorrectly predicted validation example. The
second set of network weights are trained on these weighted
examples, essentially making the model learn from its mistakes and correct them. The vanilla approaches in NAS do
not factor in the variations in learning difficulty. In contrast,
our method re-weights the training examples at each stage
based on the current capability of the learner, enabling the
learner to deal with more challenging cases in the unseen
data. Then finally, the architecture, encoder, and coefficient
vectors are learned on the second model’s validation performance.
The major contributions of the paper are as follows:

Learning from one’s mistakes is an effective human learning technique where the learners focus more on the topics
where mistakes were made, so as to deepen their understanding. In this paper, we investigate if this human learning
strategy can be applied in machine learning. We propose a
novel machine learning method called Learning From Mistakes (LFM), wherein the learner improves its ability to learn
by focusing more on the mistakes during revision. We formulate LFM as a three-stage optimization problem: 1) learner
learns; 2) learner re-learns focusing on the mistakes, and; 3)
learner validates its learning. We develop an efficient algorithm to solve the LFM problem. We apply the LFM framework to neural architecture search on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and Imagenet. Experimental results strongly demonstrate the
effectiveness of our model.

Introduction
Over the years, humans have accumulated a lot of practical
learning techniques. One such effective learning method is
to learn from previous mistakes. Initially, the learner learns
a concept and evaluates themselves through a test to measure their level of understanding. The topics in the concept
where the learner makes more mistakes can be identified as
not having been learned well by the learner. Therefore, the
learner will re-study the topic while focusing on the topics where mistakes were made. This will ensure that repetition of similar mistakes in the future is avoided while
also strengthening previously well-learned topics. Inspired
by this human learning technique, we propose a methodology that can apply the idea of learning from mistakes to
machine learning.
With the deep learning era kicking off in machine learning, state-of-the-art neural network performance is achieved
mainly by architectures designed manually by experts. The
neural architecture search (NAS) and evaluation by human
experts require substantial effort and may not give the most
optimal performance. Recently, there has been growing interest in automating the manual process of learning architecture design. This paper proposes a general framework that

• Inspired by the human learning technique, we propose
a novel approach to apply the Learning from Mistakes
(LFM) method in machine learning.
• We formulate LFM as a multi-level optimization framework that involves three stages of learning: learner
learns; learner corrects its mistakes; learner, encoder, and
coefficient vector validate themselves.
• We apply our approach to neural architecture search
on CIFAR-100, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10184

