The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TrustAL: Trustworthy Active Learning Using Knowledge Distillation
Beong-woo Kwak1 , Youngwook Kim2 , Yu Jin Kim1 , Seung-won Hwang3 , Jinyoung Yeo1 *
1

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University
Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
{beongwoo.kwak, youngwook, yujin000731, jinyeo}@yonsei.ac.kr, seungwonh@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract

iterations, we find that knowledge learned at some time is
suddenly forgotten, which indicates that the recent model is
ineligible to be treated as a good reference of the labeled
dataset. More specifically, we can observe such inconsistent
behaviors of the trained model during inference time, where
sample i predicted correctly at iteration t is predicted incorrectly at iteration t + ∆t, which is called example forgetting (Toneva et al. 2019).
Motivated by this, in this work, we argue that correctconsistency (which we call consistency for brevity) should
be an essential criterion, which is the model ability to make
consistent correct predictions across successive AL generations for the same input (Wang et al. 2020). In the view of
consistency, prior AL methods only focusing on data acquisition steps (Dasgupta 2011; Xu et al. 2003; Bodó, Minier,
and Csató 2011; Ash et al. 2019) are still sub-optimal since
the three transitions among AL steps may suffer from following problems due to inconsistency (reverse phenomenon
of consistency), which we empirically analyze later:

Active learning can be defined as iterations of data labeling,
model training, and data acquisition, until sufficient labels
are acquired. A traditional view of data acquisition is that,
through iterations, knowledge from human labels and models is implicitly distilled to monotonically increase the accuracy and label consistency. Under this assumption, the most
recently trained model is a good surrogate for the current labeled data, from which data acquisition is requested based
on uncertainty/diversity. Our contribution is debunking this
myth and proposing a new objective for distillation. First, we
found example forgetting, which indicates the loss of knowledge learned across iterations. Second, for this reason, the
last model is no longer the best teacher– For mitigating such
forgotten knowledge, we select one of its predecessor models as a teacher, by our proposed notion of “consistency”. We
show that this novel distillation is distinctive in the following
three aspects; First, consistency ensures to avoid forgetting labels. Second, consistency improves both uncertainty/diversity
of labeled data. Lastly, consistency redeems defective labels
produced by human annotators.

• From labeling to model training: Despite successful
data acquisition, the subsequent labeling efforts can be
negated by forgetting the learned knowledge later, which
wastes annotation cost. We argue that consistency is key
to make a label-efficient AL (Figure 3).
• From model training to data acquisition: Inconsistent data acquisition models cannot serve as a good reference for the current data distribution, which leads to
contaminating the next data acquisition step. Improving
consistency may be synergetic to either uncertainty- or
diversity-based acquisition strategies (Figure 5).
• From data acquisition to labeling: Human annotators
who act as oracles are usually subject to accidental mislabeling (Bouguelia et al. 2018) which degrades traditional AL methods. Learning to keep consistency enables
to mitigate the confusion from the noisy labels (Figure 6).

Introduction
Labeling data is a fundamental bottleneck in machine learning due to annotation cost and time. One practical solution
is Active Learning (AL): given a limited labeling budget
k, which example should I ask human annotators to label?
Generally, this can be done through an iterative process of
labeling data, model training, and data acquisition steps, until sufficient labels are obtained. At each iteration, based on
the last trained model, unlabeled yet the k most desirable
examples are recognized and added to the labeled dataset to
train a new model. This process continues to the next iteration for selecting next k unlabeled examples based on the
newly trained model. That is, a naive belief in AL is that the
last trained model can be a good reference or surrogate for
the distribution of the currently labeled data, which indicates
what examples are desired for the next model update.
In this work, our empirical observation dispels this myth.
Although the model knowledge learned from the labels is
expected to be “consistently” kept or improved across AL

To overcome these drawbacks and thus make all the three
transitions in AL more trustworthy, we propose a labelefficient AL framework, called Trustworthy AL (TrustAL),
for bridging the knowledge discrepancy between labeled
data and model. In TrustAL, our key idea is to add a new step
in the iterative process of AL to learn the forgotten knowledge, which is orthogonally applicable to state-of-the-art
data acquisition strategies in a synergistic manner. Specifi-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7263

