The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Is Discourse Role Important for Emotion Recognition in Conversation?
Donovan Ong1,2,3 , Jian Su1 , Bin Chen1 , Anh Tuan Luu3 * , Ashok Narendranath1 , Yue Li1 ,
Shuqi Sun4 , Yingzhan Lin4 , Haifeng Wang4
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
2
CNRS@CREATE LTD, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Baidu Inc., China
{donovan ong,sujian,bchen,machingaln,li yue}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg,
{sunshuqi01,linyingzhan01,wanghaifeng}@baidu.com
Abstract
A conversation is a sequence of utterances, where each utterance plays a specific discourse role while expressing a particular emotion. This paper proposes a novel method to exploit
latent discourse role information of an utterance to determine
the emotion it conveys in a conversation. Specifically, we
use a variant of the Variational-Autoencoder (VAE) to model
the context-aware latent discourse roles of each utterance in
an unsupervised way. The latent discourse role representation further equips the utterance representation with a salient
clue for more accurate emotion recognition. Our experiments
show that our proposed method beats the best-reported performances on three public Emotion Recognition in Conversation datasets. This proves that the discourse role information
of an utterance plays an important role in the emotion recognition task, which no previous work has studied.

Introduction

Figure 1: Utterances with their discourse roles and emotions.

With the growing usage of chatbots on e-commerce platforms and increasing online messaging at work due to the
ongoing pandemic, a number of potential applications for
conversational artificial intelligence (AI) have arisen. One
key topic - emotion recognition in conversations (ERC) has
also started to gain attention from both the research (Hazarika et al. 2018a,b; Majumder et al. 2019; Zhong, Wang,
and Miao 2019; Ghosal et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020) and industrial community. Besides being used to analyse the quality of
customer service conversations, automated chatbots use it to
detect the emotion of users during ongoing dialogue and engage users with real-time emotion-aware responses.
Previous works on recognising the emotion of an utterance in a conversation mainly consider two factors - (i) context of the conversation (Poria et al. 2017), i.e. what was
said previously, and (ii) identity of the speaker (Ghosal et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020). Quite some efforts (Poria et al. 2017;
Ghosal et al. 2019; Ishiwatari et al. 2020) focus on how
to incorporate information about the conversation context
from the surrounding utterances to identify the emotion expressed by the query utterance. Hazarika et al. (2018a) and

Majumder et al. (2019) explicitly model the effect of the
speaker identity to incorporate the speaker’s emotional state.
While these factors have proven to be effective in identifying the emotion expressed by an utterance, there are other
factors that also influence the emotion. A conversation is a
sequence of utterances, where each utterance plays a specific discourse role while expressing a particular emotion.
The discourse role played by each utterance, such as asking
a question, disagreeing to a previous prompt, and other dialogue acts (Zeng et al. 2019) captures the underlying user
intent and information flow of a conversation. Thus, earlier
works that ignore the discourse role suffer from the intentmisleading problem, i.e., they cannot capture the utterance’s
intention correctly, especially when the intent is not explicit,
and the utterance has lexical ambiguity.
For example, in the conversation shown in Figure 1, by
recognising that the last utterance “We’ve got to say it to
him” plays a disagreement role in the dialogue flow, we can
readily infer that the utterance conveys an angry emotion.
On the other hand, if the utterance is intended to be sympathy, then the speaker will be expressing a sad emotion. Consequently, we observe that the discourse role could provide
a signal to identify the emotion expressed.

* The author’s contribution to this paper was made when he was
at Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11121

