The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Block-Skim: Efficient Question Answering for Transformer
Yue Guan1,2 , Zhengyi Li1,2 , Zhouhan Lin1 , Yuhao Zhu3 , Jingwen Leng1,2 , Minyi Guo1,2 ,
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
3
University of Rochester
{bonboru,hobbit,leng-jw}@sjtu.edu.cn, guo-my@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, lin.zhouhan@gmail.com, yzhu@rochester.edu

[CLS] Who played quarterback for the Broncos after Peyton Manning was benched ? [SEP]
Following their loss in the divisional round of the previous season 's playoffs , the Denver Broncos
underwent numerous coaching changes, including a mutual parting with head coach John Fox ( who
had won four divisional championships in his four years as Broncos head coach ), and the hiring of
Gary Kubiak as the new head coach. under Kubiak, the Broncos planned to install a run - oriented
offense with zone blocking to blend in with quarterback Peyton Manning's shotgun passing skills,
but struggled with numerous changes and injuries to the offensive line, as well as manning having
his worst statistical season since his rookie year with the Indianapolis Colts in 1998, due to a
plantar fasciitis injury in his heel that he had suffered since the summer, and the simple fact that
Manning was getting old, as he turned 39 in the 2015 off - season. Although the team had a 7 – 0
start , Manning led the NFL in interceptions. In week 10, Manning suffered a partial tear of the
plantar fasciitis in his left foot. He set the NFL's all - time record for career passing yards in this
game, but was benched after throwing four interceptions in favor of backup quarterback Brock
Osweiler , who took over as the starter for most of the remainder of the regular season. Osweiler
was injured, however, leading to Manning's return during the
week 17 regular season finale,
where the Broncos were losing 13 – 7 against the 4 – 11 San Diego Chargers, resulting in Manning
re - claiming the starting quarterback position for the playoffs by leading the team to a key 27 –
20 win that enabled the team to clinch the number one overall AFC seed. Under defensive
coordinator Wade
Phillips, the Broncos'defense ranked number one in total yards allowed,
passing yards allowed and sacks, and like the previous three seasons, the team has continued. [SEP]

Abstract
Transformer models have achieved promising results on natural language processing (NLP) tasks including extractive
question answering (QA). Common Transformer encoders
used in NLP tasks process the hidden states of all input tokens in the context paragraph throughout all layers. However,
different from other tasks such as sequence classification, answering the raised question does not necessarily need all the
tokens in the context paragraph. Following this motivation,
we propose Block-Skim, which learns to skim unnecessary
context in higher hidden layers to improve and accelerate
the Transformer performance. The key idea of Block-Skim
is to identify the context that must be further processed and
those that could be safely discarded early on during inference. Critically, we find that such information could be sufficiently derived from the self-attention weights inside the
Transformer model. We further prune the hidden states corresponding to the unnecessary positions early in lower layers, achieving significant inference-time speedup. To our surprise, we observe that models pruned in this way outperform
their full-size counterparts. Block-Skim improves QA models’ accuracy on different datasets and achieves 3× speedup
on BERTbase model.

Figure 1: Example of Block-Skim method on a query from
the SQuAD dataset. The question and answer tokens are annotated in red. Only question and few evidence blocks are
fully processed (annotated by yellow). And other blocks are
skimmed for acceleration with the knowledge from attention weights (annotated by grey). Here the block size is 32
tokens.

of computation, which suggests that we can take advantage
of that by discarding many of the tokens early in the lower
layers of the Transformer. This semantic level redundancy
sheds light on effectively reducing the sequence lengths at
higher layers. Since the execution overhead of self-attention
increases quadratically w.r.t. sequence length, this semantic level pruning could significantly reduce the computation
time for long contexts.
To excavate the efficiency from this insight, we propose to
first chop up the context into blocks, and then learn a classifier to terminate those less relevant ones early in lower layers by looking at the attention weights as shown in Fig. 1.
Moreover, with the supervision of ground truth answer positions, a model that jointly learns to discard context blocks as
well as answering questions exhibits significantly better performance over its full-size counterpart. Unfortunately, this
also makes the proposed Block-Skim method dedicated for
extractive QA downstream task. However, QA task is significant in real work production scenarios. Moreover, our
method lies in the trade-off space between generality, usability, and efficiency. While sacrificing generality on appli-

Introduction
The Transformer model (Vaswani et al. 2017) has pushed
model performance on various NLP applications to a new
stage by introducing multi-head attention (MHA) mechanism (Lin et al. 2017). Further, the Transformer-based
BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) model advances its performances
by introducing self-supervised pre-training and has reached
state-of-the-art accuracy on many NLP tasks. This has made
it at the core of many state-of-the-art models, especially in
recent question answering (QA) models (Huang et al. 2020).
Our key insight for QA is that when human beings are
answering a question with a passage as a context, they do
not spend the same level of comprehension for each of the
sentences equally across the paragraph. Most of the contents are quickly skimmed over with little attention on it,
which means that for a specific question most of the contents are semantically redundant. However, in the Transformer architecture, all tokens go through the same amount
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10710

