The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Handwritten Mathematical Expression Recognition via Attention Aggregation
Based Bi-directional Mutual Learning
Xiaohang Bian1 , Bo Qin 2 , Xiaozhe Xin 2 , Jianwu Li 1 * , Xuefeng Su 2 , Yanfeng Wang2 ,
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
AI Interaction Department, Tencent, China
{xhang.bian,ljw}@bit.edu.cn, {bqin,georgexin,felixsu,shawndwang}@tencent.com,

Abstract

et al. 2016), segmentation (Tianfei et al. 2020, 2021; Wenguan et al. 2021). These attention-based methods (Deng
et al. 2017; Le and Nakagawa 2017; Zhang et al. 2017, 2018;
Zhang, Du, and Dai 2018; Wu et al. 2018; Le, Indurkhya,
and Nakagawa 2019; Li et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020) are
remarkably superior to grammar-based ones. For example,
WAP (Zhang et al. 2017) first introduces the 2D coverage
attention to solve the problem of lacking coverage, as shown
in Fig. 1 (a). The coverage attention is the sum of past attentions aiming to keep track of past alignment information,
such that the attention model can be guided to assign higher
attention probabilities to the untranslated regions of images.
Nevertheless, one main limitation of the coverage attention
is that it only employs historical alignment information, disregarding future information (untranslated regions). For example, many mathematical expressions are of symmetrical
structures, where the left “{” and right “}” braces always
appear together or sometimes far apart. AndR some symbols in an equation are correlated, such as “ ” and “dx”.
Most methods only use the left-to-right coverage attention
to identify the current symbol, ignoring the fact that the future information from the right is also important, which may
cause the problem of attention drift. And the captured dependence information between the current symbol and previous
symbols becomes weaker as their distances increase. Therefore, they may not adequately exploit long-distance correlation or grammatical specification of mathematical expressions (Zhao et al. 2021). BTTR (Zhao et al. 2021) uses a
transformer decoder with two directions to handle attention
drift (Fig. 1(f)), but there is no explicitly supervised information for BTTR to learn from the reversed direction, and
BTTR aligns attention without a coverage mechanism, making it still suffer from some limitations in recognizing long
formulas. Besides, variable scales of characters in a mathematical expression may result in recognition difficulty or
uncertainty. DWAP-MSA (Zhang et al. 2018) attempts to encode multi-scale features to alleviate this problem. However,
they do not scale the local receptive field, but only scale the
feature map, making it impossible to accurately attend to
small characters during recognition.

Handwritten mathematical expression recognition aims to
automatically generate LaTeX sequences from given images. Currently, attention-based encoder-decoder models are
widely used in this task. They typically generate target sequences in a left-to-right (L2R) manner, leaving the right-toleft (R2L) contexts unexploited. In this paper, we propose an
Attention aggregation based Bi-directional Mutual learning
Network (ABM) which consists of one shared encoder and
two parallel inverse decoders (L2R and R2L). The two decoders are enhanced via mutual distillation, which involves
one-to-one knowledge transfer at each training step, making full use of the complementary information from two inverse directions. Moreover, in order to deal with mathematical symbols in diverse scales, an Attention Aggregation Module (AAM) is proposed to effectively integrate multi-scale
coverage attentions. Notably, in the inference phase, given
that the model already learns knowledge from two inverse directions, we only use the L2R branch for inference, keeping
the original parameter size and inference speed. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach achieves
the recognition accuracy of 56.85 % on CROHME 2014,
52.92 % on CROHME 2016, and 53.96 % on CROHME 2019
without data augmentation and model ensembling, substantially outperforming the state-of-the-art methods. The source
code is available in https://github.com/XH-B/ABM.

Introduction
Handwritten Mathematical Expression Recognition
(HMER) has multiple application scenarios, such as intelligent education, human-computer interaction and academic
paper writing auxiliary tools. Traditional methods generating LaTeX sequences from input images always depend
on specially designed grammars (Lavirotte and Pottier
1998; Chan and Yeung 2001; MacLean and Labahn 2013).
These grammars need extensive prior knowledge to define
mathematical expression structures, symbols’ position
relationship, and corresponding parsing algorithms, so that
they cannot recognize complex mathematical expressions.
Recently, attention based encoder-decoder models have
been applied to HMER, due to its excellence in machine
translation (Cho et al. 2014), speech recognition (Bahdanau

Thereby, we propose a novel framework with Attention
aggregation and Bi-directional Mutual learning (ABM) for
HMER, as shown in Fig. 1(g). Specially, our framework includes three modules: Feature Extraction, Attention Aggre-

* Corresponding author: Jianwu Li.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

113

