The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Obtaining Calibrated Probabilities with Personalized Ranking Models
Wonbin Kweon, SeongKu Kang, Hwanjo Yu*
Pohang University of Science and Technology, South Korea
{kwb4453, seongku, hwanjoyu}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

erence based on the ranking score of the pre-trained model,
without affecting the ranking performance.
While recent methods (Guo et al. 2017; Kull et al. 2019;
Rahimi et al. 2020) have successfully achieved model calibration for image classification, it has remained a longstanding problem for personalized ranking. A pioneering
work (Menon et al. 2012) firstly proposed to predict calibrated probabilities from the scores of pre-trained ranking models by using isotonic regression (Barlow and Brunk
1972), which is a simple non-parametric method that fits a
monotonically increasing function. Although it has shown
some effectiveness, there is no subsequent study about parametric calibration methods in the field of personalized ranking despite their richer expressiveness than non-parametric
methods.
In this paper, we investigate various parametric distributions, and from which we propose two calibration methods
that can best model the score distributions of the ranking
models. First, we define three desiderata that a calibration
function for ranking models should meet, and show that existing calibration methods have the insufficient capability to
model the diverse populations of the ranking score. We then
propose two parametric methods, namely Gaussian calibration and Gamma calibration, that satisfy all the desiderata.
We demonstrate that the proposed methods have a larger expressive power in terms of the parametric family and also
effectively handles the imbalanced nature of ranking score
populations compared to the existing methods (Platt et al.
1999; Guo et al. 2017). Our methods are post-processing
functions with three learnable parameters that map the ranking scores of pre-trained models to calibrated posterior probabilities.
To optimize the parameters of the calibration functions,
we can use the log-loss on the held-out validation sets (Guo
et al. 2017). The challenge here is that the user-item interaction datasets are implicit and missing-not-at-random (Schnabel et al. 2016; Saito 2019). For each user-item pair, the
label is 1 if the interaction is observed, 0 otherwise. An unobserved interaction, however, does not necessarily mean a
negative preference, but the item might have not been exposed to the user yet. Therefore, if we fit the calibration
function with the log-loss computed naively on the implicit
datasets, the mapped probabilities may indicate biased likelihoods of users’ preference on items. To tackle this prob-

For personalized ranking models, the well-calibrated probability of an item being preferred by a user has great practical
value. While existing work shows promising results in image classification, probability calibration has not been much
explored for personalized ranking. In this paper, we aim to estimate the calibrated probability of how likely a user will prefer an item. We investigate various parametric distributions
and propose two parametric calibration methods, namely
Gaussian calibration and Gamma calibration. Each proposed
method can be seen as a post-processing function that maps
the ranking scores of pre-trained models to well-calibrated
preference probabilities, without affecting the recommendation performance. We also design the unbiased empirical risk
minimization framework that guides the calibration methods
to the learning of true preference probability from the biased
user-item interaction dataset. Extensive evaluations with various personalized ranking models on real-world datasets show
that both the proposed calibration methods and the unbiased
empirical risk minimization significantly improve the calibration performance.

Introduction
Personalized ranking models aim to learn the ranking scores
of items, so as to produce a ranked list of them for the recommendation (Rendle et al. 2009). However, their prediction results provide an incomplete estimation of the user’s
potential preference for each item; the semantic of the same
ranking position differs for each user. One user might like
his third item with the probability of 30%, whereas the other
user likes her third item with 90%. Accurately estimating
the probability of an item being preferred by a user has great
practical value (Menon et al. 2012). The preference probability can help the user choose the items with high potential preference and the system can raise user satisfaction by
pruning the ranked list by filtering out items with low confidence (Arampatzis, Kamps, and Robertson 2009). To ensure
reliability, the predicted probabilities need to be calibrated
so that they can accurately indicate their ground truth correctness likelihood. In this paper, our goal is to obtain the
well-calibrated probability of an item matching a user’s pref* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4083

