The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Equity Promotion in Online Resource Allocation
Pan Xu1 , Yifan Xu2
1 Department of Computer Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, USA
2 Key Lab of CNII, MOE, Southeast University, Nanjing, China

pxu@njit.edu, xyf@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

arriving request with a demand, and aim to devise an allocation policy such that every requester can get a fair share of
resources proportional to its demand, regardless of their arrival time. The second follows an opposite direction, called
internal equity, which is to treat arriving requesters homogeneous in terms of their external factors like demands but
heterogeneous for their internal attributes. Under this approach, each requester has been placed into one or several
groups, and a distribution of resources is regarded as equitable when every group of requesters can receive a fair share
of resources proportional to the percentage of the group in
the whole population.
In this paper, we focus on internal-equity promotion in
online resource allocation. A typical motivating example is
COVID-19 vaccine distribution. There is much news showing stark racial disparities existing at least in the early stage
of the vaccine rollout across the country (Stolberg 2021;
Fitzsimmons 2021; Board 2021; Singer 2021; Blackstock
and Blackstock 2021; Jones 2021; Abcarian 2021; Adamson
2021). The article (Fitzsimmons 2021) published on Feb. 8,
2021, in The New York Times showed that “In New Jersey,
about 48 percent of vaccine recipients were White, and only
3 percent were Black, even though about 15 percent of the
state’s population is Black, according to state data.” Another
article (Blackstock and Blackstock 2021) published on Feb.
1, 2021, in The Washington Post reported that “White Americans are being vaccinated at rates of up to three times higher
than black Americans, though Black Americans have suffered a much higher death rate from COVID-19 than White
Americans.” These facts highlight the challenge of achieving
an equitable distribution of online resources in a non-profit
setting, especially when resources are scarce and competed
by an overwhelming number of requesters.
One technical challenge in addressing (internal) equity
promotion in online resource allocation is how to craft a
proper metric of equity. Current metrics of equity proposed
so far are all based on the minimum ratio of the number of
requesters served to that of total arrivals within any given
group (Ma, Xu, and Xu 2020; Nanda et al. 2020; Xu and
Xu 2020; Hosseini et al. 2022). Unfortunately, these metrics
fail to capture the exact equity we expect in practice. Consider COVID-19 vaccine distribution, for example. Among
lots of news reporting the sharp racial and ethnic disparities
in the early stage of rollout, a commonly cited evidence is

We consider online resource allocation under a typical nonprofit setting, where limited or even scarce resources are administered by a not-for-profit organization like a government.
We focus on the internal-equity by assuming that arriving requesters are homogeneous in terms of their external factors
like demands but heterogeneous for their internal attributes
like demographics. Specifically, we associate each arriving
requester with one or several groups based on their demographics (i.e., race, gender, and age), and we aim to design
an equitable distributing strategy such that every group of requesters can receive a fair share of resources proportional to
a preset target ratio.
We present two LP-based sampling algorithms and investigate them both theoretically (in terms of competitive-ratio
analysis) and experimentally based on real COVID-19 vaccination data maintained by the Minnesota Department of
Health. Both theoretical and numerical results show that our
LP-based sampling strategies can effectively promote equity,
especially when the arrival population is disproportionately
represented, as observed in the early stage of the COVID-19
vaccine rollout.

Introduction
We consider online resource allocation under a typical nonprofit setting, where limited or even scarce resources are
administered by a not-for-profit organization like a government, and our priority is equity such that every type of online agent could receive a fair share of the limited suppliers. Currently, there are two complementary approaches to
studying equity in online resource allocation under the nonprofit setting. The first is called external equity, which is to
treat arriving requesters as homogeneous in terms of their internal attributes like demographics but heterogeneous with
respect to their external factors like demands and arrival
time. The focus of equity is then placed on fairness about
external factors. A few works investigating external equity
in distributing medical suppliers during the COVID-19 pandemic (Manshadi, Niazadeh, and Rodilitz 2021) and allocating food donations to different agencies (Lien, Iravani, and
Smilowitz 2014). Specifically, these studies associate each
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9962

