The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Adversarial Framework for Generating Unseen Images
by Activation Maximization
Yang Zhang* 1 , Wang Zhou∗2† , Gaoyuan Zhang1 , David Cox1 , Shiyu Chang3
1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Meta AI, New York, NY, USA
3
Unversity of California at Santa Barbara, USA
{yang.zhang2, gaoyuan.zhang, david.d.cox}@ibm.com, wangzhou@fb.com, chang87@ucsb.edu
Abstract

can be used as a global model interpretation technique that
shows what features the classifier is utilizing to make classification decisions (Booth et al. 2021). Although AM can be
applied to different domains, this paper will primarily focus
on the task of image generation.
To prevent AM from adversarially attacking the classifier,
existing works would impose different regularization techniques to ensure that the generated images look like ‘natural’ images free of adversarial patterns (Mahendran and
Vedaldi 2016; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Wei
et al. 2015; Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017). Recently, GAN has emerged as a popular regularization technique to enforce a distributional match between generated
images and a given natural image set (Li et al. 2020; Nguyen
et al. 2017, 2016; Booth et al. 2021). In most cases, the image set is chosen to be general enough that it contains some
images of whatever target class whose activation is being
maximized.
In this paper, we would like to tackle a much more challenging setting, where images of the target class are completely removed from the image set, a constraint we call the
class absence constraint. For example, when generating the
class of ‘truck’, no truck image would be seen in the image
set. The GAN has to completely resort to the information
residing in the image classifier. The motivation for studying
this problem is twofold. First, it constitutes a pioneering scientific exploration of how much information about a class
can be elicited from a neural classifier, which we will refer
to as the classifier’s memory. Since the target class information in the generated images completely comes from the
classifier, the more information the classifier memorizes, the
greater details the generated images would contain, and thus
the better these images would resemble the target class. The
second motivation of studying this setting is that when AM
is applied to interpreting neural classifiers, only by enforcing the class absence constraint can we ensure the generated
images are faithfully reflecting the memory of the classifier,
not ‘stealing’ the information from the image set.
So far, no algorithms can generate reasonable images if
the target absence constraint is strictly enforced. For example, the most successful paradigm so far is to pre-train a
GAN on the image set, and then perform activation maximization over the random seed or style embedding (Li et al.
2020; Nguyen et al. 2017, 2016; Booth et al. 2021). How-

Activation maximization (AM) refers to the task of generating input examples that maximize the activation of a target
class of a classifier, which can be used for class-conditional
image generation and model interpretation. A popular class of
AM method, GAN-based AM, introduces a GAN pre-trained
on a large image set, and performs AM over its input random seed or style embeddings, so that the generated images
are natural and adversarial attacks are prevented. Most of
these methods would require the image set to contain some
images of the target class to be visualized. Otherwise they
tend to generate other seen class images that most maximizes
the target class activation. In this paper, we aim to tackle
the case where information about the target class is completely removed from the image set. This would ensure that
the generated images truly reflect the target class information residing in the classifier, not the target class information in the image set, which contributes to a more faithful
interpretation technique. To this end, we propose P ROBE GAN, a GAN-based AM algorithm capable of generating
image classes unseen in the image set. Rather than using a
pre-trained GAN, P ROBE GAN trains a new GAN with AM
explicitly included in its training objective. P ROBE GAN consists of a class-conditional generator, a seen-class discriminator, and an all-class unconditional discriminator. It can
be shown that such a framework can generate images with
the features of the unseen target class, while retaining the
naturalness as depicted in the image set. Experiments have
shown that P ROBE GAN can generate unseen-class images
with much higher quality than the baselines. We also explore
using P ROBE GAN as a model interpretation tool. Our code
is at https://github.com/csmiler/ProbeGAN/.

Introduction
Activation maximization (AM) refers to the technique of
generating input examples, such as images and audios, that
maximize the activation of a classifier, so that the generated
examples conform to the class characteristics as depicted by
the classifier. There are two primary uses of AM. First, it can
be used to perform class-conditional generation, e.g. Odena,
Olah, and Shlens (2017). Second and more importantly, it
* Equal contribution.
†

Work done while the author worked at IBM Research, USA.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3371

