The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Vision Transformers
Zhipeng Wei1,2 * , Jingjing Chen1,2 * , Micah Goldblum3 , Zuxuan Wu1,2†
Tom Goldstein3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
zpwei21@m.fudan.edu.cn, chenjingjing@fudan.edu.cn, goldblumcello@gmail.com,
zxwu@fudan.edu.cn, tomg@cs.umd.edu, ygj@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

data augmentation and advanced gradient calculations to
prevent perturbations from over-fitting to the model, as this
would diminish their success when transferring to black-box
models. In contrast, relatively little is known about the transferability properties of attacks crafted on ViTs, and extending existing approaches that work well on CNNs to transformers is non-trivial due to significant structural differences. More specifically, ViTs receive a sequence of flattened patches from images as inputs and use a series of
multi-headed self-attention (MSA) layers to learn relationships between patches. The use of standard attacks without
considering these unique architectural features will result in
suboptimal results, and give the user an inaccurate sense of
the adversarial vulnerability of the transformer model class.

Vision transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated impressive
performance on a series of computer vision tasks, yet they
still suffer from adversarial examples. In this paper, we
posit that adversarial attacks on transformers should be specially tailored for their architecture, jointly considering both
patches and self-attention, in order to achieve high transferability. More specifically, we introduce a dual attack framework, which contains a Pay No Attention (PNA) attack and
a PatchOut attack, to improve the transferability of adversarial samples across different ViTs. We show that skipping the
gradients of attention during backpropagation can generate
adversarial examples with high transferability. In addition,
adversarial perturbations generated by optimizing randomly
sampled subsets of patches at each iteration achieve higher attack success rates than attacks using all patches. We evaluate
the transferability of attacks on state-of-the-art ViTs, CNNs
and robustly trained CNNs. The results of these experiments
demonstrate that the proposed dual attack can greatly boost
transferability between ViTs and from ViTs to CNNs. In addition, the proposed method can easily be combined with existing transfer methods to boost performance.

In light of these structural differences, we aim to generate highly transferable adversarial examples using white-box
ViTs as proxy models to attack different black-box ViTs,
normally trained CNNs, and robustly trained CNNs. In particular, we introduce a dual attack method tailored for the architecture of ViTs—attacking the attention mechanism and
patches simultaneously, both of which are the core components of popular transformer architectures. In particular, we
use a Pay No Attention (PNA) attack and a PatchOut attack
to manipulate the attention mechanism and image features in
parallel. The PNA attack improves adversarial transferability by treating the attention weights computed on the forward pass as constants. In other words, it does not propagate
through the branch of the computation graph that produces
the attention weights, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). This prevents patches from strongly interacting, as measured by the
Shapley interaction index (Shapley 1988), which is known
to help boost adversarial transferability (Wang et al. 2020).
In addition, the PatchOut attack randomly samples a subset of patches to receive updates on each iteration of the attack crafting process. This is akin to using dropout (Hinton
et al. 2012) on perturbation patches, and helps to combat
over-fitting. It also shares similarities with random feature
selection in Random Forests (Breiman 2004), Dropout and
Diversity Input (DI) (Xie et al. 2019). Besides, we integrate
the L2 norm (Chen et al. 2021b) into our dual attack to prefer
a large distance from the benign sample.

Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020) have
attained excellent performance compared to state-of-the-art
CNNs on standard image recognition tasks. However, ViTs
are still vulnerable to security threats via adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Wang et al.
2021a; Chen et al. 2021a; Wei et al. 2020), which are nearly
indistinguishable from natural images while containing perturbations that result in incorrect predictions. It is known that
a model of unknown structure can be attacked using adversarial images crafted with a different “surrogate” model (Liu
et al. 2016). This cross-model transferability property of adversarial examples makes it feasible to attack a “black-box”
model without knowing its architecture or other properties.
Cross-model transferability is a well-studied phenomenon
for CNNs (Xie et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2018; Wei et al.
2021). High-performance transfer attacks typically employ
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Correspondence to: Zuxuan Wu, Yu-Gang Jiang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To validate the effectiveness of our approach, and to illustrate how the gradients of attention weights impair ad2668

