The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Using Conditional Independence for Belief Revision
Matthew James Lynn,1 James P. Delgrande,1 Pavlos Peppas2
1

Simon Fraser University, Canada
2
University of Patras, Greece
mlynn@cs.sfu.ca, jim@cs.sfu.ca, pavlos@upatras.gr

Abstract

irrelevance have been extremely strict, considering beliefs
as irrelevant only when there is no connection, however indirect, between them.
To see the issue, consider the following situation: an agent
is informed that refrigerators require power, power is generated in the local area by wind turbines, and wind turbines kill
birds. It would seem that information about birds would be
independent of information concerning refrigerators; however, this is not the case, given the link between refrigerators and birds mediated by wind turbines. Consequently,
existing approaches would consider refrigerators relevant to
birds. However, when revising our beliefs about birds there
would seem to be no reason for our beliefs about refrigerators to change. Hence, it seems we need a more nuanced and
less restrictive notion of irrelevance.
This situation has a parallel in probability theory. In practice, random variables are rarely independent. However,
they are frequently conditionally independent. As a result,
Bayesian networks have been developed to exploit conditional independence properties, thereby overcoming the otherwise seemingly-intractable complexity of probabilistic inference (Pearl 2014).
In this paper we take a suitable analogue of conditional
independence for determining which beliefs may be considered irrelevant to others in a given context. We then apply this notion to belief revision, and we study those revision operators which comply with this formulation of conditional independence. Our approach is given in terms of the
Katsuno-Mendelzon approach for belief revision. In our approach, we assume that conditional independence is a property of the underlying domain, and we consequently assume
that a knowledge engineer has provided a collection of such
conditional independence assertions. These assertions can
then be taken into account in the belief revision process.
To this end, we study two related notions of what it means
for a belief revision operator to take into account conditional independencies. We provide postulates that characterise conditional independence in revision, and which generalise previous approaches to (non-conditional, absolute)
independence. Furthermore, we provide representation results, giving conditions on faithful rankings which correspond to the sets of postulates characterising conditional independence in revision.
The next section covers background material: we first

We present an approach to incorporating qualitative assertions of conditional irrelevance into belief revision, in order
to address the limitations of existing work which considers
only unconditional irrelevance. These assertions serve to enforce the requirement of minimal change to existing beliefs,
while also suggesting a route to reducing the computational
cost of belief revision by excluding irrelevant beliefs from
consideration. In our approach, a knowledge engineer specifies a collection of multivalued dependencies that encode
domain-dependent assertions of conditional irrelevance in the
knowledge base. We consider these as capturing properties of
the underlying domain which should be taken into account
during belief revision. We introduce two related notions of
what it means for a multivalued dependency to be taken into
account by a belief revision operator: partial and full compliance. We provide characterisations of partially and fully
compliant belief revision operators in terms of semantic conditions on their associated faithful rankings. Using these characterisations, we show that the constraints for partially and
fully compliant belief revision operators are compatible with
the AGM postulates. Finally, we compare our approach to existing work on unconditional irrelevance in belief revision.

1

Introduction

Belief revision is concerned with the situation in which an
agent is confronted with a new fact to incorporate into its belief set. If the new fact is inconsistent with the current belief
set, the challenge is to revise these beliefs so that as many of
the current beliefs as possible are retained while incorporating the new fact and maintaining consistency. This process
is formalised as a belief revision operator ∗ which takes a
current knowledge base K and a formula for revision φ and
produces a revised knowledge base K ∗ φ.
In order to formalise the requirement that revision should
result in a minimal change to existing beliefs, a number of
authors have turned to irrelevance, suggesting that those beliefs irrelevant to the formula for revision should remain unchanged (Gardenfors 1990). This also has the potential advantage of opening a pathway to more efficient belief revision operators, by being able to exclude irrelevant beliefs
from the revision process. However, so far, these notions of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5809

