The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Prevailing in the Dark: Information Walls in Strategic Games
Pavel Naumov,1 Wenxuan Zhang 2
1

University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom
2
Scripps College; Claremont, California, United States
p.naumov@soton.ac.uk, wzhang4343@scrippscollege.edu

Abstract

✲✲✲

w

The paper studies strategic abilities that rise from restrictions
on the information sharing in multiagent systems. The main
technical result is a sound and complete logical system that
describes the interplay between the knowledge and the strategic ability modalities.

FBI

w

Introduction

1
✲✲

0✲✲

v

✲1✲

100

u

Figure 1: Strategic game between Al-Qaeda, FBI, and CIA

Controlled by al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar, American Airline
flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon at 9:37:46 am on September 11th, 2001 (Kean 2004). The months that preceded this
event could be viewed as a strategic game between Al-Qaeda
headquarters, U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
and U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). As later investigation revealed, CIA had evidence that al-Hazmi and
al-Mihdhar were Al-Qaeda agents living in California and
potentially plotting an attack on the United States. However, American laws prevented CIA from arresting them
on American land. FBI, whose informant lived under the
same roof with al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar, suspected that
they were a potential threat, but did not have enough evidence to open a preliminary inquiry to investigate them. If
CIA would have shared their knowledge with FBI, the latter
could have arrested them and, thus, prevented the attack on
Pentagon. CIA did not share this information with FBI1 because it believed that it was illegal to share information between intelligence and criminal investigations of a common
target (Grewe 2004). As a result, al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar
were left free to live in California and to high-jack the plane
once ordered to do so by Al-Qaeda headquarters.
Figure 1 captures the above situation as a strategic game
between three agents: Al-Qaeda, FBI, and CIA. This game
has two “initial” states, w and w0 , and two “final” states, u
and v. In state w, al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar are Al-Qaeda
agents preparing for the attack on the United States. In state
w0 , they are peaceful foreigners taking flight lessons in San
Diego. The actual initial state of the game was w. CIA was
able to distinguish this state from state w0 , but FBI was not.
We show the indistinguishability relation by dashed line in

Figure 1. Final state u is the one in which flight 77 crashes
into the Pentagon. Final state v is when it does not.
We assume that each of the three agents has two actions
available in state w and w0 : action 0 and action 1. For CIA,
action 1 means “arrest” and action 0 means “do not arrest”
al-Hazmi and al-Mihdhar. Because it is illegal for CIA to
conduct operations on American land, action 1 is illegal for
CIA in state w as well as in state w0 . For FBI, action 1 means
“open an investigation” and action 0 means “do not open
the investigation.” FBI cannot conduct searches or electronic
surveillance without probable cause unless the target is an
agent of foreign power. Thus, it would be proper for FBI to
conduct an investigation in state w but not in state w0 . For
Al-Qaeda, action 1 means “order the attack”, action 0 means
“do not order the attack.”
In this game, an action profile is a tuple af c, where a, f ,
and c are actions of Al-Queda, FBI, and CIA, respectively.
The directed edges in Figure 1 show transitions of the strategic game from an initial to a final state under different action
profiles. For example, edge from state w0 to state v is labeled
with ∗∗∗. This means that the game transitions from state w0
to state v under any action profile af c. At the same time,
directed edge from state w to state u is labeled with 100. It
means that this transition can only happen if Al-Queda decides to attack and FBI and CIA decide not to act.
FBI
Al-Qaeda

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
CIA placed al-Hazmi and al-Mihdha on FBI’s watch list in
August 2001, but this did not give FBI enough time to investigate.

CIA

Figure 2: Information wall defining partition σ.

5842

