The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Universal and Tight Online Algorithms for Generalized-Mean Welfare
Siddharth Barman1 , Arindam Khan2 , Arnab Maiti3
1

Indian Institute of Science
Indian Institute of Science
3
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
barman@iisc.ac.in, arindamkhan@iisc.ac.in, maitiarnab9@gmail.com
2

Abstract

(agents) (Prendergast 2017; Aleksandrov et al. 2015). Here,
the perishable nature of the good (food) mandates online
allocations, and supply (and demand) variability leads to
limited information about the future. The online model is
also applicable in scheduling contexts wherein computational resources, which become available over time, have to
be shared among users (Blazewicz et al. 2019; Pinedo 2012;
Leung 2004).
In such settings—and resource-allocation contexts, in
general—economic efficiency and fairness are fundamental
objectives. Motivated by these considerations and application domains, such as the ones mentioned above, a growing
body of work in recent years has been directed towards the
study of online fair division (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2020).
The current paper contributes to this thread of research with
a welfarist perspective.
Specifically, we provide a unified treatment of fairness
and efficiency objectives by developing an online algorithm
for finding allocations that maximize the generalized mean
of the values achieved by the agents. Formally, for exponent
parameter p ∈ R, the pth generalized mean of n nonnegative
1/p
Pn
values ν1 , ν2 , . . . , νn is defined as n1 i=1 νip
. As a
family of objective functions (parameterized by p), generalized means encapsulate well-studied measures of economic
efficiency as well as fairness: the p = 1 case corresponds
to average social welfare (arithmetic mean), which is a standard measure of economic efficiency. At the other end of
the spectrum with p → −∞, the pth generalized mean corresponds to egalitarian welfare (the minimum value across
the agents), a fundamental measure of fairness. Furthermore,
when p tends to zero, the generalized mean reduces to Nash
social welfare (specifically, the geometric mean)–a prominent objective which achieves a balance between the extremes of social and egalitarian welfare. Notably, p-means,
with p ∈ (−∞, 1], exactly constitute a family of functions
characterized by a set of natural, fairness axioms, including the Pigou-Dalton principle (Moulin 2004). Therefore, pmean welfare, with p ≤ 1, provides us with an important
and axiomatically justified family of objectives.
The current work focuses on the online allocation of divisible goods, i.e., goods that can be assigned fractionally
among the n participating agents. The divisible goods arrive
online, one by one, and upon the arrival of each good t, every agent i reports her (nonnegative) value, vit , for the good.

We study fair and efficient allocation of divisible goods, in an
online manner, among n agents. The goods arrive online in a
sequence of T time periods. The agents’ values for a good are
revealed only after its arrival, and the online algorithm needs
to fractionally allocate the good, immediately and irrevocably, among the agents. Towards a unifying treatment of fairness and economic efficiency objectives, we develop an algorithmic framework for finding online allocations to maximize
the generalized mean of the values received by the agents.
In particular, working with the assumption that each agent’s
value for the grand bundle of goods is appropriately scaled,
we address online maximization of p-mean welfare. Parameterized by an exponent term p ∈ (−∞, 1], these means encapsulate a range of welfare functions, including social welfare (p = 1), egalitarian welfare (p → −∞), and Nash social
welfare (p → 0).
We present a simple algorithmic template that takes a threshold as input and, with judicious choices for this threshold,
leads to both universal and tailored competitive guarantees.
First, we show
√ that one can compute online a single allocation that O( n log n)-approximates the optimal p-mean welfare for all p ≤ 1. The existence of such a universal allocation
is interesting in and of itself. Moreover, this universal guarantee achieves essentially tight competitive ratios for specific
values of p.
Next, we obtain improved competitive ratios for different
ranges of p by executing our algorithm with p-specific thresholds, e.g., we provide O(log3 n)-competitive ratio for all
−1
p ∈ ( log
, 1).
2n
We complement our positive results by establishing lower
bounds to show that our guarantees are essentially tight for
a wide range of the exponent parameter.

1

Introduction

Resource-allocation settings are ubiquitous and often require the assignment of resources (goods) that arrive over
time. In particular, these settings require that each good
gets allocated (among the participating agents) as it arrives,
and one needs to make these allocative decisions without
knowing the values of the pending goods. Consider, as an
example, a food bank that distributes food donations (essentially a divisible good) every day among soup kitchens
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4793

