The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pinpointing Fine-Grained Relationships between Hateful Tweets and Replies
Abdullah Albanyan1 , Eduardo Blanco2
1

University of North Texas
Arizona State University
abdullahalbanyan@my.unt.edu, eduardo.blanco@asu.edu
2

Abstract
Recent studies in the hate and counter hate domain have provided the grounds for investigating how to detect this pervasive content in social media. These studies mostly work with
synthetic replies to hateful content written by annotators on
demand rather than replies written by real users. We argue
that working with naturally occurring replies to hateful content is key to study the problem. Building on this motivation,
we create a corpus of 5,652 hateful tweets and replies. We
analyze their fine-grained relationships by indicating whether
the reply (a) is hate or counter hate speech, (b) provides a
justification, (c) attacks the author of the tweet, and (d) adds
additional hate. We also present linguistic insights into the
language people use depending on these fine-grained relationships. Experimental results show improvements (a) taking into account the hateful tweet in addition to the reply
and (b) pretraining with related tasks.

Figure 1: Hateful tweet (top) and two replies. The first reply
disapproves of the hateful tweet and provides a justification.
On the other hand, the second reply approves of the hateful
tweet and adds additional hate.
hate speech online” (European Commission 2019). Instagram, Snapchat and Dailymotion joined the alliance in 2018,
Jeuxvideo.com in 2019, and TikTok in 2020. These companies are reportedly investing millions in manual moderation
of hate speech yearly (Seetharaman 2018).
Identifying hate speech and blocking such content can be
eased by automatic classifiers (Zampieri et al. 2020). Another strategy is to counter hate speech with new content
in an attempt to redirect the conversation away from hate
speech, as counter hate replies can neutralize the effect of
online hateful content and it is considered an effective alternative to blocking or removing such content (Gagliardone
et al. 2015). In this paper, we investigate hate and counter
hate speech in Twitter. We work with hateful tweets and
replies posted by real Twitter users, and study the relationships between them beyond whether the reply counters the
hateful tweet. Consider the example in Figure 1. The hateful tweet3 uses irony to criticize Michelle Obama’s physical appearance. The first reply counters the hateful content
and provides an alternative opinion or justification. On the
other hand, the second reply uses sarcasm to introduce additional hate (not being pretty vs. being a male). Note that
(a) countering hate does not require a justification (e.g., You
are wrong. This comment is offensive) and may include an

Introduction
The rapid growth of social media platforms and the shield
of anonymity have enabled online hate speech to proliferate.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe defines hate speech as “all forms of expression which spread,
incite, promote or justify racial hatred, xenophobia, antiSemitism or other forms of hatred based on intolerance, including intolerance expressed by aggressive nationalism and
ethnocentrism, discrimination and hostility against minorities, migrants and people of immigrant origin.”1 In recent
surveys,2 83% of participants reported that they had encountered online hate speech, and LGBT youth, Muslims, immigrants, and women were the top 4 targets. 36.5% of participants felt personally threatened or offended by online hate
speech, and 38.5% of those who encountered online hate
speech reacted and replied to counter the hateful content.
These statistics along with other surveys (Fernandes et al.
2014) show the widespread presence of hate speech online.
In an attempt to address this issue, the European Commission allied with Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter and YouTube
to implement a “Code of conduct on countering illegal
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://rm.coe.int/1680505d5b
2
https://rm.coe.int/1680700016

3
Despite tweets are public content once published, we remove
author information to preserve a degree of privacy.

10418

