The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Local Differential Privacy for Belief Functions
Qiyu Li1 , Chunlai Zhou1 * , Biao Qin1 , Zhiqiang Xu2
1

2

Computer Science Dept., Renmin University of China, Beijing, CHINA
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{qiyuli,czhou,qinbiao}@ruc.edu.cn, zhiqiangxu2001@gmail.com

Abstract

To address noncompliance and nonresponse, we propose
in this paper to design differential privacy mechanisms
which incorporate “don’t know” or nonresponse as an alternative outcome or allow imprecision in the mechanism design. In practice, people may prefer not to response or say “I
don’t know” to withhold sensitive information which minimizes the questionable ethical consequences of lying in their
eyes (Bullek et al. 2017). By addressing such ethical privacy
concerns, our new mechanisms aims to increase respondents’ willing to share their data. Here we study this new
type of privacy mechnisms from a more general DempsterShafer perspective by representing uncertainty in privacy
mechanisms with belief functions (Dempster 1967; Shafer
1976). The Dempster-Shafer theory (also known as the theory of evidence or the theory of belief functions) is a wellknown uncertainty theory for its expressiveness in representing ignorance. The theory improves the root concepts
of probabilities “yes” and “no” that sum to one, by appending a third probability of “don’t know” (Dempster 2008).
As the world of statistical analysis moves more and more to
“big data” and associated “complex systems”, the DempsterShafer theory provides a middle ground with the third probability “don’t know” and can be expected to become increasingly important in privacy protection.

In this paper, we propose two new definitions of local differential privacy for belief functions. One is based on Shafer’s
semantics of randomly coded messages and the other from the
perspective of imprecise probabilities. We show that such basic properties as composition and post-processing also hold
for our new definitions. Moreover, we provide a hypothesis
testing framework for these definitions and study the effect of
“don’t know” in the trade-off between privacy and utility in
discrete distribution estimation.

Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) is a mathematically rigorous definition of privacy which addresses the paradox of learning
nothing about an individual while learning useful information about a population (Dwork et al. 2006; Dwork and
Roth 2014). In particular, local differential privacy (LDP)
is a model of differential privacy with the added restriction that even if an adversary has access to the personal
responses of an individual in the database, that adversary
will still be unable to learn too much about the user’s personal data (Kasiviswanathan et al. 2008; Kairouz, Oh, and
Viswanath 2016; Duchi, Jordan, and Wainwright 2013). The
uncertainty in standard LDP mechanisms is usually provided by randomization which associates each input with
a probability function over all possible outputs. The prototypical example of an LDP mechanism is the randomized response survey technique proposed in (Warner 1965).
Current randomized response mechanisms equate privacypreserving with lying and are designed on the assumption
that users abide by the data collection protocol which allows
respondents to lie with a known probability. However, recent research results from the perspective of the respondents
show that, in practice, although these mechanisms allow the
respondents to maintain privacy, the procedures may confuse respondents, fail to address the concerns of the users
and hence yield nonresponse or noncompliance (Xiong et al.
2020; Cummings, Kaptchuk, and Redmiles 2021; Ramokapane et al. 2021). An effective differential privacy communication can increase data-sharing rates (Xiong et al. 2020).

Our first and main contribution in this paper is to propose
two new definitions of LDP (one is ϵ-local differential privacy according to Shafer (ϵ-SLDP) (Definition 1) and the
other according to Walley (ϵ-WLDP) (Definition 13)) and
to provide a statistical framework for these two definitions
as the trade-offs between type I and II errors in a natural
hypothesis-testing problem (Theorems 5 and 18). Our second contribution is to characterize the effect of “don’t know”
in the trade-off between privacy and utility in discrete distribution estimation problem. The privacy mechanisms in the
two definitions associate each input x with a belief function on the output set Y . The difference between these two
definitions comes from their different semantics of belief
functions. The first definition is motivated by Shafer’s interpretation of belief functions as randomly coded messages
(Shafer and Tversky 1985). In this semantics, we generalize
Warner’s randomized response mechanism by allowing answering “don’t know” with probability 1 − p − q where p is
the probability of answering truthfully and q the probability
of lying. For the discrete distribution estimation problem of

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10025

