The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Imbalance-Aware Uplift Modeling for Observational Data
Xuanying Chen* 1 , Zhining Liu* 1 , Li Yu* 1 , Liuyi Yao* 2 , Wenpeng Zhang1 , Yi Dong1 , Lihong Gu1 ,
Xiaodong Zeng1 , Yize Tan1 , Jinjie Gu1
1
Ant Group, 2 Alibaba Group
{xuanying.cxy,eason.lzn,jinli.yl}@antgroup.com, yly287738@alibaba-inc.com, zhangwenpeng0@gmail.com,
{dongyi.dy,lihong.glh,xiaodong.zxd,yize.tyz,jinjie.gujj}@antgroup.com

Abstract

effect of a campaign can be prevented, so that the return of
investment of a campaign can be maximized.
Traditional uplift modeling methods rely on data collected through RCTs, where subjects are randomly assigned
to receive treatment. However, due to the high cost, timeconsuming, and sometimes unethical of conducting RCT, a
more realistic way is to build the estimator from non-random
data, namely observational data. Existing works, such as
TOM (Athey and Imbens 2015), DR (Wang et al. 2019) and
SDRM (Saito, Sakata, and Nakata 2019) transforms the estimated ITE as the proxy outcome, which can train a new
model with any existing off-the-shelf supervised methods to
estimate the uplift directly.
However, it is worthy to notice that, existing works may
still have large bias and deviation in the highly imbalanced
dataset. A highly imbalanced dataset refers to the case where
only a small portion of the people receive the treatment,
which is very common in various fields. For example, in
marketing compaigns, to maximize the return of investment,
the advertisement is usually exposed to a small group of
audiences to save the cost. In other words, in the observed
dataset, only a small group of people receive the treatment,
but the estimated uplift model is used to predict the uplift over all the audiences. In this case, particularly small
propensity scores exist in the estimation, leading to large estimation bias and deviation in the existing work when its
inverse is adopted to construct the proxy outcome, such as
TOM and DR. Theoretical and quantitative analysis on TOM
and DR show that both methods will suffer the same large
bias and deviation problem while learning with a highly imbalanced dataset.
In addition to the extreme propensity score, the certainty
level of treated and control outcome prediction would be different due to the high imbalance in treatment and control
group size. When constructing the proxy outcome, without
considering this certainty difference, the performance of the
uplift modeling would be decreased. The above challenges
brought by high imbalance data require the estimator to carefully take imbalance into consideration and balance the bias
and deviation of the estimator on the two groups with dramatically different numbers of samples.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose an
Imbalance-Aware Uplift Modeling (IAUM) by adaptively
taking the advantages of the doubly robust estimator and

Uplift modeling aims to model the incremental impact of a
treatment on an individual outcome, which has attracted great
interests of researchers and practitioners from different communities. Existing uplift modeling methods rely on either the
data collected from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or
the observational data which is more realistic. However, we
notice that on the observational data, it is often the case that
only a small number of subjects receive treatment, but finally
infer the uplift on a much large group of subjects. Such highly
imbalanced data is common in various fields such as marketing and medical treatment but it is rarely handled by existing works. In this paper, we theoretically and quantitatively
prove that the existing representative methods, transformed
outcome (TOM) and doubly robust (DR), suffer from large
bias and deviation on highly imbalanced datasets with skewed
propensity scores, mainly because they are proportional to
the reciprocal of the propensity score. To reduce the bias and
deviation of uplift modeling with an imbalanced dataset, we
propose an imbalance-aware uplift modeling (IAUM) method
via constructing a robust proxy outcome, which adaptively
combines the doubly robust estimator and the imputed treatment effects based on the propensity score. We theoretically
prove that IAUM can obtain a better bias-variance trade-off
than existing methods on a highly imbalanced dataset. We
conduct extensive experiments on a synthetic dataset and two
real-world datasets, and the experimental results well demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Uplift modeling refers to the techniques that model the incremental impact of a treatment on an individual outcome,
and the incremental impact is also known as individual treatment effect (ITE) or the uplift. Uplift modeling is widely
applied in various domains, such as marketing (Radcliffe
2007), social science (Imai and Ratkovic 2013; Künzel et al.
2019) and medicine treatment (Zhang et al. 2017) because of
its ability to sufficiently target customer. For example, in the
marketing area, uplift modeling helps the marketing team
improve the targeting by focusing on only the persuadable
customers who will purchase if they are exposed to a campaign otherwise not. In this way, the no effect or negative
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6313

