The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Finding Nontrivial Minimum Fixed Points in Discrete Dynamical Systems:
Complexity, Special Case Algorithms and Heuristics
Zirou Qiu,1,2 Chen Chen,2 Madhav V. Marathe,1,2 S. S. Ravi,2,3
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz,2,3 Richard E. Stearns,2,3 Anil Vullikanti1,2
1

Computer Science Dept., University of Virginia. 2 Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia.
3
Computer Science Dept., University at Albany – SUNY.
{zq5au, vsakumar, marathe}@virginia.edu, {chenannie45, drosenkrantz, ssravi0, thestearns2}@gmail.com
Abstract

been extensively studied in many contexts including opinion dynamics (Auletta, Ferraioli, and Greco 2018), information diffusion (Cheng et al. 2018) and the spread of social
conventions and rumors (Dong et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2021).
The threshold model also captures decision patterns in networked coordination games (Ramazi, Riehl, and Cao 2016).
One important stage of the system dynamics is the convergence of nodes’ states, where no individuals change states
further; this is similar to an equilibrium in a networked
game (Daskalakis and Papadimitriou 2007, 2015). Such a
stage is called a fixed point of the dynamical system. Consider a scenario where a rumor is spreading in a community
under the threshold model; here, an individual v chooses to
believe the rumor if the number of believers in v’s social circle is at least the threshold of v. Given the undesirable nature
of rumors, identifying fixed points with minimum numbers
of believers is desirable (Wang et al. 2017).
For some social contagions that are widely adopted in
communities, it is often unrealistic to expect contagions
to eventually disappear spontaneously. One example is the
anti-vaccination opinion, which emerged in 1853 against the
smallpox vaccine (Wolfe and Sharp 2002). Even today, the
anti-vaccination sentiment persists across the world (Willis
et al. 2021). Such considerations motivate us to study a
more realistic problem, namely determining whether there
are fixed points with at most a given number of contagion
adoptions under the nontriviality constraint that the number
of adoptions in the fixed point must be nonzero. We refer to
this as the nontrivial minimum fixed point existence problem (NM IN -FPE).
Nontrivial minimum fixed points of a system, which are
jointly determined by the network structure and local functions, provide a way of quantifying the system’s resilience
against the spread of negative information. In particular,
the number of contagion adoptions in a nontrivial minimum
fixed point provides the lower bound on the number of individuals affected by the negative contagion. Further, when the
complete absence of a contagion is impractical, nontrivial
minimum fixed points serve as desirable convergence points
for control strategies (Khalil, Dilkina, and Song 2013). Similarly in coordination games, one is interested in finding equilibria wherein only a small number of players deviate from
the strategy adopted by a majority of the players (Ramazi,
Riehl, and Cao 2016).

Networked discrete dynamical systems are often used to
model the spread of contagions and decision-making by
agents in coordination games. Fixed points of such dynamical systems represent configurations to which the system converges. In the dissemination of undesirable contagions (such
as rumors and misinformation), convergence to fixed points
with a small number of affected nodes is a desirable goal.
Motivated by such considerations, we formulate a novel optimization problem of finding a nontrivial fixed point of the
system with the minimum number of affected nodes. We establish that, unless P = NP, there is no polynomial time algorithm for approximating a solution to this problem to within
the factor n1−ϵ for any constant ϵ > 0. To cope with this
computational intractability, we identify several special cases
for which the problem can be solved efficiently. Further, we
introduce an integer linear program to address the problem
for networks of reasonable sizes. For solving the problem on
larger networks, we propose a general heuristic framework
along with greedy selection methods. Extensive experimental
results on real-world networks demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed heuristics.
A full version of the manuscript, source code and data are
available at:
https://github.com/bridgelessqiu/NMIN-FPE

1

Introduction

Discrete dynamical systems are commonly used to model
the propagation of contagions (e.g., rumors, failures of subsystems in infrastructures) and decision-making processes in
networked games (Valdez et al. 2020; Jackson 2010). Specifically, the states of nodes in such dynamical systems are
binary, with state 1 indicating the adoption of a contagion.
At each time step, the states of the nodes are updated using
their local functions. When the local functions are threshold
functions, a node v acquires a contagion (i.e., v changes to
state 1) if the number of v’s neighbors that have adopted the
contagion (i.e., v’s peer strength) is at least a given threshold value. Conversely, an individual’s adoption of a contagion is reversed (i.e., v changes to state 0) when the peer
strength is below the threshold (Barrett et al. 2006). Since its
introduction by Granovetter (1978), the threshold model has
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9422

