The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Nice Perfume. How Long Did You Marinate in It?
Multimodal Sarcasm Explanation
Poorav Desai, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Md Shad Akhtar
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi (IIIT Delhi), India
{desai19010@iiitd.ac.in, tanmoy, shad.akhtar}@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
Sarcasm is a pervading linguistic phenomenon and highly
challenging to explain due to its subjectivity, lack of context
and deeply-felt opinion. In the multimodal setup, sarcasm is
conveyed through the incongruity between the text and visual entities. Although recent approaches deal with sarcasm
as a classification problem, it is unclear why an online post is
identified as sarcastic. Without proper explanation, end users
may not be able to perceive the underlying sense of irony.
In this paper, we propose a novel problem – Multimodal
Sarcasm Explanation (MuSE) – given a multimodal sarcastic post containing an image and a caption, we aim to generate a natural language explanation to reveal the intended
sarcasm. To this end, we develop MORE, a new dataset with
explanation of 3510 sarcastic multimodal posts. Each explanation is a natural language (English) sentence describing the hidden irony. We benchmark MORE by employing
a multimodal Transformer-based architecture. It incorporates
a cross-modal attention in the Transformer’s encoder which
attends to the distinguishing features between the two modalities. Subsequently, a BART-based auto-regressive decoder is
used as the generator. Empirical results demonstrate convincing results over various baselines (adopted for MuSE) across
five evaluation metrics. We also conduct human evaluation
on predictions and obtain Fleiss’ Kappa score of 0.4 as a fair
agreement among 25 evaluators.

Caption: This guy gets a gold star for excellent parking.
Explanation: this guy has parked his car partially covering
the parking slot for handicapped.
Non-Sarcastic utterance: This guy does not get a gold star
for bad parking.

(a) Difference of MuSE with non-sarcastic interpretation

Caption: Internet is awesome. i love my dialup internet! show
me the 70mbps! #wtf.
Explanation: This internet is terrible, I hate dialup internet.
Non-Sarcastic utterance: This internet is not awesome, I
hate dial up internet.

(b) Similarity of MuSE and non-sarcastic interpretation.

Introduction
Sarcasm1 refers to the use of satirical or ironic statements
usually to hurt, insult, or offend someone. The surface meaning of such statements is usually different from the intended meaning, and to comprehend the sarcasm, one needs
to be aware of the context in which the statement was uttered. Joshi, Sharma, and Bhattacharyya (2015) suggested
the presence of incongruity as a vital signal for sarcasm.
Traditionally, the research around sarcasm analysis revolves
around the detection of underlying sarcasm in text (Campbell and Katz 2012; Riloff et al. 2013). In recent years, the
exploitation of multimodal signals viz. image, video or audio, is on the rise for detecting sarcasm (Schifanella et al.
2016; Castro et al. 2019; Sangwan et al. 2020). With multimodal signals, the scope of incongruity in sarcastic posts

Figure 1: Example scenarios showing the multimodal sarcasm explanation task compared to the (textual) nonsarcastic interpretation task (Dubey, Joshi, and Bhattacharyya 2019). Non-sarcastic interpretation is primarily
negation of caption.
expands to inter-modality and intra-modality incongruity.
Most existing systems rely on the interaction among the
modality-specific latent representations for leveraging incongruity. For example, Sangwan et al. (2020) employed a
gating mechanism to fuse the two modalities.
Motivation. Sarcasm comes in different varieties – some
sarcasms are lucid while some require intense scrutiny of
the situation. In such situation, merely the detection of sarcasm without revealing the implicit irony may not be adequate for many use cases. For various applications, ranging from feedback analysis in e-commerce to sensitive so-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/sarcasm

10563

