The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Non-parametric Online Learning from Human Feedback
for Neural Machine Translation
Dongqi Wang1 , Haoran Wei2 , Zhirui Zhang2 , Shujian Huang1 * , Jun Xie2 , Jiajun Chen1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba DAMO Academy
wangdq@smail.nju.edu.cn, {huangsj, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn
{funan.whr, zhirui.zzr, qingjing.xj}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

We study the problem of online learning with human feedback in the human-in-the-loop machine translation, in which
the human translators revise the machine-generated translations and then the corrected translations are used to improve
the neural machine translation (NMT) system. However, previous methods require online model updating or additional
translation memory networks to achieve high-quality performance, making them inflexible and inefficient in practice. In
this paper, we propose a novel non-parametric online learning method without changing the model structure. This approach introduces two k-nearest-neighbor (KNN) modules:
one module memorizes the human feedback, which is the correct sentences provided by human translators, while the other
balances the usage of the history human feedback and original
NMT models adaptively. Experiments conducted on EMEA
and JRC-Acquis benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed
method obtains substantial improvements on translation accuracy and achieves better adaptation performance with less
repeating human correction operations.

Figure 1: The workflow of online learning from human feedback in the human-in-the-loop machine translation. Given
the source sentence SRC, the NMT System generates the
translation MT. The user corrects it and produces PE. Then
the corrected sample is used to adapt the NMT system.

model right after humans correct the translation. Although
these methods improve translation performance, they require extra costs for frequent gradient computations at the
inference time. Tuning parameters only on the new-coming
sentences also brings the risk of catastrophic forgetting
problems. Another research line (Gu et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2018a) augments the NMT model with the translation memory to cache the human-corrected sentences. For each sentence to translate, cached sentences with similar context are
retrieved to help the decoding process of the NMT model.
Memory-augmented NMT avoids updating parameters onthe-fly, but it requires careful network architecture design to
model the retrieved translation memories. Also, extra training overhead is inevitable to optimize the memory network.
Recently, Khandelwal et al. (2020) proposed KNN-MT,
a non-parametric and model-agnostic method for domain
adaptation. It equips the pre-trained NMT model with a knearest-neighbor classifier over a datastore of cached context representations and corresponding target tokens. The final translation probability is the interpolation between the
probability calculated by the NMT model and the KNN
module. KNN-MT provides a simple but effective way to
exploit human feedback by adding human-corrected translations into the datastore. However, the success of KNN-MT is
owed to enough in-domain samples pre-cached in the datastore. In the human-in-the-loop translation, to learn the cor-

Introduction
The quality of the neural machine translation (NMT) system
has been significantly improved recently (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016a; Vaswani et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2018b; Hassan et al. 2018). However, recent research has
shown that machine translation still lags behind human
parity on translation quality (Läubli, Sennrich, and Volk
2018; Freitag et al. 2021). In some scenarios where highquality translation should be guaranteed, human-in-the-loop
machine translation, i.e., machine translation with human
post-editing, is still indispensable. As human corrections on
machine-translated text are constantly produced, adapting
the NMT model to these corrections could improve translation quality and effectively reduce human efforts, as shown
in Figure 1. However, the training of NMT models requires
a certain amount of data and consumes dozens or hundreds
of GPU hours, which is unavailable in this scenario. Therefore, online learning from human feedback at a low training
cost has become a promising research topic in recent years.
A series of studies (Turchi et al. 2017; Kothur, Knowles,
and Koehn 2018) propose to on-the-fly update the NMT
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11431

