The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FOCUS: Flexible Optimizable Counterfactual Explanations for Tree Ensembles
Ana Lucic,1 Harrie Oosterhuis,2 Hinda Haned,1 Maarten de Rijke1
1

University of Amsterdam
2
Radboud University
a.lucic@uva.nl, harrie.oosterhuis@ru.nl, h.haned@uva.nl, m.derijke@uva.nl

Abstract

Counterfactual explanations are based on counterfactual
examples: generated instances that are close to an existing
instance but have an alternative prediction. The difference
between the original instance and the counterfactual example is the counterfactual explanation. Wachter, Mittelstadt,
and Russell (2018) propose framing the problem as an optimization task, but their work assumes that the underlying machine learning models are differentiable, which excludes an important class of widely applied and highly effective non-differentiable models: tree ensembles. We propose a method that relaxes this assumption and builds upon
the work of Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell by introducing
differentiable approximations of tree ensembles that can be
used in such an optimization framework. Alternative nonoptimization approaches for generating counterfactual explanations for tree ensembles involve an extensive search
over many possible paths in the ensemble that could lead
to an alternative prediction (Tolomei et al. 2017).
Given a trained tree-based model f , we probabilistically
approximate f by replacing each split in each tree with a
sigmoid function centred at the splitting threshold. If f is
an ensemble of trees, then we also replace the maximum
operator with a softmax. This approximation allows us to
generate a counterfactual example x̄ for an instance x based
on the minimal perturbation of x such that the prediction
changes: yx 6= yx̄ , where yx and yx̄ are the labels f assigns
to x and x̄, respectively. This leads us to our main research
question:

Model interpretability has become an important problem in
Machine Learning (ML) due to the increased effect that algorithmic decisions have on humans. Counterfactual explanations can help users understand not only why ML models
make certain decisions, but also how these decisions can be
changed. We frame the problem of finding counterfactual explanations as a gradient-based optimization task and extend
previous work that could only be applied to differentiable
models. In order to accommodate non-differentiable models
such as tree ensembles, we use probabilistic model approximations in the optimization framework. We introduce an approximation technique that is effective for finding counterfactual explanations for predictions of the original model and
show that our counterfactual examples are significantly closer
to the original instances than those produced by other methods specifically designed for tree ensembles.

1

Introduction

As ML models are prominently applied and their outcomes
have a substantial effect on the general population, there is
an increased demand for understanding what contributes to
their predictions (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2018). For an individual who is affected by the predictions of these models, it
would be useful to have an actionable explanation – one that
provides insight into how these decisions can be changed.
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is an example of recently enforced regulation in Europe which gives
an individual the right to an explanation for algorithmic decisions, making the interpretability problem a crucial one for
organizations that wish to adopt more data-driven decisionmaking processes (EU 2016).
Counterfactual explanations are a natural solution to this
problem since they frame the explanation in terms of what
input (feature) changes are required to change the output
(prediction). For instance, a user may be denied a loan based
on the prediction of an ML model used by their bank. A
counterfactual explanation could be: “Had your income been
e1000 higher, you would have been approved for the loan.”
We focus on finding optimal counterfactual explanations:
the minimal changes to the input required to change the outcome.

Are counterfactual examples generated by our method
closer to the original input instances than those generated by existing heuristic methods?
Our main findings are that our method is (i) a more effective
counterfactual explanation method for tree ensembles than
previous approaches since it manages to produce counterfactual examples that are closer to the original input instances
than existing approaches; (ii) a more efficient counterfactual
explanation method for tree ensembles since it is able to handle larger models than existing approaches; and (iii) a more
reliable counterfactual explanation method for tree ensembles since it is able to generate counterfactual explanations
for all instances in a dataset, unlike existing approaches specific to tree ensembles.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5313

