The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dist2Cycle: A Simplicial Neural Network for Homology Localization
Alexandros D. Keros1 , Vidit Nanda2 , Kartic Subr1
1

The University of Edinburgh
2
University of Oxford
a.d.keros@sms.ed.ac.uk, nanda@maths.ox.ac.uk, ksubr@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

niques underpinned by solid graph theory, this approach is
fundamentally misaligned with problems where the relationships involve multiple points, and topological & geometric
structure must be encoded beyond pairwise interactions.
Fortunately, higher dimensional combinatorial structures
come to the rescue in the form of simplicial complexes,
the powerhorse of topological data analysis (Chazal and
Michel 2017). Interfacing between combinatorics and geometry, simplicial complexes capture multi-scale relationships
and facilitate the passage from local structure to global invariant features. These features occur in the form of homology groups, intuitively perceived as holes, or voids, in any
desired dimension. Alas, this expressive power comes with a
burden, that of high computational complexity, and difficulty
in localization of said voids (Chen and Freedman 2011).
For every hard computational problem there seems to exist a neural network approximation (Xu et al. 2018). Nevertheless, homology and simplicial complexes have only recently started to follow suit (Bodnar et al. 2021b; Ebli, Defferrard, and Spreemann 2020; Bunch et al. 2020), with inference of homological information still lacking.
The key insight in this paper is to guide learning on simplicial complexes by flipping the conventional view of approximation. We propose a GNN model for localizing homological information in the form of a distance function of
each point of a complex to its the nearest homology generating features, a bird’s-eye view of which is illustrated in
Figure 1. Instead of using the most-significant eigenvectors
of the relevant Laplacian operator we focus on the subspace
spanned by the eigenvectors corresponding to the lowest
eigenvalues. The justification is that homology-related information is contained in its nullspace. We implement this
idea by calculating the most-significant subspace of an inverted version of the operator (see Sec. ). Figure 2 shows
the result of twelve diffusion iterations performed using the
conventional view and compares it with our inverted operator. Although diffusion is insufficient to localise homology,
it highlights the tendency of the inverted operator to localize
cycles.
The main contributions in the paper are:

Simplicial complexes can be viewed as high dimensional generalizations of graphs that explicitly encode multi-way ordered relations between vertices at different resolutions, all
at once. This concept is central towards detection of higher
dimensional topological features of data, features to which
graphs, encoding only pairwise relationships, remain oblivious. While attempts have been made to extend Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) to a simplicial complex setting, the methods do not inherently exploit, or reason about, the underlying topological structure of the network. We propose a graph
convolutional model for learning functions parametrized by
the k-homological features of simplicial complexes. By spectrally manipulating their combinatorial k-dimensional Hodge
Laplacians, the proposed model enables learning topological
features of the underlying simplicial complexes, specifically,
the distance of each k-simplex from the nearest “optimal” kth homology generator, effectively providing an alternative to
homology localization.

Introduction
Tremendous advancements in sensor technology and datadriven machine learning have enabled exciting applications such as automatic health monitoring and autonomous
cars. In many cases, the lack of data in certain regions
of the domain reveals important structure. For instance,
the sensors on a car driving through a parking lot might
have dense observation points in 3D except inside pillars. Such voids in the data are ubiquitous across applications whether it is a subspace of unattainable configurations for a robot (Farber 2018), regions without network
coverage (Ghrist and Muhammad 2005) or missing measurements in an experimentally-determined chemical structure (Townsend et al. 2020), to name a few (Aktas, Akbas,
and El Fatmaoui 2019).
A standard approach to extract structural information
from data proceeds by first encoding pairwise relationships
in a problem via a graph and then analysing its properties.
Recent advances in Graph Neural Networks have enabled
practical learning in the domain of graphs and have provided
approximate solutions to difficult graph problems (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017). Despite the wealth of tech-

1. A novel way to represent simplicial complexes as computational graphs suitable for inference via GNNs, the
Hodge Laplacian graphs, focusing on the dimension of
interest (see Section ), and

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7133

