The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reliable Inlier Evaluation for Unsupervised Point Cloud Registration
Yaqi Shen, Le Hui, Haobo Jiang, Jin Xie∗ , Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{syq, le.hui, jiang.hao.bo, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

mation between them. Due to large pose changes and occlusions, point cloud registration is still a challenging problem
in real applications.
In recent years, owing to the discriminative representation ability of deep learning, deep point cloud registration
methods have achieved increasing research interests. Most
of these methods (Pais et al. 2020; Fu et al. 2021; Ali et al.
2021) focus on learning the rigid transformation in a supervised manner, where a large number of ground truth transformations are required as the supervision signal for model
training. However, collecting required ground truth transformations is expensive and time-consuming, which may
greatly increase the training cost and hinder their applications in the real world. To handle the concerns above, much
more effort has been dedicated to the unsupervised deep
point cloud registration field. For example, alignment error is a commonly used optimization signal for unsupervised training (Wang, Li, and Fang 2020). By minimizing
the alignment error (e.g., Chamfer distance) between the
transformed source point clouds and the target point clouds,
it is expected to learn the optimal rigid transformation so that
the point cloud pair can be aligned perfectly. Nevertheless,
for the partially overlapping point cloud pair, due to the existing noise error from the outliers, its optimization is prone
to stick into the local optima. In addition, the cycle consistency based methods (Yang et al. 2020) perform unsupervised optimization by constructing a cycle constraint as the
self-supervised signal. However, the cycle consistency based
loss still suffers from the outlier dilemma since the outliers
may not be able to form a closed loop well.
In this paper, we propose a novel neighborhood consensus
based reliable inlier evaluation framework for unsupervised
deep point cloud registration. By constructing an effective
graph representation for the source neighborhood and the
learned pseudo target neighborhood of a point, it aims to exploit the structure-wise difference between the source and
the pseudo target neighborhoods to identify whether this
point is an inlier or not. Specifically, our model mainly
consists of two modules, including a matching map refinement module and an inlier evaluation module. Given a point
cloud pair with unknown correspondence, the matching map
refinement module aims to provide a high-quality correspondence estimation for constructing a pseudo target point
cloud. Since the locally similar single points may confuse

Unsupervised point cloud registration algorithm usually suffers from the unsatisfied registration precision in the partially
overlapping problem due to the lack of effective inlier evaluation. In this paper, we propose a neighborhood consensus
based reliable inlier evaluation method for robust unsupervised point cloud registration. It is expected to capture the discriminative geometric difference between the source neighborhood and the corresponding pseudo target neighborhood
for effective inlier distinction. Specifically, our model consists of a matching map refinement module and an inlier evaluation module. In our matching map refinement module, we
improve the point-wise matching map estimation by integrating the matching scores of neighbors into it. The aggregated
neighborhood information potentially facilitates the discriminative map construction so that high-quality correspondences
can be provided for generating the pseudo target point cloud.
Based on the observation that the outlier has the significant
structure-wise difference between its source neighborhood
and corresponding pseudo target neighborhood while this difference for inlier is small, the inlier evaluation module exploits this difference to score the inlier confidence for each
estimated correspondence. In particular, we construct an effective graph representation for capturing this geometric difference between the neighborhoods. Finally, with the learned
correspondences and the corresponding inlier confidence, we
use the weighted SVD algorithm for transformation estimation. Under the unsupervised setting, we exploit the Huber
function based global alignment loss, the local neighborhood
consensus loss, and spatial consistency loss for model optimization. The experimental results on extensive datasets
demonstrate that our unsupervised point cloud registration
method can yield comparable performance.

Introduction
Point cloud registration, as a fundamental and important
topic in the 3D vision field, has been widely applied in various vision tasks, including 3D scene reconstruction (Agarwal et al. 2011; Schonberger and Frahm 2016), object pose
estimation (Wong et al. 2017), and SLAM (Deschaud 2018;
Zhang and Singh 2014). The goal of the point cloud registration is to align point clouds by estimating the rigid transfor∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2198

