The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fairness without Imputation:
A Decision Tree Approach for Fair Prediction with Missing Values
Haewon Jeong, Hao Wang, Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University
{haewon,flavio}@seas.harvard.edu, hao wang@g.harvard.edu

Abstract

show a concrete example of different missing patterns in different sociodemographic groups in the high school longitudinal study (HSLS) dataset (Ingels et al. 2011), which contains education-related surveys from students and parents2 .
In the parent survey, there are generally 6-7% more missing
values in under-represented minority (URM) students3 compared to White and Asian students. On the questions related
to secondary caregivers, URM students had 15% more missing values, as there are disproportionately more children in a
single-parent family in URM (United States Census Bureau
2019).
In the machine learning (ML) pipeline, missing values are
handled in the preprocessing step (either dropping missing
entries or performing imputation) before training a model.
When there exist disparate missing patterns across different
groups, how missing values are treated can affect the final
trained prediction model, not just its accuracy, but also its
fairness. Despite the ubiquity of the problem, fairness issues
in missing values have gained only limited attention (Fernando et al. 2021; Wang and Singh 2021). The burgeoning
literature on fair ML algorithms either overlooks the existence of missing data or assumes that the training data are
always complete (see e.g., Calmon et al. 2017; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Zemel et al. 2013; Zafar et al. 2019; Feldman et al. 2015; Menon and Williamson 2018).
In this work, we connect two well-studied, yet still mostly
disjoint research areas—handling missing values and fair
ML—and answer a crucial question:

We investigate the fairness concerns of training a machine
learning model using data with missing values. Even though
there are a number of fairness intervention methods in the literature, most of them require a complete training set as input.
In practice, data can have missing values, and data missing
patterns can depend on group attributes (e.g. gender or race).
Simply applying off-the-shelf fair learning algorithms to an
imputed dataset may lead to an unfair model. In this paper,
we first theoretically analyze different sources of discrimination risks when training with an imputed dataset. Then,
we propose an integrated approach based on decision trees
that does not require a separate process of imputation and
learning. Instead, we train a tree with missing incorporated as
attribute (MIA), which does not require explicit imputation,
and we optimize a fairness-regularized objective function. We
demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing fairness
intervention methods applied to an imputed dataset, through
several experiments on real-world datasets.

Introduction
Datasets can contain missing values, i.e., unobserved variables that would be meaningful for analysis if observed (Little and Rubin 2019). In many domains ranging from survey data, electronic health records, and recommender systems, data missingness is so common that it is the norm
rather than the exception. This challenge has inspired significant research on methods to handle missing values (Little and Rubin 2019; Schafer and Graham 2002; Buuren and
Groothuis-Oudshoorn 2010; Royston 2004; Molenberghs
and Kenward 2007). Data missingness is usually modeled
as a random process independent of non-missing features.
However, when it comes to human-related data, data missingness often correlates with the subject’s sociodemographic
group attributes1 . For example, in medical data, there can be
more missing values in low-income patients as they are more
likely to refuse to take costly medical tests. In survey data,
questionnaires can be less friendly for a certain population,
e.g., the fonts are too small for elderly participants, or the
language is too difficult for non-native English speakers. We

In order to train a fair model on data with missing values,
is it sufficient to first impute the data then apply a fair
learning algorithm?
We address this question through both a theoretical analysis
and an experimental study with real-world datasets.
In the first part of the paper, we examine the limitation
of the disconnected process of imputing first and training
next. We identify three different potential sources of discrimination. First, we show that depending on the missing
patterns, the performance of imputation methods can be different per group. As a result, the predictive model trained

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We refer to attributes that identify groups of individuals (e.g.,
age, ethnicity, sex) as group attributes.

2

See Section C of the supplementary material for details
In this paper we use the term URM to include Black, Hispanic,
Native American and Pacific Islander.
3

9558

