The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TRF: Learning Kernels with Tuned Random Features
Alistair Shilton, Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, Arun Kumar Venkatesh, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{alistair.shilton, sunil.gupta, santu.rana, aanjanapuravenk, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

hyper-parameters like weights, length-scales etc.
Random Fourier features (RFF) (Rahimi and Recht 2006;
Liu et al. 2020) was originally developed to tackle the problem of computational complexity. RFF-based methods work
by approximating the feature map underlying a kernel using
a finite (D-) dimensional map obtained by sampling from a
density function - typically, but not necessarily (Chang et al.
2017; Liu et al. 2020; Bullins, Zhang, and Zhang 2017), the
spectral density corresponding to the kernel by Bochner’s theorem. Using this map, the problem is re-cast in approximate
feature space and solved in primal form, reducing the typical complexity to O(N D3 ). Building on this, methods have
been developed that take advantage of the fact that the feature space is exposed to, in effect, tune the feature map. For
example random features may instead be drawn to maximise
some criteria, typically kernel alignment (Li et al. 2019a;
Yu et al. 2015; Bullins, Zhang, and Zhang 2017; Sinha and
Duchi 2016). Alternatively, Fourier kernel learning (FKL)
(Băzăvan, Li, and Sminchisescu 2012) directly learns feature
weights during training, in effect making the density itself an
optimisation parameter. The elegance and directness of FKL
make it particularly attractive from a practical standpoint;
however, regularising the feature weights using a Euclidean
norm effectively casts the density function in reproducing
kernel Hilbert space with a delta (diagonal) kernel, which is
somewhat restrictive and does not afford the user an opportunity to incorporate their expectations regarding the spectral
structure of the optimal kernel.
In this paper we propose an algorithm, tuned random features (TRF), to perform simultaneous regularised risk minimisation and kernel learning in spectral space. Our algorithm incorporates kernel regularisation in spectral domain to prevent
kernel over-fitting and uses a meta-kernel to allow users to
specify the characteristics that we expect the optimal kernel
to have, or, more precisely, that we expect the optimal kernel’s spectral density to have. To achieve this, we let the density function itself be the parameter (function) to be selected
from a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), where the
meta-kernel defining this RKHS captures the characteristics
we expect of the kernel’s spectral density. We incorporate kernel selection directly into the regularised empirical risk minimisation problem formulation, with regularisation towards a
default (reference) kernel. Using representor and RFF theory,
we obtain a convex optimisation problem combining kernel

Random Fourier features (RFF) are a popular set of tools for
constructing low-dimensional approximations of translationinvariant kernels, allowing kernel methods to be scaled to big
data. Apart from their computational advantages, by working
in the spectral domain random Fourier features expose the
translation invariant kernel as a density function that may, in
principle, be manipulated directly to tune the kernel. In this
paper we propose selecting the density function from a reproducing kernel Hilbert space to allow us to search the space of
all translation-invariant kernels. Our approach, which we call
tuned random features (TRF), achieves this by approximating the density function as the RKHS-norm regularised leastsquares best fit to an unknown “true” optimal density function, resulting in a RFF formulation where kernel selection is
reduced to regularised risk minimisation with a novel regulariser. We derive bounds on the Rademacher complexity for
our method showing that our random features approximation
method converges to optimal kernel selection in the large N,D
limit. Finally, we prove experimental results for a variety of
real-world learning problems, demonstrating the performance
of our approach compared to comparable methods.

1

Introduction

Kernel based learning is an elegant and powerful family
of techniques in machine learning (Cristianini and ShaweTaylor 2005; Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2001; Herbrich 2002; Schölkopf and Smola 2001; Shawe-Taylor and
Cristianini 2004; Steinwart and Christman 2008; Vapnik
1995; Suykens et al. 2002). Rather than constructing a complex parametric model and then learning its parameters,
kernel-based methods encode this complexity into a kernel
and then learn a linear (dual) representation using representor
theory. A significant theoretical framework has been developed demonstrating the advantages of this approach, backed
by substantial experimental evidence. However the computational complexity typically scales as O(N 3 ), where N is
the training set size, so kernel methods may not scale well
for large datasets. Further, kernel selection is often ad-hoc,
relying heavily on user knowledge and guesswork (which
kernels to consider etc), and can be slow if global optimisation methods such as Bayesian optimisation are used to tune
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8286

