The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Depth Completion with Uncertainty-Driven Loss Functions
Yufan Zhu1 , Weisheng Dong1 * , Leida Li1 , Jinjian Wu1 , Xin Li2 , Guangming Shi1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
Lane Dep. of CSEE, West Virginia University, Morgantown WV 26506, USA
zhyf70695@163.com, wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn, ldli@xidian.edu.cn, jinjian.wu@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
xin.li@mail.wvu.edu, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Recovering a dense depth image from sparse LiDAR scans
is a challenging task. Despite the popularity of color-guided
methods for sparse-to-dense depth completion, they treated
pixels equally during optimization, ignoring the uneven distribution characteristics in the sparse depth map and the accumulated outliers in the synthesized ground truth. In this work,
we introduce uncertainty-driven loss functions to improve the
robustness of depth completion and handle the uncertainty in
depth completion. Specifically, we propose an explicit uncertainty formulation for robust depth completion with Jeffrey’s
prior. A parametric uncertain-driven loss is introduced and
translated to new loss functions that are robust to noisy or
missing data. Meanwhile, we propose a multiscale joint prediction model that can simultaneously predict depth and uncertainty maps. The estimated uncertainty map is also used
to perform adaptive prediction on the pixels with high uncertainty, leading to a residual map for refining the completion
results. Our method has been tested on KITTI Depth Completion Benchmark and achieved the state-of-the-art robustness
performance in terms of MAE, IMAE, and IRMSE metrics.

Figure 1: Depth completion with uncertainty prediction.
Top: density distribution of a raw Lidar scans with a zoomin part. Color is proportional to the local sampling density
(blue to red is low to high density). To facilitate visual inspection, we have superimposed it on the RGB scene. Middle: the uncertainty map predicted by our method (note that
high uncertainty is often associated with depth discontinuities). Bottom: the completed depth image with our method.

Introduction
Depth sensing has become increasingly important to a variety of 3D vision tasks, including human-computer interaction (Newcombe et al. 2011), 3D mapping (Zhang and
Singh 2014), and autonomous driving (Wang et al. 2019).
Depending on the application, 3D sensing of indoor and
outdoor environments often faces different technical barriers. For indoor environments, 3D sensing such as Microsoft
Kinect and Intel RealSense has become widely affordable,
but often suffer from the problem of missing pixels in the
presence of shiny/transparent surfaces or inappropriate camera distance (Huang et al. 2019). For outdoor environments,
LiDAR is the most popular sensor for acquiring depth information. In addition to the high cost, a fundamental limitation with existing LiDAR sensors is the sparsity of depth
measurements. Accordingly, so-called sparse-to-dense completion (a.k.a. depth completion) has been widely studied in
the literature (e.g., DeepLiDAR (Qiu et al. 2019), GuideNet
(Tang et al. 2020), Adaptive Context-aware Multi-modal

Network (Zhao et al. 2020), Non-Local spatial propagation
network (Park et al. 2020)). Unlike image super-resolution
(SR) (Zhang et al. 2018), the sparse depth map is the degradation (with non-uniform downsampling) of distance projection; while the low resolution (LR) RGB image is the
spatially uniform sampling, which makes the problem of
depth completion unique. For instance, we have to handle a
significant portion of missing data, as shown in Fig. 1(Top).
Traditional full convolution network (FCN) models for SR
methods (e.g., RCAN (Zhang et al. 2018), etc.) can not be
directly applied to sparse depth maps due to the non-uniform
sampling of sparse depth maps as well as the absence of high
resolution (HR) RGB images as the ground truth (GT).
Two kinds of uncertainty were introduced in Bayesian
deep learning for depth regression and segmentation

* Corresponding author(wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3626

