The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Exploring Relational Semantics for Inductive Knowledge Graph Completion
Changjian Wang, 1,2 Xiaofei Zhou, 1,2∗ Shirui Pan, 3 Linhua Dong, 1,2 Zeliang Song, 1,2 Ying Sha 4
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
4
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
{wangchangjian,zhouxiaofei,donglinhua,songzeliang}@iie.ac.cn, shirui.pan@monash.edu, shaying@mail.hzau.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Knowledge graph completion (KGC) aims to infer missing
information in incomplete knowledge graphs (KGs). Most
previous works only consider the transductive scenario where
entities are existing in KGs, which cannot work effectively
for the inductive scenario containing emerging entities. Recently some graph neural network-based methods have been
proposed for inductive KGC by aggregating neighborhood
information to capture some uncertainty semantics from the
neighboring auxiliary triples. But these methods ignore the
more general relational semantics underlying all the known
triples that can provide richer information to represent emerging entities so as to satisfy the inductive scenario. In this paper, we propose a novel model called CFAG, which utilizes
two granularity levels of relational semantics in a coarsegrained aggregator (CG-AGG) and a fine-grained generative
adversarial net (FG-GAN), for inductive KGC. The CG-AGG
firstly generates entity representations with multiple semantics through a hypergraph neural network-based global aggregator and a graph neural network-based local aggregator,
and the FG-GAN further enhances entity representations with
specific semantics through conditional generative adversarial
nets. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that
our model outperforms state-of-the-art models for inductive
KGC.

Figure 1: An example of inductive KGC. E is an emerging
entity and the task is hE, act in, ?i. In addition to limited
local neighborhood information, through relations, we can
utilize coarse-grained relational semantics (global head entities of author of and global tail entities of directed by)
and fine-grained relational semantics (query relation act in)
to represent the emerging entity E.
we know that KGs may continuously evolve into an inductive scenario which emerges many new entities. So under the
inductive scenario, the traditional embedding-based models
hardly represent the emerging entities, and cannot work for
the inductive KGC.
The inductive KGC is more challenging than the traditional task, due to the uncertainty of emerging entity representations. Traditional KGC methods can learn the representations of entities more accurately by fully training, but
the inductive KGC methods need to learn a general model
through as much known information as possible to represent emerging entities. Recently, some methods (Hamaguchi
et al. 2017; Albooyeh, Goel, and Kazemi 2020) based on
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Defferrard, Bresson, and
Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2017) have been proposed for inductive KGC, which generate the representation of an emerging entity by aggregating the information
of its local neighbors. Such methods can capture some uncertainty semantics from the neighboring auxiliary triples,
but face two issues. Firstly, they obtain coarse-grained entity
representations by gathering the local information, but ignore the possible global information. Secondly, for specific
query relations, they obtain fine-grained entity representations through training on known triples to balance with the
coarse-grained representations, but cannot generalize better

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) store facts about the real world
as collections of triples. Each triple hh, r, ti in KGs indicates a relation r between a head entity h and a tail entity t. In recent years, several KGs such as NELL (Carlson
et al. 2010) and DBpedia (Lehmann et al. 2015) have been
built and become extremely useful resources for various applications (Hao et al. 2017; Moon et al. 2019; Zhu et al.
2020). Since KGs are still far from completion to support
the downstream tasks, many knowledge graph completion
(KGC) methods have been proposed to predict the missing
links, such as TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), DistMult (Yang
et al. 2015), and ConvE (Dettmers et al. 2018). However,
these traditional models are inherently transductive, which
require that all entities should be seen during training. As
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4184

