The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Go Wider Instead of Deeper
Fuzhao Xue, Ziji Shi, Futao Wei, Yuxuan Lou, Yong Liu, Yang You
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{f.xue,ziji.shi}@u.nus.edu, weifutao2019@gmail.com, yuxuanlou@u.nus.edu, {liuyong,youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

trainable parameters for a lite model. To this end, some
works propose to reuse the trainable parameters across transformer blocks (e.g., Universal Transformer (Dehghani et al.
2018) and ALBERT (Lan et al. 2019)). Model compression (Xu et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2019) can also make transformer more parameter efficient.
The two existing methods both have their own limitations. For huge models, one typical and effective method
to scale trainable parameters is replacing part of the feedforward network (FFN) layer in transformer blocks with
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layers. In each MoE layer, to
refine one single token representation, only a few experts
are activated, so the MoE based transformer holds comparable FLOPs with the vanilla transformer. However, during
training and inference, we are required to use advanced parallelisms (e.g., tensor (Shoeybi et al. 2019), sequence (Li
et al. 2021), pipeline (Huang et al. 2018) and expert parallelism (Lepikhin et al. 2020)) to hold these models on TPU
or GPU. Also, the performance cannot improve linearly during scaling. Another limitation is that the sparseness of MoE
based models cannot scale well on relatively small datasets.
We will discuss the reason for this phenomenon in the following sections. For small models, although they can reduce trainable parameters significantly by going shallower,
the performance of these shallower models is still under the
original transformers. These smaller models are constructed
by compressing the original model along with depth so all
transformer blocks share the same knowledge. Such structure induces the unavoidable loss of model capacity.
In this paper, we present a parameter deployment framework that deploys trainable parameters more effectively: going wider instead of deeper. We then implement it on the
transformer and named it as WideNet. Specially, we first employs parameter sharing along with depth to go shallower.
Due to avoidable model capacity loss, we go wider by using
the same MoE layer in all transformer blocks. The multihead attention layer is also shared across the blocks. To help
the transformer blocks learn different semantics and maximize the modeling capacity from MoE layer, we do not
share the normalization layers. Different trainable parameters of the normalization layer enable transformer blocks
to be fed by diversified representations. Since the modeling capacity of each transformer block has been enhanced
by the MoE layer, it can model diversified semantics effec-

More transformer blocks with residual connections have
recently achieved impressive results on various tasks. To
achieve better performance with fewer trainable parameters,
recent methods are proposed to go shallower by parameter
sharing or model compressing along with the depth. However, weak modeling capacity limits their performance. Contrastively, going wider by inducing more trainable matrixes
and parameters would produce a huge model requiring advanced parallelism to train and inference.
In this paper, we propose a parameter-efficient framework,
going wider instead of deeper. Specially, following existing works, we adapt parameter sharing to compress along
depth. But, such deployment would limit the performance.
To maximize modeling capacity, we scale along model width
by replacing feed-forward network (FFN) with mixture-ofexperts (MoE). Across transformer blocks, instead of sharing normalization layers, we propose to use individual layernorms to transform various semantic representations in a
more parameter-efficient way. To evaluate our plug-and-run
framework, we design WideNet and conduct comprehensive
experiments on popular computer vision and natural language
processing benchmarks. On ImageNet-1K, our best model
outperforms Vision Transformer (ViT) by 1.5% with 0.72×
trainable parameters. Using 0.46× and 0.13× parameters,
our WideNet can still surpass ViT and ViT-MoE by 0.8%
and 2.1%, respectively. On four natural language processing
datasets, WideNet outperforms ALBERT by 1.8% on average
and surpass BERT using factorized embedding parameterization by 0.8% with fewer parameters.

Introduction
Transformer-based models have achieved promising results
on various tasks (e.g., Q&A (Qu et al. 2019; Yang et al.
2020), relation extraction (Xue et al. 2020b,a; Zhou et al.
2020)). To further improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of the transformer, there are two trains of thought to deploy trainable parameters. The first thought is to scale
transformer along width to more trainable parameters (e.g.,
Switch Transformer (Fedus, Zoph, and Shazeer 2021), ViTMoE (Riquelme et al. 2021)). These sparse models can scale
to extremely large models with comparable FLOPs by sparse
conditional computation. Another thought is to decrease the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8779

