The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Inductive Relation Prediction by BERT
Hanwen Zha, Zhiyu Chen, Xifeng Yan
University of California, Santa Barbara
{hwzha, zhiyuchen, xyan}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract

or their differentiable counterparts (NEURAL-LP (Yang,
Yang, and Cohen 2017), DRUM (Sadeghian et al. 2019)).
The following shows a logical rule which is explainable, can
be generalized, and can handle unseen entities,

Relation prediction in knowledge graphs is dominated by embedding based methods which mainly focus on the transductive setting. Unfortunately, they are not able to handle inductive learning where unseen entities and relations
are present and cannot take advantage of prior knowledge.
Furthermore, their inference process is not easily explainable. In this work, we propose an all-in-one solution, called
B ERT RL (BERT-based Relational Learning), which leverages
pre-trained language model and fine-tunes it by taking relation instances and their possible reasoning paths as training
samples. B ERT RL outperforms the SOTAs in 15 out of 18
cases in both inductive and transductive settings. Meanwhile,
it demonstrates strong generalization capability in few-shot
learning and is explainable. The data and code can be found at
https://github.com/zhw12/BERTRL.

(x, president_of, y) ∧ (z, capital_of, y)
→ (x, work_at, z).

(1)

These logical rules introduce inductive ability for predicting missing links in KG. For example, once the rule in (1) is
learned, the model can generalize to other president, capital
and country.
Despite the compelling advantage of the existing logical
induction methods, their inductive learning power is limited
as it only exploits the structural information while ignoring
the textual information associated with entities and relations,
and furthermore, prior knowledge carried in these texts. This
weakens the model’s usability when only small knowledge
graphs are available – a typical few-shot setting. Moreover,
none of them can handle unseen but relevant relations in KG
completion.
In this work, we propose an all-in-one solution, called
B ERT RL (BERT-based Relational Learning), a model that
combines rule-based reasoning with textual information and
prior knowledge by leveraging pre-trained language model,
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019). In B ERT RL, we linearize the
local subgraph around entities in a target relation (h, r, t)
into paths p : (h, r0 , e1 ), (e1 , r1 , e2 ), . . . , (en , rn , t), input
(h, r, t) : p to BERT, and then fine-tune. B ERT RL is different from KG-BERT (Yao, Mao, and Luo 2019) where only
relation instance (h, r, t) is fed to BERT. While this difference looks small, it actually lets B ERT RL reason explicitly
via paths connecting two entities. KG-BERT’s prediction is
mainly based on the representation of entities and relations:
Knowledge graph is memorized inside BERT and reasoning
is implicit. In B ERT RL, knowledge is dynamically retrieved
from the knowledge graph during inference: Reasoning is
conducted explicitly, which enables B ERT RL to achieve explainability and much higher accuracy. Table 1 illustrates the
difference among these approaches.
Our approach naturally generalizes to unseen entities. It
also has the potential to handle some unseen relations. Empirical experiments on inductive knowledge graph completion benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of
B ERT RL in comparison with state-of-the-art baselines: It

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are essential in a wide range of
tasks such as question answering and recommendation systems (Ji et al. 2020). As many knowledge graphs are substantially incomplete in practice, knowledge graph completion
(KGC) becomes a must in many applications (Nickel et al.
2016).
Embedding-based methods such as TransE (Bordes et al.
2013), Complex (Trouillon et al. 2017), ConvE (Dettmers
et al. 2018), RotatE (Sun et al. 2019) and TuckER (Balažević, Allen, and Hospedales 2019), achieve the state-of-the-art
performance on a few KGC benchmarks. However, the drawbacks of these approaches are obvious as they are limited to
the transductive setting where entities and relations need to
be seen at training time. In reality, new entities and relations
emerge over time (inductive setting). The cost of retraining
may be too high for dynamically populated knowledge graphs.
In addition to the inductive setting, explainability, few-shot
learning and transfer learning cannot be easily solved by
these specialized embedding methods.
Logical induction methods partially meet the aforementioned need by seeking probabilistic subgraph patterns
(GraIL(Teru, Denis, and Hamilton 2020), CoMPILE(Mai
et al. 2021), and TACT (Chen et al. 2021)), logical rules
(AMIE (Galárraga et al. 2013), RuleN (Meilicke et al. 2018))
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5923

