The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Explainable Metaphor Identification Inspired by Conceptual Metaphor Theory
Mengshi Ge* , Rui Mao* , Erik Cambria
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
mengshi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, rui.mao@ntu.edu.sg, cambria@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Thus, the studying of concept mapping mechanisms helps
infer the implicit meanings and imageabilities of metaphorical expressions. Furthermore, the conceptualization and
mapping also explain why a word is metaphoric with a general description, e.g., TIME IS MONEY also explains the
metaphoricity of “your help will save me days” and “I have
invested many months in the project” and, hence, also enables intention mining (Howard and Cambria 2013). Based
on CMT, Lakoff, Espenson, and Schwartz (1991) compiled
a Master Metaphor List to categorize common concepts and
mappings with great labor efforts. However, Shutova and Simone (2010) argued that the abstractness level of the listed
concept agents (e.g., TIME and MONEY) was hardly controlled, because of the subjectivity of annotators. Additionally, the listed concept agents failed to represent the whole
spectrum of metaphoric expressions, resulting in the fact
that the list was rarely used in the computational metaphor
community. Finally, current deep learning-based metaphor
detection methods are unexplainable, because these methods (Gao et al. 2018; Su et al. 2020) can simply yield the
metaphoricity labels for individual tokens. Our motivation
is to propose an automatic method to mitigate the labor
efforts and the subjective issues in conceptualization; We
project concept agents to WordNet (Fellbaum 1998) to gain
a broader spectrum and a unified conceptualization criterion
for concept generations.

Metaphor is not only a linguistic phenomenon but also reflects the concept projection between source and target domains in human cognition. Previous sequence tagging-based
metaphor identification methods could not model the concept projection, resulting in a limitation that the outputs of
these models are unexplainable in the predictions of the
metaphoricity labels. In this work, we propose the first explainable metaphor identification model, inspired by Conceptual Metaphor Theory. The model is based on statistic learning, a lexical resource, and a novel reward mechanism. Our
model can identify the metaphoricity on the word-pair level,
and explain the predicted metaphoricity labels via learned
concept mappings. The use of the reward mechanism allows
the model to learn the optimal concept mappings without
knowing their true labels. Our method is also applicable for
the concepts that are out of training domains by using the lexical resource. The automatically generated concept mappings
demonstrate the implicit human thoughts in metaphoric expressions. Our experiments show the effectiveness of the proposed model in metaphor identification, and concept mapping
tasks, respectively.

Introduction
Metaphor is a special linguistic phenomenon, using one
or several words to modify a target concept that is different from the source concept. Lakoff and Johnson (1980)
proposed a Conceptual Metaphor Theory (CMT), arguing
that metaphorical expressions are the linguistic surface realization of metaphorical concepts in human cognitive systems, reflecting human thoughts and behaviors. They explained the cognitive mechanisms of metaphors in the form
of the mapping of concepts between source and target domains, e.g., given “you are wasting1 my time”, “wasting”
is metaphoric, because conceptually, TIME IS MONEY2 in
the context (Lakoff and Johnson 1980). The source concept
MONEY and the target concept TIME are domain-different.
The metaphoric expression frames TIME in the MONEY
shape, associating with precious and scarce attributes.

Given a pair of dependent words, “clean datum”, our
model identifies the word pair as metaphoric, and generating
source and target concepts in natural language, e.g., INFOR MATION IS MATERIAL . We do not have a very large corpus,
containing all metaphoric concepts for the supervised learning. To abstract appropriate concept agents that promote the
accuracy of the metaphor identification, we propose a novel
dynamic reward mechanism. The reward mechanism allows
the model to identify an efficient concept without knowing
the true label of the concept. An accurate metaphoricity label prediction will reward the associated source and target
concept predictions. Thus, the reward mechanism can push
the model to yield more accurate metaphor identifications
and effective concept generations. Due to the absence of
word pair datasets in other Parts-of-Speech (PoS), we focus
on verb-noun and adjective-noun metaphor identification,
which is in line with Shutova, Sun, and Korhonen (2010);
Shutova, Kiela, and Maillard (2016) and Rei et al. (2017).

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Italics are metaphors.
2
Capitalization represents concepts and mappings.

10681

