The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Being Friends Instead of Adversaries:
Deep Networks Learn from Data Simplified by Other Networks
Simone Marullo1,2 , Matteo Tiezzi2 , Marco Gori2,3 , Stefano Melacci2
1

2

Dept. of Information Engineering, University of Florence (Italy)
Dept. of Information Engineering and Mathematics, University of Siena (Italy)
3
MAASAI, Universitè Côte d’Azur, Nice (France)
simone.marullo@unifi.it, {mtiezzi,marco,mela}@diism.unisi.it
Abstract

2009; Wu, Dyer, and Neyshabur 2020; Sinha, Garg, and
Larochelle 2020), exposing the network to simple, easilydiscernible examples at first, and to gradually harder examples later, progressively increasing the size of the training set
(Elman 1993). Self-Paced Learning (SPL) (Kumar, Packer,
and Koller 2010; Li and Gong 2017) is another related research area, in which some examples are either excluded
from the training set or their impact in the risk function is
downplayed if some conditions are met (Li and Gong 2017).
A common property of CL and SPL is that they essentially sub-select or re-order the training examples, without
altering the contents of the data. However, more recently,
researches considered approaches that perform transformations of the input data within the input space of the classifier.
Friendly Training (FT) (Marullo et al. 2021) is a novel approach belonging to the latter category. FT allows the training procedure not only to adapt the weights and biases of
the classifier, but also to transform the training data in order to facilitate the early fulfilment of the learning criterion.
Basically, data are modified to better accommodate the development of the classifier. Such transformations (also referred to as “simplifications”) are controlled and embedded
into a precise developmental plan in which the training procedure is progressively constrained to reduce their extent,
until data are left in their original version. A key property of
FT is that data are altered according to the state of the classifier at the considered stage of the training procedure, and
each example is perturbed by a specific offset, obtained by
an inner iterative optimization procedure that is started from
scratch for each input. Similarly to CL, the benefits of FT
are expected to be mostly evident in the case of noisy examples or in datasets annotated with noisy labels. These are
pretty common situations of every data collection process of
the real-world. In the case of CL, this has been recently discussed and evaluated in (Wu, Dyer, and Neyshabur 2020),
while in the case of FT the existing evaluation is limited to
artificial datasets for digit recognition (Marullo et al. 2021).
In this paper we revisit and extend the idea of FT, introducing a radically different and novel approach. The intuition behind what we propose is that the data simplification process of FT might include regularities that are shared
among different training examples, and that there is an intrinsic coherence in the way data are altered in consecutive
training iterations, i.e., similar simplifications might be fine

Amongst a variety of approaches aimed at making the learning procedure of neural networks more effective, the scientific community developed strategies to order the examples
according to their estimated complexity, to distil knowledge
from larger networks, or to exploit the principles behind adversarial machine learning. A different idea has been recently
proposed, named Friendly Training, which consists in altering the input data by adding an automatically estimated perturbation, with the goal of facilitating the learning process
of a neural classifier. The transformation progressively fadesout as long as training proceeds, until it completely vanishes.
In this work we revisit and extend this idea, introducing a
radically different and novel approach inspired by the effectiveness of neural generators in the context of Adversarial
Machine Learning. We propose an auxiliary multi-layer network that is responsible of altering the input data to make
them easier to be handled by the classifier at the current stage
of the training procedure. The auxiliary network is trained
jointly with the neural classifier, thus intrinsically increasing
the “depth” of the classifier, and it is expected to spot general regularities in the data alteration process. The effect of
the auxiliary network is progressively reduced up to the end
of training, when it is fully dropped and the classifier is deployed for applications. We refer to this approach as Neural Friendly Training. An extended experimental procedure
involving several datasets and different neural architectures
shows that Neural Friendly Training overcomes the originally
proposed Friendly Training technique, improving the generalization of the classifier, especially in the case of noisy data.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, the scientific research in neural networks
studied different aspects of the training procedure, leading to
deep neural models of significantly increased quality (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015; Kingma and Ba 2015; Srivastava et al.
2014; Bengio et al. 2009; Li and Gong 2017; Zhang et al.
2020). Amongst a large variety of approaches, this paper
considers those that are mostly oriented in performing specific actions on the available training data in order to improve the quality of the trained neural classifier. For example, Curriculum Learning (CL) pursues the idea of presenting the training data in a more efficient manner (Bengio et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7728

