The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A First Mathematical Runtime Analysis of
the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II)
Weijie Zheng1 , Yufei Liu2 , Benjamin Doerr2 *
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Laboratoire d’Informatique (LIX), École Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
zhengwj13@tsinghua.org.cn, yufei.liu@polytechnique.edu, doerr@lix.polytechnique.fr
Abstract

Yu, and Zhou 2013; Bian, Qian, and Tang 2018; Roostapour et al. 2019; Qian, Bian, and Feng 2020; Bian et al.
2020; Doerr and Zheng 2021). We note that the (G)SEMO
algorithm keeps all non-dominated solutions in the population and discards all others, which can lead to impractically
large population sizes. There are two theory works (Brockhoff, Friedrich, and Neumann 2008; Nguyen, Sutton, and
Neumann 2015) on the runtime of a simple hypervolumebased EMO algorithm called (µ + 1) SIBEA, regarding
both classic benchmarks and problems designed to highlight particular strengths and weaknesses of this algorithm.
Like the SEMO and GSEMO, the (µ + 1) SIBEA also creates a single offspring per generation; different from the
former, it works with a fixed population size µ. Recently,
also decomposition-based multi-objective evolutionary algorithms were analyzed (MOEA/D) (Li et al. 2016; Huang
et al. 2019; Huang and Zhou 2020), which decompose the
multi-objective problem into several related single-objective
problems and then solve each single-objective problem in
a co-evolutionary manner. This direction is fundamentally
different from the above works and our research. Since it is
not primarily focused on multi-objective optimization, we
also do not discuss further the successful line of works that
solve constrained single-objective problems by turning the
constraint violation into a second objective, see, e.g., (Neumann and Wegener 2006; Friedrich et al. 2010; Neumann,
Reichel, and Skutella 2011; Friedrich and Neumann 2015;
Qian et al. 2017, 2019; Crawford 2021).

The non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) is
the most intensively used multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) in real-world applications. However, in contrast to several simple MOEAs analyzed also via mathematical means, no such study exists for the NSGA-II so far. In
this work, we show that mathematical runtime analyses are
feasible also for the NSGA-II. As particular results, we prove
that with a population size larger than the Pareto front size by
a constant factor, the NSGA-II with two classic mutation operators and three different ways to select the parents satisfies
the same asymptotic runtime guarantees as the SEMO and
GSEMO algorithms on the basic O NE M IN M AX and LOTZ
benchmark functions. However, if the population size is only
equal to the size of the Pareto front, then the NSGA-II cannot
efficiently compute the full Pareto front (for an exponential
number of iterations, the population will always miss a constant fraction of the Pareto front). Our experiments confirm
the above findings.

Introduction
Most real-world problems contain multiple conflicting objectives. Due to their population-based nature, evolutionary
algorithms (EAs) are a natural choice for such problems,
and in fact, such multi-objective evolutionary algorithms
(MOEAs) have been successfully used in many real-world
applications (Zhou et al. 2011).
Unfortunately, the theoretical understanding of MOEAs
falls far behind their success in practice. The first mathematical runtime analysis of an MOEA was conducted by Laumanns, Thiele, Zitzler, Welzl, and Deb (2002); Laumanns,
Thiele, and Zitzler (2004), who discussed the runtime of
the simple evolutionary multi-objective optimizer (SEMO),
a bi-objective counterpart of the randomized local search
heuristic, on the COCZ and LOTZ benchmarks. Giel (2003)
analyzed the global SEMO (GSEMO), the bi-objective
counterpart of the (1 + 1) EA, on the LOTZ function. Subsequent theoretical works majorly focused on variants of
these algorithms and analyzed their runtime on the COCZ
and LOTZ benchmarks, on variants of them, on new benchmarks, and on combinatorial optimization problems (Qian,

As pointed out in the survey (Zhou et al. 2011), the majority of the MOEAs used in research and applications builds
on the framework of the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) (Deb et al. 2002). This algorithm uses
a fixed population size N and a complete order defined
by the non-dominated sorting and the crowding distance
to compare individuals. In each generation, N offspring
are generated from the parent population and the N best
individuals (according to the complete order) are selected
as new parent population. This approach is substantially
different from the (G)SEMO algorithm and hypervolumebased approaches (and naturally completely different from
decomposition-based methods). Both the predominance in
practice and the fundamentally different working principles ask for a rigorous understanding of the NSGA-II, however, to the best of our knowledge so far no mathematical

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10408

