The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Channelized Axial Attention –
Considering Channel Relation within Spatial Attention for Semantic Segmentation
Ye Huang1 , Di Kang 2 , Wenjing Jia1 , Liu Liu3 and * Xiangjian He1
1

University of Technology Sydney
2
Tencent AI LAB
3
University of Sydney
edward.ye.huang@qq.com

Abstract

Spatial Attention

Spatial and channel attentions, modelling the semantic interdependencies in spatial and channel dimensions respectively, have recently been widely used for semantic segmentation. However, computing spatial and channel attentions separately sometimes causes errors, especially for those difficult
cases. In this paper, we propose Channelized Axial Attention (CAA) to seamlessly integrate channel attention and spatial attention into a single operation with negligible computation overhead. Specifically, we break down the dot-product
operation of the spatial attention into two parts and insert
channel relation in between, allowing for independently optimized channel attention on each spatial location. We further develop grouped vectorization, which allows our model
to run with very little memory consumption without slowing
down the running speed. Comparative experiments conducted
on multiple benchmark datasets, including Cityscapes, PASCAL Context, and COCO-Stuff, demonstrate that our CAA
outperforms many state-of-the-art segmentation models (including dual attention) on all tested datasets.

(a) Parallel dual Attention

Channel Attention

Conflicting
Conflicting

(b) Sequential dual Attention

Overriding

(c) Our Channelized Attention

Introduction

Seamless

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in many computer vision applications, which assigns a class label to each
pixel in the image. Most of the existing approaches (Yuan,
Chen, and Wang 2020; Yang et al. 2018; Fu et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2019) have adopted a pipeline similar to the one that
is defined by Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) using fully convolutional layers to output the pixel-level segmentation results of input images. These approaches have achieved state-of-the-art performance. After the FCNs, there have been many approaches
dedicated to extracting enhanced pixel representations from
the backbone. Earlier approaches, including PSPNet (Zhao
et al. 2017) and DeepLab (Chen et al. 2018), used a Pyramid Pooling Module or an Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling
module to expand the receptive field to enhance the representation capabilities. Recently, many works focus on using
the attention mechanisms to enhance pixel representations.
The first attempts in this direction included Squeeze and Excitation Networks (SENets) (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018) that

Seamless

Figure 1: Different dual attention designs: (a) Parallel dual
attention sums the results from spatial and channel attentions directly, which may cause conflicts because spatial
and channel attentions are focusing on different aspects.
(b) Sequential dual attention performs spatial attention after channel attention, where the spatial attention may override correct features extracted by the channel attention. (c)
Our channelized attention seamlessly merges the spatial and
channel attentions into a single operation, removing the potential conflicting issue caused by a or b.

introduced a simple yet effective channel attention module
to explicitly model the interdependencies between channels.
Meanwhile, spatial attention relied on self-attention pro-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1016

