The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Hypergraph Neural Network for Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Xixia Xu, Qi Zou* , Xue Lin
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{19112036,qzou,18112028}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel two-stage hypergraph-based
framework, dubbed ADaptive Hypergraph Neural Network
(AD-HNN) to estimate multiple human poses from a single
image, with a keypoint localization network and an AdaptivePose Hypergraph Neural Network (AP-HNN) added onto the
former network. For providing better guided representations
of AP-HNN, we employ a Semantic Interaction Convolution (SIC) module within the initial localization network to
acquire more explicit predictions. Build upon this, we design a novel adaptive hypergraph to represent a human body
for capturing high-order semantic relations among different
joints. Notably, it can adaptively adjust the relations between
joints and seek the most reasonable structure for the variable
poses to benefit the keypoint localization. These two stages
are combined to be trained in an end-to-end fashion. Unlike
traditional Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) that are
based on a fixed tree structure, AP-HNN can deal with ambiguity in human pose estimation. Experimental results demonstrate that the AD-HNN achieves state-of-the-art performance
both on the MS-COCO, MPII and CrowdPose datasets.

Figure 1: Graph-based human body representation, (a) a
simple graph (tree structure), (b) an initial hypergraph with
adaptability, (c) an adjusted hypergraph. For edges in (a),
both the edge degree and the number of edges are fixed. By
comparison, the hyperedges are free in (b). As the model
trains, new (old) hyperedges will create (disappear) and assignments of joints belonging to a hyperedge will change.
Finally, the hypergraph structure can be learned as (c). Different colored lines indicate different IDs of hyperedges.

work (GCN) to exploit the structural joints dependency
for improving the 2D MPPE performance. Firstly, although
these GCN-based methods have achieved promising results,
they all treat the human body as a tree structure and represent it as a simplified graph as in Fig. 1(a). Namely, they
only capture adjacent pair-wise joint relations and cannot
model high-order semantic dependencies. Since the human
body has a typical chain-like structure, the keypoint prediction is not only constrained by directly neighboring joints,
but also is subject to multiple non-neighboring joints. This
high-order joint relations can help infer the occluded keypoints (i.e., like the challenging self-occlusions) with the
global and local joint contexts. Such a complex relationship
can hardly be captured by a simple graph with a set of fixed
adjacent connections.
Secondly, the semantic relations between joints vary for
different poses. It thus should build the most reasonable
structure for dynamically changing poses. This makes it essential to automatically find the most suitable structure to
benefit the estimation. A pre-defined initial graph that is built
according to kinematic prior (like Fig. 1(a)) cannot provide
such adaptability and robustness. Despite the DGCN(Qiu
et al. 2020b) explores the high-order relations with a dynamic GCN, while it assumes the location subjects to a dis-

Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation (MPPE) aims to locate human keypoints for multiple persons in 2D image(Yang et al.
2017). It’s basic to deal with many high-level tasks, such
as action recognition(Yan et al. 2018) and 3D pose estimation(Li et al. 2020). Recently, although large progress
has been made in pose estimation, while occlusions, variations in clothing, poses and viewpoints, unconstrained backgrounds remain challenge MPPE. It’s a natural way to consider structural constraint among joints to handle these challenges. A serious of approaches employ a graph to model
the relations between joints. Such graphs can mine human
part relations and spatial context for improving MPPE performance. However, two properties of human poses are ignored to different extent in these methods: (i) high-order
semantic dependencies among joints, (ii) relations of keypoints dynamically change subject to the variations in pose,
viewpoint and occlusions should be considered.
There are some attempts (Wang et al. 2020; Qiu et al.
2020a; Jin et al. 2020) introducing graph convolutional net* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2955

