The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MAPF-LNS2: Fast Repairing for Multi-Agent Path Finding
via Large Neighborhood Search
Jiaoyang Li,1 Zhe Chen,2 Daniel Harabor,2 Peter J. Stuckey,2 Sven Koenig1
1

University of Southern California, USA
2
Monash University, Australia
jiaoyanl@usc.edu, {zhe.chen, daniel.harabor, peter.stuckey}@monash.edu, skoenig@usc.edu

Abstract

1998). We call the new algorithm MAPF-LNS2. MAPFLNS2 starts from a set of paths that have collisions and repeatedly replans subsets of paths to reduce the overall number of collisions until the paths become collision-free. By
using Prioritized Planning (PP) (Silver 2005) with an efficient single-agent pathfinding algorithm to plan and replan
paths and a variety of heuristics to select subsets of paths,
MAPF-LNS2 can solve easy instances as fast as PP and hard
instances significantly faster than PP and other MAPF algorithms. Even when MAPF-LNS2 fails to find collision-free
paths within the runtime limit, it usually returns paths with
only a few collisions, which is acceptable in many applications (Belov et al. 2020). The main contributions of this
work are twofold:

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of planning collision-free paths for multiple agents in a shared environment. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm MAPFLNS2 based on large neighborhood search for solving MAPF
efficiently. Starting from a set of paths that contain collisions,
MAPF-LNS2 repeatedly selects a subset of colliding agents
and replans their paths to reduce the number of collisions
until the paths become collision-free. We compare MAPFLNS2 against a variety of state-of-the-art MAPF algorithms,
including Prioritized Planning with random restarts, EECBS,
and PPS, and show that MAPF-LNS2 runs significantly faster
than them while still providing near-optimal solutions in most
cases. MAPF-LNS2 solves 80% of the random-scenario instances with the largest number of agents from the MAPF
benchmark suite with a runtime limit of just 5 minutes, which,
to our knowledge, has not been achieved by any existing algorithms.

1

1. We propose an efficient single-agent pathfinding algorithm SIPPS based on SIPP (Phillips and Likhachev
2011) for finding a short path that avoids collisions with
a given set of paths and minimizes the number of collisions with another given set of paths. We show that
SIPPS runs 5 times (or more) faster than Space-Time A*,
an A*-based algorithm widely used by many MAPF algorithms. Thus, we demonstrate that SIPPS can speed up
not only MAPF-LNS2 but also many other MAPF algorithms, such as EECBS (Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021).
2. We propose a suboptimal MAPF algorithm MAPF-LNS2
that is fast, scalable, and memory-efficient. Although
it lacks theoretical guarantees, it empirically significantly outperforms a variety of state-of-the-art MAPF
algorithms, including Prioritized Planning with random
restarts, EECBS, and PPS (Sajid, Luna, and Bekris
2012), in terms of both success rates and runtimes.
MAPF-LNS2 solves 80% of the random-scenario instances with the largest number of agents from the MAPF
benchmark suite with a runtime limit of just 5 minutes,
which, to our knowledge, has not been achieved by any
existing algorithms. Moreover, when given a longer runtime limit of one hour, MAPF-LNS2 can scale to 8,000
agents on a congested warehouse map.

Introduction

MAPF (Stern et al. 2019) is the problem of planning
collision-free paths for multiple agents in a shared environment while minimizing their travel times. It is NP-hard
to solve optimally and the core problem of many applications, such as in warehouse automation, traffic management,
and robotics. Existing MAPF algorithms include systematic search algorithms (that are exponential-time but guaranteed to find optimal or bounded-suboptimal solutions),
rule-based algorithms (that are usually polynomial-time and
complete), and prioritized algorithms (that run fast empirically but are neither complete nor optimal). When facing
challenging MAPF instances, however, the first two types
of algorithms suffer from either memory-outs or time-outs
while the last type suffers from incompleteness. One successful technique that can improve the chance of finding solutions is to restart the search with a new random seed (Bennewitz, Burgard, and Thrun 2001; Cohen et al. 2018).
In this work, we propose a different way to improve the
chance of finding solutions. Instead of giving up on the previous search effort and restarting from scratch, we make use
of the infeasible set of paths produced by a MAPF algorithm
and try to repair it via Large Neighborhood Search (Shaw

2

Background

Definition 1 (Multi-Agent Path Finding). We are given a
connected graph G = (V, E), a set of m agents A =
{a1 , · · · , am }, and a start vertex si ∈ V and a target vertex

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10256

