The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Conjugated Discrete Distributions for Distributional Reinforcement Learning
Björn Lindenberg* , Jonas Nordqvistand Karl-Olof Lindahl
Department of Mathematics, Linnæus University, Växjö, Sweden, bjorn.lindenberg@lnu.se

Abstract

is in itself an old idea in reinforcement learning. Transformations are particularly important for algorithms that are supposed to function over a wide variety of different environments with varying reward magnitudes, where adaptation to
different settings is a common way to benchmark the robustness and ability of an algorithm.
Ideally, one would want the fixed points of the Bellman
operators in both the original MDP and the transformed
MDP to induce the same optimal policy, i.e., to obtain optimal policy invariance. Early attempts at shaping rewards
directly where shown to require specific forms in terms of
impractical potential functions if we were to keep the invariance (Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999). A much more general
approach is to consider non-linear equations that correspond
to transformed Bellman operators. An investigation of such
models and operator classes can be found in (van Hasselt
et al. 2019). Regardless, many modern algorithms still employ reward shaping by clipping rewards for improved performance, even though this implies that the underlying MDP
may never be solved in a theoretical sense.
An attempt to learn on unaltered rewards was presented in
(Pohlen et al. 2018), where an alternative Bellman operator
Th was introduced. The operator uses a function to generate updates with downscaled expectations. This allowed for
deep Q-learning over environments with wildly different return magnitudes. At the time of writing, this method is used
successfully by some of the most powerful known distributive algorithms (Kapturowski et al. 2018; Schrittwieser et al.
2020; Badia et al. 2020). However, the proof of invariance
for Th in (Pohlen et al. 2018) required fully deterministic
MDPs and it was left as an open question whether a similar
property holds in a stochastic setting.

In this work we continue to build upon recent advances in reinforcement learning for finite Markov processes. A common
approach among previous existing algorithms, both singleactor and distributed, is to either clip rewards or to apply a
transformation method on Q-functions to handle a large variety of magnitudes in real discounted returns. We theoretically
show that one of the most successful methods may not yield
an optimal policy if we have a non-deterministic process. As
a solution, we argue that distributional reinforcement learning
lends itself to remedy this situation completely. By the introduction of a conjugated distributional operator we may handle a large class of transformations for real returns with guaranteed theoretical convergence. We propose an approximating single-actor algorithm based on this operator that trains
agents directly on unaltered rewards using a proper distributional metric given by the Cramér distance. To evaluate its
performance in a stochastic setting we train agents on a suite
of 55 Atari 2600 games using sticky-actions and obtain stateof-the-art performance compared to other well-known algorithms in the Dopamine framework.

Introduction
In recent years, the resurgence of the distributional perspective in modern algorithms for reinforcement learning
(RL) has represented a paradigm shift. Initially only used in
risk-sensitive methods with parameterized continuous functions or in theoretical analysis, the approach of combining
deep learning with distributional learning of return variables
has been empirically proved to give superior performance.
This is possibly due to a much richer set of predictions
than value-based algorithms and different learning trajectories under gradient descent (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos
2017; Lyle, Bellemare, and Castro 2019). As such, distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) is now the foundation
of many state-of-the-art RL-algorithms such as the quantile
functions of (Dabney et al. 2018a,b; Yang et al. 2019).

A New Distributional Operator We show in our work
that the previously mentioned invariance for Th may not
hold true if we are given a non-deterministic MDP. Specifically, we show that the fixed-point policy similarity may
break for a class of operators which includes Th . We show
that this problem is rectified in DRL by the introduction of a
new generalized operator Tφ , the so-called conjugated distributional operator. The operator, which transforms random outcomes by a chosen homeomorphism, can properly
handle all its transformations while keeping the invariance
property intact.

Transformations Another prevalent method in modern algorithms is to shape or transform an underlying Markov decision process (MDP) in order to improve performance. This
* Appendix: https://github.com/bjliaa/c2d
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7516

