The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Identifiability of Linear AMP Chain Graph Models
Yuhao Wang and Arnab Bhattacharyya
National University of Singapore
yuhaowang@u.nus.edu, arnabb@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

parents’ values plus additive independent noise (often Gaussian) (Bollen 1989; Spirtes et al. 2000). (Hoyer et al. 2008)
defined the more general additive noise model where each
node is an arbitrary function of its parents with an additive
independent noise.
While Bayesian networks offer a clear conceptual way to
model the causal structure of a system, they are in practice
very hard to infer from data, as they require knowledge of
how every single variable is generated. In applications involving hundreds of variables (e.g., in computational biology), this requirement is unreasonable, particularly because
at the end, we may only be interested in causal effects on
a few target variables. Furthermore, in SEMs modeled by
Bayesian networks, the noise terms of different variables
must be independent whereas in real-world systems, correlations can arise for various reasons (e.g., latent confounders).
An interesting middle ground is the notion of chain graphs
(Lauritzen and Wermuth 1989). Here, the variable set is partitioned into chain components, and there is a DAG on these
chain components. The variables inside each chain component, however, are connected by undirected edges, not directed ones. See Figure 1 for an illustration. Thus, chain
graph models interpolate between directed (causal) models
and undirected (probabilistic) models.
There are several prevalent interpretations of chain graph
models, namely the Lauritzen-Wermuth-Frydenberg (LWF)
(Lauritzen and Wermuth 1989; Frydenberg 1990), Alternative Markov Property or Andersson-Madigan-Perlman
(AMP) (Andersson, Madigan, and Perlman 2001), and Multivariate Regression (MVR) (Cox and Wermuth 1993). They
differ in the conditional independence relations implied by
the graphical structure. In this work, we restrict ourselves to
the linear AMP model, which is very natural from a generative viewpoint. Let C be an AMP chain graph* on n nodes.
Suppose the nodes are partitioned into chain components
{τ }. Then, we say that a random variable X ∈ Rn is generated by C if for every chain component τ :

We study identifiability of linear Andersson-MadiganPerlman (AMP) chain graph models, which are a common generalization of linear structural equation models and
Gaussian graphical models. AMP models are described by
DAGs on chain components which themselves are undirected
graphs. For a known chain component decomposition, we
show that the DAG on the chain components is identifiable
if the determinants of the residual covariance matrices of the
chain components are equal (or more generally, monotone
non-decreasing in topological order). This condition extends
the equal variance identifiability criterion for Bayes nets, and
it can be generalized from determinants to any super-additive
function on positive semidefinite matrices. When the component decomposition is unknown, we describe conditions
that allow recovery of the full structure using a polynomial
time algorithm based on submodular function minimization.
This is the first work that offers a general and rigorous identifiability condition for unknown chain components. We also
conduct experiments comparing our algorithm’s performance
against existing baselines.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models offer architectures for modeling and representing uncertainties in decision making. From
a computational standpoint, graphical representations enable efficient algorithms for inference, e.g., message passing, loopy belief propagation, and other variational inference
methods (Kschischang, Frey, and Loeliger 2001). They have
found applications in a wide range of domains, e.g., image
processing, natural language processing and computational
biology; see (Koller and Friedman 2009; Wainwright and
Jordan 2008) and references therein for examples.
A typical application of graphical models is to encode
causal information. An influential article from (Pearl 1995)
elucidated how Bayesian networks can be used to represent
causal processes and allow identification of causal effects.
The graphical structure of a Bayesian network is a directed
acyclic graph (DAG). Each node has a functional dependency on its parents, as determined by the graph. A popular way to substantiate Bayesian networks is as a linear
structural equation model (SEM) where variables that correspond to nodes in the graph are a linear function of their

Xτ = Mτ XPa(τ ) + Zτ

(1.1)

where Xτ is X restricted to τ , Pa(τ ) = {v : ∃u ∈ τ, v →C
u}, Mτ is a matrix satisfying:
(Mτ )uv ̸= 0 =⇒ v →C u,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

* See Notations and Preliminaries section for formal definitions.

10080

