The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards End-to-End Image Compression and Analysis with Transformers
Yuanchao Bai1,2∗ , Xu Yang1∗ , Xianming Liu1,2† , Junjun Jiang1,2 ,
Yaowei Wang2 , Xiangyang Ji3 , Wen Gao2,4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Peking University
yuanchao.bai@gmail.com, 20s103274@stu.hit.edu.cn, {csxm,jiangjunjun}@hit.edu.cn
wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn, wgao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

vices, such as mobile phones or surveillance cameras, and
transmitted to the cloud (i.e., data center) for further analysis, sharing and storage. Image compression serves as a fundamental infrastructure for data communication between the
frontend and the cloud.
In the traditional paradigm of cloud-based applications,
image compression is considered independent of image
analysis, and adopts lossy image compression standards designed for human vision, such as JPEG (Wallace 1992). In
particular, the raw images are first transformed to the frequency domain with Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT). The
frequency coefficients are then quantized to discard high frequencies that are less sensitive to human eyes. The quantized
coefficients are encoded to bitstreams with entropy encoding and are transmitted to the cloud. On the cloud side, the
quantized coefficients are recovered from the received bitstreams, which are then inversely transformed to reconstruct
images. The reconstruction distortions are minimized with
respect to Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR). However, if
the reconstructed images optimized by PSNR are fed into
the downstream image analysis tasks, which are tailored to
machine vision instead, the corresponding results may be inaccurate, because the principle of machine vision is different
from human vision (Wang et al. 2020). Besides, the traditional image codecs are comprised of hand-crafted modules
with complex dependencies. It is difficult to optimize the
sophisticated compression frameworks together with subsequent machine analysis tasks.
Recently, learning-based image compression emerges as
an active research area in computer vision community. A
number of learning-based image codecs, such as (Toderici
et al. 2016; Theis et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Ballé et al.
2018; Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici 2018; Cheng et al. 2020;
Ma et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2021), have achieved comparable or even better perceptual performance than traditional
image codecs for human vision. Besides, by replacing the
hand-crafted modules with deep neural networks (DNNs),
learning-based image compression can be integrated with
high-level tasks and end-to-end optimized for machine vision (Torfason et al. 2018; Chamain et al. 2021; Le et al.
2021). However, compared with image compression for human vision, image compression for machine vision is still in
its infancy, because it is challenging to achieve the best of
both worlds for low-level and high-level tasks.

We propose an end-to-end image compression and analysis
model with Transformers, targeting to the cloud-based image classification application. Instead of placing an existing
Transformer-based image classification model directly after
an image codec, we aim to redesign the Vision Transformer
(ViT) model to perform image classification from the compressed features and facilitate image compression with the
long-term information from the Transformer. Specifically, we
first replace the patchify stem (i.e., image splitting and embedding) of the ViT model with a lightweight image encoder
modelled by a convolutional neural network. The compressed
features generated by the image encoder are injected convolutional inductive bias and are fed to the Transformer for image
classification bypassing image reconstruction. Meanwhile,
we propose a feature aggregation module to fuse the compressed features with the selected intermediate features of the
Transformer, and feed the aggregated features to a deconvolutional neural network for image reconstruction. The aggregated features can obtain the long-term information from the
self-attention mechanism of the Transformer and improve the
compression performance. The rate-distortion-accuracy optimization problem is finally solved by a two-step training
strategy. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed model in both the image compression and the
classification tasks.

Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and its
variations (Touvron et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2021; Yuan et al.
2021; Chen et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2021), inherited from
Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) in natural
language processing (NLP), have recently demonstrated outstanding performance on a board range of image analysis
tasks, such as image classification (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021),
segmentation (Zheng et al. 2021) and object detection (Fang
et al. 2021). With the self-attention mechanism, these models are capable of capturing long-range dependencies in the
image data, but inevitably result in high computational cost.
In practice, Transformer-based models are usually deployed
in the cloud-based paradigm and executed remotely. For example, massive image data is acquired by the frontend de∗

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

104

