The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Anisotropic Fourier Features for Neural Image-Based Rendering and Relighting
Huangjie Yu1,3,4 , Anpei Chen1 , Xin Chen1 , Lan Xu1 , Ziyu Shao1 , Jingyi Yu1,2
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology
{yuhj, chenap, chenxin2, xulan1, shaozy, yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

2

by a factor of 200; 3) parallel implementation capability using modern computing hardware to achieve near real-time
performance.
The core of these implicit image-based rendering techniques is the adoption of deep fully-connected networks (also called multilayer perceptrons or MLPs). Such
coordinate-based MLPs take low-dimensional coordinates
as inputs and compactly regress a continuous output for various attributes like shape, density, or color (Mescheder et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2018; Mildenhall et al. 2020; Yariv et al.
2020). Theoretically, the MLPs can approximate any measurable functions to any desired degree of accuracy (Hornik,
Stinchcombe, and White 1989). However, it is known that
standard MLPs tend to learn low-frequency functions due to
“spectral bias” (Rahaman et al. 2019), leading to severe blur
artifact for neural image-based rendering and relighting.
To overcome such drawbacks of vanilla MLPs, previous
researchers (Mildenhall et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2019) experimentally adopt a heuristic sinusoidal mapping of the input coordinates called positional encoding to recover highfrequency details in protein structures and surface textures.
At the same time, the recent work (Sitzmann et al. 2020)
utilizes the “SIREN” network to substitute the traditional
ReLU activation function in MLPs with a periodic one. The
most notable method (Tancik et al. 2020) adopts Gaussian
random Fourier features (RFF), which relies on a carefully
chosen standard deviation (bandwidth) to sample frequencies from an isotropic normal distribution and generate sinusoids for feature transformation. However, current methods still utilize a time-consuming grid-search scheme for
the bandwidth parameter, leading to inefficient training overload. Moreover, such isotropic Gaussian RFF mapping treats
every coordinate equally, without considering the heterogeneity of a plenoptic function across various dimensions for
image-based rendering and relighting. Thus it suffers from
imbalanced regression and the loss of high-frequency details (over-smoothness) or rough signal estimation (undersmoothness). For example, a surface light field displays
much more substantial color variation among adjacent surface points than among different viewing angles. However,
only using a single bandwidth fails to balance different degrees of smoothness in the spatial and angular domain.
In this paper, we attack the above challenges and present
an anisotropic RFF mapping scheme for a range of neural

Abstract
Recent neural rendering techniques have greatly benefited
image-based modeling and relighting tasks. They provide
a continuous, compact, and parallelable representation by
modeling the plenoptic function as multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs). However, vanilla MLPs suffer from spectral biases on multidimensional datasets. Recent rescues based on
isotropic Fourier features mapping mitigate the problem but
still fall short of handling heterogeneity across different dimensions, causing imbalanced regression and visual artifacts
such as excessive blurs. We present an anisotropic random
Fourier features (RFF) mapping scheme to tackle spectral biases. We first analyze the influence of bandwidth from a different perspective: we show that the optimal bandwidth exhibits strong correlations with the frequency spectrum of the
training data across various dimensions. We then introduce
an anisotropic feature mapping scheme with multiple bandwidths to model the multidimensional signal characteristics.
We further propose an efficient bandwidth searching scheme
through iterative golden-section search that can significantly
reduce the training overload from polynomial time to logarithm. Our anisotropic scheme directly applies to neural surface light-field rendering and image-based relighting. Comprehensive experiments show that our scheme can more faithfully model lighting conditions and object features as well as
preserve fine texture details and smooth view transitions even
when angular and spatial samples are highly imbalanced.

Introduction
There has been renewed interest in conducting image-based
modeling and rendering (IBMR), such as new view synthesis
and post-capture relighting, largely due to recent advances
in neural modeling and rendering. Applications range from
surface reflectance modeling to photorealistic relighting in
virtual reality and augmented reality. While traditional approaches rely on ray interpolation and tedious hand-crafted
blending schemes, recent neural advances implicitly encode
continuous surface attributes like reflectance or appearance.
Such implicit solutions enable 1) powerful interpolation capabilities with continuous representation in both spatial and
angular domains; 2) de-factor compression scheme; for example, neural relighting compresses light transport matrices
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3152

