The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DarkVisionNet: Low-Light Imaging via RGB-NIR Fusion
with Deep Inconsistency Prior
Shuangping Jin,1, 2 * Bingbing Yu, 1, 3 * Minhao Jing 1 Yi Zhou 1 Jiajun Liang 1 Renhe Ji 1†
1

Megvii Technology
Southeast University
3
Dalian University Of Technology
220191583@seu.edu.cn, 21901037@mail.dlut.edu.cn, jingminhao@megvii.com, zhouyi@megvii.com,
liangjiajun@megvii.com, jirenhe@megvii.com
2

Abstract
RGB-NIR fusion is a promising method for low-light imaging. However, high-intensity noise in low-light images amplifies the effect of structure inconsistency between RGB-NIR
images, which fails existing algorithms. To handle this, we
propose a new RGB-NIR fusion algorithm called Dark Vision Net (DVN) with two technical novelties: Deep Structure and Deep Inconsistency Prior (DIP). The Deep Structure extracts clear structure details in deep multiscale feature
space rather than raw input space, which is more robust to
noisy inputs. Based on the deep structures from both RGB
and NIR domains, we introduce the DIP to leverage the structure inconsistency to guide the fusion of RGB-NIR. Benefiting from this, the proposed DVN obtains high-quality lowlight images without the visual artifacts. We also propose a
new dataset called Dark Vision Dataset (DVD), consisting
of aligned RGB-NIR image pairs, as the first public RGBNIR fusion benchmark. Quantitative and qualitative results
on the proposed benchmark show that DVN significantly outperforms other comparison algorithms in PSNR and SSIM,
especially in extremely low light conditions.

Introduction
High-quality low-light imaging is a challenging but significant task. On the one hand, it is the cornerstone of many
important applications such as 24-hour surveillance, smartphone photography, etc. On the other hand, though, massive noise of images in extremely dark environments hinders algorithms from the satisfactory restoration of low-light
images. RGB-NIR fusion techniques provide a new perspective for the challenge: it enhances the low-light noisy
color (RGB) image through rich, detailed information in the
corresponding near-infrared (NIR) image (The high quality
of NIR images in dark environments comes from invisible
near-infrared flash), which greatly improves the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) of the restored RGB image. Under the
constraint of cost, size and other factors, RGB-NIR fusion
becomes the most promising technique to restore the vanished textual and structural details from noisy RGB images

Figure 1: (a) and (b) are fusion examples from DVD, compared to CU-Net (Deng and Dragotti 2020), DKN (Kim,
Ponce, and Ham 2021) and Scale Map (Yan et al. 2013),
our method, Dark Vision Net (DVN), effectively handle the
structure inconsistency between RGB-NIR images. Regions
with inconsistent structures are framed in red.
taken in an extremely low-light environments, as shown in
Figure 1(a).
However, the existing RGB-NIR fusion algorithms suffers from the problem of structure inconsistency between
RGB and NIR images, resulting in unnatural appearance
and loss of key information, which limits the application
of RGB-NIR fusion algorithm in low-light imaging. Figure 1 illustrates two typical examples of structure inconsistency between RGB and NIR images: Figure 1(b) shows
the absence of NIR shadows in the RGB image (grass shadows only appear on the book edge in the NIR image), and

* Authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1104

