The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

BERTMap: A BERT-Based Ontology Alignment System
Yuan He1 , Jiaoyan Chen1 , Denvar Antonyrajah2 , Ian Horrocks1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
Samsung Research, UK
{yuan.he,jiaoyan.chen,ian.horrocks}@cs.ox.ac.uk, denvar.a@samsung.com

Abstract

considers texts’ surface form such as overlapped sub-strings,
and cannot capture the word semantics. Recently, machine
learning has been proposed as a replacement for lexical and
structural matching; for example, DeepAlignment (Kolyvakis, Kalousis, and Kiritsis 2018) and OntoEmma (Wang
et al. 2018) utilize word embeddings to represent classes and
compute two classes’ similarity according to their word vectors’ Euclidean distance. Nevertheless, these methods adopt
either traditional non-contextual word embedding models
such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), which only learns a
global (context-free) embedding for each word, or use complex feature engineering which is ad-hoc and relies on a
large number of annotated samples for training. In contrast,
pre-trained transformer-based language representation models such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) can learn robust contextual text embeddings, and usually require only moderate
training resources for fine-tuning. Although these models
perform well in many Natural Language Processing tasks,
they have not yet been sufficiently investigated in OM.
In this paper, we propose BERTMap, a novel ontology
alignment system that exploits BERT fine-tuning for mapping prediction and utilizes the graphical and logical information of ontologies for mapping refinement. As shown
in Figure 1, BERTMap includes the following main steps:
(i) corpus construction, where synonym and non-synonym
pairs from various sources are extracted; (ii) fine-tuning,
where a suitable pre-trained BERT model is selected and
fine-tuned on the corpora constructed in (i); (iii) mapping
prediction, where mapping candidates are first extracted
based on sub-word inverted indices and then predicted by
the fine-tuned BERT classifier; and (iv) mapping refinement,
where additional mappings are recalled from neighbouring
classes of highly scored mappings, and some mappings that
lead to logical inconsistency are deleted for higher precision.
We evaluate BERTMap1 on the FMA-SNOMED task and
the FMA-NCI task of the OAEI Large BioMed Track2 , and
an extended task of FMA-SNOMED where the more complete labels from the original SNOMED ontology are added.
Our results demonstrate that BERTMap can often outperform the state-of-the-art systems LogMap and AML.

Ontology alignment (a.k.a ontology matching (OM)) plays a
critical role in knowledge integration. Owing to the success
of machine learning in many domains, it has been applied in
OM. However, the existing methods, which often adopt adhoc feature engineering or non-contextual word embeddings,
have not yet outperformed rule-based systems especially in an
unsupervised setting. In this paper, we propose a novel OM
system named BERTMap which can support both unsupervised and semi-supervised settings. It first predicts mappings
using a classifier based on fine-tuning the contextual embedding model BERT on text semantics corpora extracted from
ontologies, and then refines the mappings through extension
and repair by utilizing the ontology structure and logic. Our
evaluation with three alignment tasks on biomedical ontologies demonstrates that BERTMap can often perform better
than the leading OM systems LogMap and AML.

Introduction
Ontology alignment (a.k.a. ontology matching (OM)) aims
at matching semantically related entities from different ontologies. A relationship (usually equivalence or subsumption) between two matched entities is known as a mapping.
OM plays an important role in knowledge engineering, as
a key technique for ontology integration and quality assurance (Shvaiko and Euzenat 2013). The independent development of ontologies often results in heterogeneous knowledge
representations with different categorizations and naming
schemes. For example, the class named “muscle layer” in the
SNOMED Clinical Terms ontology is named “muscularis
propria” in the Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA)
ontology. Moreover, real-world ontologies often contain a
large number of classes, which not only causes scalability
issues, but also makes it harder to distinguish classes of similar names and/or contexts but representing different objects.
Traditional OM solutions typically use lexical matching
as their basis and combine it with structural matching and
logic-based mapping repair. This has led to several classic
systems such as LogMap (Jiménez-Ruiz and Cuenca Grau
2011) and AgreementMakerLight (AML) (Faria et al. 2013)
which still demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on
many OM tasks. However, their lexical matching part only

1

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

5684

Codes and data: https://github.com/KRR-Oxford/BERTMap.
http://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/isg/projects/SEALS/oaei/

