The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Unit Auction in Social Networks with Budgets
Mingyu Xiao, Yuchao Song, Bakh Khoussainov
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
myxiao@uestc.edu.cn, ycsongcs@gmail.com, bmk@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

and the neighborhood truthfully. Followed by this work,
several different auction models that diffuse commodity information through social networks have been studied. Zhao
et al. [2018] generalized IDM to the setting of selling multi
identical items to single-minded buyers. Takanashi et al.
[2019] noted that the generalized IDM is not strategy-proof
and proposed a strategy-proof design. In their mechanism,
however, the revenue of the seller can be negative. This
may discourage sellers’ participation in auctions. Recently,
Kawasaki et al. [2020] gave a strategy-proof mechanism for
this model that guarantees a non-negative revenue.
Most of the previous single-unit and multi-unit auctions
in social networks assume that each buyer has unit demand.
It is natural to study scenarios where buyers demand more
than one item. Under this setting, the following question
arises: how many units can each buyer get? Frequently
considered scenario is to set a budget for each buyer. For
example, budget constraints are often observed in public asset privatization auctions in Eastern Europe [Maskin 2000].
Classical auctions without networking structures under the
budget setting have widely been studied [Dobzinski, Lavi,
and Nisan 2012; Borgs et al. 2005; Abrams 2006; Dobzinski
and Leme 2014; Lu and Xiao 2015]. Addressing budgets
properly breaks down the usual quasi-linear setting on the
utility of the buyers, and because of this the well-known
VCG mechanism [Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971; Groves 1973]
loses incentive compatibility property. The design of incentive compatible mechanisms becomes significantly more
involved [Dobzinski, Lavi, and Nisan 2012].
There are two widely studied models with the budgets.
In private budget models [Borgs et al. 2005; Feldman et al.
2008; Dobzinski, Lavi, and Nisan 2012], the budget is reported by each buyer and incentive compatible mechanisms
encourage buyers to report their budgets truthfully. In public
budget models [Dobzinski, Lavi, and Nisan 2012; Dobzinski
and Leme 2014], budgets of the buyers are not considered in
the incentive compatibility, and they are regarded as known
information. Both models are natural. Here are some scenarios for public budget models. Deposits [Mehta et al. 2007]
and bonds [Laffont and Robert 1996] are known forms of
public budgets. Before the start of an auction, all buyers
should deposit money or buy bonds (the public budget) in
the system. Also, some budgets reported by buyers can be
regarded as public budgets. For example, the budgets in the

We study multi-unit auctions in social networks, where each
buyer has a fixed budget and can spread the sale information
to the network neighbors. We design a mechanism encouraging buyers to report their valuations truthfully and spread the
sale information. Our design uses the idea of the clinching
mechanism to decide the transaction price and can be viewed
as a network version of the mechanism. Most of the previous
clinching mechanisms search for the transaction prices by
increasing the current price. Our mechanism directly computes the transaction prices in polynomial time. Furthermore,
the mechanism applies a technique to iteratively activate new
buyers in the network. This ensures utility preservations of
the buyers and benefits the seller. We prove key properties of
our mechanism, such as no-positive-transfers, individual rationality, incentive compatibility, non-wastefulness and social
welfare preservation.

Introduction
Mechanism design in social networks has become an active research area [Li et al. 2017, 2018; Zhao et al. 2018;
Kawasaki et al. 2020; Xu and He 2020]. The classical
auctions only sell items to buyers directly connected to
the seller and do not consider spreading the commodity
information through the network links between buyers to
get possibly higher utilities [Nisan et al. 2007; Bajari and
Hortacsu 2003]. Auctions in social networks that attract
more participants seek mechanisms that encourage buyers
to diffuse the commodity information. This model is more
economically efficient in attracting audiences than advertising on TV, in newspapers, and search engines [Emek et al.
2011; Leskovec, Adamic, and Huberman 2007].
There is a series of interesting work on spreading influence through social networks [Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Emek et al. 2011; Borgatti et al. 2009]. However,
they do not consider auctions. Li et al. [2017] considered
auctions in social networks. They proposed a new auction
model under the structure of social networks ensuring that
the participants in the social network have an incentive to
invite their neighbors into the auction. For the case of selling one single item to one buyer, they gave a mechanism
IDM that can encourage participants to report both the bid
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5228

