The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Clustering of Text Representations for Supervision-Free Probing of Syntax
Vikram Gupta1 , Haoyue Shi2 , Kevin Gimpel2 , Mrinmaya Sachan3
1
ShareChat, India
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
vikramgupta@sharechat.co, freda@ttic.edu, kgimpel@ttic.edu, mrinmaya.sachan@inf.ethz.ch
2

ing is not well explored1 . Most of the recent work in “probing” contextual representations have focused on building supervised classifiers and using accuracy to interpret these representations. This has led to a debate as it is not clear if the
supervised probe is probing the model or trying to solve the
task (Hewitt and Manning 2019; Pimentel et al. 2020).
Thus, we explore a new clustering-based approach to
probe contextualized text representations. Our probe allows
for studying text representations with relatively less taskspecific transformations due to the absence of supervision.
Thus, our approach is arguably a less biased way to discover
linguistic structure than supervised probes (Hewitt and Manning 2019; Pimentel et al. 2020). Our work is similar in spirit
to (Wu et al. 2020; Zhou and Srikumar 2021) who also investigate supervision/parameter free probing methods. We
focus on two syntactic formalisms: part-of-speech induction (POSI) and constituency labelling (CoLab), and explore the efficacy of contextualized representations towards
encoding syntax in an unsupervised manner. We investigate
the research question: Do contextualized representations encode information for unsupervised syntax induction? How
do these perform on POSI, which has been traditionally
solved using smaller context windows and morphology and
span-based CoLab?
For both formalisms, we find that naively clustering text
representations does not perform well. We speculate that
this is because contextualized text representations are highdimensional and not very friendly to existing clustering approaches. Thus, we develop a deep clustering approach (Xie,
Girshick, and Farhadi 2016; Ghasedi Dizaji et al. 2017;
Chang et al. 2017; Yang, Parikh, and Batra 2016; Yang et al.
2017) which transforms these representations into a lower
dimensional, clustering friendly latent space. This transformation is learnt jointly with clustering using a combination
of reconstruction and clustering objectives. The procedure
iteratively refines the transformation and clustering using an
auxiliary target distribution derived from current soft clustering. As this process is repeated, it gradually improves the

Abstract
We explore deep clustering of text representations for unsupervised model interpretation and induction of syntax. As
these representations are high-dimensional, out-of-the-box
methods like KMeans do not work well. Thus, our approach jointly transforms the representations into a lowerdimensional cluster-friendly space and clusters them. We
consider two notions of syntax: part of speech induction
(POSI) and constituency labelling (CoLab) in this work. Interestingly, we find that Multilingual BERT (mBERT) contains surprising amount of syntactic knowledge of English;
possibly even as much as English BERT (E-BERT). Our
model can be used as a supervision-free probe which is arguably a less-biased way of probing. We find that unsupervised probes show benefits from higher layers as compared
to supervised probes. We further note that our unsupervised
probe utilizes E-BERT and mBERT representations differently, especially for POSI. We validate the efficacy of our
probe by demonstrating its capabilities as a unsupervised syntax induction technique. Our probe works well for both syntactic formalisms by simply adapting the input representations. We report competitive performance of our probe on
45-tag English POSI, state-of-the-art performance on 12tag POSI across 10 languages, and competitive results on
CoLab. We also perform zero-shot syntax induction on resource impoverished languages and report strong results.

Introduction
Contextualized text representations (Peters et al. 2018a;
Devlin et al. 2019) have been used in many NLP problems such as part-of-speech (POS) tagging, syntactic parsing (Kim et al. 2020; Kitaev and Klein 2018; Zhou and
Zhao 2019), coreference resolution (Lee, He, and Zettlemoyer 2018; Joshi et al. 2019), often leading to significant
improvements. Recent works have shown that these representations encode linguistic information including POS (Belinkov et al. 2017), morphology (Peters et al. 2018a), and
syntactic structure (Linzen, Dupoux, and Goldberg 2016;
Peters et al. 2018b; Tenney, Das, and Pavlick 2019; Hewitt
and Manning 2019). While there has been a lot of focus on
using contextualized representations in supervised settings,
the efficacy of these representations for unsupervised learn-

1
Some recent work such as DIORA (Drozdov et al. 2019b,a)
has explored specialized methods for unsupervised discovery and
representation of constituents using ELMo (Peters et al. 2018a).
(Jin et al. 2019) used ELMo with a normalizing flow model while
(Cao, Kitaev, and Klein 2020) used RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019b) for
unsupervised constituency parsing.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10720

