The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hierarchical Multi-Supervision Multi-Interaction Graph Attention Network for
Multi-Camera Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Guoliang Zhao1 , Yuxun Zhou2 , Zhanbo Xu1 , Yadong Zhou1 , Jiang Wu1
1

2

Institute of Automation Science and Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University, China
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley, United States
zgl934455716@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yxzhou@berkeley.edu,
zbxu@sei.xjtu.edu.cn, {ydzhou, jiangwu}@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Pedestrian trajectory prediction has become an essential underpinning in various human-centric applications including
but not limited to autonomous vehicles, intelligent surveillance system and social robotics. Previous research endeavors mainly focus on single camera trajectory prediction
(SCTP), while the problem of multi-camera trajectory prediction (MCTP) is often overly simplified into predicting presence in the next camera. This paper addresses MCTP from a
more realistic yet challenging perspective, by redefining the
task as a joint estimation of both future destination and possible trajectory. As such, two major efforts are devoted to facilitating related research and advancing modeling techniques.
Firstly, we establish a comprehensive multi-camera Scenes
Pedestrian Trajectory Dataset (mcScenes), which is collected
from a real-world multi-camera space combined with thorough human interaction annotations and carefully designed
evaluation metrics. Secondly, we propose a novel joint prediction framework, namely HM3 GAT, for the MCTP task by
building a tailored network architecture. The core idea behind HM3 GAT is a fusion of topological and trajectory information that are mutually beneficial to the prediction of each
task, achieved by deeply customized networks. The proposed
framework is comprehensively evaluated on the mcScenes
dataset with multiple ablation experiments. Status-of-the-art
SCTP models are adopted as baselines to further validate the
advantages of our method in terms of both information fusion and technical improvement. The mcScenes dataset, the
HM3 GAT, and alternative models are made publicly available
for interested readers.

3
Camera 2

2

Camera 3

3
2

Camera 1

3
1
3

Observed Trajectory
Predicted Trajectory
Predicted Camera ID
1,2,3
Person Interations in one camera
Group Interations across cameras

Figure 1: An illustration of the HM3 GAT. By leveraging the
strong association between pedestrian trajectory and their
potential intention, HM3 GAT achieves a joint prediction of
both next camera and future trajectory.
view, which is referred to as single camera trajectory prediction (SCTP). This simplification leads to a critical drawback: The location and the inter-connection (topological) information among different camera scenes are completely neglected. However in most public spaces, such as transportation hubs, shopping malls and subway stations, occupant
spaces are usually composed of multi-camera networks, and
pedestrian presence prediction in the next possible camera
scene is much more valuable. With that, we re-define the
multi-camera trajectory prediction (MCTP) task as follows:
In a space with a multi-camera network, MCTP performs a
comprehensive prediction about future trajectories, including both the next camera and the detailed trajectory in the
current camera scene, based on topological information and
historical knowledge available from the multi-camera network. A specific example is given in Fig. 1, where pedestrians move in a space with a multi-camera network composed
of three cameras. The MCTP defined in this paper strives to
learn a model that not only can predict a target pedestrian’s
future trajectory, but also can predict the next camera that the
target pedestrian will likely reach. This combined approach
would resolve practical needs in an unified framework, and
as will be shown in this paper, would allow the fusion of
multi-supervision information to benefit each sub-task.
The MCTP task defined here is confronted by two major
challenges. Practically, most of the existing datasets are acquired for SCTP, such as ETH and UCY (Pellegrini et al.
2009; Lerner, Chrysanthou, and Lischinski 2007), Although

Introduction
The information about human behavior, especially human
trajectory, is of major importance for multiple humancentric application domains, including autonomous driving
(Chai et al. 2019), intelligent surveillance system (Bastani,
Marcenaro, and Regazzoni 2016) and social robotic navigation (Rhinehart, Kitani, and Vernaza 2018). Trajectory prediction, in a nutshell, aims to estimate socially acceptable
trajectories in a near future, according to historical records
in a time window from the past. Despite of an unprecedented
development in this research direction, most works only consider pedestrian trajectory in a single scene from an aerial
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4698

