The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Heterogeneity-Aware Twitter Bot Detection with Relational Graph Transformers
Shangbin Feng1 , Zhaoxuan Tan1 , Rui Li2 , Minnan Luo1
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Continuing Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{wind binteng, tanzhaoxuan}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lrvberg,minnluo}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Twitter bot detection has become an important and challenging task to combat misinformation and protect the integrity
of the online discourse. State-of-the-art approaches generally leverage the topological structure of the Twittersphere,
while they neglect the heterogeneity of relations and influence among users. In this paper, we propose a novel bot
detection framework to alleviate this problem, which leverages the topological structure of user-formed heterogeneous
graphs and models varying influence intensity between users.
Specifically, we construct a heterogeneous information network with users as nodes and diversified relations as edges.
We then propose relational graph transformers to model heterogeneous influence between users and learn node representations. Finally, we use semantic attention networks to
aggregate messages across users and relations and conduct
heterogeneity-aware Twitter bot detection. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposal outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on a comprehensive Twitter bot detection
benchmark. Additional studies also bear out the effectiveness
of our proposed relational graph transformers, semantic attention networks and the graph-based approach in general.

Figure 1: Users and bots of real-world social media interact in different ways and have varied influence over others,
which result in relation and influence heterogeneity.
on their semantic content (Kudugunta and Ferrara 2018;
Wei and Nguyen 2019). Self-supervised learning techniques
were introduced to counter bot evolution (Feng et al. 2021b).
Graph neural networks (Ali Alhosseini et al. 2019; Feng
et al. 2021d) were later used to leverage the graph structure of the Twittersphere, while state-of-the-art methods are
topology-aware in one way or another.
Despite earlier successes of leveraging the topological
structure of the Twittersphere, these methods fail to recognize the intrinsic heterogeneity of Twitter and leverage it to
identify subtle differences between genuine users and novel
Twitter bots. Figure 1 illustrates two levels of heterogeneity
that are pervasive on the real-world Twittersphere:
• Relation Heterogeneity. Twitter users are connected
with different types of relations. For example, one user
might like, comment, retweet or block another user,
while these activities signal different relations between
them.
• Influence Heterogeneity. Twitter users have different influence range and intensity over their neighbors on the
Twittersphere. For example, distinguished news outlets
might have a tremendous impact on the minds of many,
while ordinary users generally inform close circles of
their recent activities.
In this paper, we propose a novel Twitter bot detection
framework that leverages the topological structure of the
real-world Twittersphere, and on top of that, models pervasive heterogeneity of relation and influence to boost task
performance. Specifically, we construct heterogeneous information networks with users as nodes and diversified rela-

Introduction
Twitter bots are Twitter accounts controlled by automated
programs or the Twitter API. Bot operators often launch bot
campaigns to pursue malicious goals, which harms the integrity of the online discourse. Over the past decade, Twitter bots were actively involved in election interference (Deb
et al. 2019; Ferrara 2017), spreading misinformation (Cresci
2020) and promoting extreme ideology (Berger and Morgan 2015). Since malicious Twitter bots pose threat to online
communities and induce undesirable social effects, effective
Twitter bot detection measures are desperately needed.
Earlier works in Twitter bot detection generally rely on
feature engineering, where an ample amount of user features are proposed and evaluated. Features extracted from
tweets (Cresci et al. 2016) and user metadata (Yang et al.
2020; Lee and Kim 2013; Miller et al. 2014) were combined with traditional classifiers for bot detection. With the
advent of deep learning, neural network based Twitter bot
detectors were increasingly prevalent. Recurrent neural networks are adopted to encode tweets and detect bots based
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3977

