The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Low-Light Image Enhancement with Normalizing Flow
Yufei Wang1 , Renjie Wan2 * , Wenhan Yang1 , Haoliang Li3 , Lap-Pui Chau1 , Alex Kot1
1

Rapid-Rich Object Search Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, China
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, China
{yufei001, wenhan.yang, elpchau, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, renjiewan@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, haoliang.li@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
To enhance low-light images to normally-exposed ones is
highly ill-posed, namely that the mapping relationship between them is one-to-many. Previous works based on the
pixel-wise reconstruction losses and deterministic processes
fail to capture the complex conditional distribution of normally exposed images, which results in improper brightness,
residual noise, and artifacts. In this paper, we investigate to
model this one-to-many relationship via a proposed normalizing flow model. An invertible network that takes the low-light
images/features as the condition and learns to map the distribution of normally exposed images into a Gaussian distribution.
In this way, the conditional distribution of the normally exposed images can be well modeled, and the enhancement
process, i.e.. the other inference direction of the invertible
network, is equivalent to being constrained by a loss function that better describes the manifold structure of natural
images during the training. The experimental results on the
existing benchmark datasets show our method achieves better
quantitative and qualitative results, obtaining better-exposed
illumination, less noise and artifact, and richer colors.

L1 loss: 5.43
Log Likelihood: 1.02

(a) noisy image

L1 loss: 5.43
Log Likelihood: 5.37

L1 loss: N\A
Log Likelihood: 5.35

(b) image with
(c) reference image
slight brightness variance

Figure 1: Illustration of the superiority of our normalizing
flow model in measuring the visual distance compared to
l1 loss for low-light image enhancement. Although (b) is
more visually similar to (c), i.e., reference image, than (a),
their l1 losses are the same. Benefiting from better capturing
the complex conditional distribution of normally exposed
images, our model can better capture the error distribution
and therefore provide the measure results more consistent
with human vision.
these losses might fail in describing the real visual distance
between the reference image and enhanced images in the image manifold as shown in Fig. 1, which further undermines
the performance. Though the GAN-based scheme can partly
alleviate this issue, these approaches require careful tuning
during training (Wolf et al. 2021) and might overfit certain
visual features or the properties of the training data.
Recently, researchers have shown the effectiveness of normalizing flow in the field of computational photography.
(Wolf et al. 2021; Lugmayr et al. 2020; Xiao et al. 2020)
The normalizing flow is capable to learn a more complicated conditional distribution than the classical pixel-wise
loss, which can well solve the above-mentioned two issues.
Beyond previous CNN-based models that learn a deterministic mapping from the low-light image to an image with
specific brightness, the normalizing flow learns to map the
multi-modal image manifold into a latent distribution. Then,
the loss enforced on the latent space equivalently constructs
an effective constraint on the enhanced image manifold. It
leads to better characterization of the structural details in various contexts and better measurement of the visual distance
in terms of high-quality well-exposed images, which helps
effectively adjust the illumination and suppress the image
artifacts. However, since the classical normalizing flow is

Introduction
Low-light image enhancement aims to improve the visibility
of low-light images and suppress captured noise and artifacts.
Deep learning-based methods (Zhang et al. 2019; Zamir et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2018) achieve promising performance by
utilizing the power of large collections of data. However, most
of them mainly rely on the pixel-wise loss functions (e.g.,
l1 or l2 ) in the network training that derive a deterministic
mapping between the low-light and normally exposed images.
This enhancement paradigm encounters two issues. First, this
pixel-wise loss cannot provide effective regularization on the
local structures in diverse contexts. As one low-light image
may correspond to several reference images with different
brightness (Zhang et al. 2021), this pixel-to-pixel deterministic mapping is easily trapped into the “regression to mean”
problem and obtains the results that are the fusion of several
desirable ones, which inevitably leads to improperly exposed
regions and artifacts. Second, due to the simplified assumption of the pixel-wise losses about the image distribution,
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2604

