The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SyncTalkFace: Talking Face Generation with
Precise Lip-Syncing via Audio-Lip Memory
Se Jin Park, Minsu Kim, Joanna Hong, Jeongsoo Choi, Yong Man Ro*
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{jinny960812, ms.k, joanna2587, jeongsoo.choi, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

generated facial sequence is coherent with the input audio. Previous methods based on encoder-decoder structure
have worked on improving audio and visual representations.
(Zhou et al. 2019, 2021) disentangled visual input into identity and speech content space using metric learning and
enhanced audio feature by embedding into a shared latent
space between visual feature. (Mittal and Wang 2020) disentangled audio representation into phonetic content, emotional tone, and other factors. They have explored feature
disentanglement to remove irrelevant factors in lip-syncing.
However, the disentangled audio representation does not explicitly contain visual information of the mouth which can
help the decoder to map visual dynamics from audio.
Recent advances utilize intermediate structural representations such as facial landmarks and 3D models to better
capture facial dynamics. (Chen et al. 2019; Das et al. 2020;
Zhou et al. 2020) mapped lip landmarks from audio and
composited into the mouth region of a target person. (Song
et al. 2020; Thies et al. 2020) learned speaker independent
features in a 3D face model and rendered a talking face video
of a target person with fine-tuning. However, they commonly
lack sophistication in lip-syncing. This is because the facial
landmarks are too sparse to provide accurate lip synchronization, and the 3D models cannot capture fine details in
the mouth region including teeth (Zhang et al. 2021; Wang,
Mallya, and Liu 2021). Also, they bear the limitation of
having to acquire the intermediate representation separately
from the generation network.
Distinct from the previous works, we introduce AudioLip Memory that explicitly provides visual information of
the mouth region and enables more precise lip synchronization with input audio. The memory learns to align audio with
corresponding lip features from sequential ground truth images during training, so that it outputs the audio-aligned lip
features, when queried with audio at inference time. The recalled lip features are fused with audio features and injected
into the decoder for synthesizing the talking face video.
As the decoder can leverage the explicit visual hints of the
mouth, it can better map audio to video both temporal- and
pixel-wise. Moreover, the Audio-Lip Memory stores the representative lip features at the phoneme level and retrieves
various combinations of the lip features through memory addressing, enabling sophisticated and diverse lip movements.
We additionally impose visual-visual synchronization along

The challenge of talking face generation from speech lies in
aligning two different modal information, audio and video,
such that the mouth region corresponds to input audio. Previous methods either exploit audio-visual representation learning or leverage intermediate structural information such as
landmarks and 3D models. However, they struggle to synthesize fine details of the lips varying at the phoneme level as
they do not sufficiently provide visual information of the lips
at the video synthesis step. To overcome this limitation, our
work proposes Audio-Lip Memory that brings in visual information of the mouth region corresponding to input audio
and enforces fine-grained audio-visual coherence. It stores
lip motion features from sequential ground truth images in
the value memory and aligns them with corresponding audio features so that they can be retrieved using audio input
at inference time. Therefore, using the retrieved lip motion
features as visual hints, it can easily correlate audio with visual dynamics in the synthesis step. By analyzing the memory, we demonstrate that unique lip features are stored in
each memory slot at the phoneme level, capturing subtle lip
motion based on memory addressing. In addition, we introduce visual-visual synchronization loss which can enhance
lip-syncing performance when used along with audio-visual
synchronization loss in our model. Extensive experiments are
performed to verify that our method generates high-quality
video with mouth shapes that best align with the input audio,
outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Talking face generation from speech, also referred to as lipsyncing, is synthesizing a video of a target identity such
that the mouth region is consistent with arbitrary audio input. It has many applications such as audio-driven photorealistic avatars that can be employed in online classes or
games, dubbing films in another language, and communication aids for the hearing-impaired who can lip-read. As the
talking face generation carries various practical usage, it has
received great interest for research.
The main challenge of talking face generation from
speech is aligning audio and visual information so that the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2062

