The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FCA: Learning a 3D Full-Coverage Vehicle Camouflage for Multi-View Physical
Adversarial Attack
Donghua Wang1,2 , Tingsong Jiang2 * , Jialiang Sun2 , Weien Zhou2 , Zhiqiang Gong2 , Xiaoya
Zhang2 , Wen Yao2 , Xiaoqian Chen2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Defense Innovation Institute, Chinese Academy of Military Science
wangdonghua@zju.edu.cn, tingsong@pku.edu.cn, sun1903676706@163.com, weienzhou@outlook.com,
wendy0782@126.com, {gongzhiqiang13, zhangxiaoya09, chenxiaoqian}@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Physical adversarial attacks in object detection have attracted
increasing attention. However, most previous works focus on
hiding the objects from the detector by generating an individual adversarial patch, which only covers the planar part of
the vehicle’s surface and fails to attack the detector in physical scenarios for multi-view, long-distance and partially occluded objects. To bridge the gap between digital attacks and
physical attacks, we exploit the full 3D vehicle surface to propose a robust Full-coverage Camouflage Attack (FCA) to fool
detectors. Specifically, we first try rendering the non-planar
camouflage texture over the full vehicle surface. To mimic
the real-world environment conditions, we then introduce a
transformation function to transfer the rendered camouflaged
vehicle into a photo-realistic scenario. Finally, we design an
efficient loss function to optimize the camouflage texture. Experiments show that the full-coverage camouflage attack can
not only outperform state-of-the-art methods under various
test cases but also generalize to different environments, vehicles, and object detectors.

(a)

(b)
(e)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) is a car without camouflage. (b) is a camouflaged car by placing a planar adversarial patch in front
of the car (Thys, Van Ranst, and Goedemé 2019). (c) is a
camouflaged car by placing an adversarial patch over the
rooftop, hood and doors (Wang et al. 2021a). (d) is a the
camouflaged car by repeating an adversarial pattern (Zhang
et al. 2018). (e) shows the camouflaged car generated by
FCA, which is undetected.

Recently, adversarial attacks on object detection have attracted increasing attention, particularly in physical attacks
due to complex physically realizable constraints (e.g., nonplanar object surface) and environmental conditions (e.g.,
lighting, viewing angles, camera-to-object distances and occlusions) (Elsayed et al. 2018). There are mainly two kinds
of methods to modify the visual characteristics of the real
object: patch-based and camouflage-based. Patched-based
methods try to perform physical adversarial attacks by generating adversarial patches (Brown et al. 2017), which confine the noise to a small and localized patch without perturbation constraint. A patch is often stuck to a planar object(e.g., STOP sign (Eykholt et al. 2018)) or placed in front
of the object(e.g., person (Thys, Van Ranst, and Goedemé
2019)) or placed in the background (Lee and Kolter 2019).
Camouflage-based method is implemented by modifying the target object itself and is more challenging due to
the non-planarity of 3D objects. There are two ways to paint
the camouflage: one way is to optimize an adversarial pattern and repeat the patterns as a whole camouflage to paint
on the vehicle’s surface using a physical non-differentiable
renderer (Zhang et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2020a), while another
way is to optimize the texture (Zeng et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2021a) or the shape (Xiao et al. 2019) of the 3D vehicle di-

Introduction
Over the past years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved tremendous success in computer vision tasks.
However, DNNs are found vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013), which are elaborately designed to
mislead DNNs to make incorrect predictions. As a new security issue in artificial intelligence, adversarial attacks appeal
the attraction from both academics and industry.
Adversarial attacks can be divided into two categories by
their applicable domains: 1) digital attacks directly add imperceptible perturbations to pixels of input images in the
digital space (Szegedy et al. 2013), while 2) physical attacks modify objects in the real-world environment or physical simulators (Chen et al. 2018; Sharif et al. 2016; Kurakin
et al. 2017; Lu, Sibai, and Fabry 2017; Athalye et al. 2018)
to investigate whether the perturbations are physically realizable and can stay adversarial under different transformations. In this paper, we mainly concentrate on the latter as
it is a more direct threat to visual systems in the physical
world.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2414

