The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

D IALOG LM: Pre-trained Model for Long Dialogue
Understanding and Summarization
Ming Zhong* 1 , Yang Liu2 , Yichong Xu2 , Chenguang Zhu2 , Michael Zeng2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Microsoft Cognitive Services Research Group
mingz5@illinois.edu, {yaliu10, yichong.xu, chezhu, nzeng}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

2021). However, different from monologic texts like news,
long conversations have dialogic structures and lengthy input which is difficult for current NLP systems to process
them. Thus, exploring a model that can better understand
and summarize an entire long dialogue is practically needed.
Recently, pre-trained neural language models achieve
remarkable success on a spectrum of natural language
tasks (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019). However, these
general-purpose models are pre-trained on free-form text
data with universal objectives. Although this can obtain
powerful contextualized language representations, it also
limits their ability in specific domains. Motivated by this,
several dialogue-related pre-trained models have been proposed to tackle different tasks like conversational response
generation (Zhang et al. 2020b), dialogue response ranking (Gao et al. 2020) and multi-party conversation understanding (Gu et al. 2021). Nonetheless, these models are
limited to short conversations (e.g, usually fewer than 200
words), and hence are not capable of handling long dialogues (usually longer than 5,000 words) with more speakers and utterances. On the other hand, when it comes to
long sequences, subsequent research focuses on improving
self-attention method (Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2019;
Wang et al. 2020) and facilitating the interaction of local
and global information (Beltagy, Peters, and Cohan 2020;
Zaheer et al. 2020). However, these systems are not designed
for dialogues and thus they learn limited knowledge of the
dialogic structures. In general, existing models all have their
own dilemmas when dealing with long conversations.
In this paper, we present D IALOG LM, a pre-trained neural encoder-decoder model for long dialogue understanding and summarization. D IALOG LM is established on the
sequence-to-sequence model architecture and can be applied
to a wide range of natural language processing tasks. As
shown in Figure 1, we propose a window-based denoising
pre-training task on a large dialogue corpus: (1) select a window containing multiple consecutive turns from a conversation; (2) inject arbitrary dialogue-related noise into the window, and (3) train the model to restore this window based on
the rest of the conversation. Intuitively, a pre-trained model
should be able to reconstruct the noisy window, as speaking
style of the interlocutors and topic content exist distributedly
in a long conversation. Compared with sentence-level masking like PEGASUS (Zhang et al. 2020a), a window com-

Dialogue is an essential part of human communication and
cooperation. Existing research mainly focuses on short dialogue scenarios in a one-on-one fashion. However, multiperson interactions in the real world, such as meetings or interviews, are frequently over a few thousand words. There
is still a lack of corresponding research and powerful tools
to understand and process such long dialogues. Therefore,
in this work, we present a pre-training framework for long
dialogue understanding and summarization. Considering the
nature of long conversations, we propose a window-based denoising approach for generative pre-training. For a dialogue,
it corrupts a window of text with dialogue-inspired noise,
and guides the model to reconstruct this window based on
the content of the remaining conversation. Furthermore, to
process longer input, we augment the model with sparse attention which is combined with conventional attention in a
hybrid manner. We conduct extensive experiments on five
datasets of long dialogues, covering tasks of dialogue summarization, abstractive question answering and topic segmentation. Experimentally, we show that our pre-trained model
D IALOG LM significantly surpasses the state-of-the-art models across datasets and tasks. Source code and all the pretrained models are available on our GitHub repository (https:
//github.com/microsoft/DialogLM).

Introduction
Dialogue plays a vital role in interpersonal interaction in
daily life, workplace or online forums, and it has drawn extensive attention from both academia and industry (Zhang
et al. 2020b). With the development of speech recognition
systems and the growing need of remote work, an increasing
number of long conversations are recorded and transcribed,
such as meeting minutes, interviews and debates. These
long dialogues are dense medium of information, bringing
challenges for users to quickly understand the gist and extract related information. To address these challenges, many
NLP tasks are proposed, including dialogue summarization,
dialogue-based question answering and dialogue segmentation (Feng, Feng, and Qin 2021; Feng et al. 2021; Zhong
et al. 2021; Zou et al. 2021a,b; Chen et al. 2021b; Koay et al.
* Ming completed this work during his internship at Microsoft.
Correspondence to: Yang Liu (yaliu10@microsoft.com).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11765

