The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

H2 -MIL: Exploring Hierarchical Representation with Heterogeneous Multiple
Instance Learning for Whole Slide Image Analysis
Wentai Hou1,2 ,* , Lequan Yu 3,* , Chengxuan Lin 2,4 ,* , Helong Huang 4 , Rongshan Yu 4 , Jing Qin 5 ,
†
Liansheng Wang 4,
1

Information and Communication Engineering Department at School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
4
Department of Computer Science at School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
5
Center for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
houwt@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lqyu@hku.hk, lincx@stu.xmu.edu.cn, hlhuang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rsyu@xmu.edu.cn,
harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk, lswang@xmu.edu.cn
Abstract

Current representation learning methods for whole slide image (WSI) with pyramidal resolutions are inherently homogeneous and flat, which cannot fully exploit the multiscale and heterogeneous diagnostic information of different
structures for comprehensive analysis. This paper presents
a novel graph neural network-based multiple instance learning framework (i.e., H2 -MIL) to learn hierarchical representation from a heterogeneous graph with different resolutions
for WSI analysis. A heterogeneous graph with the “resolution” attribute is constructed to explicitly model the feature
and spatial-scaling relationship of multi-resolution patches.
We then design a novel resolution-aware attention convolution (RAConv) block to learn compact yet discriminative
representation from the graph, which tackles the heterogeneity of node neighbors with different resolutions and yields
more reliable message passing. More importantly, to explore
the task-related structured information of WSI pyramid, we
elaborately design a novel iterative hierarchical pooling (IHPool) module to progressively aggregate the heterogeneous
graph based on scaling relationships of different nodes. We
evaluated our method on two public WSI datasets from the
TCGA project, i.e., esophageal cancer and kidney cancer. Experimental results show that our method clearly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on both tumor typing and staging
tasks.

Figure 1. Top: A WSI can be scaled at different resolutions,
forming a pyramid structure. Bottom: Fixed size patches obtained from WSI pyramid present varying diagnostic information ranging from global level to cellular level.

a WSI due to (1) the gigapixels and the pyramidal resolutions of the WSI and (2) the complex colors and patterns of
different structures. Therefore, it is highly demanded to develop automatic and accurate inspection tools for WSI analysis to reduce the workload of pathologists and improve the
accuracy and efficiency of the examination (Cui and Zhang
2021; Farris et al. 2021).
Due to the huge size and high annotation cost of WSI
(e.g., the usual size is 40000 × 40000), multiple instance
learning (MIL) (Maron and Lozano-Pérez 1998) is a promising framework to learn effective representations for WSI
analysis. Specifically, we consider each WSI as a bag and
the numerous cropped patches in WSI (e.g., by sliding window) as instances. With deep neural networks (DNNs),
the features of patches (instances) are extracted and aggregated to produce WSI-level prediction (Ilse, Tomczak, and
Welling 2018; Tu et al. 2019). However, the previous MIL
works usually applied to a single resolution of WSIs (Tellez
et al. 2021; Courtiol et al. 2018; Campanella et al. 2019),

Introduction
Pathological slide examination is considered as the “gold
standard” for diagnosis and treatment planning of many diseases (Yao et al. 2020; Cai et al. 2021; Ortega et al. 2018).
To facilitate preservation and retrieval, pathological slides
are usually scanned into whole slide images (WSI) with
pyramidal resolutions for quantitative analysis. As shown in
Figure 1, at different resolutions, pathologists can clearly
observe the tissue features ranging from cellular-scale to
millimeter-scale. However, it is a time-consuming and tedious task for pathologists to perform manual inspection on
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

933

