The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Interpretable Neural Subgraph Matching for Graph Retrieval
Indradyumna Roy, Venkata Sai Baba Reddy Velugoti, Soumen Chakrabarti, Abir De
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{indraroy15, abir, soumen}@cse.iitb.ac.in, saibaba.rapur@gmail.com

Abstract

edit distance (GED) and maximum common subgraph (MCS)
detection. In this work, we focus on the notion of (approximate) subgraph matching for computing relevance scores,
driven by several real-world applications, e.g., molecular
fingerprint detection (Cereto-Massagué et al. 2015), circuit
design (Ohlrich et al. 1993), object detection (Wong 1992),
scene graph retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015), software analysis
(Ling et al. 2021), and frequent subgraph mining (Yan, Yu,
and Han 2004). Often, an important piece is to find a subgraph in a corpus graph, which is (approximately) isomorphic
to the given query graph.
The closely-related problem of full-graph matching has
been heavily investigated by the computer vision community
(Schellewald and Schnörr 2005; Leordeanu and Hebert 2005;
Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010; Bernard, Theobalt, and Moeller
2018; Yu et al. 2018; Gupta and Jain 2021). More recently,
trainable neural models have aimed to solve the underlying
quadratic assignment using explicit supervision of the ground
truth node-level alignments (Zanfir and Sminchisescu 2018;
Wang, Yan, and Yang 2019; Tan et al. 2021; Zhao, Tu, and
Xu 2021; Fey et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2019). For the applications
mentioned earlier, such fine-grained supervision may entail
excessive cognitive burden.

Given a query graph and a database of corpus graphs, a graph
retrieval system aims to deliver the most relevant corpus
graphs. Graph retrieval based on subgraph matching has a wide
variety of applications, e.g., molecular fingerprint detection,
circuit design, software analysis, and question answering. In
such applications, a corpus graph is relevant to a query graph,
if the query graph is (perfectly or approximately) a subgraph
of the corpus graph. Existing neural graph retrieval models
compare the node or graph embeddings of the query-corpus
pairs, to compute the relevance scores between them. However,
such models may not provide edge consistency between the
query and corpus graphs. Moreover, they predominantly use
symmetric relevance scores, which are not appropriate in the
context of subgraph matching, since the underlying relevance
score in subgraph search should be measured using the partial
order induced by subgraph-supergraph relationship. Consequently, they show poor retrieval performance in the context
of subgraph matching. In response, we propose I SO N ET, a
novel interpretable neural edge alignment formulation, which
is better able to learn the edge-consistent mapping necessary
for subgraph matching. I SO N ET incorporates a new scoring
mechanism which enforces an asymmetric relevance score,
specifically tailored to subgraph matching. I SO N ET’s design
enables it to directly identify the underlying subgraph in a corpus graph, which is relevant to the given query graph. Our experiments on diverse datasets show that I SO N ET outperforms
recent graph retrieval formulations and systems. Additionally,
I SO N ET can provide interpretable alignments between querycorpus graph pairs during inference, despite being trained only
using binary relevance labels of whole graphs during training,
without any fine-grained ground truth information about node
or edge alignments.

1

1.1

Limitations of Prior Work

A slew of recent studies proffer neural approaches for graph
retrieval. These use a wide variety of relevance measures,
e.g., GED, MCS (Li et al. 2019; Bai et al. 2019, 2020; Doan
et al. 2021; Peng, Choi, and Xu 2021), complete graph isomorphism (Li et al. 2019), subgraph isomorphism (Lou et al.
2020), inter alia. However, they share the following limitations in the context of subgraph matching for graph retrieval.
Node or graph embedding based alignment. Subgraph
search should find edge-consistent mappings between query
and corpus graphs. However, existing graph retrieval formulations lack explicit edge mapping mechanisms. Instead, they
either attempt to align nodes to nodes, depending on contextual embeddings for consistency, or they align aggregated,
coarse-grained embeddings of entire graphs to train neural
scoring models (Li et al. 2019; Doan et al. 2021). However,
without any edge matching protocol, such embeddings are
often unable to capture edge correspondences between querycorpus pairs. This leads to inferior performance.
Symmetric scoring function. Most existing graph retrieval

Introduction

The goal of graph retrieval is to search for the most relevant
or similar graphs, from a corpus graph database, in response
to a given query graph. A graph retrieval system must effectively sort corpus graphs based on their relevance scores with
respect to a given query graph, and then returns the top-K
graphs from this ranked list. Modeling the relevance score
between a query and a corpus graph is the central challenge
of any graph retrieval system, which predominantly relies on
full-graph or subgraph matching, graph kernel design, graph
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8115

