The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Meta Faster R-CNN: Towards Accurate Few-Shot Object Detection with Attentive
Feature Alignment
Guangxing Han, Shiyuan Huang, Jiawei Ma, Yicheng He, Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University
{gh2561, sh3813, jiawei.m, yh3330, sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to detect objects using only a few examples. How to adapt state-of-the-art object
detectors to the few-shot domain remains challenging. Object
proposal is a key ingredient in modern object detectors. However, the quality of proposals generated for few-shot classes
using existing methods is far worse than that of many-shot
classes, e.g., missing boxes for few-shot classes due to misclassification or inaccurate spatial locations with respect to
true objects. To address the noisy proposal problem, we propose a novel meta-learning based FSOD model by jointly
optimizing the few-shot proposal generation and fine-grained
few-shot proposal classification. To improve proposal generation for few-shot classes, we propose to learn a lightweight
metric-learning based prototype matching network, instead
of the conventional simple linear object/nonobject classifier,
e.g., used in RPN. Our non-linear classifier with the feature
fusion network could improve the discriminative prototype
matching and the proposal recall for few-shot classes. To improve the fine-grained few-shot proposal classification, we
propose a novel attentive feature alignment method to address the spatial misalignment between the noisy proposals
and few-shot classes, thus improving the performance of fewshot object detection. Meanwhile we learn a separate Faster
R-CNN detection head for many-shot base classes and show
strong performance of maintaining base-classes knowledge.
Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple
FSOD benchmarks over most of the shots and metrics.

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed model for FSOD. (a)
We compare our coarse-grained prototype matching based
Meta-RPN with the original RPN. Our method can generate
category-specific proposals in an efficient and effective way.
(b) Through feature alignment for fine-grained prototype
matching, our method can address the spatial misalignment
issues between proposals and few-shot classes, leading to
better matching and FSOD performance.

only few examples, the goal is to transfer the knowledge
learned from base classes to novel classes to assist in object
detection for novel classes. How to learn few-shot object
detectors both efficiently and effectively remains challenging.
Object proposal (Hosang et al. 2015) is a key ingredient
in modern object detectors (Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016),
which usually first generate a few potential object bounding
boxes (a.k.a proposals) or dense anchor boxes and then convert object detection to a classification task1 . Training the
region proposal network (RPN (Ren et al. 2015)) and proposal classification network (Fast R-CNN (Girshick 2015))
using a large scale dataset have been demonstrated successful.
However, as shown in Table 2, the quality of proposals for
few-shot novel classes using existing methods are far worse
than that of many-shot base classes. Specifically, the detector
could miss some high IoU proposals for novel classes due
to misclassification with very few examples. Moreover, the

Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental and challenging tasks in computer vision. Recent years have witnessed
great progress in this field using deep learning techniques
(Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; He
et al. 2017; Tian et al. 2019). However, deep learning based
object detection methods need a sufficient amount of human
annotations for model training, which are expensive to collect and unavailable for rare categories. Given scarce training
data, these models suffer from the risk of overfitting and poor
generalization ability (Kang et al. 2019).
This has motivated research on few-shot object detection
(FSOD) (Karlinsky et al. 2019). Given a set of base classes
with plenty of examples and another set of novel classes with
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

780

We omit the bounding box regression for simplicity

