The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

EtinyNet: Extremely Tiny Network for TinyML
Kunran Xu1,2 , Yishi Li1,2 , Huawei Zhang1,2 , Rui Lai1,2∗ , Lin Gu3,4∗
1

2

School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
Chongqing Innovation Research Institute of Integrated Cirtuits, Xidian University, Chongqing 400031, China.
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo103-0027, Japan
4
The University of Tokyo, Japan
aazzttcc@gmail.com, yshlee1994@outlook.com, myyzhww@gmail.com
rlai@mail.xidian.edu.cn, lin.gu@riken.jp
Abstract

There are many AI applications in high-income countries because their implementation depends on expensive GPU cards
(∼2000$) and reliable power supply (∼200W). To deploy AI
in resource-poor settings on cheaper (∼20$) and low-power
devices (<1W) , key modifications are required to adapt neural networks for Tiny machine learning (TinyML). In this paper, for putting CNNs into storage limited devices, we developed efficient tiny models with only hundreds of KB parameters. Toward this end, we firstly design a parameter-efficient
tiny architecture by introducing dense linear depthwise block.
Then, a novel adaptive scale quantization (ASQ) method
is proposed for further quantizing tiny models in aggressive low-bit while retaining the accuracy. With the optimized
architecture and 4-bit ASQ, we present a family of ultralightweight networks, named EtinyNet, that achieves 57.0%
ImageNet top-1 accuracy with an extremely tiny model size
of 340KB. When deployed on an off-the-shelf commercial
microcontroller for object detection tasks, EtinyNet achieves
state-of-the-art 56.4% mAP on Pascal VOC. Furthermore, the
experimental results on Xilinx compact FPGA indicate that
EtinyNet achieves prominent low power of 620mW, about 5.6
× lower than existing FPGA designs. The code and demo are
in https://github.com/aztc/EtinyNet

Figure 1: The model size and ImageNet top-1 accuracy of
variety CNN models for TinyML, MobileML and CloudML.
Different from MobileML and CloudML that there are abundant hardware resources for running large models, TinyML
denotes the scenarios in which storage and power are strictly
limitd, generally of < 1MB and hundreds of milliwatts.

Introduction
Tiny machine learning (TinyML), executing AI workloads
locally on low-cost and low-energy hardwares, has grown
rapidly in recent years. As shown in Fig 1, TinyML generally processes data near sensors with only hundreds of milliwatts of power while running Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on IoT devices, e.g., microcontroller unit
(MCU) and field programable gate array (FPGA). It’s a fresh
and attractive area different from well developed MobileML
and CloudML (Banbury et al. 2020). TinyML is believed to
make a broad of new applications possible, including smart
manufacturing, consumer electronics, precision agriculture,
wildlife conservation and many other domains.
However, TinyML presents severe challenges, as CNNs
usually require too many parameters to be deployed on IoT
devices with limited storage. For example, the state-of-theart STM32F746 (ARM Cortex-M7 CPU) MCU has only

320KB on-chip SRAM and 1MB Flash, which shows a big
gap between the desired and available hardware capacity:
ResNet50 (He et al. 2016) exceeds the storage limit by 100
× while the 8-bit quantized MobileNetV2 (Sandler et al.
2018) still exceeds the storage by 2.5 ×. Moreover, transmission massive model parameters between different hierarchies of memory (e.g. from DRAM/Flash to SRAM or
from SRAM to register) also results in considerable energy
consumption. It is reported that FPGAs need 3.5W - 9W
of power to run CNNs, nearly 80% of which is caused by
transmission of model parameters (Yu et al. 2020; Guo et al.
2018; Xiao et al.; Lian et al. 2019), far exceeding the requirements of TinyML. The large model size of existing CNNs
brings much difficulties for TinyML.
Despite the recent efficient lightweight CNN architectures (Sandler et al. 2018; Li et al. 2021; Han et al. 2020)
for MobileML as depicted in Fig 1, it is still hard for them
to address the challenges presented by TinyML. Most of

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4628

