The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Post-OCR Document Correction with Large Ensembles of Character
Sequence-to-Sequence Models
Juan Ramirez-Orta1 * , Eduardo Xamena2 , Ana Maguitman3, 4 , Evangelos Milios1 , Axel J. Soto3, 4
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Dalhousie University
Institute of Research in Social Sciences and Humanities (ICSOH), Universidad Nacional de Salta - CONICET
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Universidad Nacional del Sur
4
Institute for Computer Science and Engineering, UNS–CONICET

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method to extend sequenceto-sequence models to accurately process sequences much
longer than the ones used during training while being sampleand resource-efficient, supported by thorough experimentation.
To investigate the effectiveness of our method, we apply it to
the task of correcting documents already processed with Optical Character Recognition (OCR) systems using sequence-tosequence models based on characters. We test our method on
nine languages of the ICDAR 2019 competition on post-OCR
text correction and achieve a new state-of-the-art performance
in five of them. The strategy with the best performance involves splitting the input document in character n-grams and
combining their individual corrections into the final output
using a voting scheme that is equivalent to an ensemble of a
large number of sequence models. We further investigate how
to weigh the contributions from each one of the members of
this ensemble. Our code for post-OCR correction is shared at
https://github.com/jarobyte91/post ocr correction.

Introduction
Since its inception in the early sixties, OCR has been a
promising and active area of research. Nowadays, systems
like Tesseract (Smith 1987) obtain accuracies above 90%
on documents from 19th- and early 20th-century newspaper
pages (Rice, R., and Nartker 1995), but the accurate recognition of older, historical texts remains an open challenge
due to their vocabulary, page layout, and typography. This
is why successful OCR systems are language-specific and
focus only on resource-rich languages, like English.
As a consequence of these difficulties, the task of automatically detecting and correcting errors in documents has been
studied for several decades (Kukich 1992), ranging from
techniques based on statistical language modelling (Tong
and Evans 1996), dictionary-based translation models (Kolak and Resnik 2002) or large collections of terms and word
sequences (Bassil and Alwani 2012).
With the advent of methods based on neural networks, and
more specifically, sequence models such as (Cho et al. 2014;
* Corresponding author. Please send correspondence to
juan.ramirez.orta@dal.ca
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11192

Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017), the automatic correction of texts using sequence models witnessed
considerable progress in the form of neural sequence models
based on characters or words (Rijhwani, Anastasopoulos, and
Neubig 2020; Schnober et al. 2016).
Character-based sequence models offer good generalization due to the flexibility of their vocabulary, but they are
challenging to train and inefficient at inference time, as generating a document one character at a time requires thousands
of steps. On the other hand, word-based sequence models
are efficient at inference time and more sample-efficient than
character-based sequence models, but they lack generalization, a problem that has been partially solved with systems
like WordPiece (Wu et al. 2016) or Byte-Pair Encodings
(Gage 1994), that learn useful sub-word units to represent
text from the data they are trained on.
In this work, we propose a novel method to correct documents of arbitrary length based on character sequence models. The novelty of our method lies in training a character
sequence model on short windows both to detect the mistakes
and to generate the candidate corrections at the same time,
instead of first finding the mistakes and then use a dictionary
or language model to correct them, as is usual with post-OCR
text correction systems.
The first main idea behind our method is to use the sequence model to correct n-grams of the document instead of
the whole document as a single sequence. In this way, the
document can be processed efficiently because the n-grams
are corrected in parallel. The other key idea of the method
is the combination of all the n-gram corrections into a single output, a process that adds robustness to the technique
and is equivalent to using an ensemble of a large number of
sequence models, where each one acts on a different segment.
The features that set apart the method proposed in this
paper from previous methods for post-OCR text correction
are the following:
• It can handle documents of great length and difficulty
while being character-based, which means that it can deal
with out-of-vocabulary sequences gracefully and be easily
applied to various languages.
• It is sample- and resource-efficient, requiring only a couple of hundred corrected documents in some cases to produce good improvements in the quality of the text while

