The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Strictly Proper Contract Functions Can Be Arbitrage-Free
Eric Neyman, Tim Roughgarden
Columbia University
eric.neyman@columbia.edu, tim.roughgarden@gmail.com

Abstract

expert opinion and the extent to which there is a consensus.
The principal could use the quadratic scoring rule (or any
other strictly proper scoring rule) to elicit each expert’s forecast. If experts are not allowed to collude, then this strategy
is incentive-compatible; however, (French 1983) observed
that experts can collude in a way that increases the sum
total profit of all experts, no matter the final outcome. For
example, if three experts believe that there is a 40%, 50%,
and 90% chance of rain and are rewarded with the quadratic
scoring rule, then their total reward is 0.28 + 0.5 + 0.98 =
1.76 if it rains and 0.68 + 0.5 − 0.62 = 0.56 if it does
not; but if they collude to all report 60% then their reward is
0.68+0.68+0.68 = 2.04 if it rains and 0.28+0.28+0.28 =
0.84 if it does not. The experts can agree beforehand to a redistribution of their rewards in such a way that each expert
is guaranteed to be better off than if they had not colluded.
(Chun and Shachter 2011) called this phenomenon —
in which experts collude to misreport in a way where their
total reward is larger no matter the outcome — arbitrage.
They showed that every strictly proper scoring rule admits
arbitrage — indeed, that there is an arbitrage opportunity for
any group of experts so long as they do not all agree on the
probability of the event. Specifically, a coalition of experts
can risklessly make a profit by deviating to report an aggregate of their beliefs (in the case of the quadratic scoring
rule, this aggregate is the arithmetic mean). (Neyman and
Roughgarden 2021) extends this observation to probability
distributions over more than two possible outcomes.

We consider mechanisms for truthfully eliciting probabilistic predictions from a group of experts. The standard approach — using a proper scoring rule to separately reward
each expert — is not robust to collusion: experts may collude to misreport their beliefs in a way that guarantees them
a larger total reward no matter the eventual outcome. It is a
long-standing open question whether there is a truthful elicitation mechanism that makes any such collusion (also called
arbitrage) impossible. We resolve this question positively, exhibiting a class of strictly proper arbitrage-free contract functions. These contract functions have two parts: one ensures
that the total reward of a coalition of experts depends only on
the average of their reports; the other ensures that changing
this average report hurts the experts under at least one outcome.

Introduction
Suppose that some person or entity (the principal) wishes
to elicit a probabilistic forecast from an expert: for example,
a local news organization may want to ask a meteorologist
for the probability that it will rain tomorrow. The principal
could incentivize the expert with a payment scheme that depends on the expert’s report (in our example, the meteorologist’s stated probability) and the eventual outcome (whether
or not it rains). Such a payment scheme is called a scoring rule, and a scoring rule is called proper if the expert’s
optimal strategy for maximizing expected payment is to report their belief. A scoring rule is called strictly proper if
this is the expert’s unique optimal strategy, no matter their
belief. The space of all strictly proper scoring rules is very
large, but the most well-known and frequently used one is
Brier’s quadratic scoring rule (Brier 1950), which gives an
expert who reports p a reward of 1 − 2(1 − p)2 if the event
happens and 1 − 2p2 if it does not. This can be thought of
as penalizing the expert based on their report’s distance to
the “right answer” (see Equation 1). The logarithmic scoring rule (Good 1952), which gives a reward of ln(p) if the
event happens and ln(1 − p) if it does not, is also strictly
proper and well known.
In many settings, the principal may wish to elicit forecasts from multiple experts, so as to get a better sense of

For many reasons, the expert may wish to make arbitrage
impossible. First, the principal may wish to know whether
the experts are in agreement: if they are not, for instance, the
principal may want to elicit opinions from more experts. If
the experts collude to report an aggregate value (as in our
example), the principal does not find out whether they originally agreed. Second, even if the principal only seeks to
act based on some aggregate of the experts’ opinions, their
method of aggregation may be different from the one that
experts use to collude. For instance, the principal may have
a private opinion on the trustworthiness of each expert and
wishes to average the experts’ opinions with corresponding
weights. Collusion among the experts denies the principal
this opportunity. Third, a principal may wish to track the accuracy of each individual expert (to figure out which experts

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5150

