The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving Local Search Algorithms via Probabilistic Configuration Checking
Weilin Luo1 , Rongzhen Ye1 , Hai Wan1,2∗ , Shaowei Cai3∗ , Biqing Fang1 , Delong Zhang1
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{luowlin3,yerzh,fangbq3,zhangdlong3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, caisw@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

set problem (MWDS) (Wang, Cai, and Yin 2017), and maximum k-plex problem (Chen et al. 2020). Although there are
numerous variants of CC, the way of defining the configuration relies on manual design. The configuration based on the
1-level neighborhoods of a vertex (Definition 1) is widely
used in CC-based local search algorithms. Another one is
the 2-level neighborhoods definition introduced for MWDS.
We argue that neighborhoods with more than two levels
can have an impact on a vertex and should be considered
in the configuration. To confirm that, we conduct a motivation experiment to give empirical evidence (details in Section 4), where we consider the 1st-, 2nd- and 2+ -level (Definition 1) neighborhoods in the configuration for MWDS.
We randomly choose half vertices at each level as its new
configuration. The results show that the new configuration
improves the average performance for 71% instances.
In this paper, we focus on a new variant of CC that can
capture the contributions of neighborhoods with different
levels to the CC strategy. Our work revolves around the following two questions. Firstly, is there a general way to define
the configuration of a vertex? Then, how does the new configuration lead to a further improvement of the CC strategy?
To answer the above questions, we propose a probabilistic configuration (PC) which can be grounded into a specific
configuration by training for a given COP. The highlights
of PC are as follows. Firstly, it allows automatic design of
configurations, as its general form provides a design space
of every possible definition of configuration based on neighborhoods. Secondly, it can easily lead to probabilistic configuration checking (PCC) strategy by following the updating rules of CC strategy. Finally, by introducing probability,
it enhances the ability to explore new candidate solutions.
We apply PCC to two CC-based local search algorithms (Wang, Cai, and Yin 2017, 2016) that achieve stateof-the-art performance for MWDS and MWCP respectively.
Following the assessment of the methods (Wang, Cai, and
Yin 2017, 2016), we conduct experiments to compare the
improved algorithms using PCC with the original ones on a
wide range of benchmarks, which shows the superiority of
PCC over the original CC strategies. Besides, further analyses show that by replacing the original CC strategies with
PCC, the number of different candidate solutions visited by
the algorithms in fixed steps significantly increases. This indicates that PCC can better alleviate the cycling issue, which

Configuration checking (CC) has been confirmed to alleviate
the cycling problem in local search for combinatorial optimization problems (COPs). When using CC heuristics in local
search for graph problems, a critical concept is the configuration of the vertices. All existing CC variants employ either
1- or 2-level neighborhoods of a vertex as its configuration.
Inspired by the idea that neighborhoods with different levels
should have different contributions to solving COPs, we propose the probabilistic configuration (PC), which introduces
probabilities for neighborhoods at different levels to consider
the impact of neighborhoods of different levels on the CC
strategy. Based on the concept of PC, we first propose probabilistic configuration checking (PCC), which can be developed in an automated and lightweight favor. We then apply
PCC to two classic COPs which have been shown to achieve
good results by using CC, and our preliminary results confirm that PCC improves the existing algorithms because PCC
alleviates the cycling problem.

1

Introduction

Local search is a popular method for solving combinatorial optimization problems (COPs). One severe issue with
local search is the cycling problem, i.e., revisiting a candidate solution that has been visited recently (Michiels, Aarts,
and Korst 2007). More generally, the cycling problem refers
to the phenomenon that a local search algorithm spends too
much time in searching a small part of the search space.
Configuration checking (CC) (Cai, Su, and Sattar 2011)
is an effective mechanism to alleviate the cycling problem
for COPs, particularly those graph theoretic ones. It is an
interesting alternative to the standard use of tabu mechanism (Glover 1989, 1990) to alleviate the cycling problem
in COPs. The main idea of the CC strategy is that if the configuration of a vertex remains unchanged since its last removal from the candidate solution, then it is forbidden to be
added back into the candidate solution. In recent years, there
have been variants of CC adapted to different COPs, such as
maximum weight clique problem (MWCP) (Wang, Cai, and
Yin 2016; Wang et al. 2020), minimum weight dominating
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10283

