The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MobileFaceSwap: A Lightweight Framework for Video Face Swapping
Zhiliang Xu1 , Zhibin Hong1 * , Changxing Ding2 , Zhen Zhu3 ,
Junyu Han1 , Jingtuo Liu1 , Errui Ding1
1

Baidu Inc.
South China University of Technology
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{xuzhiliang, hongzhibin, hanjunyu, liujintuo, dingerrui}@baidu.com,
chxding@scut.edu.cn, zhenzhu4@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

Source

Advanced face swapping methods have achieved appealing
results. However, most of these methods have many parameters and computations, which makes it challenging to apply
them in real-time applications or deploy them on edge devices
like mobile phones. In this work, we propose a lightweight
Identity-aware Dynamic Network (IDN) for subject-agnostic
face swapping by dynamically adjusting the model parameters according to the identity information. In particular, we
design an efficient Identity Injection Module (IIM) by introducing two dynamic neural network techniques, including the weights prediction and weights modulation. Once
the IDN is updated, it can be applied to swap faces given
any target image or video. The presented IDN contains only
0.50M parameters and needs 0.33G FLOPs per frame, making it capable for real-time video face swapping on mobile
phones. In addition, we introduce a knowledge distillationbased method for stable training, and a loss reweighting module is employed to obtain better synthesized results. Finally,
our method achieves comparable results with the teacher
models and other state-of-the-art methods.

Target

SimSwap

Ours
Ours
(SimSwap) FaceShifter (FaceShifter)

Figure 1: Face swapping results of our and the teacher models by swapping the face of the target image with the source
image. Our method decreases the computations of SimSwap
and FaceShifter by 146 and 207 times while preserving the
visual fidelity.

A natural idea to address the challenges above is using
model compression techniques to produce a lightweight network for face swapping. However, when we apply the channel pruning technique and shrink the network to significantly
compress the SimSwap or FaceShifter, we observe that it
is troublesome to obtain pleasant face swapping results. In
particular, some of the generated images have apparent artifacts, or the identities of the generated images may not be
similar to the source images as the compressed model is insufficient to inject identity information with the limited network capacity. Inspired by the subject-aware face swapping
technique (Perov et al. 2020), we also find that the better
swapped images can be obtained if we fix the source image
and train a lightweight model for a specific identity. Therefore, to achieve subject-agnostic and real-time face swapping, an intuitive idea is to adjust the parameters of a neural
network according to the identity information.
Inspired by the dynamic neural network techniques, we
propose a lightweight Identity-aware Dynamic Network
(IDN) for real time face swapping. To efficiently inject identity information, we also design an Identity Injection Module (IIM) using weights prediction (De Brabandere et al.
2016) and weights modulation (Karras et al. 2020) to adjust the parameters of IDN. In this way, the IDN can be
updated given the needed identity information, and then
we can achieve fast face swapping for any target image or
video. Our method can significantly reduce the parameters
and computations using these designs and achieve compa-

Introduction
Recently, face swapping has drawn much attention from the
research community, and it has many applications in visual
effects. Face swapping means transferring the identity information of the source image to the target image while keeping the other attributes like the expression and background
of the target image unchanged. Face swapping has achieved
rapid progress with deep learning. However, most of these
methods require many parameters and involve high computation costs. For example, FaceShifter (Li et al. 2020a)
contains two stages for face swapping. The first stage alone
has nearly 421M parameters and 97.4G FLOPs. FSGAN
(Nirkin, Keller, and Hassner 2019) proposes a more complicated algorithm, which has over 226M parameters and
2440G FLOPs in total. Despite SimSwap (Chen et al. 2020)
claims that it presents an efficient network, it still has 107M
parameters and 55.7G FLOPs. It is not only challenging to
deploy these methods on edge devices, but these methods
also require plenty of time for video face swapping, which
means we cannot deploy them in real-time applications.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2973

