The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ApproxIFER: A Model-Agnostic Approach to
Resilient and Robust Prediction Serving Systems
Mahdi Soleymani1 , Ramy E. Ali2 , Hessam Mahdavifar1 , A. Salman Avestimehr2
1

University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
University of Southern California (USC)
mahdy@umich.edu, reali@usc.edu, hessam@umich.edu, avestime@usc.edu
2

Abstract

the same task to multiple workers, either proactively or reactively, in order to reduce the tail latency of the computations
(Suresh et al. 2015; Dean and Barroso 2013; Shah, Lee, and
Ramchandran 2015; Gardner et al. 2015; Chaubey and Saule
2015). Replication, however, entails significant overhead as
a result of assigning the same task to multiple workers.
Erasure coding is known to be more resource-efficient
compared to replication and has been recently leveraged to
speed up distributed computing and learning systems (Lee
et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2019; Yu, Maddah-Ali, and Avestimehr
2017; Narra et al. 2019; Muralee Krishnan, Hosseini, and
Khisti 2020; Soto, Li, and Fan 2019). The traditional codingtheoretic approaches, known as the coded computing approaches, are limited to polynomial computations and require
a large number of workers that depends on the desired computation. Hence, such techniques cannot be directly applied
in prediction serving systems.
To overcome the limitations of the traditional codingtheoretic approaches, a learning-based approach known as
ParM was proposed in (Kosaian, Rashmi, and Venkataraman
2019). In ParM, the prediction queries are encoded using an
erasure code. These coded queries are then transformed into
coded predictions by learning parity models to provide straggler resiliency. The desired predictions are then reconstructed
from the fastest workers as shown in Fig. 1. By doing this,
ParM can be applied to non-polynomial computations with a
number of workers that is independent of the computations.
These parity models, however, depend on the model hosted
by the cloud and are suitable for tolerating one straggler and
handling a small number of queries (typically less than 4).
Moreover, they require retraining whenever they are used
with a new hosted model. In this work, we take a different approach leveraging approximate coded computing techniques
(Jahani-Nezhad and Maddah-ali 2022) to design scalable,
straggler-resilient and Byzantine-robust prediction serving
systems. Our approach relies on rational interpolation techniques (Berrut 1988) to estimate the predictions of the slow
and erroneous workers from the predictions of the other workers. Our contributions in this work are summarized as follows.

Due to the surge of cloud-assisted AI services, the problem of
designing resilient prediction serving systems that can effectively cope with stragglers and minimize response delays has
attracted much interest. The common approach for tackling
this problem is replication which assigns the same prediction
task to multiple workers. This approach, however, is inefficient and incurs significant resource overheads. Hence, a
learning-based approach known as parity model (ParM) has
been recently proposed which learns models that can generate “parities” for a group of predictions to reconstruct the
predictions of the slow/failed workers. While this learningbased approach is more resource-efficient than replication, it
is tailored to the specific model hosted by the cloud and is
particularly suitable for a small number of queries (typically
less than four) and tolerating very few stragglers (mostly one).
Moreover, ParM does not handle Byzantine adversarial workers. We propose a different approach, named Approximate
Coded Inference (ApproxIFER), that does not require training
any parity models, hence it is agnostic to the model hosted
by the cloud and can be readily applied to different data domains and model architectures. Compared with earlier works,
ApproxIFER can handle a general number of stragglers and
scales significantly better with the number of queries. Furthermore, ApproxIFER is robust against Byzantine workers.
Our extensive experiments on a large number of datasets and
model architectures show significant degraded mode accuracy
improvement by up to 58% over ParM.

Introduction
Machine learning as a service (MLaS) paradigms allow incapable clients to outsource their computationally-demanding
tasks such as neural network inference tasks to powerful
clouds (Amazon 2021; Microsoft 2021; Google 2021). More
specifically, prediction serving systems host complex machine learning models and respond to the inference queries
by the corresponding predictions with low latency. To ensure
a fast response to the different queries in the presence of
stragglers, prediction serving systems distribute these queries
on multiple workers in the system each having an instance
of the deployed model (Crankshaw et al. 2017). Such systems mitigate stragglers through replication which assigns

1. We propose ApproxIFER, a model-agnostic inference
framework that leverages approximate computing techniques. In ApproxIFER, all workers deploy instances of
the model hosted by the cloud and no additional models
are required as shown in Fig. 2. Furthermore, the encod-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8342

