The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Learn Transferable Attack
Shuman Fang,1 * Jie Li,1 * Xianming Lin,1† Rongrong Ji1,2
1

MAC Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
fangshuman@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lijie.32@outlook.com, linxm@xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
𝒈𝒔𝒑𝒕

Support Set

Transfer adversarial attack is a non-trivial black-box adversarial attack that aims to craft adversarial perturbations on the
surrogate model and then apply such perturbations to the victim model. However, the transferability of perturbations from
existing methods is still limited, since the adversarial perturbations are easily overfitting with a single surrogate model
and specific data pattern. In this paper, we propose a Learning
to Learn Transferable Attack (LLTA) method, which makes
the adversarial perturbations more generalized via learning
from both data and model augmentation. For data augmentation, we adopt simple random resizing and padding. For
model augmentation, we randomly alter the back propagation
instead of the forward propagation to eliminate the effect on
the model prediction. By treating the attack of both specific
data and a modified model as a task, we expect the adversarial perturbations to adopt enough tasks for generalization.
To this end, the meta-learning algorithm is further introduced
during the iteration of perturbation generation. Empirical results on the widely-used dataset demonstrate the effectiveness
of our attack method with a 12.85% higher success rate of
transfer attack comparing with the state-of-the-art methods.
We also evaluate our method on the real-world online system,
i.e., Google Cloud Vision API, to further show the practical
potentials of our method.

Transform

…

𝜹′
…

Image

Combine
…

Model

Generate

various
decay factors
Task Generation

𝜹

…

Query Set

𝒈𝒒𝒓𝒚

Meta-Learning Optimization

Figure 1: Overview of LLTA, which includes task generation
and meta-learning optimization. In task generation, treating
attacking of an augmented data and model as a task, we
generate multiple tasks by adopting random transformation
…
(data augmentation) and introducing a group of learnable
decay factors on backpropagation (model augmentation). In
meta-learning optimization, we split these tasks into support
set and query set, craft a temporary perturbation from support set and finetune it on the query set. Finally we update
the actual perturbation with the gradient from two sets.

adversarial perturbations by querying the victim model iteratively, which achieves a high attack success rate but brings
more resource cost (Ilyas, Engstrom, and Madry 2019; Li
et al. 2020a, 2021). Instead, the transfer-based attack crafts
the adversarial perturbations on a white-box surrogate model
and then transfer to the victim model directly, which is more
efficient and avoids suspicion. Essentially, the adversarial
transferability is highly expected since the surrogate model
should be ideally similar to the victim model (Orekondy,
Schiele, and Fritz 2019; Wang et al. 2021). However, as
in reality the perturbations usually overfit to the surrogate
model, the transfer success rate remains unsatisfactory.
To this end, many efforts have been put to learn more
generalized perturbations. Dong et al. (2018) and Lin et al.
(2020) integrated optimization techniques. These techniques
are effective but with limited improvement space for adversarial attack due to the small number of optimization steps
here. Huang et al. (2019) and Li, Guo, and Chen (2020) only
perturbed features from the intermediate layer of DNNs, but
the layer should be picked manually and carefully. There are
also some augmentation-based methods (Xie et al. 2019; Lin

Introduction
Though showing dominant advance in various tasks, deep
neural networks (DNNs) are proven vulnerable to adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015),
i.e., adding well-designed human-imperceptible perturbations into natural images can mislead DNNs. Such a drawback has raised high-security concerns when deploying
DNNs in security-sensitive scenarios (Xiao et al. 2021; Fang
et al. 2021), which has caused researchers to attach attention
to model security (Wu, Xia, and Wang 2020; Naseer et al.
2020). According to the knowledge of victim model, the adversarial attack can be categorized into white-box and blackbox attack. The black-box attack is more practical but challenging, which can be further divided into query-based and
transfer-based attack. The query-based attack polishes the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

571

