The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semi-supervised Object Detection with Adaptive Class-Rebalancing Self-Training
Fangyuan Zhang,1,2 Tianxiang Pan, 1,2 Bin Wang 1,2 *
1

School of Software, Tsinghua Unviersity
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
zhangfy19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ptx9363@gmail.com, wangbins@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

tain accurate pseudo-labels, self-training adopts a high confidence threshold. This scheme leads to sparse foreground
instances distribution in detection data, i.e. foregroundbackground imbalance (see Fig.1 (b)).
The above two types of imbalance yield biased pseudolabels during self-training. Subsequent training on biased
supervisions further intensifies the class imbalance, thereby
aggravating the performance of the final model. Unfortunately, this problem is largely overlooked in current solutions and hinders further improvements in SSOD.
To address the preceding issues, using data-rebalancing
algorithms in classification tasks (Pang et al. 2019; Ouyang
et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015) is an intuitive solution. However, this idea is impeded by entanglements of foreground
instances and background in detection data. Besides, directly
redistributing class distributions without prior information
on unlabeled data is insufficient in previous researches.
Contributions. In this work, we introduce a simple yet effective Adaptive Class-Rebalancing Self-Training (ACRST)
method to redistribute pseudo-labels. ACRST consists
of two detection-specific data-rebalancing algorithms:
foreground-background rebalancing (FBR) and adaptive
foreground-foreground rebalancing (AFFR).
Before handling class imbalance, we design a memory
module called CropBank to decouple instance entanglements in detection data. CropBank stores classification and
localization information of foreground instances, according
to ground-truths and pseudo-labels during training. As far
as we know, CropBank is the first method to allow distribution rebalancing at instance-level instead of image-level.
Besides, we contribute a selective supervision scheme to reduce noise in inaccurate regression with CropBank.
We first propose FBR to address the foregroundbackground imbalance in SSOD. FBR samples foreground
instances from CropBank and injects them into other images
to produce unbiased data. In this regard, FBR directly adjusts the proportion of foreground instances in self-training
and alleviates the foreground-background imbalance.
We then design AFFR based on FBR to handle the
foreground-foreground imbalance. Specifically, a simple yet
effective criterion called Pseudo Recall is proposed to judge
which class is neglected or over-focused during training.
Consequently, pseudo-labels of neglected classes are sampled more frequently because of higher negative confidence,

While self-training achieves state-of-the-art results in semisupervised object detection (SSOD), it severely suffers from
foreground-background and foreground-foreground imbalances in SSOD. In this paper, we propose an Adaptive ClassRebalancing Self-Training (ACRST) with a novel memory module called CropBank to alleviate these imbalances
and generate unbiased pseudo-labels. Besides, we observe
that both self-training and data-rebalancing procedures suffer from noisy pseudo-labels in SSOD. Therefore, we contribute a simple yet effective two-stage pseudo-label filtering
scheme to obtain accurate supervision. Our method achieves
competitive performance on MS-COCO and VOC benchmarks. When using only 1% labeled data of MS-COCO, our
method achieves 17.02 mAP improvement over the supervised method and 5.32 mAP gains compared with state-ofthe-arts.

Introduction
Recently, significant progress has been witnessed in deeplearning-based object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Zhu et al.
2021; Tian et al. 2019). However, this success heavily relies
on large datasets with bounding-box annotations, which are
prohibitively time-consuming and expensive to collect.
Therefore, a surge of attention has been dedicated to semisupervised object detection (SSOD), which uses a small
amount of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data
to obtain an accurate detector. In this regard, state-of-the-art
SSOD performance has been achieved by the self-training
paradigm (Liu et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2021; Sohn et al.
2020), in which pseudo-labels of unlabeled data are generated as extra supervisions.
Motivations. Despite the promising results, the majority of SSOD approaches are inherited directly from
advanced self-training algorithms (Tarvainen and Valpola
2017; Xie et al. 2020b; Laine and Aila 2017), which are
designed specifically for classification tasks under a classbalanced data distribution. However, most real-world detection datasets have biased class distributions where few
classes occupy the majority of instances, i.e. foregroundforeground imbalance as shown in Fig.1 (a). And, to ob* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3252

