The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Modal Object Tracking: Modality-Aware Representations and A Unified
Benchmark
Chenglong Li1,2,4 , Tianhao Zhu3* , Lei Liu3 * , Xiaonan Si3 , Zilin Fan3 , Sulan Zhai5†
1

Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Hefei, China
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, Hefei, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
5
School of Mathematical Sciences, Anhui University, Hefei, China
lcl1314@foxmail.com, zhutianhao79@gmail.com, liulei970507@163.com, 1065682519,1198791575@qq.com,
01044@ahu.edu.cn
Abstract

Some works introduce other modalities such as depth
and infrared data to overcome imaging limitations of RGB
source (Song and Xiao 2013; Li et al. 2016, 2019b). However, multi-modal imaging platforms usually require elaborate design and cannot be applied in many real-world applications at present. For example, the depth sensors can provide valuable additional depth information to improve tracking results by robust occlusion and model drift handling, but
suffer from the limited range (e.g., 4-5 meters at most) and
indoor environment (Song and Xiao 2013; Li et al. 2016).
Thermal sensors are usually independent of RGB ones and
their visual properties are very different. Therefore, a lot
of efforts are needed in platform design and frames alignment (Li et al. 2016, 2019b).
Near-infrared (NIR) imaging becomes an essential part of
many surveillance cameras, whose imaging is switchable between RGB and NIR based on the light intensity, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). This kind of imaging system well handles imaging limitations of RGB source in low-light conditions while
avoiding the imaging and platform problems introduced by
existing multi-modal visual systems. From Fig. 1(b) we can
also observe that these two modalities are heterogeneous
with very different visual properties and the appearance of
the target object is thus totally different in different modalities. Such an appearance gap brings big challenges for visual
tracking, and existing tracking works have not studied this
challenging problem.
In this work, we address the problem of cross-modal object tracking and aim to answer the following two questions.
How to design a suitable algorithm, which could mitigate the
appearance gap between RGB and NIR modalities and flexibly embedded into different tracking frameworks, for robust
cross-modal object tracking? How to create a video benchmark dataset for the promotion of research and development
of cross-modal object tracking?
First, we propose a Modality-Aware cross-Modal Object
Tracking algorithm (MArMOT), which learns the modalityaware target representations to mitigate the appearance gap
between RGB and NIR modalities in the tracking process.
MArMOT is plug-and-play and could thus be flexibly embedded into different tracking frameworks. MArMOT in-

In many visual systems, visual tracking often bases on RGB
image sequences, in which some targets are invalid in lowlight conditions, and tracking performance is thus affected
significantly. Introducing other modalities such as depth and
infrared data is an effective way to handle imaging limitations
of individual sources, but multi-modal imaging platforms
usually require elaborate designs and cannot be applied in
many real-world applications at present. Near-infrared (NIR)
imaging becomes an essential part of many surveillance cameras, whose imaging is switchable between RGB and NIR
based on the light intensity. These two modalities are heterogeneous with very different visual properties and thus bring
big challenges for visual tracking. However, existing works
have not studied this challenging problem. In this work, we
address the cross-modal object tracking problem and contribute a new video dataset, including 644 cross-modal image
sequences with over 478K frames in total, and the average
video length is more than 742 frames. To promote the research and development of cross-modal object tracking, we
propose a new algorithm, which learns the modality-aware
target representation to mitigate the appearance gap between
RGB and NIR modalities in the tracking process. It is plugand-play and could thus be flexibly embedded into different
tracking frameworks. Extensive experiments on the dataset
are conducted, and we demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm in two representative tracking frameworks against 19 state-of-the-art tracking methods.

Introduction
Visual tracking is an important problem in the field of computer vision and plays a critical role in many visual systems, such as visual surveillance, intelligent transportation,
and robotics. However, existing tracking methods often base
on RGB image sequences which are sensitive to illumination variations, and some targets are thus invalid in low-light
conditions. In such scenarios, the tracking performance of
existing methods might degrade significantly.
* Tianhao Zhu and Lei Liu contribute equally to the article.
†

Sulan Zhai is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1289

