The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Causal Discovery in Hawkes Processes
by Minimum Description Length
Amirkasra Jalaldoust,1,2 Kateřina Hlaváčková-Schindler, 3,4 Claudia Plant, 3,5
1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA
Department of Mathematical Science, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
3
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
4
Institute of Computer Science, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic
5
ds:UniVie, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
jalaldoust@cs.columbia.edu, katerina.schindlerova@univie.ac.at, claudia.plant@univie.ac.at
2

Abstract

Methods to discover Granger-causal graphs in MHP search
for a solution of a variable selection problem, mostly in
terms of an optimum of a corresponding objective function constructed for the MHP at hand (Zhou, Zha, and Song
2013a; Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016; Zhou, Zha, and Song
2013b). These methods usually show good performance in
scenarios with ”long” horizon T , i.e. when T is greater by
several orders of magnitude than the dimension of MHP p,
however in the opposite case of ”short” horizon, they often suffer from over-fitting. We define short event sequence
when the time horizon is at most of order 100 · p for a pdimensional event sequence.
In our paper we approach causal discovery in MHP by
the minimum description (MDL) principle which was as a
model selection method introduced in (Rissanen 1998) and
developed in (Grünwald and Roos 2019). Although MDL
has been already applied to graphical Granger-causality in
(Hlaváčková-Schindler and Plant 2020a) for Gaussian time
series with a significant precision superiority over baseline
methods, application of MDL to Hawkes processes is more
challenging due to the nature of the processes. The contributions of our paper are summarized as follows.

Hawkes processes are a special class of temporal point processes which exhibit a natural notion of causality, as occurrence of events in the past may increase the probability of
events in the future. Discovery of the underlying influence
network among the dimensions of multi-dimensional temporal processes is of high importance in disciplines where
a high-frequency data is to model, e.g. in financial data
or in seismological data. This paper approaches the problem of learning Granger-causal network in multi-dimensional
Hawkes processes. We formulate this problem as a model
selection task in which we follow the minimum description length (MDL) principle. Moreover, we propose a general algorithm for MDL-based inference using a Monte-Carlo
method and we use it for our causal discovery problem.
We compare our algorithm with the state-of-the-art baseline
methods on synthetic and real-world financial data. The synthetic experiments demonstrate superiority of our method in
causal graph discovery compared to the baseline methods
with respect to the size of the data. The results of experiments
with the G-7 bonds price data are consistent with the experts’
knowledge.

1

Introduction

• We present a general procedure for practical estimation of a MDL objective function based on Monte-Carlo
(MC) methods for estimation of integrals.

In many applications, one needs to deal with multidimensional sequential data of irregular or asynchronous nature occurring in a continuous time. The examples can be
preferences of users in in social networks, interactions of areas during earthquakes and aftershocks in geophysics (Veen
and Schoenberg 2008) or high-frequency signals in financial data (Bacry, Mastromatteo, and Muzy 2015). These data
can be seen as event sequences containing multiple event
types and modeled by a multi-dimensional Hawkes process
(MHP)(Hawkes 1971), also known as a self-exciting temporal point process. The main advantage of using Hawkes
processes over e.g. Poisson processes is that they permit to
model the influence of the past events on the current behavior of the process, due to their memory property. Eichler
(Eichler, Dahlhaus, and Dueck 2017) introduced the graphical Granger causal model for MHP in the form of an autoregressive structure for the intensities of each marginal process.

• Using this procedure we construct an MDL objective
function for inference of the Granger-causal graph for
multi-dimensional Hawkes processes.
• We evaluate the performance of our causal discovery algorithm on both synthetic and real-world data, and compare our results with the baseline methods. Our method
demonstrates a significant superiority in causal discovery
for short event sequences.
The paper is organized as follows: The multi-dimensional
Hawkes processes and the minimum description length principle are defined in Section 2. Section 3 presents our method
to estimate a general MDL function. Causal discovery in
Hawkes processes is proposed in Section 4. Related work is
discussed in Section 5. Section 6 presents experiments and
discussion and our conclusion is in Section 7. The Appendix
contains a proof and experimental setup.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6978

