The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Modality-Adaptive Mixup and Invariant Decomposition for RGB-Infrared
Person Re-identification
Zhipeng Huang1 * , Jiawei Liu1 * , Liang Li2 , Kecheng Zheng1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hzp1104,zkcys001}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {jwliu6,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract

(RGB-RGB) matching problem. They have achieved remarkable progresses in recent years for addressing appearance discrepancy (large intra-class and small inter-class variations). However, visible (RGB) cameras can not provide
useful appearance information under poor illumination environments (e.g., at night), which limits the applicability of
person Re-ID in a real scenario.
To handle this issue, recent surveillance systems begin to
be equipped with infrared (IR) cameras to facilitate nighttime monitoring, which raises a new cross-modality matching task termed RGB-infrared person Re-ID (Wu et al.
2017). RGB-infrared person Re-ID aims to find the corresponding IR (or RGB) images of the same person captured
by other spectrum cameras, given a RGB (or IR) image
of a target person. Compared with the conventional singlemodality person Re-ID, it encounters prominent modality
discrepancy derived from the different imaging processes
between different spectrum cameras (RGB and infrared images are intrinsically heterogeneous, which have different
wavelength ranges), apart from appearance discrepancy. The
key solution for RGB-infrared person Re-ID is to bridge
large modality gap, and learn modality-invariant and discriminative features from RGB and IR images.
Existing RGB-infrared person Re-ID approaches mainly
concentrate on mitigating the inherent modality discrepancy at the pixel-level or the feature-level to extract crossmodality shared features. For alleviating modality discrepancy at the pixel-level, these methods commonly design
complex generative adversarial models (Dai et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019b, 2020, 2019a) to perform image-to-image
translation and generate fake counterpart images, which are
difficult to optimize and inevitably introduce noisy generated samples due to the ill-posed infrared-to-RGB transforming. On the other hand, for mitigating modality discrepancy at the feature-level, these methods employ onestream (Wu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020) or two-stream
networks (Ye et al. 2018a,b, 2020; Hao et al. 2019; Zhu
et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2019) to extract modality-invariant
features by several customized losses. Nevertheless, onestream network based methods learn a common network
model, which lacks the capacity of explicitly modeling individual modalities and neglects modality specific characteristics, leading to crucial information loss. The two-stream
network based methods firstly utilize separate branch lay-

RGB-infrared person re-identification is an emerging crossmodality re-identification task, which is very challenging due
to significant modality discrepancy between RGB and infrared images. In this work, we propose a novel modalityadaptive mixup and invariant decomposition (MID) approach
for RGB-infrared person re-identification towards learning
modality-invariant and discriminative representations. MID
designs a modality-adaptive mixup scheme to generate suitable mixed modality images between RGB and infrared images for mitigating the inherent modality discrepancy at
the pixel-level. It formulates modality mixup procedure as
Markov decision process, where an actor-critic agent learns
dynamical and local linear interpolation policy between different regions of cross-modality images under a deep reinforcement learning framework. Such policy guarantees
modality-invariance in a more continuous latent space and
avoids manifold intrusion by the corrupted mixed modality
samples. Moreover, to further counter modality discrepancy
and enforce invariant visual semantics at the feature-level,
MID employs modality-adaptive convolution decomposition
to disassemble a regular convolution layer into modalityspecific basis layers and a modality-shared coefficient layer.
Extensive experimental results on two challenging benchmarks demonstrate superior performance of MID over stateof-the-art methods.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) (Sun et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2016, 2019) has attracted increasing attention recently, due
to its widespread applications in automated tracking (Wang
2013; Kim et al. 2017) and activity analysis (Aggarwal and
Ryoo 2011; Caba Heilbron et al. 2015), etc. It aims at identifying a target pedestrian from a gallery set captured from
multi-disjoint camera views. Person Re-ID is quite challenging due to large intra-class and small inter-class variations
caused by background clutter, occlusion, dramatic variations
in illumination, body pose, etc. Most existing person Re-ID
methods mainly focus on RGB images of pedestrians from
visible cameras and formulate the task as a single-modality
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1034

