The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unbiased IoU for Spherical Image Object Detection
Feng Dai,1 Bin Chen,2,1 Hang Xu,3 Yike Ma,1 Xiaodong Li,4 Bailan Feng,4
Peng Yuan,4 Chenggang Yan,3 Qiang Zhao1∗
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China, 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Abstract

As one of the fundamental components of object detection, intersection-over-union (IoU) calculations between two
bounding boxes play an important role in samples selection, NMS operation and evaluation of object detection algorithms. This procedure is well-defined and solved for planar images, while it is challenging for spherical ones. Some
existing methods utilize planar bounding boxes to represent
spherical objects. However, they are biased due to the distortions of spherical objects. Others use spherical rectangles as
unbiased representations, but they adopt excessive approximate algorithms when computing the IoU. In this paper, we
propose an unbiased IoU as a novel evaluation criterion for
spherical image object detection, which is based on the unbiased representations and utilize unbiased analytical method
for IoU calculation. This is the first time that the absolutely
accurate IoU calculation is applied to the evaluation criterion,
thus object detection algorithms can be correctly evaluated
for spherical images. With the unbiased representation and
calculation, we also present Spherical CenterNet, an anchor
free object detection algorithm for spherical images. The experiments show that our unbiased IoU gives accurate results
and the proposed Spherical CenterNet achieves better performance on one real-world and two synthetic spherical object
detection datasets than existing methods.

Figure 1: (a) Axis-aligned rectangle used in planar image,
(b) axis-aligned rectangle used as biased representation in
unrolled spherical image, (c) part of spherical zone used in
biased approximate calculation on the sphere.

over-union (IoU) is always indispensable for the different
network training or inference phrases. However, although
it can be defined and calculated easily for planar image
object detection task, it is challenging and unsolved for
spherical ones, which leads to comparatively limited existing studies for spherical image object detection. Some existing works directly use biased representations, such as axisaligned rectangles or circles as representations for objects
and check whether a predicted detection is correct based on
the IoU between two bounding boxes in unrolled spherical
images (Yang et al. 2018; Wang and Lai 2019; Lee et al.
2019). These works would give large errors due to the distortions of spherical objects, which have made these evaluation criteria adopted in planar object detection, shown in
Figure 1 (a), is not suitable because axis-aligned rectangles
can not tightly bound objects in unrolled spherical images as
shown in Figure 1 (b). Other works are based on the unbiased representations but utilize the biased IoU calculations.
These works either use the rectangles on tangent planes of
sphere as bounding boxes (Su and Grauman 2017; Coors,
Condurache, and Geiger 2018) or represent each object using a spherical rectangle on the sphere (Chou et al. 2020;
Zhao et al. 2020). Nevertheless, when computing the IoU,
they adopt excessive approximate compromises for simplicity of computation, such as considering the spherical rectangles as part of spherical zones as shown in Figure 1 (c),
which would give incorrect results. In a nutshell, none of existing methods gives both unbiased representations and unbiased IoU calculations for spherical image object detection.
In this paper, we propose an unbiased IoU as a new evaluation criterion for spherical image object detection task,

Introduction
Due to the development of numerous panoramic cameras in
recent years, spherical multimedia data are widely used in
virtual navigation, cultural heritage and entertainment industry (Anguelov et al. 2010), which also facilitate the progress
in the panoramic research (Zhang et al. 2019; Gu, Sun, and
Xu 2020; Shen et al. 2021). With the growing amount of
these new types of data, it is also required to detect objects
in spherical images for better understanding their contents.
For example, Hu et al. treat detected foreground objects as
targets to be followed in 360◦ piloting (Hu et al. 2017).
In the literature, a lot of planar image object detection
algorithms (Ren et al. 2017; Zhou, Wang, and Krähenbühl
2019) have been proposed and this field has achieved significant breakthroughs. Among these algorithms, intersection∗
Corresponding author: qiangzhao@ieee.org. This work was
done when Qiang was at ICT.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

508

