The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Curiosity-Driven Exploration via Latent Bayesian Surprise
Pietro Mazzaglia, Ozan Catal, Tim Verbelen, Bart Dhoedt
IDLab, Ghent University
pietro.mazzaglia@ugent.be, ozan.catal@ugent.be, tim.verbelen@ugent.be, bart.dhoedt@ugent.be

Abstract

wards (Matusch, Ba, and Hafner 2020), fostering more selfsupervised strategies of learning.
The idea of instilling intrinsic motivation, or ‘curiosity’,
into artificial agents has raised a large interest in the RL
community (Oudeyer, Kaplan, and Hafner 2007; Schmidhuber 1991), where curiosity is used to generate intrinsic rewards that replace or complement the external reward function. However, what is the best approach to generate intrinsic
bonuses is still unsettled and current techniques underperform in certain domains, such as stochastic or ambiguous
environments (Wauthier et al. 2021).
Several successful approaches modeled intrinsic rewards
as the ‘surprisal’ of a model. In layman’s terms, this can
be described as the difference between the agent’s belief
about the environment state and the ground truth, and can be
implemented as the model’s prediction error (Achiam and
Sastry 2017; Pathak et al. 2017). However, searching for
less predictable states suffers from the ‘NoisyTV problem’,
where watching a screen outputting white random noise appears more interesting than other exploratory behaviours
(Schmidhuber 2010). This because the noise of the TV is
stochastic and thus results generally more interesting than
the rest of the environment (Burda et al. 2019a).
In contrast, Bayesian surprise (Itti and Baldi 2006) measures the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs of an agent, after observing new data. As we also
show in this work, this means that for stochastic transitions of the environment, which carry no novel information to update the agent’s beliefs, low intrinsic bonuses are
provided, potentially overcoming the NoisyTV issue. Previous work adopting Bayesian surprise for exploration has
mostly focused on evaluating surprise in the model’s parameter space (Houthooft et al. 2016), which suffers from being
computationally-expensive.
Contributions. In this work, we present a new curiosity
bonus based on the concept of Bayesian surprise. Establishing a latent variable model in the task dynamics, we derive Latent Bayesian Surprise (LBS) as the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs of a latent dynamics
model. Our dynamics model uses the random variable in latent space to predict the future, while at the same time capturing any uncertainty in the dynamics of the task.
The main contributions of the work are as follows: (i) a latent dynamics model, which captures the information about

The human intrinsic desire to pursue knowledge, also known
as curiosity, is considered essential in the process of skill acquisition. With the aid of artificial curiosity, we could equip
current techniques for control, such as Reinforcement Learning, with more natural exploration capabilities. A promising
approach in this respect has consisted of using Bayesian surprise on model parameters, i.e. a metric for the difference between prior and posterior beliefs, to favour exploration. In
this contribution, we propose to apply Bayesian surprise in
a latent space representing the agent’s current understanding of the dynamics of the system, drastically reducing the
computational costs. We extensively evaluate our method by
measuring the agent’s performance in terms of environment
exploration, for continuous tasks, and looking at the game
scores achieved, for video games. Our model is computationally cheap and compares positively with current state-of-theart methods on several problems. We also investigate the effects caused by stochasticity in the environment, which is often a failure case for curiosity-driven agents. In this regime,
the results suggest that our approach is resilient to stochastic
transitions.

Introduction
Agents can be trained with Reinforcement Learning (RL) to
successfully accomplish tasks by maximising a reward signal that encourages correct behaviors and penalizes wrong
actions. For instance, agents can learn to play video games
by maximizing the game score (Mnih et al. 2015) or achieve
robotic manipulation tasks, such as solving a Rubik’s cube
(OpenAI et al. 2019), by following human-engineered rewards. However, how to correctly define reward functions to
develop general skills remains an unsolved problem, and it is
likely to stumble across undesired behaviours when designing rewards for complex tasks (Amodei et al. 2016; Clark
and Amodei 2016; Krakovna et al. 2020; Popov et al. 2017).
In contrast to RL agents, humans can learn behaviors
without any external rewards, due to the intrinsic motivation that naturally drives them to be active and explore the
environment (Larson and Rusk 2011; Legault 2016). The design of similar mechanisms for RL agents opens up possibilities for training and evaluating agents without external reCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7752

