The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pale Transformer: A General Vision Transformer Backbone with Pale-Shaped
Attention
Sitong Wu1,2 , Tianyi Wu1,2 , Haoru Tan3 , Guodong Guo1,2 *
1

2

Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
wusitong98@gmail.com, {wutianyi01, guoguodong01}@baidu.com, tanhaoru2018@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

the local settings. For example, Swin (Liu et al. 2021) and
Shuffle Transformer (Huang et al. 2021) proposed shifted
window and shuffled window, respectively (Figure 1(b)),
and alternately used two different window partitions (i.e.,
regular window and the proposed window) in consecutive
blocks to build cross-window connections. MSG Transformer (Fang et al. 2021) manipulated the messenger tokens to exchange information across windows. Axial selfattention (Wang et al. 2020) treated the local attention region as a single row or column of the feature map (Figure
1(c)). CSWin (Dong et al. 2021) proposed cross-shaped window self-attention (Figure 1(d)), which can be regarded as a
multiple row and column expansion of axial self-attention.
Although these methods achieve excellent performance and
are even superior to the CNN counterparts, the dependencies
in each self-attention layer are not rich enough for capturing
sufficient contextual information.
In this work, we propose a Pale-Shaped self-Attention
(PS-Attention) to capture richer contextual dependencies
efficiently. Specifically, the input feature maps are first
split into multiple pale-shaped regions spatially. Each paleshaped region (abbreviating as pale) is composed of the
same number of interlaced rows and columns of the feature map. The intervals between adjacent rows or columns
are equal for all the pales. For example, the pink shadow in
Figure 1(e) indicates one of the pales. Then, self-attention
is performed within each pale. For any token, it can directly
interact with other tokens within the same pale, which endows our method with the capacity of capturing richer contextual information in a single PS-Attention layer. To further improve the efficiency, we develop a more efficient parallel implementation of the PS-Attention. Benefit from the
larger receptive fields and stronger context modeling capability, our PS-Attention shows superiority to the existing local self-attention mechanisms illustrated in Figure 1.
Based on the proposed PS-Attention, we design a general vision transformer backbone with a hierarchical architecture, named Pale Transformer. We scale our approach
up to get a series of models, including Pale-T (22M),
Pale-S (48M), and Pale-B (85M), reaching significantly
better performance than previous approaches. Our Pale-T
achieves 83.4% Top-1 classification accuracy on ImageNet1k, 50.4% single-scale mIoU on ADE20K (semantic segmentation), 47.4 box mAP (object detection) and 42.7 mask

Recently, Transformers have shown promising performance
in various vision tasks. To reduce the quadratic computation
complexity caused by the global self-attention, various methods constrain the range of attention within a local region to
improve its efficiency. Consequently, their receptive fields in
a single attention layer are not large enough, resulting in insufficient context modeling. To address this issue, we propose
a Pale-Shaped self-Attention (PS-Attention), which performs
self-attention within a pale-shaped region. Compared to the
global self-attention, PS-Attention can reduce the computation and memory costs significantly. Meanwhile, it can capture richer contextual information under the similar computation complexity with previous local self-attention mechanisms. Based on the PS-Attention, we develop a general Vision Transformer backbone with a hierarchical architecture,
named Pale Transformer, which achieves 83.4%, 84.3%, and
84.9% Top-1 accuracy with the model size of 22M, 48M,
and 85M respectively for 224 × 224 ImageNet-1K classification, outperforming the previous Vision Transformer backbones. For downstream tasks, our Pale Transformer backbone performs better than the recent state-of-the-art CSWin
Transformer by a large margin on ADE20K semantic segmentation and COCO object detection & instance segmentation. The code will be released on https://github.com/BRIDL/PaddleViT.

Introduction
Inspired by the success of Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
on a wide range of tasks in natural language processing
(NLP) (McCann et al. 2017; Howard and Ruder 2018), Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) first employed a pure Transformer architecture for image classification, which shows the promising performance of Transformer architecture for vision tasks. However, the quadratic
complexity of the global self-attention results in expensive
computation costs and memory usage especially for highresolution scenarios, making it unaffordable for applications
in various vision tasks.
A typical way to improve the efficiency is to replace the
global self-attention with local ones. A crucial and challenging issue is how to enhance the modeling capability under
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2731

