The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Agent Incentive Communication via Decentralized Teammate Modeling
Lei Yuan* 1,3 , Jianhao Wang* 2 , Fuxiang Zhang* 1 , Chenghe Wang1 ,
Zongzhang Zhang†1 , Yang Yu1,3,4 , Chongjie Zhang†2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Polixir Technologies, Nanjing 210000, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
yuanl@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wjh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhangfx@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wangch@lamda.nju.edu.cn,
zzzhang@nju.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn, chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

have been proposed, including both policy gradient methods
(Lowe et al. 2017; Foerster et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020a,
2021b; Zhang et al. 2021), and value-based methods (Rashid
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020b, 2021a, 2020c; Cao et al. 2021;
Qin et al. 2022), which show state-of-the-art performance in
challenging tasks (e.g., the StarCraft II micromanagement
benchmark). Despite its recent success, fully decentralization
policy execution may not be effective in many applications,
especially when agents have partial observability and the environment is stochastic, where an agent’s uncertainty of other
agent’s states and actions can be exacerbated during decentralized sequential execution, which results in catastrophic
miscoordination and sub-optimal policies.
An effective mechanism to address the mentioned challenges is to enable communication among agents. One popular communication scheme has been adopted to exchange
messages about agents’ local observations (Sukhbaatar,
Szlam, and Fergus 2016; Singh, Jain, and Sukhbaatar 2019;
Ding, Huang, and Lu 2020) or corresponding embeddings
(Das et al. 2019; Zhang, Zhang, and Lin 2019; Wang et al.
2020d; Mao et al. 2020b). Such messages are then used
to augment individual local observations for learning policies and selecting actions. This informative communication
scheme can reduce uncertainty for individual local decisionmaking and induce implicit coordination. However, such
a communication mechanism enlarges agents’ local policy
spaces and increases learning complexity, leading to poor performance in some complex scenery. Furthermore, this scheme
deviates a common way humans communicate, as humans
would often offer helpful and tailored suggestions based on
their knowledge and beliefs instead of simply providing their
own information (Stenning, Lascarides, and Calder 2006).
Towards realizing efficient and human-like teamwork,
this paper investigates a new communication scheme that
allows agents to exchange persuasive messages to coordinate their decision-making explicitly. We propose a novel
MARL framework called Multi-Agent Incentive Communication (MAIC), where each agent learns to generate incentive
messages and uses the messages to bias other agents’ value
functions directly for effective coordination. Inspired by recent opponent modeling works (Albrecht and Stone 2018),

Effective communication can improve coordination in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). One popular
communication scheme is exchanging agents’ local observations or latent embeddings and using them to augment individual local policy input. Such a communication paradigm
can reduce uncertainty for local decision-making and induce
implicit coordination. However, it enlarges agents’ local policy spaces and increases learning complexity, leading to poor
coordination in complex settings. To handle this limitation,
this paper proposes a novel framework named Multi-Agent
Incentive Communication (MAIC) that allows each agent to
learn to generate incentive messages and bias other agents’
value functions directly, resulting in effective explicit coordination. Our method firstly learns targeted teammate models,
with which each agent can anticipate the teammate’s action
selection and generate tailored messages to specific agents.
We further introduce a novel regularization to leverage interaction sparsity and improve communication efficiency. MAIC
is agnostic to specific MARL algorithms and can be flexibly
integrated with different value function factorization methods.
Empirical results demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms baselines and achieves excellent performance on
multiple cooperative MARL tasks.

Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
attracted popular attention (Hernandez-Leal, Kartal, and Taylor 2019; Du and Ding 2021), showing a promise in many
domains like autonomous vehicle teams (Zhou et al. 2020),
sensor networks (Zhang and Lesser 2011) and intelligent
warehouse systems (Nowé, Vrancx, and De Hauwere 2012).
To avoid non-stationarity and enable scalability, a popular
MARL paradigm, called Centralized Training and Decentralized Execution (CTDE) (Kraemer and Banerjee 2016;
Lyu et al. 2021), has recently been adopted, where agents’
policies are learned in a centralized way and executed in
a decentralized manner. Many CTDE learning approaches
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors: Zongzhang Zhang and Chongjie Zhang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9466

