The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Single-Agent Dynamics in Additively Separable Hedonic Games
Felix Brandt, Martin Bullinger, and Leo Tappe
Institut für Informatik, Technische Universität München
brandtf@in.tum.de, bullinge@in.tum.de, leo.tappe@tum.de

Abstract

another coalition. While such a deviation clearly captures
the incentive of single agents to perform deviations, it completely ignores the other agents’ opinions about the deviation.
To overcome this shortcoming, various restrictions of Nash
deviations have been proposed. This has motivated stability
notions such as individual stability or contractual Nash stability, which consider the unanimous consent of some or all
of the coalitions directly affected by the deviation. While
unanimous consent is in fact used in the formation process
of international bodies like the EU or the NATO, it might
be impractical and even undesirable in small- or mediumscale coalition formation scenarios. As a compromise, we
also study intermediate notions of stability based on majority
votes among the involved coalitions. This setting has received
little attention so far (Gairing and Savani 2019), and we will
also define some new majority-based stability notions.
The study of hedonic games was initiated by Drèze and
Greenberg (1980), and later popularized by Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez (2001), Cechlárová and Romero-Medina
(2001), and Bogomolnaia and Jackson (2002). Since then, a
large body of research has been devoted to defining suitable
game representations and solution concepts. An overview of
many important aspects is provided in the survey by Aziz
and Savani (2016). One prominent, natural, and arguably simple type of hedonic games is given by additively separable
hedonic games (Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002). In these
games, agents entertain cardinal utilities for other agents and
the utility for a coalition is defined by taking the sum of the
individual utility values. This game representation allows, for
instance, the modeling of settings where agents have friends
and enemies, and their goal is to simultaneously maximize
the number of friends and minimize the number of enemies,
while one of these two goals can have higher priority than the
other one (Dimitrov et al. 2006). Our work provides exact
boundaries for the computational tractability of stability concepts based on single-agent deviations in additively separable
hedonic games, showing a clear cut between Nash stability
and stability notions under consent. We give simple and precise conditions for restricted classes of utility functions that
pinpoint the boundaries of computational tractability. This
includes well-studied classes of games where agents only
distinguish between friends and enemies.
A more recent line of research on stability notions focuses on the dynamical aspects leading to the formation of

The formation of stable coalitions is a central concern in multiagent systems. A considerable stream of research defines
stability via the absence of beneficial deviations by single
agents. Such deviations require an agent to improve her utility
by joining another coalition while possibly imposing further
restrictions on the consent of the agents in the welcoming as
well as the abandoned coalition. While most of the literature
focuses on unanimous consent, we also study consent decided
by majority vote, and introduce two new stability notions that
can be seen as local variants of popularity. We investigate
these notions in additively separable hedonic games by pinpointing boundaries to computational complexity depending
on the type of consent and restrictions on the utility functions.
The latter restrictions shed new light on well-studied classes
of games based on the appreciation of friends or the aversion
to enemies. Many of our positive results follow from the Deviation Lemma, a general combinatorial observation, which can
be leveraged to prove the convergence of simple and natural
single-agent dynamics under fairly general conditions.

Introduction
Coalition formation is a central concern in multi-agent systems and considers the question of grouping a set of agents,
e.g., humans or machines, into coalitions such as teams, clubs,
or societies. A prominent framework for studying coalition
formation is that of hedonic games, where agents’ utilities are
solely based on the coalition they are part of, and which thus
disregards inter-coalitional relationships (Drèze and Greenberg 1980). Hedonic games have been successfully used to
model various scenarios evolving from operations research
or the mathematical social sciences such as research team
formation (Alcalde and Revilla 2004), task allocation (Saad
et al. 2011), or community detection (Newman 2004; Aziz
et al. 2019). Identifying desirable coalition structures is often
based on the prospect of coalitions to stay together. To this
end, various notions of stability have been introduced and
studied. A coalition structure (henceforth partition) is stable
when no individual or group of agents benefits by joining
another coalition or by forming a new coalition.
In this paper, we focus on deviations by single agents. The
simplest example is a Nash deviation where some agent unilaterally decides to leave her current coalition in order to join
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4867

