The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Temporal Knowledge Graph Completion Using Box Embeddings
Johannes Messner, Ralph Abboud, İsmail İlkan Ceylan
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
messnerjo@gmail.com, {ralph.abboud, ismail.ceylan}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Standard KG embedding models, however, operate under
the assumption that the input KG is static, i.e., the ground
truth of a fact is independent of time. This assumption is not
always realistic, as, e.g., a person living in a location could
move to a different location, invalidating the associated fact
in the future. Indeed, many real-world KGs include temporal
information for their facts, most commonly in the form of
time stamps, indicating when the fact holds (Kazemi et al.
2020). Specifically, a temporal (binary) fact is a fact of the
form r(h, t|τ ), where h and t represent entities, τ is a time
stamp, and r represents a relation that holds between these
entities at the time specified by τ . A temporal knowledge
graph (TKG) is then a (finite) set of temporal facts.
The focus of this work is on temporal knowledge graph
completion (TKGC) which is the task of inferring missing
temporal facts from a TKG. The main challenge in TKGC is
to additionally learn embeddings for time stamps, such that
embedding models perform scoring jointly based on relation, entity and time stamp embeddings. This perspective has
led to the development of several embedding models, building on static embedding models (Leblay and Chekol 2018;
Lacroix, Obozinski, and Usunier 2020), or having dedicated
neural architectures (Wu et al. 2020; Garcı́a-Durán, Dumančić, and Niepert 2018), to appropriately represent temporal information. However, no current embedding model,
to our knowledge, studies TKGC from the perspective of
capturing temporal inference patterns despite their prevalence in real-world data (Toutanova and Chen 2015).
In this paper, we propose BoxTE, a box embedding model
for TKGC. BoxTE builds on the static KG embedding model
BoxE (Abboud et al. 2020), and extends it with dedicated
time embeddings, allowing to flexibly represent temporal information. In BoxTE, time embeddings are unique for each
time point, but they are specific for every relation, which
yields a very flexible and powerful representation. Our contibutions are manifold. We first show that BoxTE is fully expressive, and has strong inductive capacity, capturing, e.g.,
a rich class of rigid inference patterns, and cross-time inference patterns. Our study presents the first thorough analysis
of inductive capacity in the context of TKGC. Empirically,
we conduct a detailed experimental evaluation, and show
that BoxTE achieves state-of-the-art performance on several
TKGC baselines, even with a limited number of parameters.
The full version of this work, including all proofs and ex-

Knowledge graph completion is the task of inferring missing
facts based on existing data in a knowledge graph. Temporal
knowledge graph completion (TKGC) is an extension of this
task to temporal knowledge graphs, where each fact is additionally associated with a time stamp. Current approaches for
TKGC primarily build on existing embedding models which
are developed for (static) knowledge graph completion, and
extend these models to incorporate time, where the idea is
to learn latent representations for entities, relations, and time
stamps and then use the learned representations to predict
missing facts at various time steps. In this paper, we propose BoxTE, a box embedding model for TKGC, building
on the static knowledge graph embedding model BoxE. We
show that BoxTE is fully expressive, and possesses strong inductive capacity in the temporal setting. We then empirically
evaluate our model and show that it achieves state-of-the-art
results on several TKGC benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are sets of (binary) facts of the
form r(h, t), where h and t represent entities, and r represents a relation that holds between these entities. KGs
play an increasingly prominent role in representing, storing,
and processing information. KGs such as YAGO (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek 2015), Knowledge Vault (Dong
et al. 2014), Freebase (Bollacker, Cook, and Tufts 2007)
and NELL (Mitchell et al. 2018) store hundreds of millions
of facts, and are key drivers for downstream tasks, such as
question answering (Bordes, Chopra, and Weston 2014), information retrieval (Xiong, Power, and Callan 2017), and
recommender systems (Wang et al. 2018).
Notably, most KGs are inherently incomplete, which negatively affects their use in downstream applications. This has
motivated a large body of work for automatically inferring
missing facts, a task known as knowledge graph completion (KGC). One prominent approach for KGC is based on
KG embedding models, where the idea is to learn embeddings for entities and relations through training over known
facts, and subsequently use the learned embeddings to compute plausibility scores for all possible facts (Bordes et al.
2013).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7779

