The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AlphaHoldem: High-Performance Artificial Intelligence for Heads-Up No-Limit
Poker via End-to-End Reinforcement Learning
Enmin Zhao1,3 * , Renye Yan3,1 * , Jinqiu Li1,3 , Kai Li1,3 , Junliang Xing1,2,3†
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Tsinghua University
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhaoenmin2018, yanrenye2018, lijinqiu2021, kai.li@ia.ac.cn, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn
3

Abstract

gorithms for studying the two-player zero-sum games with
imperfect information (Bard et al. 2013; Jackson 2013).
Recently, with the aid of increasing computing resources,
computer programs have reached the performance that exceeds expert human players in many games, e.g., Go (Silver et al. 2016), MahJong (Li et al. 2020), DOTA (Berner
et al. 2019), and StarCraft (Vinyals et al. 2019). These AI
systems collect a tremendous amount of replay samples either from human experts or self-play of the system to train
some complex learning models. The adoption of deep neural networks significantly improves the learning ability and
performance of these systems. However, the model training process often lasts for dozens of days using thousands
of CPU/GPUs, making these models extremely expensive to
obtain. According to the reported computing resources used
in AlphaGo (Silver et al. 2016), training an AlphaGo model
costs about 35 million dollars.
As for the HUNL AI, new algorithms are also progressing very fast under the counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) framework (Zinkevich et al. 2007). DeepStack (Moravcik et al. 2017) and Libratus (Brown and
Sandholm 2018) are independently developed and demonstrate expert-level performance. Both DeepStack and Libratus compute an abstraction of the game and introduce subgame solving with the CFR+ (Tammelin et al. 2015) algorithm to learn HUNL AIs. Under the CFR framework, the
primary computation cost comes from the CFR iteration process performed in both the model training and testing stages.
To ensure high-quality prediction, this iteration process often needs to be carried out for more than 1,000 times in
practice (Moravcik et al. 2017). This restriction makes the
training of a high-performance CFR-based HUNL AI computationally infeasible for most research institutions and prevents the application of the CFR model into larger IIGs.
This work aims to develop a high-performance HUNL
AI with affordable computation and storage costs for small
research institutions and inspire further studies to develop
more universal solutions for AI of Texas hold’em and other
IIGs. To this end, we propose AlphaHoldem, a HUNL AI
trained from an end-to-end reinforcement learning framework rather than the CFR framework that gives birth to most
of the current HUNL AIs. We design a pseudo-Siamese architecture in this framework that directly learns from the input game information to produce the action through a single

Heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em (HUNL) is the quintessential game with imperfect information. Representative prior
works like DeepStack and Libratus heavily rely on counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) and its variants to tackle
HUNL. However, the prohibitive computation cost of CFR
iteration makes it difficult for subsequent researchers to learn
the CFR model in HUNL and apply it in other practical applications. In this work, we present AlphaHoldem, a highperformance and lightweight HUNL AI obtained with an endto-end self-play reinforcement learning framework. The proposed framework adopts a pseudo-siamese architecture to directly learn from the input state information to the output actions by competing the learned model with its different historical versions. The main technical contributions include a
novel state representation of card and betting information, a
multi-task self-play training loss function, and a new model
evaluation and selection metric to generate the final model.
In a study involving 100,000 hands of poker, AlphaHoldem
defeats Slumbot and DeepStack using only one PC with three
days training. At the same time, AlphaHoldem only takes 2.9
milliseconds for each decision-making using only a single
GPU, more than 1,000 times faster than DeepStack. We release the history data among among AlphaHoldem, Slumbot,
and top human professionals in the author’s GitHub repository to facilitate further studies in this direction.

Introduction
Poker is a typical imperfect information game (IIG) that
has a long history as a challenging problem for developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) that can address hidden information (Waterman 1970). Among different poker games,
Heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em (HUNL) is a two-player
poker game in which two cards are initially dealt face-down
to each player, and additional cards are dealt with face-up
in three subsequent rounds. No-limit means no restriction
on the bet size, although it may be restricted by the total
amount wagered in each game. Because of its explicit problem setting with large decision space (∼10161 information
sets) and strategic complexity, HUNL has been an excellent
benchmark and challenging problem for developing AI al* Equal contribution, † corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4689

