The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Perceiving Stroke-Semantic Context: Hierarchical Contrastive Learning
for Robust Scene Text Recognition
Hao Liu1†* , Bin Wang1* , Zhimin Bao1 , Mobai Xue1,2‡ , Sheng Kang1,2‡ ,
Deqiang Jiang1 , Yinsong Liu1 , Bo Ren1
1
Tencent YouTu Lab
University of Science and Technology of China
{ivanhliu, bingolwang, zhiminbao, dqiangjiang, jasonysliu, timren}@tencent.com, {xmb15, ksc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

English

We introduce Perceiving Stroke-Semantic Context (PerSec),
a new approach to self-supervised representation learning tailored for Scene Text Recognition (STR) task. Considering
scene text images carry both visual and semantic properties, we equip our PerSec with dual context perceivers which
can contrast and learn latent representations from low-level
stroke and high-level semantic contextual spaces simultaneously via hierarchical contrastive learning on unlabeled text
image data. Experiments in un- and semi-supervised learning settings on STR benchmarks demonstrate our proposed
framework can yield a more robust representation for both
CTC-based and attention-based decoders than other contrastive learning methods. To fully investigate the potential
of our method, we also collect a dataset of 100 million unlabeled text images, named UTI-100M, covering 5 scenes and
4 languages. By leveraging hundred-million-level unlabeled
data, our PerSec shows significant performance improvement
when fine-tuning the learned representation on the labeled
data. Furthermore, we observe that the representation learned
by PerSec presents great generalization, especially under few
labeled data scenes.

Chinese
Korean

(a) Examples of scene text.
a1 a2 a3

f(·)

…

p1 p2 p3

f(·)

…

f(·)

p1

a1

n2

n3
p2
a2

n1 n2 n3

a3
p3
n1

…
(b) Contrastive learning process of previous methods.

…

Stroke context

fstroke(·)

…

…

Semantic context
fsemantic(·)

…

(c) Contrastive learning process of the PerSec.

Figure 1: Demonstration of scene text examples and contrastive learning processes. (a) Examples of scene text. (b)
The contrastive learning process of the previous methods.
The methods greedily contrast instances merely from highlevel sequential features across different text images (c) The
contrastive learning process of our proposed PerSec. Our
method drives each element of features at high and low levels to distinguish itself from its context within one same image via hierarchical contrastive learning.

Introduction
Scene Text Recognition (STR) aims at reading text from
the cropped text region detected by text detector, which has
wide applications, ranging from translation by recognizing
foreign languages to street sign recognition for autonomous.
However, it is still an intractable problem as scene text image can carry both visual and semantic information, which
is demonstrated in Fig. 1(a).
From visual perspective, the difficulty lies in the internal
appearance property of scene text image presented, e.g., text
font, text color and writing style (handwritten or printed), as
well as various external factors such as illumination, occlusion and low-resolution. Several previous works (Shi et al.
2016; Jaderberg et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2017; Cheng et al.
2018) focus on designing discriminative feature extractors
or rectification algorithms on irregular-shape text line.
As for the semantics contained in scene text image, its
content could be from any scenario with great diversity.

Many researches (Li et al. 2019; Sheng, Chen, and Xu 2019;
Wang et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020; Qiao et al. 2020) attempt to
enhance the semantic ability of algorithm by incorporating
language model into it. Nevertheless, most of previous methods are in the supervised learning paradigm, whose success
is largely attributable to the availability of large amounts of
annotated data. In many scenarios, the collection of data is
costly, and the annotation may require expert knowledge,
which hinders the applicability of such paradigm.
Recently, many self-supervised contrastive learning methods (He et al. 2020; Falcon and Cho 2020; Rao et al. 2021;

* Equal contribution. † Contact person. ‡ Interns at YouTu Lab.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1702

