The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

LAGConv: Local-Context Adaptive Convolution Kernels with Global Harmonic
Bias for Pansharpening
Zi-Rong Jin1 * , Tian-Jing Zhang 1 * , Tai-Xiang Jiang 2 , Gemine Vivone3 , Liang-Jian Deng 1†
2

1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
School of Economic Information Engineering, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
3
National Research Council - Institute of Methodologies for Environmental Analysis
2018051403016@std.uestc.edu.cn, zhangtianjinguestc@163.com,
taixiangjiang@gmail.com,gemine.vivone@gmail.com,liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pansharpening is a critical yet challenging low-level vision
task that aims to obtain a higher-resolution image by fusing
a multispectral (MS) image and a panchromatic (PAN) image. While most pansharpening methods are based on convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures with standard convolution operations, few attempts have been made
with context-adaptive/dynamic convolution, which delivers
impressive results on high-level vision tasks. In this paper, we
propose a novel strategy to generate local-context adaptive
(LCA) convolution kernels and introduce a new global harmonic (GH) bias mechanism, exploiting image local specificity as well as integrating global information, dubbed LAGConv. The proposed LAGConv can replace the standard convolution that is context-agnostic to fully perceive the particularity of each pixel for the task of remote sensing pansharpening. Furthermore, by applying the LAGConv, we provide an image fusion network architecture, which is more
effective than conventional CNN-based pansharpening approaches. The superiority of the proposed method is demonstrated by extensive experiments implemented on a wide
range of datasets compared with state-of-the-art pansharpening methods. Besides, more discussions testify that the
proposed LAGConv outperforms recent adaptive convolution
techniques for pansharpening.

K

K

Standard Conv.

LAGConv.

Figure 1: A toy example to motivate the use of the LAGConv. Left: The standard convolution operation, by which
all the pixels in the image/feature map are convolved by the
same kernel K; Right: The LAGConv operation, by which
all the pixels in the feature map are convolved by locale The blue line indicates
context adaptive (LCA) kernels K.
the classical convolution operation, and the orange line is
the dot product between the kernel K and the weights adaptively learned from the local patches.
Standard convolution, however, is inherently limited by
its spatial-invariance property when addressing pixel-wise
tasks like image super-resolution and pansharpening. For a
specific feature map, using a uniform convolution kernel on
different locations that record different objects can lead to a
limited ability in terms of image content adaptation (Su et al.
2019). To overcome this shortcoming, many adaptive convolution techniques have been designed to dynamically generate convolution kernels for different regions or pixels. They
have yielded promising performance in several high-level vision tasks (Chen et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2021b). Nevertheless, existing adaptive convolution methods, either only focusing on the locality of small regions (Su
et al. 2019) or full images (Yang et al. 2019), result in an
undesired redundancy or neglect the details in the image.
For this reason, they are hardly applicable to pansharpening.
This paper proposes a novel adaptive convolution operation
consisting of local-context adaptive (LCA) convolution kernels and global harmonic (GH) bias, specifically applied to
remote sensing pansharpening. This method can fully extract and exploit the local and global information of the involved image/features to achieve superior performance. The

Introduction
Pansharpening aims to fuse a low-resolution multispectral
image (LR-MSI) and a high-resolution panchromatic image
(HR-PANI) to make up for the deficiencies of certain kinds
of remote sensing data, even promoting the applicability of
remote sensing image for higher-level processing, such as
classification (Cao et al. 2020), land monitoring (Du et al.
2013) and detection (Ying et al. 2017). Recently, there has
been a considerable improvement for pansharpening thanks
to new and complex CNN architectures, which are mainly
based on the standard convolution operations (Vivone et al.
2021; Guo, Zhuang, and Guo 2020).
* Co-first authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1113

