The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

(2.5+1)D Spatio-Temporal Scene Graphs for Video Question Answering
Anoop Cherian, Chiori Hori, Tim K. Marks, Jonathan Le Roux
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs (MERL), Cambridge, MA
{cherian, chori, tmarks, leroux}@merl.com

Abstract

a better reasoning pipeline (Anderson et al. 2018; Johnson
et al. 2015; Krishna et al. 2017; Dornadula et al. 2019), perhaps because of the possibility for an easier disentanglement
of the scene objects relevant to the given question. Such a
disentanglement naturally leads to a graph representation of
the scene, usually called a scene graph (Johnson et al. 2015).
Using such a graph representation allows one to use the
powerful machinery of graph neural networks for VQA, and
has demonstrated significant promise (Li and Jiang 2019; Li
et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2020; Geng et al. 2021).
While visual scene graphs were originally proposed for
image-based tasks, there have been direct adaptations of this
data structure for video-based reasoning problems (Geng
et al. 2021; Chatterjee et al. 2021; Pan et al. 2020; Herzig
et al. 2019). Usually, in such problems, scene graphs are
constructed for every video frame, followed by an interframe representation learning to produce holistic video level
features for reasoning. However, having scene graphs for every frame may be redundant and could even become computationally detrimental for longer video sequences. Taking a
step back, we note that videos are essentially 2D views of
a 3D space in which various events happen temporally, and
representing the scene in a 4D spatio-temporal space could
thus potentially avoid such representational redundancies.
Furthermore, object properties such as permanence (Shamsian et al. 2020) could be handled more effectively in a 3D
space, as each object (that is visible in some video frame)
gets a location therein, thereby disentangling the camera
views from its spatial location (Tung et al. 2020; Girdhar
and Ramanan 2019). Using such a 3D representation thus
would provide a natural way to avoid occlusions, which is a
significant problem when working with 2D scene graphs.
Motivated by the above insight, we explore a novel spatiotemporal scene graph representation, where the graph nodes
are not grounded on individual video frames, instead are
mapped to a shared 3D world coordinate frame. While there
are approaches in computer vision that could produce such
a common 3D world (Hartley and Zisserman 2004), such
methods usually assume: i) that the scene is static, without
dynamic objects, ii) that the camera calibration information
is known, or iii) that multiple overlapping views of the same
scene are available; none of which may exist for arbitrary
(internet) videos typically used in VQA tasks. Fortunately,
there have been several recent advancements in 3D recon-

Spatio-temporal scene-graph approaches to video-based reasoning tasks, such as video question-answering (QA), typically construct such graphs for every video frame. These approaches often ignore the fact that videos are essentially sequences of 2D “views” of events happening in a 3D space,
and that the semantics of the 3D scene can thus be carried
over from frame to frame. Leveraging this insight, we propose a (2.5+1)D scene graph representation to better capture the spatio-temporal information flows inside the videos.
Specifically, we first create a 2.5D (pseudo-3D) scene graph
by transforming every 2D frame to have an inferred 3D structure using an off-the-shelf 2D-to-3D transformation module,
following which we register the video frames into a shared
(2.5+1)D spatio-temporal space and ground each 2D scene
graph within it. Such a (2.5+1)D graph is then segregated into
a static sub-graph and a dynamic sub-graph, corresponding to
whether the objects within them usually move in the world.
The nodes in the dynamic graph are enriched with motion
features capturing their interactions with other graph nodes.
Next, for the video QA task, we present a novel transformerbased reasoning pipeline that embeds the (2.5+1)D graph
into a spatio-temporal hierarchical latent space, where the
sub-graphs and their interactions are captured at varied granularity. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach,
we present experiments on the NExT-QA and AVSD-QA
datasets. Our results show that our proposed (2.5+1)D representation leads to faster training and inference, while our
hierarchical model showcases superior performance on the
video QA task versus the state of the art.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have made it possible to
think beyond individual domains, such as computer vision
and natural language processing, and consider tasks that
are at their intersections. Visual question answering (VQA)
is one such task that has witnessed a significant attention
lately (Antol et al. 2015; Anderson et al. 2018; Wu et al.
2017; Jang et al. 2017; Geng et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020;
Ghosh et al. 2019). While earlier approaches to this task
used holistic visuo-textual representations (Dang et al. 2021;
Antol et al. 2015), it was found that decomposing a visual
scene into its constituents (and their relationships) provided
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

444

