The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeformRS: Certifying Input Deformations with Randomized Smoothing
Motasem Alfarra *1 , Adel Bibi *2 , Naeemullah Khan 2 , Philip H.S. Torr 2 , Bernard Ghanem 1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 2 University of Oxford
motasem.alfarra@kaust.edu.sa, adel.bibi@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

2019; Mohapatra et al. 2020). Only recently has a certification approach been developed for the richer class of smooth
vector fields (general displacement of pixels) (Ruoss et al.
2021). However, all previous approaches require solving a
mixed-integer or linear program, thus limiting their applicability to small DNNs on small datasets. On the contrary,
the only certification methods that scale to larger networks
on large datasets (e.g. ImageNet) are based on randomized
smoothing (Cohen, Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019). However,
such approaches (Fischer, Baader, and Vechev 2020a; Li et al.
2020), similar to many others, are limited to individual deformations, e.g. only translations, or to deformations that ought
to be resolvable limiting the class of certifiable deformations.

Deep neural networks are vulnerable to input deformations in
the form of vector fields of pixel displacements and to other parameterized geometric deformations e.g. translations, rotations,
etc. Current input deformation certification methods either (i)
do not scale to deep networks on large input datasets, or (ii) can
only certify a specific class of deformations, e.g. only rotations.
We reformulate certification in randomized smoothing setting
for both general vector field and parameterized deformations
and propose D EFORM RS-VF and D EFORM RS-PAR, respectively. Our new formulation scales to large networks on large
input datasets. For instance, D EFORM RS-PAR certifies rich
deformations, covering translations, rotations, scaling, affine
deformations, and other visually aligned deformations such
as ones parameterized by Discrete-Cosine-Transform basis.
Extensive experiments on MNIST, CIFAR10, and ImageNet
show competitive performance of D EFORM RS-PAR achieving
a certified accuracy of 39% against perturbed rotations in the
set [−10◦ , 10◦ ] on ImageNet.

In this paper, we revisit the problem of certifying the
parameterization of a general class of input deformations
through randomized smoothing. Our approach, dubbed D E FORM RS, is general, and it allows for the certification of
vector field and parameterized deformations. For the class of
parameterized deformations, D EFORM RS certifies general
affine deformations that cover translation, rotations, scaling,
sheering, etc., and any composition of them. Moreover, we
show that if the parameterized deformation is represented
by the low frequency components of the Discrete Cosine
Transform (DCT), D EFORM RS allows for the certification
of a set of visually aligned and plausible deformations. Figure 1 presents several examples of the class of deformations
D EFORM RS certifies at scale. Our contributions can be summarized as follows. (i) D EFORM RS-VF. We extend the formulation of randomized smoothing from pixel intensities to
vector field deformations and derive a certification radius R
for the deformation vector field. That is to say, D EFORM RSVF resists all deformations having a vector field with a norm
that is smaller than R. (ii) D EFORM RS-PAR . We specialize
our analysis for parametrizable deformations and propose
D EFORM RS-PAR, which grants certification to popular deformations, e.g. translation, rotation, scaling, and any composition subset of them, in addition to the general affine class
of deformations. We also specialize D EFORM RS-PAR for
the set of deformations parameterized by the low-frequency
components of DCT, thus certifying a richer class of visually aligned deformations that were not explored in earlier
works. (iii) We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach by conducting extensive experiments on MNIST
(LeCun 1998), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky 2012), and ImageNet

Introduction
1

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are susceptible to small additive input perturbations, i.e. a DNN that correctly classifies
x can be fooled into misclassifying (x + δ), even when δ is so
small that x and (x + δ) are imperceptibly different (Szegedy
et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015a). Even
worse, DNNs were shown to be vulnerable to input deformations (Alaifari, Alberti, and Gauksson 2019) such as input
rotations and scaling, where such deformations, unlike additive perturbations, can exist due to a slight change in the
physical world. This raises a critical concern especially since
DNNs are now deployed in safety critical applications, e.g.
self-driving cars. To address the nuisance of sensitivity to
input deformations, one would ideally seek to train DNNs
that are certifiably free from such adversaries. While there
has been impressive progress towards this goal, i.e. certifying input deformations, prior art suffers from the limitation
of only being able to certify an individual set of deformations, e.g. only rotations or only translations etc., or a small
composition set of them (Singh et al. 2019; Balunovic et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Official Code: https://github.com/MotasemAlfarra/DeformRS.
∗
Denotes equal contribution.

6001

