The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

EMVLight: A Decentralized Reinforcement Learning Framework for Efficient
Passage of Emergency Vehicles
Haoran Su, 1 * Yaofeng Desmond Zhong, 2 Biswadip Dey, 2 Amit Chakraborty 2
1

New York University,
Siemens Corporation, Technology
haoran.su@nyu.edu, {yaofeng.zhong, biswadip.dey, amit.chakraborty}@siemens.com
2

Abstract

it more and more challenging for fast EMV passage. Department (2021) have shown that the average EMV travel time
increases from 7.2 minutes in 2015 to 10.1 minutes in 2021
in New York City. Thus, reducing the average EMV travel
time on increasingly crowded roads is a significant problem
which can help save people’s lives.
Existing works have studied strategies to reduce the travel
time of EMVs by route optimization and traffic signal preemption. Route optimization usually refers to the search for a
time-based shortest path. The traffic network (e.g., city road
map) is modeled as a graph with intersections as nodes and
road segments between intersections as edges. Based on the
time a vehicle needs to travel through each edge (road segment), route optimization calculates an optimal route such
that an EMV can travel from the rescue station to the incident site in the least amount of time. In addition, as the
EMV needs to be as fast as possible, the law in most places
requires non-EMVs to yield to emergency vehicles sounding sirens, regardless of the traffic signals at intersections.
Even though this practice gives the right-of-way to EMVs,
it poses safety risks for vehicles and pedestrians at the intersections. To address this safety concern, existing methods
have also studied traffic signal pre-emption, which refers to
the process of deliberately altering the signal phases at each
intersection to prioritize EMV passage.
However, as the traffic condition constantly changes, an
optimal route returned by route optimization can potentially
become suboptimal as an EMV travels through the network.
Moreover, traffic signal pre-emption has a significant impact
on the traffic flow, which would change the fastest route as
well. Thus, the optimal route should be updated with realtime traffic flow information, i.e., the route optimization
should be solved in a dynamic (time-dependent) way. As
an optimal route can change as an EMV travels through the
traffic network, the traffic signal pre-emption would need to
adapt accordingly. In other words, the subproblems of route
optimization and traffic signal pre-emption are coupled and
should be solved simultaneously in real-time. Existing approaches does not address this coupling.
In addition, most of the existing models on emergency
vehicle service have a single objective of reducing the EMV
travel time. As a result, their traffic signal control strategies
have an undesirable effect of increasing the travel time of
non-EMVs, since only EMV passage is optimized. In this

Emergency vehicles (EMVs) play a crucial role in responding to time-critical events such as medical emergencies and
fire outbreaks in an urban area. The less time EMVs spend
traveling through the traffic, the more likely it would help
save people’s lives and reduce property loss. To reduce the
travel time of EMVs, prior work has used route optimization based on historical traffic-flow data and traffic signal
pre-emption based on the optimal route. However, traffic signal pre-emption dynamically changes the traffic flow which,
in turn, modifies the optimal route of an EMV. In addition,
traffic signal pre-emption practices usually lead to significant disturbances in traffic flow and subsequently increase the
travel time for non-EMVs. In this paper, we propose EMVLight, a decentralized reinforcement learning (RL) framework for simultaneous dynamic routing and traffic signal control. EMVLight extends Dijkstra’s algorithm to efficiently update the optimal route for the EMVs in real time as it travels through the traffic network. The decentralized RL agents
learn network-level cooperative traffic signal phase strategies
that not only reduce EMV travel time but also reduce the average travel time of non-EMVs in the network. This benefit has
been demonstrated through comprehensive experiments with
synthetic and real-world maps. These experiments show that
EMVLight outperforms benchmark transportation engineering techniques and existing RL-based signal control methods.

Introduction
Emergency vehicles (EMVs) are vehicles including ambulances, fire trucks, and police cars, which respond to critical events such as medical emergencies, fire disasters, and
criminal activities. Emergency response time is the key indicator of a city’s emergency management capability. Reducing response time saves lives and prevents property loss.
For instance, the survival rate from a sudden cardiac arrest
drops 7% - 10% for every minute without treatment, and
there is barely any chance to survive after 8 minutes. EMV
travel time, the time interval for an EMV to travel from a
rescue station to an incident site, accounts for a majority of
the emergency response time. However, overpopulation and
urbanization have been worsening road congestion, making
* This work is done through his internship with Siemens Corporation, Technology.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4593

