The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Texture Reformer: Towards Fast and Universal Interactive Texture Transfer
Zhizhong Wang, Lei Zhao∗ , Haibo Chen, Ailin Li,
Zhiwen Zuo, Wei Xing∗ , Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{endywon, cszhl, cshbchen, liailin, zzwcs, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present the texture reformer, a fast and universal neural-based framework for interactive texture transfer with user-specified guidance. The challenges lie in three
aspects: 1) the diversity of tasks, 2) the simplicity of guidance maps, and 3) the execution efficiency. To address these
challenges, our key idea is to use a novel feed-forward multiview and multi-stage synthesis procedure consisting of I) a
global view structure alignment stage, II) a local view texture refinement stage, and III) a holistic effect enhancement
stage to synthesize high-quality results with coherent structures and fine texture details in a coarse-to-fine fashion. In addition, we also introduce a novel learning-free view-specific
texture reformation (VSTR) operation with a new semantic
map guidance strategy to achieve more accurate semanticguided and structure-preserved texture transfer. The experimental results on a variety of application scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our framework. And
compared with the state-of-the-art interactive texture transfer algorithms, it not only achieves higher quality results but,
more remarkably, also is 2-5 orders of magnitude faster.

1

(a) Doodles-to-artworks

(b) Texture Pattern Editing

(c) Text Effects Transfer

(d) Virtual Clothing Manipulation

Figure 1: Representative results generated by our interactive texture reformer. The stylized images are synthesized
under the guidance of corresponding user-specified semantic maps. Our framework is universal for multiple challenging user-controlled texture transfer tasks, e.g., (a) turning
doodles into artworks, (b) editing texture patterns, (c) transferring text effects, (d) manipulating clothing textures and
distributions. Compared with the state-of-the-art interactive
texture transfer algorithms, it not only can achieve higher
quality results but, more remarkably, also is 2-5 orders of
magnitude faster.

Introduction

As a variant of texture synthesis, texture transfer is a longstanding problem that seeks to transfer the stylized texture
from a given sample to the target image (Efros and Freeman 2001). After the rapid development in recent years, a
bunch of conventional (Hertzmann et al. 2001) or neuralbased (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) methods have been
proposed and obtained visually appealing results. However,
due to the lack of user guidance, general texture transfer
methods often produce unsatisfying results against human
expectations. To resolve this dilemma, the community resorts to using the user-specified semantic maps to guide the
transfer process, which is called interactive texture transfer
(Men et al. 2018). Users can control the shape, scale, and
spatial distribution of the objects to be synthesized in the
target image via semantic maps.
At first, the interactive texture transfer methods are only
designed for specific usage scenarios. (Champandard 2016)
proposed Neural Doodle to turn doodles painted by users

into fine artworks with provided samples. Lu et al. designed
HelpingHand (Lu et al. 2012), RealBrush (Lu et al. 2013),
and DecoBrush (Lu et al. 2014) to edit different kinds of
texture patterns. (Yang et al. 2017, 2019) achieved text effects transfer that can migrate fantastic text effects of stylized texts onto raw plain texts. (Han et al. 2018) introduced
a virtual try-on network to transfer a target clothing item
to the corresponding region of a clothed person. These approaches seem to be isolated, but they all share a common
notion of transferring textures under user guidance.
To unify them, (Men et al. 2018) proposed a common
framework for interactive texture transfer by incorporating
multiple custom channels to dynamically guide the synthesis. This method can handle various tasks and achieves the
state of the art. However, it relies on several CPU-based operations and a backward optimization process, thus usually
requiring several minutes to generate a result for each interaction, which is prohibitively slow. Therefore, existing algorithms are hard to satisfy the practical requirements due to
the limitations of efficiency or application scenarios. A fast

∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2624

