The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SVT-Net: Super Light-Weight Sparse Voxel Transformer for Large
Scale Place Recognition
Zhaoxin Fan1 , Zhenbo Song3 , Hongyan Liu4∗ , Zhiwu Lu2 , Jun He1∗ , and Xiaoyong Du1
1

Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of MOE,
School of Information, Renmin University of China, 100872, Beijing, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, 100872, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 210094, Nanjing, China
4
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, 100084, Beijing, China
{fanzhaoxin, luzhiwu, hejun}@ruc.edu.cn, hyliu@tsinghua.edu.cn, songzb@njust.edu.cn
Abstract
query sample

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) and Autonomous Driving are becoming increasingly more important
in recent years. Point cloud-based large scale place recognition is the spine of them. While many models have been proposed and have achieved acceptable performance by learning
short-range local features, they always skip long-range contextual properties. Moreover, the model size also becomes a
serious shackle for their wide applications. To overcome these
challenges, we propose a super light-weight network model
termed SVT-Net. On top of the highly efficient 3D Sparse
Convolution (SP-Conv), an Atom-based Sparse Voxel Transformer (ASVT) and a Cluster-based Sparse Voxel Transformer (CSVT) are proposed respectively to learn both shortrange local features and long-range contextual features. Consisting of ASVT and CSVT, SVT-Net can achieve state-ofthe-art performance in terms of both recognition accuracy
and running speed with a super-light model size (0.9M parameters). Meanwhile, for the purpose of further boosting
efficiency, we introduce two simplified versions, which also
achieve state-of-the-art performance and further reduce the
model size to 0.8M and 0.4M respectively.

database

retrieval

Introduction

Submap 1

Submap 2

Submap 3

Figure 1: (Top) Pipeline of point cloud based place recognition. (Bottom) Model size and accuracy.

Large scale place recognition is the spine of a wide range
of applications like Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) (Mur-Artal and Tardós 2017), Autonomous
Driving (Levinson et al. 2011), Robot Navigation (Ravankar
et al. 2018), etc. Commonly, the place recognition result can
be used for loop-closure (Chen et al. 2020) in a SLAM system or for user location in a indoor vision positioning system, when GPS signal is not available. Fig. 1 (Top) illustrates a common pipeline of large place recognition. For a
large scale region, a database of scenes (usually represented
by point clouds or images ) tagged with UTM coordinates
acquired from GPS/INS readings are constructed in advance.
When a user traverses the same region, he/her may collect a
query scene from scratch. Then the most similar scene to the
query scene should be retrieved from the database to determine where the location of the query scene is.

A straight-forward idea for this task is to use images to
learn global descriptors for accurate and efficient scene retrieval (Li, Snavely, and Huttenlocher 2010; Han et al. 2017;
Yu et al. 2019). However, images are sensitive to illumination, weather change, diurnal variation, etc, making models based on them unstable and unreliable. Besides, images
are short of perceiving 3D scenes due to lack of depth information. Recently, a line of point cloud based deep learning models (Uy and Lee 2018; Zhang and Xiao 2019; Sun
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019; Fan et al. 2020; Xia et al.
2021; Komorowski 2021) for large scale place recognition
have been proposed. Since point clouds are invariant to illumination and weather changes, point cloud based methods
are more robust than image based methods. Besides, since
point clouds contain richer 3D information, global descriptors learned from them are stronger in describing 3D scenes

∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

551

