The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deconfounded Visual Grounding
Jianqiang Huang1,2 , Yu Qin2 , Jiaxin Qi1 , Qianru Sun3 , Hanwang Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Singapore Management University
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com, dongdong.qy@alibaba-inc.com, jiaxin003@e.ntu.edu.sg
qianrusun@smu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

y

We focus on the confounding bias between language and location in the visual grounding pipeline, where we find that
the bias is the major visual reasoning bottleneck. For example, the grounding process is usually a trivial languagelocation association without visual reasoning, e.g., grounding any language query containing sheep to the nearly central
regions, due to that most queries about sheep have groundtruth locations at the image center. First, we frame the visual grounding pipeline into a causal graph, which shows the
causalities among image, query, target location and underlying confounder. Through the causal graph, we know how to
break the grounding bottleneck: deconfounded visual grounding. Second, to tackle the challenge that the confounder is
unobserved in general, we propose a confounder-agnostic approach called: Referring Expression Deconfounder (RED),
to remove the confounding bias. Third, we implement RED
as a simple language attention, which can be applied in any
grounding method. On popular benchmarks, RED improves
various state-of-the-art grounding methods by a significant
margin. Code is available at: https://github.com/JianqiangH/
Deconfounded VG.

ground-truth
brown color sheep
looking at camera

0.4

biased
0.5

x

p

p

y
0 0.4
1
distribution of sheep
box center in y-axis

x
0
0.5
1
distribution of sheep
box center in x-axis

Figure 1: Two image examples: one with ground truth location of brown color sheep looking at camera; and the other
with a wrong prediction caused by the language bias in the
grounding model. Blue bars denote the distribution of the
center positions of sheep on the y-axis (of the image), and
orange bars for the x-axis (of the image).

Introduction
Visual Grounding, also known as the task of Referring
Expression Comprehension (Karpathy, Joulin, and Fei-Fei
2014; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Hu et al. 2016), has
greatly expanded the application domain of visual detection,
from a fixed noun vocabulary, e.g., dog, car, and person, to
free-form natural language on demand, e.g., the dog next to
the person who is driving a car. Regarding the place of candidate proposal generation in the grounding pipeline, there
are two traditional camps: two-stage and one-stage. For the
two-stage, the first detection stage denotes any object detectors (Ren et al. 2015) for extracting candidate regions from
the image, and the second visual reasoning stage is to rank
the candidates and select the top one based on their similarities to the query embedding (Yu et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2019a); for the one-stage, the detection and reasoning is
unified by directly performing the referent detection: generating the referent region proposals with confidence scores
and spatial coordinates for each pixel in the multi-modal

feature map, which is usually the concatenation of the visual feature map, location coordinates, and language embeddings (Yang et al. 2019, 2020). However, if the gradients can backpropagate through the visual detector in the
two-stage methods, there is little difference between the two
camps. Without loss of generality, this paper will be focused
on one-stage methods. In particular, the introduction of our
approach will be based on the one-stage model (Yang et al.
2019) with YOLO (Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020)
backbone which has been validated of high inference speed
and good generalizability.
By analyzing the failure examples of existing grounding
methods, we find an ever-overlooked bias, as illustrated in
Figure 1: the bounding box prediction tends to be strongly
biased to some particular position, e.g., for the subject sheep,
the prediction is often on the central area because most of the
ground truth locations for sheep related queries are close to
the center of the image as shown in the statistics in Figure 1.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

998

