The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transfer Learning from Synthetic to Real LiDAR Point Cloud
for Semantic Segmentation
Aoran Xiao1 , Jiaxing Huang1 , Dayan Guan1 , Fangneng Zhan2 , Shijian Lu1 *
1

Singtel Cognitive and Artificial Intelligence Lab for Enterprises, Nanyang Technological University
2
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University
{aoran.xiao, jiaxing.huang, dayan.guan, fnzhan, shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

et al. 2016; Armeni et al. 2016; Gaidon et al. 2016), one
possible way to mitigate the data annotation constraint is to
leverage synthetic point cloud data that can be collected and
annotated automatically by computer engines. However, collecting large-scale synthetic LiDAR sequential point cloud
is a nontrivial task which involves a large number of virtual
scenes and objects as well as complicated point generation
processes. In addition, most existing transfer learning methods (Sun et al. 2019; Saito et al. 2019a; Guan et al. 2021;
Huang et al. 2021a,b,c) focus on 2D images which do not
work for 3D point cloud. To the best of our knowledge, few
researches tackle the challenge of synthetic-to-real transfer
of point cloud of nature scenes, largely due to the lack of
large-scale synthetic data with accurate geometries and rich
semantic annotations.
We address the said issues by creating SynLiDAR, a
large-scale LiDAR sequential point cloud dataset for facilitating the research of synthetic-to-real transfer of 3D point
cloud data. We collected SynLiDAR from multiple virtual
environments that were constructed by professional 3D generalists with advanced graphic tools. Each virtual environment contains configurable object models that are similar to
real-world data in both geometry and layout. The dataset is
ideal for the study of synthetic-to-real transfer as it consists
of comprehensive and diverse point semantics (32 semantic
classes with over 19 billion point-wise annotated points) and
its collected points are also highly accurate in geometry.
In addition, we designed PCT, a point-cloud translator for
mitigating domain gaps between synthetic and real point
cloud as illustrated in Fig. 1. The design of PCT is inspired by the observations that point clouds can be viewed
as discrete samplings of continuous 3D geometric environments where the domain gaps between synthetic and real
point clouds come from either appearance differences (due
to environments variations) or sparsity differences (due to
sampling variation by sensors). We hence disentangle the
domain gap into an appearance component and a sparsity
component, and design an appearance translation module
(ATM) and a sparsity translation module (STM) to handle
the two gap components separately. Specifically, ATM first
up-samples synthetic point cloud and translates it to have
similar appearance as real point cloud. STM then extracts
sparsity features from real point cloud and fuses it with the
ATM output to translate synthetic point cloud to have real

Knowledge transfer from synthetic to real data has been
widely studied to mitigate data annotation constraints in various computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation.
However, the study focused on 2D images and its counterpart in 3D point clouds segmentation lags far behind due
to the lack of large-scale synthetic datasets and effective
transfer methods. We address this issue by collecting SynLiDAR, a large-scale synthetic LiDAR dataset that contains point-wise annotated point clouds with accurate geometric shapes and comprehensive semantic classes. SynLiDAR was collected from multiple virtual environments with
rich scenes and layouts which consists of over 19 billion
points of 32 semantic classes. In addition, we design PCT,
a novel point cloud translator that effectively mitigates the
gap between synthetic and real point clouds. Specifically,
we decompose the synthetic-to-real gap into an appearance
component and a sparsity component and handle them separately which improves the point cloud translation greatly. We
conducted extensive experiments over three transfer learning setups including data augmentation, semi-supervised domain adaptation and unsupervised domain adaptation. Extensive experiments show that SynLiDAR provides a highquality data source for studying 3D transfer and the proposed PCT achieves superior point cloud translation consistently across the three setups. The dataset is available at
https://github.com/xiaoaoran/SynLiDAR.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation of LiDAR sequential point cloud
is critical in various scene perception tasks and it has attracted increasing attention from both industry and academia
(Behley et al. 2019; Milioto et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2020;
Hu et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2020) in recent years. However, training effective segmentation models requires large
amounts of annotated point cloud, which are prohibitively
time-consuming to collect due to the view change of 3D data
and visual inconsistency between LiDAR point cloud and
physical world. This can be observed by the small size of
existing real LiDAR sequential datasets as listed in Table 1.
Inspired by the great success of transfer learning from
synthetic to real data in two-dimensional (2D) field (Ros
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2795

