The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SimSR: Simple Distance-Based State Representation
for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Hongyu Zang1 , Xin Li* 1 , Mingzhong Wang2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
University of the Sunshine Coast
{zanghyu,xinli}@bit.edu.cn, mwang@usc.edu.au
2

Abstract

et al. 2021b). Other work utilizes contrastive loss for heuristic augmentation pairs to achieve more distinguishable representations of the environment observations (van den Oord,
Li, and Vinyals 2018; Anand et al. 2019; Warde-Farley et al.
2019; Laskin, Srinivas, and Abbeel 2020). However, both
lines of research are prone to task-agnostic representations
as they encode all signals no matter which are relevant to
the task or not.
The latest study (Gelada et al. 2019; Castro 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021; Castro et al. 2021) presents promising results on
learning robust state representation with bisimulation metric (Ferns and Precup 2014; Castro 2020), which implicates
the state equivalence/similarity and thus is commonly used
for MDP (Markov Decision Process) model reduction/minimization. Though driven by various motivations, the use of
bisimulation metric in RL can be thought of as learning suitable measurement in the representation space. These work
trains the mapping functions (encoders) to minimize the discrepancy between the representations of similar observation
pairs in the latent representation space according to their
bisimulation metric. Intuitively, the distance between two
encoded observations should correspond to their “behavioral
difference” that is jointly determined by the difference of
their immediate rewards and the difference of the distributions over their next states. Although effective, the bisimulation metric needs to compute the Wasserstein distance between distributions, which is computationally expensive.
Existing work only partially addressed the complexity
issue, resulting in limitations in deploying the solutions.
Gelada et al. (2019) require a stringent assumption that the
learned representation is Lipschitz, so that the dual form of
Wasserstein distance can be used to alleviate the computational complexity. Zhang et al. (2021) assume the state distribution is Gaussian, so that it can use euclidean distance
of the Gaussian distribution in the latent space to compute
the closed-form Wasserstein distance, thus optimizing the ℓ1
distance between two representations. However, the inconsistency of ℓ1 distance and euclidean distance may steer inaccurate approximation. Castro et al. (2021) develop MICo
operator to update a sample-based metric that does not contain Wasserstein distance. However, this design has the risk
to fall in the failure mode of representation collapse since it
violates the “zero self-distance” property.
Therefore, we argue that it is crucial to find a measure-

This work explores how to learn robust and generalizable
state representation from image-based observations with deep
reinforcement learning methods. Addressing the computational complexity, stringent assumptions and representation
collapse challenges in existing work of bisimulation metric, we devise Simple State Representation (SimSR) operator. SimSR enables us to design a stochastic approximation
method that can practically learn the mapping functions (encoders) from observations to latent representation space. In
addition to the theoretical analysis and comparison with the
existing work, we experimented and compared our work with
recent state-of-the-art solutions in visual MuJoCo tasks. The
results shows that our model generally achieves better performance and has better robustness and good generalization.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) with image-based observations commonly leverages deep convolutional networks
to obtain low-dimensional representations of environments
to accomplish sequential decision tasks. Conventionally, the
features, which deep convolutional networks embed raw observations into, are modeled as state representations. As
these representations are generally learned implicitly as a
byproduct of deep RL, they are unlikely to provide sufficient
and compact information to summarize the task-relevant
states or enhance policy learning. This explains in part why
learning policies from physical states, e.g., control inputs
like robot’s velocity, is generally more sample-efficient than
learning policies from image-based environment.
However, since physical states are unobtainable in many
real-world domains, recent work in RL has attempted to
learn a mapping from image space to low-dimensional representation space that contains the concise state information with the help of auxiliary tasks and self-supervision objectives (Pathak et al. 2017; Laskin, Srinivas, and Abbeel
2020; Lee et al. 2020a; Yarats et al. 2021b; Allen et al.
2021; Fan and Li 2021). Some existing work learns lowdimensional representation by enforcing reconstruction objective to improve the predictiveness and consistency of representations (Jaderberg et al. 2017; Pathak et al. 2017; Yarats
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8997

