The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Boosting Contrastive Learning with Relation Knowledge Distillation
Kai Zheng, Yuanjiang Wang* , Ye Yuan
Megvii Technology
{zhengkai, wangyuanjiang, yuanye}@megvii.com

Abstract
While self-supervised representation learning (SSL) has
proved to be effective in the large model, there is still a
huge gap between the SSL and supervised method in the
lightweight model when following the same solution. We
delve into this problem and find that the lightweight model
is prone to collapse in semantic space when simply performing instance-wise contrast. To address this issue, we propose a
relation-wise contrastive paradigm with Relation Knowledge
Distillation (ReKD). We introduce a heterogeneous teacher
to explicitly mine the semantic information and transferring a novel relation knowledge to the student (lightweight
model). The theoretical analysis supports our main concern
about instance-wise contrast and verify the effectiveness of
our relation-wise contrastive learning. Extensive experimental results also demonstrate that our method achieves significant improvements on multiple lightweight models. Particularly, the linear evaluation on AlexNet obviously improves
the current state-of-art from 44.7% to 50.1% , which is the
first work to get close to the supervised (50.5%). Code will
be made available.

(a) Lightweight Model

(b) Large Model

(c) ReKD

(d) Supervised Learning

Figure 1: Different contrastive learning paradigms. Large
model has better semantic feature space (a) than lightweight
model (b) under the “one-positive” instance-wise contrastive
learning. (c) Our ReKD builds the relation between the instances in semantic space for lightweight model, which roles
as semantic label in supervised contrastive learning (d).

Introduction
The rise of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN)
has led to significant success in computer vision benchmarks. Such success relies heavily on massive labeled
datasets, which are prohibitively expensive to obtain. Therefore, self-supervised learning (SSL), an effective way to
learn visual representations from unlabeled data, has attracted widespread attention among researchers. A variety
of different self-defined pretext tasks (Komodakis and Gidaris 2018; Feng, Xu, and Tao 2019; Zhang, Isola, and Efros
2016; Noroozi and Favaro 2016; Zhang et al. 2019) have
been proposed. Recently, instance discrimination (Wu et al.
2018; He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020b,a; Grill et al. 2020)
has emerged as a dominant pretext task in unsupervised
learning. This task considers each image in the dataset as
an independent class, which makes the model learn discriminative feature under contrastive objective.
The renewed interest in exploring contrastive learning has
derived several awesome works (Chen et al. 2020b; Grill

et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a; Caron et al. 2020), some
even close the gap between unsupervised-based method and
supervised-based method, which attracts more researches’
attention into this field. However, these works focused on
how to boost the performance of large models like ResNet50 and ResNet-50x4, and rare of them paid attention to the
lightweight models like MobileNet (Howard et al. 2019) and
EfficientNet (Tan and Le 2019). In practice, engineers prefer
to select efficient models with low computational complexity and the least storage requirements, which make them easier to deploy in real-time applications, such as video surveillance and autonomous vehicles. Therefore, we pay attention
to the SSL on lightweight models’ performance. However,
the gap between the unsupervised method and supervised
method is rather huge in lightweight models. Specifically,
we find that MobileNet and EfficientNet are the most typical examples, whose supervised training accuracy is 75.2%
and 77.1%, but their unsupervised linear evaluation accuracies using MoCov2 are only 33.3% and 37.9%, which is far
from satisfying when compared to ResNet-50’s result on supervised (76.5%) and unsupervised (67.6%) training. Mean-

* Corresponding author(yuanjiang.wang@outlook.com).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3508

