The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Entailment Relation Aware Paraphrase Generation
Abhilasha Sancheti,

1,2

2

Balaji Vasan Srinivasan, Rachel Rudinger

1

1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Adobe Research
sancheti@umd.edu, balsrini@adobe.com, rudinger@umd.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new task of entailment relation aware paraphrase generation which aims at generating a paraphrase conforming to a given entailment relation (e.g., equivalent, forward entailing, or reverse entailing) with respect to a given
input. We propose a reinforcement learning-based weaklysupervised paraphrasing system, ERAP, that can be trained
using existing paraphrase and natural language inference
(NLI) corpora without an explicit task-specific corpus. A
combination of automated and human evaluations show that
ERAP generates paraphrases conforming to the specified entailment relation and are of good quality as compared to
the baselines and uncontrolled paraphrasing systems. Using
ERAP for augmenting training data for downstream textual
entailment task improves performance over an uncontrolled
paraphrasing system, and introduces fewer training artifacts,
indicating the benefit of explicit control during paraphrasing.

1

Figure 1: Entailment-unaware system might output approximately equivalent paraphrases. Label preserving augmentations generated using such system for textual entailment task
can result in incorrect labels (red). Explicit entailment relation control in entailment-aware system helps in reducing
such incorrectly labeled augmentations (green).

Introduction

Paraphrase is “an alternative surface form in the same language expressing the same semantic content as the original form” (Madnani and Dorr 2010). Although the logical definition of paraphrase requires strict semantic equivalence (or bi-directional entailment (Androutsopoulos and
Malakasiotis 2010)) between a sequence and its paraphrase,
data-driven paraphrasing accepts a broader definition of approximate semantic equivalence (Bhagat and Hovy 2013).
Moreover, existing automatically curated paraphrase resources do not align with this logical definition. For instance,
pivot-based paraphrasing rules extracted by Ganitkevitch,
Van Durme, and Callison-Burch (2013) contain hypernym
or hyponym pairs, e.g., due to variation in the discourse
structure of translations, and unrelated pairs, e.g., due to misalignments or polysemy in the foreign language.
While this flexibility of approximate semantic equivalence allows for greater diversity in expressing a sequence,
it comes at the cost of the ability to precisely control the semantic entailment relationship (henceforth “entailment relation”) between a sequence and its paraphrase. This trade-off
severely limits the applicability of paraphrasing systems or
resources to a variety of downstream natural language understanding (NLU) tasks (e.g., machine translation, question

answering, information retrieval, and natural language inferencing (Pavlick et al. 2015)) (Figure 1). For instance, semantic divergences in machine translation have been shown
to degrade the translation performance (Carpuat, Vyas, and
Niu 2017; Pham et al. 2018).
Existing works identify directionality (forward, reverse,
bi-directional, or no implication) of paraphrase and inference rules (Bhagat, Pantel, and Hovy 2007), and add semantics (natural logic entailment relationships such as equivalence, forward or reverse entailment, etc.) to data-driven
paraphrasing resources (Pavlick et al. 2015) leading to improvements in lexical expansion and proof-based RTE systems, respectively. However, entailment relation control in
paraphrase generation is, to our knowledge, a relatively
unexplored topic, despite its potential benefit to downstream applications (Madnani and Dorr 2010) such as MultiDocument Summarization (MDS) (or Information Retrieval
(IR)) wherein having such a control could allow the MDS
(or IR) system to choose either the more specific (reverse
entailing) or general (forward entailing) sentence (or query)
depending on the purpose of the summary (or user needs).
To address the lack of entailment relation control in para-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11258

