The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning and Dynamical Models for Sub-seasonal Climate Forecasting:
Comparison and Collaboration
Sijie He1, 3 , Xinyan Li1 , Laurie Trenary2 , Benjamin A Cash2 ,
Timothy DelSole2 , Arindam Banerjee3
1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
2
Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Earth Science, George Mason University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{hexxx893, lixx1166}@umn.edu, {ltrenary, bcash, tdelsole}@gmu.edu, arindamb@illinois.edu
Abstract

Research Council 2010; National Academies of Sciences
2016). In particular, high-quality SSF in the western contiguous United States would allow for better water resource
management and emergency planning for extreme events
such as droughts and wildfires (White et al. 2017). Currently,
sub-seasonal forecasts based on dynamical models are available weekly through the Subseasonal Experiment (SubX)
project (Pegion et al. 2019), but the full utility of these for
operational forecasting still remains to be determined.
SSF is challenging for a variety of reasons. First, highquality SSF has proven difficult to accomplish compared to
both short-term weather forecasting and long-term seasonal
forecasting (Vitart, Robertson, and Anderson 2012). Due to
the chaotic nature of atmosphere, weather events can not
be accurately predicted beyond two weeks using dynamical
models (Lorenz 1963). From a physical point of view, the
predictability on sub-seasonal time scales depends on correctly modeling the atmosphere, ocean, and land, including
their interactions and couplings as well as the memory effects of land and ocean. In addition to these physical complexities, SSF poses unconventional time series prediction
problems. Given a training set {x1:t , y1:t }, where y denotes
the target response variable, e.g., land temperature, and x
denotes suitable covariates, temporal models typically focus
on predicting yt+1 or maybe yt+1:t+τs for a small τs (a few
days or less). Instead, SSF is about predicting yt+T :t+T +τl
for large T  τs , e.g., weather prediction one month ahead
(T = 31 days). The long temporal range relative to the
weather predictability time, along with the nonlinear dynamics and complex interactions, makes SSF challenging.
For climate forecasting, one standard baseline for comparing forecasts is the so-called climatology (Trewin et al.
2007), i.e. the 30-year average temperature/precipitation for
each calendar day at each geographic location. Despite its
simplicity, climatology provides a competitive benchmark
for SSF. For instance, in the last Forecast Rodeo (NIDIS
2019), a SSF competition sponsored by the U.S. Bureau
of Reclamation and the NOAA/National Integrated Drought
Information System (USBR and NOAA 2019), about half of
the submitted forecasts could not beat climatology. Thus, for
any more advanced SSF models, the first order of business
is to do better than climatology. Recently, progress has been
made in developing ML models (Hwang et al. 2019; He et al.
2021; Weyn et al. 2021; Srinivasan et al. 2021) which have

Sub-seasonal forecasting (SSF) is the prediction of key climate variables such as temperature and precipitation on the
2-week to 2-month time horizon. Skillful SSF would have
substantial societal value in areas such as agricultural productivity, hydrology and water resource management, and emergency planning for extreme events such as droughts and wildfires. Despite its societal importance, SSF has stayed a challenging problem compared to both short-term weather forecasting and long-term seasonal forecasting. Recent studies
have shown the potential of machine learning (ML) models to advance SSF. In this paper, for the first time, we perform a fine-grained comparison of a suite of modern ML
models with start-of-the-art physics-based dynamical models from the Subseasonal Experiment (SubX) project for SSF
in the western contiguous United States. Additionally, we explore mechanisms to enhance the ML models by using forecasts from dynamical models. Empirical results illustrate that,
on average, ML models outperform dynamical models while
the ML models tend to generate forecasts with conservative
magnitude compared to the SubX models. Further, we illustrate that ML models make forecasting errors under extreme
weather conditions, e.g., cold waves due to the polar vortex, highlighting the need for separate models for extreme
events. Finally, we show that suitably incorporating dynamical model forecasts as inputs to ML models can substantially
improve the forecasting performance of the ML models. The
SSF dataset constructed for the work and code for the ML
models are released along with the paper for the benefit of
the artificial intelligence community.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, good quality short-term (few days)
weather forecasts as well long-term (beyond few months)
seasonal forecasts have both become routinely available.
These forecasts are largely based on dynamical models that
solve partial differential equations (PDEs) derived from the
laws of physics. In contrast, skillful sub-seasonal forecasts
(SSF), i.e., the prediction of key climate variables such as
temperature and precipitation on 2-week to 2-month time
scales, are arguably not yet available. Skillful SSF has immense societal value as discussed in two recent reports
from the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) (National
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4495

