The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Versatile Pedestrian Detector with Multisensory-Matching
and Multispectral Recalling Memory
Jung Uk Kim, Sungjune Park, Yong Man Ro*
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{jukim0701, sungjune-p, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

depending on the situation for around-the-clock operation
(Wu et al. 2017). In general, visible modality is adopted
in day time where color information is well observed and
thermal modality is used in cloudy weather or dark nights
where pedestrians cannot be seen but heat information is detected. Thus, it is necessary to build a network that is robust to changes in the input modality to automatically detect
pedestrians. However, previous single-modal methods have
a limitation in that they mainly focused on detecting pedestrians in only one specific modality (visible or thermal), so
that they cannot effectively cope with other modal inputs
(Wu et al. 2020b; Kieu et al. 2020). For instance, thermalbased detectors cannot handle visible modality due to the
significant differences between the two modalities (Li et al.
2019a). Some efforts of person re-identification task have
been made to cope with changes in input modality (Wu et al.
2017, 2020a). However, they need additional modal-specific
networks, and the users should know the input modality type
in advance to switch modal-specific networks.
Moreover, some recent works have studied on multispectral pedestrian detection which utilizes both visible modality
and thermal modality simultaneously (Hwang et al. 2015;
Zhang et al. 2019; Kim, Park, and Ro 2021b). Since this
task can utilize complementary visual information of the two
modalities, multispectral pedestrian detectors can encode
more discriminative features (Hwang et al. 2015), showing
remarkable performance. However, multispectral pedestrian
detection is somewhat difficult to be applied to practical applications for several reasons. For example, the multispectral
pedestrian detectors need an image pair of two modalities
that have the same Field-of-View (FoV) and same frame rate
(Zhang et al. 2019) in the inference phase. Also, the computational cost is much higher than the single modal detectors.
Based on the above discussions of the single modality and
multispectral modalities, it is essential to build a versatile
pedestrian detector that overcomes the above limitations. We
aim to build a pedestrian detector that shows robust performance while freely receiving the visible modality and thermal modality. To this end, we consider following two issues:
(1) how to cope with a single input regardless of the input
modality type and (2) how to enhance the visual representation of a single modality for the robust pedestrian detection.
In this paper, we propose a novel pedestrian detector by
addressing the raised two issues. First, in order to make

Recently, automated surveillance cameras can change a visible sensor and a thermal sensor for all-day operation. However, existing single-modal pedestrian detectors mainly focus
on detecting pedestrians in only one specific modality (i.e.,
visible or thermal), so they cannot cope with other modal
inputs. In addition, recent multispectral pedestrian detectors
have shown remarkable performance by adopting multispectral modalities, but they also have limitations in practical
applications (e.g., different Field-of-View (FoV) and frame
rate). In this paper, we introduce a versatile pedestrian detector that shows robust detection performance in any single
modality. We propose a multisensory-matching contrastive
loss to reduce the difference between the visual representation
of pedestrians in the visible and thermal modalities. Moreover, for the robust detection on a single modality, we design
a Multispectral Recalling (MSR) Memory. The MSR Memory enhances the visual representation of the single modal
features by recalling that of the multispectral modalities. To
guide the MSR Memory to store the multispectral modal contexts, we introduce a multispectral recalling loss. It enables
the pedestrian detector to encode more discriminative features with a single input modality. We believe our method is a
step forward detector that can be applied to a variety of realworld applications. The comprehensive experimental results
verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a widely studied task in computer vision, and it has been applied to massive real-world applications (Dalal and Triggs 2005; Benenson et al. 2014; Chi et al.
2020). When detecting pedestrians, many methods have utilized a single camera sensor. Traditional methods commonly
adopt a visible modality (e.g., RGB), because this modality
contains various color information about pedestrians (Zhang
et al. 2021). In addition, recent works have adopted a thermal
modality, because this modality is robust to various challenging environments, such as low illumination (Li et al.
2019b) and background clutter (Song et al. 2019).
Since the two modalities have different properties, recent
surveillance cameras automatically switch the input modality between the visible modality and the thermal modality
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1157

