The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Salient Object Detection through
Uncertainty-Aware Pseudo-Label Learning
Pengxiang Yan1,2* , Ziyi Wu1* , Mengmeng Liu1 , Kun Zeng1 , Liang Lin1 , Guanbin Li1,3
1

†

Sun Yat-sen University 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
yanpx@live.com, wuzy39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liumm97@outlook.com,
zengkun2@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning significantly boost the performance of salient object detection (SOD) at the expense
of labeling larger-scale per-pixel annotations. To relieve the
burden of labor-intensive labeling, deep unsupervised SOD
methods have been proposed to exploit noisy labels generated
by handcrafted saliency methods. However, it is still difficult
to learn accurate saliency details from rough noisy labels. In
this paper, we propose to learn saliency from synthetic but
clean labels, which naturally has higher pixel-labeling quality
without the effort of manual annotations. Specifically, we first
construct a novel synthetic SOD dataset by a simple copypaste strategy. Considering the large appearance differences
between the synthetic and real-world scenarios, directly training with synthetic data will lead to performance degradation
on real-world scenarios. To mitigate this problem, we propose a novel unsupervised domain adaptive SOD method to
adapt between these two domains by uncertainty-aware selftraining. Experimental results show that our proposed method
outperforms the existing state-of-the-art deep unsupervised
SOD methods on several benchmark datasets, and is even
comparable to fully-supervised ones.

Target Domain

Source Domain

(a) Target Image and Noisy Labels

(b) Source Image and Synthetic Label

(c) Test Image
on Target Domain

(e) Source only
(w/o DA)

Train

Test
(d) EDNL
(Deep USOD)

(f) Ours
(UDASOD)

Figure 1: Deep unsupervised salient object detection
(USOD) achieved by two training settings. Existing deep
USOD algorithms are mainly trained on (a) real-world images (target domain) with noisy labels generated by traditional USOD methods. While we propose to exploit (b)
the synthetic saliency data (source domain) for training.
However, due to the discrepancy between two domains, the
saliency detector trained only on synthetic data ((e) Source
only) without domain adaption (DA) usually fails to performs well on (c) real images. To solve this problem, we propose (f) an unsupervised domain adaptive SOD (UDASOD)
method, which can generate more accurate saliency predictions than (d) the best-performing deep USOD method
EDNL (Zhang, Xie, and Barnes 2020).

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to accurately locate and
segment out the most visually distinctive object region in
a scene. In recent years, the development of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) significantly boosts the
performance of salient object detection (Wei et al. 2020;
Qin et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018) and has taken place of
conventional hand-crafted feature-based algorithms (Zhang
et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2014; Li et al. 2013) to become the
dominant methods in salient object detection. However, such
promising performance comes at a cost of a large number of
pixel-wise annotated images to train the DCNN-based models. Moreover, to ensure the quality and consistency of labeling, it generally requires multiple human annotators to annotate fine pixel-level masks for the same image (Li et al. 2017;
Fan et al. 2018). The time-consuming and laborious labeling
work limits the amount of training data and thus hampers the
further development of DCNN-based SOD methods.

To alleviate the burden of pixel-wise labeling but take full
advantage of the end-to-end training advantages of DCNN,
weakly-supervised (Zhang et al. 2020b; Zeng et al. 2019;
Li, Xie, and Lin 2018) and deep unsupervised (Zhang, Xie,
and Barnes 2020; Nguyen et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2018)
SOD algorithms have been proposed. Weakly-supervised
SOD algorithms mainly focus on learning saliency inference
from simple but clean manual annotations, such as image
classes (Li, Xie, and Lin 2018), image captions (Zeng et al.
2019), and scribbles (Zhang et al. 2020b). While deep unsupervised SOD methods aim to learn saliency detection without resorting to any manual annotations. Existing deep unsupervised SOD methods mainly focus on learning from the
dense noisy labels generated by single (Zhang et al. 2020a)
or multiple (Zhang, Xie, and Barnes 2020; Nguyen et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2018; Zhang, Han, and Zhang 2017) tra-

* The first two authors have equal contribution. † Corresponding
author is Guanbin Li (Email: liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3000

