The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Domain-Lifted Sampling for Universal Two-Variable Logic and Extensions
Yuanhong Wang1 , Timothy van Bremen2 , Yuyi Wang3, 4 * , Ondřej Kuželka5
1

Beihang University, China
2
KU Leuven, Belgium
3
CRRC Zhuzhou Institute, China
4
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
5
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
lucienwang@buaa.edu.cn, timothy.vanbremen@cs.kuleuven.be, yuyiwang920@gmail.com, ondrej.kuzelka@fel.cvut.cz
Abstract

structures (Jerrum, Valiant, and Vazirani 1986); by viewing these problems through the lens of first-order sampling,
one can obtain a more generalizable approach. For example,
suppose we are interested in uniformly sampling labelled 2colored trees with n nodes, where one color is used k times
and the other n ´ k times. This is precisely the type of problems that the results in our paper allow us to solve; it can be
modelled with the sentence:

Given a first-order sentence Γ and a domain size n, how
can one sample a model of Γ on the domain t1, . . . , nu efficiently as n scales? We consider two variants of this problem:
the uniform sampling regime, in which the goal is to sample
a model uniformly at random, and the symmetric weighted
sampling regime, in which models are weighted according
to the number of groundings of each predicate appearing in
them. Solutions to this problem have applications to the scalable generation of combinatorial structures, as well as sampling in several statistical-relational models such as Markov
logic networks and probabilistic logic programs. In this paper, we identify certain classes of sentences that are domainliftable under sampling, in the sense that they admit a sampling algorithm that runs in time polynomial in n. In particular, we prove that every sentence of the form @x@y : ψpx, yq
for some quantifier-free formula ψpx, yq is domain-liftable
under sampling. We then further show that this result continues to hold in the presence of one or more cardinality constraints as well as a single tree axiom constraint.

@x : Rpx, xq ^
@x@y : Rpx, yq Ñ Rpy, xq ^
@x :C1 pxq _ C2 pxq ^
@x : C1 pxq _ C2 pxq^
@x@y :Rpx, yq Ñ
pC1 pxq ^ C1 pyqq ^ pC2 pxq ^ C2 pyqq^
TR ^
|C1 | “ k ^ |C2 | “ n ´ k
where TR enforces that the binary relation R forms a tree,
and |C1 | “ k and |C2 | “ n ´ k enforces cardinality constraints on the number of groundings of the relations C1 and
C2 .
There are also applications of first-order sampling in
the domain of statistical-relational learning (De Raedt
et al. 2016). For instance, Markov logic networks
(MLNs) (Richardson and Domingos 2006) are a flexible formalism for mixing uncertainty with first-order logic. Probabilistic inference in an MLN is known to be reducible to
weighted first-order model counting (Van den Broeck et al.
2011); as it turns out, essentially the same reduction can
be used to sample possible worlds from an MLN. Domainliftability under sampling is particularly important in these
applications, as MLNs are often modelled over large populations.
In this paper, we prove the domain-liftability under sampling of UFO2 , the universally-quantified two-variable
fragment of first-order logic, comprising sentences of the
form @x@y : ψpx, yq for some quantifier-free formula
ψpx, yq. We then show how to further extend this result in
two different directions: one allowing the addition of cardinality constraints (Kuželka 2021), and another allowing
the addition of a tree constraint (van Bremen and Kuželka
2021).

Introduction
We introduce and study the first-order sampling problem:
given a sentence in first-order logic Γ and a domain size
n, sample a model of Γ on the domain t1, . . . , nu. Clearly,
naive approaches such as rejection sampling are intractable
for all but the smallest domains here, so we focus our attention on designing domain-liftable sampling algorithms,
meaning their runtime is polynomial in n. Our approach is
inspired by the first-order model counting literature (Van den
Broeck et al. 2011; Beame et al. 2015), in which the goal is
to count the number of models of a sentence over a fixed domain size n in time polynomial in n; however, as we shall
see, new challenges arise when translating results there to
the sampling setting.
The first-order sampling problem has applications in several areas of computer science. Many problems related to
the generation of combinatorial structures can easily be expressed as first-order sampling problems. Indeed, a great
deal of research in the combinatorics community has gone
into designing sampling schemes for particular classes of
* partially supported by Huawei TCS Lab
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10070

