The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PRISM: A Rich Class of Parameterized Submodular Information Measures for
Guided Data Subset Selection
Suraj Kothawade1 , Vishal Kaushal2 , Ganesh Ramakrishnan2 , Jeff Bilmes3 , Rishabh Iyer1,2
1
University of Texas at Dallas
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
3
University of Washington, Seattle
suraj.kothawade@utdallas.edu, vkaushal@cse.iitb.ac.in, ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in, bilmes@uw.edu, rishabh.iyer@utdallas.edu
2

Abstract
With ever-increasing dataset sizes, subset selection techniques
are becoming increasingly important for a plethora of tasks. It
is often necessary to guide the subset selection to achieve certain desiderata, which includes focusing or targeting certain
data points, while avoiding others. Examples of such problems
include: i) targeted learning, where the goal is to find subsets
with rare classes or rare attributes on which the model is underperforming, and ii) guided summarization, where data (e.g.,
image collection, text, document or video) is summarized for
quicker human consumption with specific additional user intent. Motivated by such applications, we present P RISM, a rich
class of PaRameterIzed Submodular information Measures.
Through novel functions and their parameterizations, P RISM
offers a variety of modeling capabilities that enable a
trade-off between desired qualities of a subset like diversity
or representation and similarity/dissimilarity with a set of
data points. We demonstrate how P RISM can be applied to
the two real-world problems mentioned above, which require
guided subset selection. In doing so, we show that P RISM
interestingly generalizes some past work, therein reinforcing
its broad utility. Through extensive experiments on diverse
datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of P RISM over the
state-of-the-art in targeted learning and in guided imagecollection summarization. P RISM is available as a part of the
S UBMODLIB (https://github.com/decile-team/submodlib) and
T RUST (https://github.com/decile-team/trust) toolkits.

(a)

(b)

Introduction
Recent times have seen explosive growth in data across several modalities, including text, images, and videos. This has
given rise to the need for finding techniques for selecting
effective smaller data subsets with specific characteristics for
a variety of down-stream tasks. Often, we would like to guide
the data selection to either target or avoid a certain set of data
slices. One application is, what we call, targeted learning,
where the goal is to select data points similar to data slices on
which the model is currently performing poorly. These slices
are data points that either belong to rare classes or have common rare attributes (e.g., color, background, etc.). An example
of such a scenario is shown in Fig. 1(a), where a self-driving
car model struggles in detecting “cars in a dark background“
because of a lack of such images in the training set. The targeted learning problem is to augment the training dataset with
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10238

Figure 1: Applications of guided subset selection. (a) Targeted learning: improving a model’s performance on night
images (target), which are under-represented in the training
data. This is achieved by augmenting it with a subset matching the target. (b) Guided summarization: finding a summary
similar to a query set or a summary dissimilar to a private set.

more of such rare images, with an aim to improve model performance. Another example is detecting cancers in biomedical imaging datasets, where the number of cancerous images
are often a small fraction of the non-cancerous images.
Another application comes from the summarization task,
where an image collection, a video, or a text document is
summarized for quicker human consumption by eliminating
redundancy, while preserving the main content. While a
number of applications require generic summarization (i.e.,
simply picking a representative and diverse subset of the massive dataset), it is often important to capture certain user intent
in summarization. We call this guided summarization. Ex-

