The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Contrast-Enhanced Semi-supervised Text Classification with Few Labels
Austin Cheng-Yun Tsai, Sheng-Ya Lin, Li-Chen Fu
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University
{r08922086, r09944044, lichen}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

(Miyato et al. 2018, 2017; Xie et al. 2020; Chen, Yang, and
Yang 2020). However, they typically involve a sophisticated
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) system for augmenting
data by back-translation, which translates a sentence into
a different language and then translates it back. Such approaches may be bothersome in real-world scenarios by requiring an additional NMT system. Moreover, the system
may generate poor-quality sentences if the task-specific data
distribution is different from that of the data on which the
NMT system was pre-trained.
One promising solution to this issue is self-training (Lee
et al. 2013; Grandvalet and Bengio 2004; Meng et al. 2020).
Self-training generates pseudo-labels for unlabeled data,
which were later used as new labeled data for further training. Traditional self-training does not perform sample selection, nor does it consider noises in the generated pseudolabels during training. This may result in error accumulation
(Zhang et al. 2017; Arazo et al. 2020) throughout training
iterations, which is referred to as confirmation bias in contemporary works (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Arazo et al.
2020) and is considered a severe problem in conventional
SSL approaches. Though prior works have been devoted to
designing criteria for selecting samples, for example, selecting samples with smaller loss or higher confidence scores in
neural network’s predictions, these selection strategies still
suffer from over-fitting on the samples that the model is already certain about or from learning on wrong labels.
In this paper, we propose Contrast-Enhanced Semisupervised Text Classification (CEST) framework to overcome all the drawbacks mentioned above. The framework
overview is illustrated in Fig. 1. Based on self-training,
CEST leverages Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) (Wang
and Yeung 2016; Gal and Ghahramani 2016) to provide certainty estimates for unlabeled data and judiciously select appropriate instances to improve the self-training process. We
then build a reliable similarity graph on the selected data instances to enhance the contrast and exploit the smoothness
assumption in SSL among data instances. Inducing the contrast between data not only encourages the model to learn
better representations but also results in better generality and
better efficiency in utilizing data. Finally, we re-formulate
the training on pseudo-labels as a new problem and learn in
a noise-robust manner to alleviate the severe confirmation
bias issue.

Traditional text classification requires thousands of annotated
data or an additional Neural Machine Translation (NMT)
system, which are expensive to obtain in real applications.
This paper presents a Contrast-Enhanced Semi-supervised
Text Classification (CEST) framework under label-limited
settings without incorporating any NMT systems. We propose
a certainty-driven sample selection method and a contrastenhanced similarity graph to utilize data more efficiently
in self-training, alleviating the annotation-starving problem.
The graph imposes a smoothness constraint on the unlabeled
data to improve the coherence and the accuracy of pseudolabels. Moreover, CEST formulates the training as a “learning from noisy labels” problem and performs the optimization accordingly. A salient feature of this formulation is the
explicit suppression of the severe error propagation problem
in conventional semi-supervised learning. With solely 30 labeled data per class for both training and validation dataset,
CEST outperforms the previous state-of-the-art algorithms by
2.11% accuracy and only falls within the 3.04% accuracy
range of fully-supervised pre-training language model finetuning on thousands of labeled data.

Introduction
Text classification is one of the most fundamental tasks in
the Natural Language Processing (NLP) research community, with a broad range of applications, such as question
answering, sentiment analysis, topic mining, and spam detection. Previous researches have developed several deeplearning-based algorithms (Kim 2014; Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015; Tang, Qin, and Liu 2015; Yang et al. 2016) and
have achieved great success when abundant labeled data are
provided (usually over tens of thousands). However, when
there is only a limited number of labeled data, complex
neural networks often suffer from over-fitting (Xie et al.
2020). As a result, increasing attention has been paid to
semi-supervised learning (SSL) to effectively utilize large
amounts of unlabeled data to address the above shortcomings since unlabeled data are much easier and cheaper to
collect (Chawla and Karakoulas 2005).
Recent semi-supervised approaches for text classification
primarily focus on exploiting the consistency in the predictions for the same samples under different perturbations
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11394

