The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ErfAct and Pserf: Non-monotonic Smooth Trainable Activation Functions*
Koushik Biswas1 , Sandeep Kumar 1, 2 , Shilpak Banerjee3 , Ashish Kumar Pandey3
1
Department of Computer Science, IIIT Delhi, New Delhi, India
Department of Mathematics, Shaheed Bhagat Singh College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
3
Department of Mathematics, IIIT Delhi, New Delhi, India
{koushikb, sandeepk}@iiitd.ac.in, sandeep kumar@sbs.du.ac.in, shilpak@iiitd.ac.in, ashish.pandey@iiitd.ac.in
2

Abstract

differentiability and negative missing, which leads to the
infamous vanishing gradients problem (also known as the
dying ReLU problem). Worth noting that prior to the introduction of ReLU, Tanh and Sigmoid were popularly used,
but performance gains and training time gains achieved by
ReLU led to their decline.

An activation function is a crucial component of a neural network that introduces non-linearity in the network. The stateof-the-art performance of a neural network depends also on
the perfect choice of an activation function. We propose two
novel non-monotonic smooth trainable activation functions,
called ErfAct and Pserf. Experiments suggest that the proposed functions improve the network performance significantly compared to the widely used activations like ReLU,
Swish, and Mish. Replacing ReLU by ErfAct and Pserf, we
have 5.68% and 5.42% improvement for Top-1 accuracy on
Shufflenet V2 (2.0x) network in CIFAR100 dataset, 2.11%
and 1.96% improvement for Top-1 accuracy on Shufflenet
V2 (2.0x) network in CIFAR10 dataset, 1.0%, and 1.0% improvement on mean average precision (mAP) on SSD300
model in Pascal VOC dataset.

Related Works and Motivation
The newer activation functions are obtained by combining
well-known functions with simple forms in various ways,
often using hyper-parameters or trainable parameters. In the
case of trainable parameters, we optimize them during the
training process itself, yielding networks that are better fitted. In the case of trainable parameters, note that the actual
activation function curve may change in different layers during backpropagation. For example, SiLU (Elfwing, Uchibe,
and Doya 2017) shows good performance over known activation functions while Swish (Ramachandran, Zoph, and Le
2017) is a trainable version of SiLU, which is a non-linear,
non-monotonic activation function. Among the activation
mentioned in the previous section, Swish, PReLU, PAU,
ACON, and OPAU are trainable activation functions. Swish
is a non-monotonic activation function and shows promise
across a variety of deep learning tasks. Mish is one of the
popular functions proposed recently and gained popularity
due to its effectiveness in object detection task on COCO
dataset (Lin et al. 2015) in Yolo (Bochkovskiy, Wang, and
Liao 2020) models. GELU is very similar to Swish and
gained attention due to its effectiveness in computer vision
and natural language processing tasks. It is also used in popular architectures like GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019) and GPT3 (Brown et al. 2020). Apart from using a combination of
known functions, a somewhat fundamentally different technique to construct activation functions is to use perturbation
or approximations to well-known activation functions to remove some of the shortcomings yet retain the positive aspects. Recent successful examples where this strategy was
employed includes PAU and OPAU, which are activations
based on approximation of Leaky ReLU by rational polynomials were constructed.
Motivated from these works, we have proposed two activation functions with trainable parameters, we call them ErfAct and Pserf and shown that they are more effective than
conventional activation functions like ReLU, Leaky ReLU,

Introduction
The choice of activation function in a deep learning architecture can have a significant impact on the training and
performance of the neural network. The machine learning community has so far relied on hand-designed activations like ReLU (Nair and Hinton 2010), Leaky ReLU
(Maas, Hannun, and Ng 2013) or their variants. ReLU, in
particular, remains widely popular due to faster training
times and decent performance. However, evidence suggests
that considerable gains can be made when more sophisticated activation functions are used to design networks. For
example, activation functions such as ELU (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2016), Parametric ReLU (PReLU)
(He et al. 2015b), ReLU6 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2010),
PAU (Molina, Schramowski, and Kersting 2020), OPAU
(Biswas, Banerjee, and Pandey 2021), ACON (Ma et al.
2021), Mish (Misra 2020), GELU (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2020), Swish (Ramachandran, Zoph, and Le 2017),
Serf (Nag and Bhattacharyya 2021) etc. have appeared as
powerful contenders to the traditional ones. Though ReLU
remains a go-to choice in both research and practice, it
has certain well-documented shortcomings such as nonzero mean (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2016), non* An extended version of this paper can be found at https://arxiv.
org/abs/2109.04386
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6097

