The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Interpretable Domain Adaptation for Hidden Subdomain Alignment
in the Context of Pre-trained Source Models
Luxin Zhang1, 2 , Pascal Germain3 , Yacine Kessaci1 , Christophe Biernacki2
1

Worldline Labs, France
2
Inria, France
3
Université Laval, Canada
luxin.zhang@worldline.com, pascal.germain@ift.ulaval.ca, yacine.kessaci@worldline.com, christophe.biernacki@inria.fr
Abstract

In many real-life industrial applications, the predictive
model is often given as a “black-box” of a mix of models of different types: SVMs, decision trees, and even expert rules, to name a few. Retraining such a model requires
tedious hyper-parameter fine-tuning and is sometimes unfeasible due to no longer accessible expertise. Zhang et al.
(2021b,a) proposed a target to source DA method leveraging one-dimensional optimal transport to address this adaptation problem with a pre-trained source model. The proposed method transforms target data into the source domain;
thus, the pre-trained source model can be directly applied to
adapted target data. This paper stands in a similar setting
where a well-performed source domain predictive model is
given and cannot be retrained. Since such a scenario is often
used to predict tabular datasets, hereafter, we focus on the
adaptation problem of tabular data.

Domain adaptation aims to leverage source domain knowledge to predict target domain labels. Most domain adaptation methods tackle a single-source, single-target scenario,
whereas source and target domain data can often be subdivided into data from different distributions in real-life applications (e.g., when the distribution of the collected data
changes with time). However, such subdomains are rarely
given and should be discovered automatically. To this end,
some recent domain adaptation works seek separations of
hidden subdomains, w.r.t. a known or fixed number of subdomains. In contrast, this paper introduces a new subdomain
combination method that leverages a variable number of subdomains. Precisely, we propose to use an inter-subdomain
divergence maximization criterion to exploit hidden subdomains. Besides, our proposition stands in a target-to-source
domain adaptation scenario, where one exploits a pre-trained
source model as a black box; thus, the proposed method is
model-agnostic. By providing interpretability at two complementary levels (transformation and subdomain levels), our
method can also be easily interpreted by practitioners with or
without machine learning backgrounds. Experimental results
over two fraud detection datasets demonstrate the efficiency
of our method.

Furthermore, different from works of Zhang et al.
(2021b,a) that tackle a single-source single-target (singledomain) DA setting, this article addresses a more challenging multi-source multi-target DA problem. More specifically, we consider both source and target domains can
be subdivided into data from different distributions, the
so-called subdomains. Nevertheless, subdomain labels are
rarely provided; thus one should propose methods to annotate them automatically. As discrepancies between subdomains of the same domain are not as significant as discrepancies between source and target domains, such intra-domain
drifts may be omitted and even undiscovered as “hidden”
when training a predictive model for a single domain. However, identifying such hidden subdomains contributes to DA
by increasing the precision and flexibility of adaptation
methods. Some recent works (Xu et al. 2018; Peng et al.
2019) that study multi-source or multi-target DA problems
focus on a scenario where subdomain labels are provided.
In contrast, we address a more challenging case where one
needs to discover these hidden subdomains. Although Gong,
Grauman, and Sha (2013); Mancini et al. (2018) tackle such
a hidden subdomain discovering problem, they assume that
the number of hidden subdomains is known a priori. Relying
on the single-domain DA function of Zhang et al. (2021b,a),
this paper proposes a method reweighting different target
domain classifiers adapted from the best combination of subdomains. Therefore, it is not necessary to know the number
of subdomains a priori. Precisely, we first provide a gen-

Introduction
In a traditional supervised learning paradigm, one supposes
that testing data are from the same distribution as training.
However, such an assumption is often violated in real-life
applications. For example, to expand a company’s business,
a pre-trained fraud detection system may be reused to predict
fraudsters of a new market where customers have different
payment habits. Domain adaptation (DA) methods (Pan and
Yang 2009; Torralba and Efros 2011) tackle this problem by
mitigating the gaps between the training data, the so-called
source domain data, and the testing data, the so-called target domain data. Most DA methods (e.g., Long et al. (2015);
Ganin et al. (2016)) map source data into the target domain
or transform source and target domain into a latent space.
Therefore, they require a training process to estimate a predictive model during the adaptation. However, such a training process could be undesirable, especially when dealing
with a mix of predictive models.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9057

