The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sharp Restricted Isometry Property Bounds for Low-Rank Matrix Recovery
Problems with Corrupted Measurements
Ziye Ma* 1 , Yingjie Bi* 2 , Javad Lavaei2 , Somayeh Sojoudi13
1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California, Berkeley
{ziyema,yingjiebi,lavaei,sojoudi}@berkeley.edu
Here, A : Rn×n → Rm is a linear operator whose action on
a matrix M is given by

Abstract
In this paper, we study a general low-rank matrix recovery
problem with linear measurements corrupted by some noise.
The objective is to understand under what conditions on the
restricted isometry property (RIP) of the problem local search
methods can find the ground truth with a small error. By analyzing the landscape of the non-convex problem, we first propose a global guarantee on the maximum distance between
an arbitrary local minimizer and the ground truth under the
assumption that the RIP constant is smaller than 1/2. We
show that this distance shrinks to zero as the intensity of the
noise reduces. Our new guarantee is sharp in terms of the
RIP constant and is much stronger than the existing results.
We then present a local guarantee for problems with an arbitrary RIP constant, which states that any local minimizer is
either considerably close to the ground truth or far away from
it. Next, we prove the strict saddle property, which guarantees the global convergence of the perturbed gradient descent
method in polynomial time. The developed results demonstrate how the noise intensity and the RIP constant of the
problem affect the landscape of the problem.

A(M ) = [hA1 , M i, . . . , hAm , M i]T ,
where A1 , . . . , Am ∈ Rn×n are called sensing matrices. In
addition, b = A(M ∗ ) represents the perfect measurement on
the ground truth M ∗ and w comes from an arbitrary probability distribution. Note that only the noisy measurement
b − w is available to the user, and indeed b is unknown. In
other words, from a problem-solving perspective, the random variable w is hidden to the user, and it is explicitly
modeled here only for the sake of analysis.
The modeling of the noise in this problem is critical for
many practical applications in which the influence of the
noise cannot be ignored. For example, state estimation is a
major data analytic problem for the operation of power grids,
which can be modeled as matrix sensing (Jin et al. 2019b).
In this problem, each measurement comes from a physical
device, and the noise in our formulation models not only the
sensory noise but also mismatch between the true model of
the system and the one used by a power operator, changes in
the measurements due to cyber-attacks, mechanical faults,
etc. In other words, by a noisy problem we mean a learning
problem where a part of the data is wrong for various reasons, and as with this case, it is impossible to assume that
the measurements are noise-free.
Although it may be possible to solve the problem (1)
based on convex relaxations (Candès and Recht 2009; Recht,
Fazel, and Parrilo 2010; Candès and Tao 2010), the computational complexity associated with solving a semidefinite program presents a major challenge for large-scale
problems. A more scalable approach is to use the Burer–
Monteiro factorization (Burer and Monteiro 2003) by expressing M as XX T with X ∈ Rn×r , which leads to the
following equivalent formulation of the original problem
(1):
1
(2)
min
f (X) = kA(XX T ) − b + wk2 .
n×r
2
X∈R
The unconstrained problem (2) is often solved by local
search methods such as gradient descent. Since the objective
function f (X) in (2) is non-convex, local search algorithms
may converge to a local minimizer, leading to a suboptimal
or plainly wrong solution. Hence, it is desirable to provide

Introduction
Low-rank matrix recovery problems arise in various applications, such as matrix completion (Candès and Recht
2009; Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo 2010), phase synchronization/retrieval (Singer 2011; Boumal 2016; Shechtman et al.
2015), robust PCA (Ge, Jin, and Zheng 2017), and several
others (Chen and Chi 2018; Chi, Lu, and Chen 2019). In this
paper, we study a class of low-rank matrix recovery problems, where the goal is to recover a symmetric and positive
semidefinite ground truth matrix M ∗ with rank(M ∗ ) = r
from certain linear measurements corrupted by noise. This
problem can be formulated as the following optimization
problem:
min

M ∈Rn×n

s. t.

1
kA(M ) − b + wk2
2
rank(M ) ≤ r, M  0.

(1)

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7672

