The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SGEITL: Scene Graph Enhanced Image-Text Learning for Visual Commonsense
Reasoning
Zhecan Wang 1 * , Haoxuan You 1 * , Liunian Harold Li 2 , Alireza Zareian 1 , Suji Park 1 , Yiqing
Liang 1 , Kai-Wei Chang 2 , Shih-Fu Chang 1
1
Columbia University
University of California, Los Angeles
{olinzhecanwang, haoxuanyou}@gmail.com
2

Previous Works:

Abstract

[CLS]

Answering complex questions about images is an ambitious
goal for machine intelligence, which requires a joint understanding of images, text, and commonsense knowledge,
as well as a strong reasoning ability. Recently, multimodal
Transformers have made a great progress in the task of Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR), by jointly understanding visual objects and text tokens through layers of crossmodality attention. However, these approaches do not utilize the rich structure of the scene and the interactions between objects which are essential in answering complex commonsense questions. We propose a Scene Graph Enhanced
Image-Text Learning (SGEITL) framework to incorporate
visual scene graph in commonsense reasoning. In order to
exploit the scene graph structure, at the model structure level,
we propose a multihop graph transformer for regularizing attention interaction among hops. As for pre-training, a scenegraph-aware pre-training method is proposed to leverage
structure knowledge extracted in visual scene graph. Moreover, we introduce a method to train and generate domain
relevant visual scene graph using textual annotations in a
weakly-supervised manner. Extensive experiments on VCR
and other tasks show significant performance boost compared
with the state-of-the-art methods, and prove the efficacy of
each proposed component.

1

Why

…

Input Image:

?

…

[SEP]

Multimodal Transformer
Fine-tuning

Pre-training

Q: Why does man_1
look stunned?

A: man_1 is holding an
unexpected gift
someone brought to his
door.

Proposed SGEITL:
[CLS]

Why

…

?

[SEP]

On
Of

Holding

Multihop Graph Transformer
Scene Graph-aware Pretraining

Fine-tuning

Figure 1: Overview. We propose to incorporate visual scene
graph in VL model’s pre-training, fine-tuning and conventional Transformer’s structure for joint multimodal representations.
In spite of their great performance, most existing
Transformer-based models reduce the image into a bag of
object features extracted using a pre-trained object detector (Tan and Bansal 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Su et al. 2020).
However, since the VCR task requires a comprehensive understanding of the visual scene and the commonsense reasoning beyond that, object information alone may not be sufficient to understand visual scenes. Therefore, a more comprehensive visual representation along with the paired text
prompt is essential for progress in this field.
A scene graph represents an image as objects and their interactions, providing a structured understanding of the visual
scene. Due to its compact, yet comprehensive representation, it has been used for several applications, such as image
retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015), image captioning (Yang et al.
2019), image synthesis (Johnson, Gupta, and Fei-Fei 2018),
and visual question answering (Antol et al. 2015). Nevertheless, key limitations have prevented us from utilizing scene
graphs for VCR. Firstly, it is unclear how the top-performed
Transformer-based methods that assume a set of visual and
textual tokens as input can handle the information present in
a graph structure. Secondly, existing pre-training tasks of VL
models mainly use naive random masking when calculating pre-training loss. Such masking steps (Su et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2020b) lack the ability to consider graph connections if
tokens are from visual scene graphs. Thirdly, the only public
dataset with sufficient annotation to train scene graph gen-

Introduction

Visual Commonsense Reasoning (Zellers et al. 2019) is a
new addition to Vision-and-Language (VL) research, which
has drawn significant attention in the past few years. Different from the conventional Visual Question Answering
(VQA) task (Goyal et al. 2017a), VCR requires deeper understanding of the scene and commonsense knowledge. It
also requires reasoning ability such as cause-effect and nextstep prediction of the presented activity. The state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance on VCR has been improved by a series of recent works on Transformer-based VL models (Su
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Li et al. 2019). In those models, visual object features from image and word embeddings
from the image-question-answer pairs are jointly fed into the
conventional Transformer model, which consists of several
layers of multi-head attention both within each modality and
across the two.
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5914

