The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Selecting Optimal Context Sentences for Event-Event Relation Extraction
Hieu Man1 , Nghia Trung Ngo1 , Linh Ngo Van2 , and Thien Huu Nguyen3
1
VinAI Research, Vietnam
Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Vietnam
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Oregon, USA
{v.hieumdt,v.nghiant66}@vinai.io, linhnv@soict.hust.edu.vn, thien@cs.uoregon.edu
2

Abstract
Understanding events entails recognizing the structural and
temporal orders between event mentions to build event structures/graphs for input documents. To achieve this goal, our
work addresses the problems of subevent relation extraction
(SRE) and temporal event relation extraction (TRE) that aim
to predict subevent and temporal relations between two given
event mentions/triggers in texts. Recent state-of-the-art methods for such problems have employed transformer-based language models (e.g., BERT) to induce effective contextual
representations for input event mention pairs. However, a major limitation of existing transformer-based models for SRE
and TRE is that they can only encode input texts of limited
length (i.e., up to 512 sub-tokens in BERT), thus unable to
effectively capture important context sentences that are farther away in the documents. In this work, we introduce a
novel method to better model document-level context with
important context sentences for event-event relation extraction. Our method seeks to identify the most important context
sentences for a given entity mention pair in a document and
pack them into shorter documents to be consume entirely by
transformer-based language models for representation learning. The REINFORCE algorithm is employed to train models
where novel reward functions are presented to capture model
performance, and context-based and knowledge-based similarity between sentences for our problem. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method with
state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Understanding events is critical to natural language processing (NLP) due to their prevalence in texts. The major challenges to achieve this goal involve capturing multi-granular
nature of events and their complex connections/relations (i.e.,
event structures) to deliver a coherent story for an input document (Wang et al. 2020). In information extraction (IE), these
challenges are addressed in event-event relation extraction
problems (EERE) that aims to recognize relations between
pairs of event mentions/trigger words in an input document.
In this work, we focus on two types of relations between
events that provide important information to reveal event
structures for documents, i.e., subevents and temporal orders.
As such, given two event mentions in the same document,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11058

subevent relation extraction (SRE) seeks to determine if an
event mention is a subevent (e.g., “Parent-Child”) of the
other while the goal of temporal relation extraction (TRE) is
to identify the temporal order of the two event mentions (e.g.,
“Before”, “After”). Based on such relations between events,
an event graph/structure for each document can be obtained
by using event mentions as the nodes and their subevent and
temporal relations as the edges. In addition to the demonstration of event understanding, event structures find their
applications in different downstream applications, including
question answering, event prediction, timeline construction,
and text summarization (Do, Lu, and Roth 2012; Chaturvedi,
Peng, and Roth 2017; Han, Ning, and Peng 2019a).
The latest advances present transformer-based language
models, e.g., BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), to encode input texts
and deliver state-of-the-art performance for EERE problems
(Ning, Subramanian, and Roth 2019; Han et al. 2019b; Wang
et al. 2020; Ballesteros et al. 2020; Tran and Nguyen 2021).
As the two event mentions of interest in EERE might appear
in different sentences with long distances from each other,
modeling document-level context for the event mentions is
necessary for successful relation predictions. However, a critical issue with recent transformer-based language models for
EERE is the limitation over the lengths of acceptable input
texts. For instance, BERT can only encode input texts with up
to 512 sub-tokens due to its quadratic self-attention complexity (Devlin et al. 2019). As such, given an input document,
existing models for EERE have only constrained their operations to document context with a set of sentences that can fit
into the length limits of transformer-based language models
(Han, Ning, and Peng 2019a; Ballesteros et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020). These models are thus unable to capture important context sentences for EERE that go beyond the length
limit of the BERT-like models to boost the performance.
To address the length limit for transformer-based language
models, prior methods for other NLP tasks have resorted to
two major approaches. First, in Self-Attention Architecture
Modification (Zaheer et al. 2020; Beltagy, Peters, and Cohan
2020; Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020), one can replace
the vanilla self-attention of transformer networks with some
variant architectures, e.g., sparse self-attention (Zaheer et al.
2020), that allow the modeling of larger document context
while maintaining the same complexity as the original transformer. However, the transformer structures with variants of

