The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NoiseGrad — Enhancing Explanations
by Introducing Stochasticity to Model Weights
Kirill Bykov*,1, 2 , Anna Hedström*,1, 2 , Shinichi Nakajima1, 3 , Marina M.-C. Höhne1, 2
1

ML Group, TU Berlin, Germany
Understandable Machine Intelligence Lab
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
kirill.bykov@campus.tu-berlin.de, anna.hedstroem@tu-berlin.de, nakajima@tu-berlin.de, marina.hoehne@tu-berlin.de
2

Abstract

methods, such as Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP)
(Bach et al. 2015), GradCAM (Selvaraju et al. 2019), Occlusion (Zeiler and Fergus 2014), MFI (Vidovic et al. 2016), Integrated Gradient (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017), have
proven effective in explaining DNNs. In contrast, global explanations aim to illustrate the decision process as a whole,
without the connection to individual data samples. Recently,
methods belonging to the Activation-Maximization (Erhan
et al. 2009) family of methods have become widely popular,
such as DeepDream (Mordvintsev, Olah, and Tyka 2015),
GAN-generated explanations (Nguyen et al. 2016) and Feature Visualization (Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017).
For local explanation, gradient-based methods are most
popular due to their simplicity, however, they tend to suffer from the gradient shattering effect, which often results in
noisy explanation maps (Samek et al. 2021). As a remedy,
Smilkov et. al. proposed a simple method, called SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al. 2017), where stochasticity is introduced to the input. Specifically, it adds Gaussian Noise to
the input features n times, computes the n corresponding
explanations, and takes the average over the n explanations.
SmoothGrad is applicable to any local explanation method
and has been practically proven to reduce the visual noise in
the explanation map.
The mechanism behind SmoothGrad’s enhancement of
explanations is not yet well understood. One could argue
that SmoothGrad averages out the shattering effect. However, SmoothGrad performs best when the added noise level
is around 10%–20% of the signal level, which not only
smooths out peaky derivatives but is large enough to cross
the decision boundary. From this fact, we hypothesize that
SmoothGrad perturbs the test sample in order to get a signal from the steepest part of the decision boundary. This
motivated us to explore another way of using stochasticity:
instead of adding noise to the input, our proposed method
— NoiseGrad (NG) — draws samples from the network
weights from a tempered Bayes posterior (Wenzel et al.
2020), such that the decision boundaries of some models
are close to the test sample, which results in more precise
explanations.
Our hypothesis leads to a natural and easy way of hyperparameter choice: the noise level added to the weights
(which corresponds to the temperature of the tempered
Bayes posterior) is chosen such that the relative perfor-

Many efforts have been made for revealing the decisionmaking process of black-box learning machines such as deep
neural networks, resulting in useful local and global explanation methods. For local explanation, stochasticity is known
to help: a simple method, called SmoothGrad, has improved
the visual quality of gradient-based attribution by adding
noise to the input space and averaging the explanations of
the noisy inputs. In this paper, we extend this idea and propose NoiseGrad that enhances both local and global explanation methods. Specifically, NoiseGrad introduces stochasticity in the weight parameter space, such that the decision
boundary is perturbed. NoiseGrad is expected to enhance the
local explanation, similarly to SmoothGrad, due to the dual
relationship between the input perturbation and the decision
boundary perturbation. We evaluate NoiseGrad and its fusion
with SmoothGrad — FusionGrad — qualitatively and quantitatively with several evaluation criteria, and show that our
novel approach significantly outperforms the baseline methods. Both NoiseGrad and FusionGrad are method-agnostic
and as handy as SmoothGrad using a simple heuristic for the
choice of the hyperparameter setting without the need of finetuning.

Introduction
The ubiquitous usage of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), fueled by their ability to generalize and learn complex nonlinear functions, has presented both researchers and practitioners with the problem of non-interpretability and opaqueness of Machine Learning (ML) models. This lack of transparency, coupled with the widespread use of these highly
complex models in practice, represents a risk and a major
challenge for the responsible usage of artificial intelligence,
especially in security-critical areas, e.g. the medical field.
In response to this, the field of eXplainable AI (XAI) has
emerged intending to make the predictions of complex algorithms comprehensible for humans.
One possible dichotomy of post-hoc explanation methods
can be carried out on the basis of whether these methods refer to the global or local properties of a learning machine.
The local level XAI aims to explain a model decision of
an individual input (Guidotti et al. 2018), for which various
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6132

