The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Dataset Collaborative Learning for Semantic Segmentation
in Autonomous Driving
Li Wang * , Dong Li * , Han Liu, JinZhang Peng, Lu Tian, Yi Shan
Xilinx Inc.
{liwa, dongl, hanl, jinzhang, lutian, yishan}@xilinx.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is an important task for scene understanding in self-driving cars and robotics, which aims to assign dense labels for all pixels in the image. Existing work
typically improves semantic segmentation performance by
exploring different network architectures on a target dataset.
Little attention has been paid to build a unified system by
simultaneously learning from multiple datasets due to the
inherent distribution shift across different datasets. In this
paper, we propose a simple, flexible, and general method
for semantic segmentation, termed Cross-Dataset Collaborative Learning (CDCL). Our goal is to train a unified model
for improving the performance in each dataset by leveraging information from all the datasets. Specifically, we first
introduce a family of Dataset-Aware Blocks (DAB) as the
fundamental computing units of the network, which help
capture homogeneous convolutional representations and heterogeneous statistics across different datasets. Second, we
present a Dataset Alternation Training (DAT) mechanism to
facilitate the collaborative optimization procedure. We conduct extensive evaluations on diverse semantic segmentation
datasets for autonomous driving. Experiments demonstrate
that our method consistently achieves notable improvements
over prior single-dataset and cross-dataset training methods without introducing extra FLOPs. Particularly, with the
same architecture of PSPNet (ResNet-18), our method outperforms the single-dataset baseline by 5.65%, 6.57%, and
5.79% mIoU on the validation sets of Cityscapes, BDD100K,
CamVid, respectively. We also apply CDCL for point cloud
3D semantic segmentation and achieve improved performance, which further validates the superiority and generality
of our method. Code and models will be released.

(a) Single-Dataset Training

(b) Finetuning

(c) Label Remapping

(d) CDCL (Ours)

Figure 1: Illustration of prior baselines and the proposed algorithm in the cross-dataset setting. (a) Single-dataset training: each network is trained on each dataset separately. (b)
Finetuning: each network is pretrained on source and finetuned on target with shared structure. (c) Label remapping:
each network is trained on the combination of the target
dataset and a subset of the source dataset with common
classes. (d) CDCL (Ours): a unified network is trained on
all the datasets with data-aware block (DAB) and dataset alternation training (DAT). Notation: D: Dataset, O: Output,
C: Classifier layer, DS: Dataset-Specific layer.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in scene understanding, which aims to partition the image into semantically
meaningful parts. It has been widely applied to practical
vision-based systems, such as self-driving cars and robotics,
medical aided diagnosis and augmented reality.
Owing to the development of deep learning, semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable improvements in recent
years. The success is mainly attributed to discriminative

features learned from network backbone, tailored encoderdecoder framework and dense annotations for supervised
learning. Various deep networks and their variants (e.g.,
AlexNet ((Krizhevsky et al. 2017), ResNet (He et al. 2016))
provide discriminative features to recognize semantics in
images. Different encoder-decoder frameworks are developed for semantic segmentation. Especially, the mIoU performance on the Cityscapes benchmark (Cordts et al. 2016)
is improved from 65.3% by FCN (Long et al. 2015) to 82.7%

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2487

