The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Toward Physically Realizable Quantum Neural Networks
Mohsen Heidari, Ananth Grama, Wojciech Szpankowski
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
{mheidari, ayg, szpan}@purdue.edu

Abstract

cuits (either layers of QPs or variational circuits) are physically realized through technologies such as trapped ions,
quantum dots, and molecular magnets. QNNs have been applied to both classical and quantum data in the context of
diverse applications. They have also inspired the development of novel classical neural network architectures (Garg
and Ramakrishnan 2020), which have demonstrated excellent performance in applications such as image understanding and natural language processing.
Our effort focuses on developing QNNs for quantum data
within the constraints of physically realizable quantum models (e.g., no-cloning, measurement state collapse). Among
many applications, quantum state classification is of significance (Chen et al. 2020) and has been studied under various specifications such as separability of quantum states
(Gao et al. 2018; Ma and Yung 2018), integrated quantum
photonics (Kudyshev et al. 2020), and dark matter detection
through classification of polarization state of photons (Dixit
et al. 2021). In yet other applications, it has been shown
that data traditionally viewed in classical settings are better modeled in a quantum framework. In an intriguing set
of results, Orus et al. demonstrate how data and processes
from financial systems are best modeled in quantum frameworks (Orús, Mugel, and Lizaso 2019).
The problem of constructing accurate QNNs for the direct
classification of quantum data is a complex one for a number
of reasons: (i) the state of a QNN is exponential in the number of QPs. For this reason, even relatively small networks
are hard to train in terms of their computation and memory requirements; (ii) the no-cloning postulate of quantum
states implies that the state of an unknown qubit cannot be
replicated into another qubit; (iii) measurement of the state
of a qubit corresponds to a realization of a random process,
and results in state collapse; (iv) the non-deterministic nature
of measurements implies that computation of classical loss
functions itself is non-deterministic; and (v) existing solutions that rely on replicated data and oversampling for probabilistic bounds on convergence suffer greatly from lack of
data efficiency. While there have been past efforts at modeling and training QNNs, one or more of these fundamental
considerations are often overlooked. We present a comprehensive solution to designing quantum circuits for QNNs,
along with provably efficient training techniques that satisfy
the aforementioned physical constraints.

There has been significant recent interest in quantum neural networks (QNNs), along with their applications in diverse
domains. Current solutions for QNNs pose significant challenges concerning their scalability, ensuring that the postulates of quantum mechanics are satisfied and that the networks are physically realizable. The exponential state space
of QNNs poses challenges for the scalability of training procedures. The no-cloning principle prohibits making multiple
copies of training samples, and the measurement postulates
lead to non-deterministic loss functions. Consequently, the
physical realizability and efficiency of existing approaches
that rely on repeated measurement of several copies of each
sample for training QNNs are unclear. This paper presents a
new model for QNNs that relies on band-limited Fourier expansions of transfer functions of quantum perceptrons (QPs)
to design scalable training procedures. This training procedure is augmented with a randomized quantum stochastic gradient descent technique that eliminates the need for sample
replication. We show that this training procedure converges
to the true minima in expectation, even in the presence of
non-determinism due to quantum measurement. Our solution
has a number of important benefits: (i) using QPs with concentrated Fourier power spectrum, we show that the training
procedure for QNNs can be made scalable; (ii) it eliminates
the need for resampling, thus staying consistent with the nocloning rule; and (iii) enhanced data efficiency for the overall training process since each data sample is processed once
per epoch. We present a detailed theoretical foundation for
our models and methods’ scalability, accuracy, and data efficiency. We also validate the utility of our approach through a
series of numerical experiments.

Introduction
With rapid advances in quantum computing, there has been
increasing interest in quantum machine learning models and
circuits. Work at the intersection of deep learning and quantum computing has resulted in the development of quantum analogs of classical neural networks, broadly known
as quantum neural networks (QNNs) (Mitarai et al. 2018;
Farhi and Neven 2018; Schuld et al. 2020; Beer et al.
2020). These networks are comprised of quantum perceptrons (QPs) (Lewenstein 1994), and the corresponding cirCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6902

