The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Policy Learning for Robust Markov Decision Process
with a Mismatched Generative Model
Jialian Li1 , Tongzheng Ren2 , Dong Yan1 , Hang Su1 , Jun Zhu1 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and
Technology, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for Machine Learning, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China
2
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
lijialian7@163.com, tongzheng@utexas.edu, sproblvem@gmail.com, suhangss@tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

However, most of these algorithms need to interact with
the environment and collect online experimental data to train
the agent, which restricts the application of these algorithms
in high-stake scenarios like medical treatment and autopiloting. In certain cases, we have access to an additional
simulator (e.g. for auto-piloting we can train the agent in
a simulator that simulates the real traffic scenarios) which
allows us to train the agent on the simulator. However, the
simulator can substantially suffer from the domain mismatch
from the real application scenarios, which may lead to a
significant performance degeneration when deploying the
model in real world.
We can instead utilize this imperfect simulator for training and find a relatively robust policy such that it can also
work well in the real world. This indeed falls into the distributional robust optimization (DRO) problem (Rahimian and
Mehrotra 2019).
In this work, we consider DRO problems where the environment can be formalized as a Markov Decision Process
(MDP) with finite steps. Several existing works (Nilim and
El Ghaoui 2004; Iyengar 2005) treat the difference of the
training and testing MDP as a perturbation and the goal is
to find a robust policy that ensures a near-optimal reward
against the worst-case perturbation, which is so-called a Robust MDP (RMDP) problem. Many previous works (e.g.
Nilim and El Ghaoui 2004; Iyengar 2005) assume that all
the parameters of the training MDP and the perturbation set
are known. Then the robust policy can be solved directly
by (approximated) dynamic programming. However, in the
practical problems, the simulator may be constructed as a
complex system with physical computation (Comair et al.
2014; Rasheed, San, and Kvamsdal 2020) which can only
provide samples through interactions. Other works (Delage
and Mannor 2010; Burges et al. 2013; Ghavamzadeh, Petrik,
and Chow 2016) attempt to address problems under parameter uncertainty, but they generally neither take extra perturbation into consideration, nor provide sample complexity
analysis for a near-optimal result.
Solving RMDPs in an online manner is quite hard, because we might not be able to reach some potentially important states during online training. This might lead to policy’s bad performance during testing. Jiang (2018) gives
an extreme case where there is only one single state-action
pair difference between the simulator and real environment,

In high-stake scenarios like medical treatment and autopiloting, it’s risky or even infeasible to collect online experimental data to train the agent. Simulation-based training
can alleviate this issue, but may suffer from its inherent mismatches from the simulator and real environment. It is therefore imperative to utilize the simulator to learn a robust policy
for the real-world deployment. In this work, we consider policy learning for Robust Markov Decision Processes (RMDP),
where the agent tries to seek a robust policy with respect to
unexpected perturbations on the environments. Specifically,
we focus on the setting where the training environment can be
characterized as a generative model and a constrained perturbation can be added to the model during testing. Our goal is
to identify a near-optimal robust policy for the perturbed testing environment, which introduces additional technical difficulties as we need to simultaneously estimate the training
environment uncertainty from samples and find the worstcase perturbation for testing. To solve this issue, we propose a
generic method which formalizes the perturbation as an opponent to obtain a two-player zero-sum game, and further show
that the Nash Equilibrium corresponds to the robust policy.
We prove that, with a polynomial number of samples from
the generative model, our algorithm can find a near-optimal
robust policy with a high probability. Our method is able to
deal with general perturbations under some mild assumptions
and can also be extended to more complex problems like robust partial observable Markov decision process, thanks to
the game-theoretical formulation.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton, Barto et al. 1998)
aims to identify good policies that can solve the sequential
decision-making problem, and has achieved amounts of incredible results on different challenging tasks (Mnih et al.
2013, 2015; Silver et al. 2017). Most of the current work focuses on the case where we can evaluate the performance of
learned policies on the training environments, which is reasonable in multiple cases. For example, we can evaluate the
policy for video games under the same environment since
the environmental dynamics or game rules are the same for
both training and testing.
* corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7417

