The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Negative Sample Matters: A Renaissance of Metric Learning
for Temporal Grounding
Zhenzhi Wang, Limin Wang∗ , Tao Wu, Tianhao Li, Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{zhenzhiwang,tianhaolee}@outlook.com, {lmwang,gswu}@nju.edu.cn, wt@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

Temporal grounding aims to localize a video moment which
is semantically aligned with a given natural language query.
Existing methods typically apply a detection or regression
pipeline on the fused representation with the research focus
on designing complicated prediction heads or fusion strategies. Instead, from a perspective on temporal grounding as
a metric-learning problem, we present a Mutual Matching
Network (MMN), to directly model the similarity between
language queries and video moments in a joint embedding
space. This new metric-learning framework enables fully exploiting negative samples from two new aspects: constructing
negative cross-modal pairs in a mutual matching scheme and
mining negative pairs across different videos. These new negative samples could enhance the joint representation learning
of two modalities via cross-modal mutual matching to maximize their mutual information. Experiments show that our
MMN achieves highly competitive performance compared
with the state-of-the-art methods on four video grounding
benchmarks. Based on MMN, we present a winner solution
for the HC-STVG challenge of the 3rd PIC workshop. This
suggests that metric learning is still a promising method for
temporal grounding via capturing the essential cross-modal
correlation in a joint embedding space. Code is available at
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/MMN.

Query: The person opens a closet door.

The person puts
it on a shelf.
(b) Positive

Negative

Matched pairs

The person
closes the door.

A person runs
to the window.
(c) Positive

Query Moment
Unmatched (intra)

Negative

Unmatched (inter)

Figure 1: (a) In addition to matching moments given a query,
we propose a new auxiliary task named mutual matching to
differentiate the matched query (red dash line) among unmatched queries intra- (green) or inter-video (purple) for
the GT moment (red box). (b) Most previous methods only
consider intra-video negative moments (green). (c) Our mutual matching uses negative pairs from both modalities intra(green) or inter-video (purple). Best view with colors.

Introduction
Video analysis is a fundamental problem in computer vision
and has drawn increasing attention in recent years because
of the potential applications in surveillance, robotics, and Internet videos. While considerable progress has been made in
video classification (Wang et al. 2016, 2018; Feichtenhofer
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021) and action localization (Zhao
et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020), such tasks are
still limited to recognizing a pre-defined list of activities,
such as playing baseball or peeling potatoes. As videos often contain complex activities that may cause a combinatorial explosion if described by a list of actions and objects,
the task of grounding language queries in videos (Hendricks
et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017a; Tang et al. 2020), as a generalization of the action localization task to overcome the
constraints, has recently gained plenty of interest (He et al.

2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Zeng et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2019;
Zhang et al. 2020d; Tang et al. 2020) in both computer vision and language community. Formally, given a verbal description, the goal of temporal grounding is to determine the
temporal moment (i.e., the start and end time) that semantically corresponds to the query best in a given video.
Although temporal grounding opens up great opportunities for detailed video perception by using the new language
modality to capture the complex relations between sentences
and videos, most of the previous approaches (Zhang et al.
2019; Yuan et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020d; Zeng et al. 2020;
Tang et al. 2020) still tackle this problem in a detection/regression way with early-fusion designs, e.g., using the fused
multi-modal features to predict the offset of action moments

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2613

