The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Regularization Penalty Optimization for Addressing Data Quality Variance in
OoD Algorithms
Runpeng Yu,1, * Hong Zhu,2, * Kaican Li,2 Lanqing Hong,2 Rui Zhang,3,† Nanyang Ye,4,† Shao-Lun
Huang,1 Xiuqiang He2
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
www.ruizhang.info
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yrp19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuhong8@huawei.com, mjust.lkc@gmail.com, honglanqin@huawei.com, rayteam@yeah.net,
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn, shaolun.huang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, hexiuqiang1@huawei.com
Abstract

of low density or with high noise rate are deemed as lowquality data. The variance in data quality mainly exists at
two levels, the sample level and the domain level, and we
need to address the problem at both levels.
Our intuition to address the data quality problem is that,
when applying any OoD generalization algorithm, lowquality data should be detected and regularized (penalized)
differently from normal-quality data. The main challenge is
how to properly regularize each sample and domain since
the numbers of samples and domains are usually quite
large. We base our method on one of the most influential OoD generalization paradigms: invariant risk minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al. 2019). To overcome the aforementioned challenge, we propose Lipschitz regularized IRM
(LipIRM) loss with varied regularization coefficients on different samples and domains. We then theoretically reveal the
links among algorithm performance, data quality (in terms
of the density of the data and variance of the noise) and regularization. Based on the theoretical analysis, we propose
a regularization scheme that is optimal in the sense that it
minimizes the distance between the estimated model and the
ground truth model (measured by Eq. 3).
Our contributions are summarized as follows: (i) We identify the performance degeneration of the OoD generalization
algorithms when trained on data of varied quality, and we
provide the first solution to this problem. (ii) We theoretically derive the optimal regularization scheme for IRM with
the Lipschitz regularizer. (iii) Based on the theoretical analysis, we propose a novel algorithm named Regularization
Penalty Optimization (RPO) to address the data quality variance problem, which is via sample-wise and domain-wise
regularization. (iv) We conduct extensive experiments on
publicly available real-world datasets, and the results show
that RPO outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms.

Due to the poor generalization performance of traditional
empirical risk minimization (ERM) in the case of distributional shift, Out-of-Distribution (OoD) generalization algorithms receive increasing attention. However, OoD generalization algorithms overlook the great variance in the quality
of training data, which significantly compromises the accuracy of these methods. In this paper, we theoretically reveal
the relationship between training data quality and algorithm
performance and analyze the optimal regularization scheme
for Lipschitz regularized invariant risk minimization. A novel
algorithm is proposed based on the theoretical results to alleviate the influence of low-quality data at both the sample level
and the domain level. The experiments on both the regression and classification benchmarks validate the effectiveness
of our method with statistical significance.

1

Introduction

Traditional empirical risk minimization (Vapnik 1998) focuses on in-distribution generalization under the assumption that training and testing data are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). In practice, however, it is common that the distribution of the training and testing data
differ greatly, which has motivated the research of Out-ofDistribution (OoD) generalization (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz
2021; Arjovsky 2020; Li et al. 2018b; Yan et al. 2020; Arjovsky et al. 2019). In this work, we identify a common but
often overlooked problem under the setting of OoD generalization – the varying quality of training data among samples
(or instances) and across domains1 – which could severely
hurt model performance in some cases. We focus on two
types of quality of training data: the density of data and the
noise (or error2 ) rate of data. Training data in the ranges
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A domain is a data source or a data group via artificial data segmentation based on prior knowledge of data distribution (Sagawa
et al. 2019; Arjovsky et al. 2019)
2
In the rest of the paper, we omit “error” and error is implied
when we say “noise”.

2

Preliminaries

OoD Generalization. In the setting of OoD generalization, a predictor (e.g., neural network) is trained on multiple training datasets generated from different domains and is
evaluated on unseen testing domains (Gulrajani and LopezPaz 2021). Let Eall and Etr ⊂ Eall denote the set of
8945

