The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learngene: From Open-World to Your Learning Task
Qiufeng Wang* , Xin Geng† , Shuxia Lin* , Shiyu Xia* , Lei Qi, Ning Xu
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{qfwang, xgeng, shuxialin, shiyu xia, qilei, xning}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although deep learning has made significant progress on
fixed large-scale datasets, it typically encounters challenges
regarding improperly detecting unknown/unseen classes in
the open-world scenario, over-parametrized, and overfitting
small samples. Since biological systems can overcome the
above difficulties very well, individuals inherit an innate gene
from collective creatures that have evolved over hundreds of
millions of years and then learn new skills through few examples. Inspired by this, we propose a practical collectiveindividual paradigm where an evolution (expandable) network is trained on sequential tasks and then recognize unknown classes in real-world. Moreover, the learngene, i.e.,
the gene for learning initialization rules of the target model,
is proposed to inherit the meta-knowledge from the collective model and reconstruct a lightweight individual model
on the target task. Particularly, a novel criterion is proposed
to discover learngene in the collective model, according to
the gradient information. Finally, the individual model is
trained only with few samples on the target learning tasks.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in an extensive empirical study and theoretical analysis.

Figure 1: Approach Overview. Top row: The collective
model is trained on continual learning tasks composed of
base classes (as blue circles), and then recognize unknown
classes (denoted by ‘?’) as open-world classes (green triangles, not belong to base classes), which are added to the
training data incrementally. Finally, the individual model
that inherits the meta-knowledge from the collective model
adapts to the target tasks based on novel classes. Bottom
row: The expandable collective model continuously deals
with continual learning tasks and then recognize open-world
classes. The lightweight individual model is initialized and
reconstructed with learngene. The individual model adapts
quickly to the target learning task even in the absence of the
source data (no data-interaction).

Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning has made significant
progress on a fixed large-scale dataset or in a closed-world,
where only the instances seen during training are presented
to them. However, a network, trained in a specific task, is
incapable of recognizing unknown/unseen classes due to
domain shift (Ben-David et al. 2007) and category shift
(Xu et al. 2018). Consequently, static and dedicated neural networks cannot resolve incrementally learning the unknown/unseen classes (Fei, Wang, and Liu 2016; Xu et al.
2019) without retraining from scratch and without catastrophic forgetting (French 1999), which is exactly what
open-world learning (Bendale and Boult 2015; Shu, Xu, and
Liu 2018) wants to solve. In addition, neural networks are
typically over-parametrized (Han, Mao, and Dally 2016) and
easily overfitting few samples (Wang et al. 2020).

There are currently some learning paradigms that can
solve some of the above problems, such as continual learning (Hadsell et al. 2020), transfer learning (Perkins, Salomon et al. 1992) and meta-learning (Hospedales et al.
2020). Although continual learning can alleviate catastrophic forgetting by training on sequential tasks, the traditional continual learning cannot be reproduced in few samples. Many algorithms deal with category shift in transfer
learning, which reuse the model for new tasks. Nevertheless,
transfer learning and meta-learning perform inferior on the
open-world tasks, as we discuss in Related Work section.
Consequently, the above learning mechanisms are all limited. When we recall the learning process of biology, most of
the behaviors of animals are congenital, not entirely through
acquired learning. Besides, a recent neuroscience commen-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8557

