The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Making Translations to Classical Planning Competitive with Other HTN Planners
Gregor Behnke1,2 , Florian Pollitt1 , Daniel Höller3 , Pascal Bercher4 , Ron Alford5
1

University of Freiburg, Germany,
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
3
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany,
4
The Australian National University, College of Engineering & Computer Science, Canberra, Australia,
5
MITRE, McLean, VA, USA
g.behnke@uva.nl, florian.pollitt@mars.uni-freiburg.de, hoeller@cs.uni-saarland.de,
pascal.bercher@anu.edu.au, ralford@mitre.org
2

Abstract

This restricts possible task networks to a fixed size, which
can be represented in the state of a classical problem. Höller
(2021) over-approximates the set of solutions to the HTN
problem and verifies whether a solution generated by the
classical system is actually an HTN solution.
We follow Alford et al. (2016), whose approach we call
HTN2STRIPS. While recent results show that it is competitive with the winner of the track on totally-ordered HTN
planning of the recent International Planning Competition in
terms of coverage (Höller 2021), there are some drawbacks.

Translation-based approaches to planning allow for solving problems in complex and expressive formalisms via the
means of highly efficient solvers for simpler formalisms. To
be effective, these translations have to be constructed appropriately. The current existing translation of the highly expressive formalism of HTN planning into the more simple formalism of classical planning is not on par with the performance
of current dedicated HTN planners. With our contributions in
this paper, we close this gap: we describe new versions of the
translation that reach the performance of state-of-the-art dedicated HTN planners. We present new translation techniques
both for the special case of totally-ordered HTNs as well as
for the general partially-ordered case. In the latter, we show
that our new translation generates only linearly many actions,
while the previous encoding generates and exponential number of actions.

• First, the size of the target model highly depends on the
progression bound. When it is chosen too low, the classical planner will not find a solution: and the whole process
needs to be redone with a higher bound. A larger bound
increases the size of the classical model and may make
it harder to solve. However, the bound can be influenced
by model transformations prior to translation.
• Second, HTN2STRIPS performs the translation on the
lifted model and outputs a lifted classical planning problem. The resulting problem may be hard to ground for the
classical grounder. This is even more of a problem since
grounding is redone for different bounds.
• Third, when translating partially-ordered HTN problems,
the classical model gets harder to solve.

Introduction
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning has attracted
increased interest in the last couple of years (Bercher, Alford, and Höller 2019), yet the amount of research in solving HTN problems is still lacking behind the vast amount of
research done in classical planning. The sophisticated solving techniques in classical planning have spawned many
techniques that reuse or extend them in the field of HTN
planning. Some extend them, e.g. for grounding and reachability analysis (Behnke et al. 2020), or when encoding
problems as propositional logic (Behnke, Höller, and Biundo 2019; Behnke 2021b) or IP/LP (Höller, Bercher, and
Behnke 2020); others apply them directly, e.g. to calculate
heuristics (Höller et al. 2018). There are also approaches to
translate HTN planning problems to classical planning problems directly (Alford, Kuter, and Nau 2009; Alford et al.
2016; Höller 2021). That way, solvers from classical planning can be applied. To overcome the differences in expressiveness (Höller et al. 2014; 2016), there are two different
approaches: the work by Alford et al. (2016) bounds the
HTN problem before the translation based on the progression bound (Alford et al. 2012; Alford, Bercher, and Aha
2015) – the maximum number of tasks that a task network
could possibly contain when performing progression search.

In this paper, we show how to make bound-based classical encodings of HTN planning problems competitive with
other solvers from the literature both for totally-ordered and
partially-ordered problems. We first show that it is beneficial
to apply the translation on the model grounded by an HTN
grounder. Using a grounder that’s specifically designed to
HTN planning problems exploits the (hierarchical) problem
structure, which not only makes the process much faster, but
also generates much smaller models. Grounding also does
not need to be redone when increasing the bound. Further,
having a ground model enables us to perform several steps
that decrease the size of the classical model as well as the
progression bound that would be much harder on the lifted
model. Second, we show that a recently-introduced transformation of the HTN model decreases the progression bound
without changing the set of solutions to the HTN model.
Third, we introduce improved translations for the case of
partially-ordered HTN models that make the translated problem simpler to solve for the classical planner.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9687

