The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Role of Human-AI Interaction in Selective Prediction
∗

Elizabeth Bondi, 1 Raphael Koster, 2 Hannah Sheahan, 2 Martin Chadwick, 2 Yoram Bachrach, 2
∗
Taylan Cemgil, 2 Ulrich Paquet, 2 Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham 3
1

Harvard University
2
DeepMind
3
Google Brain
ebondi@g.harvard.edu, {rkoster, hsheahan, mjchadwick, yorambac, taylancemgil, upaq}@deepmind.com, dvij@google.com
Abstract

and Maloney 2012), a pragmatic alternative is to determine
whether an AI system is more likely to make an erroneous
prediction than a human, and defer to a human in such cases.
A number of such settings have been studied in the literature,
including selective prediction (Wiener and El-Yaniv 2013),
learning to defer (Mozannar and Sontag 2020) and classification with a reject option (Chow 1970). While there are
nuances that differentiate these works, in this paper, we will
collectively refer to this body of literature as selective prediction and only emphasize the differences where relevant to
our work. A related line of work considers human-AI teams
in which humans receive AI assistance but make the final
decision (Bansal et al. 2021), and systems in which the AI
makes the final decision with human input (Wilder, Horvitz,
and Kamar 2020). These prior works either: a) Assume that
the human behaves identically even when they know that
they are part of a human-AI team or b) Assume a utilitymaximizing model for a human decision maker.
However, it has been documented that human-AI interaction may be more complex due to a range of cognitive phenomena. For example, humans have been shown to rely excessively on AI predictions (anchoring bias) (Rastogi et al.
2022; Logg, Minson, and Moore 2019), or even distrust
AI predictions after observing AI mistakes (Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey 2015). Some work has begun to investigate solutions to these issues (Buçinca, Malaya, and Gajos
2021; Rastogi et al. 2022), however they have not focused
on selective prediction systems, and context is critical.
In this work, we focus on binary classification tasks and
study selective prediction systems (Fig. 1) that determine
whether to rely on the outputs of an AI or defer to a human. To evaluate the overall performance of such a selective
prediction system, it is important to model how the messaging, hereafter referred to as selective prediction messaging (SPM), that communicates the decision to defer impacts
human accuracy. We run experiments with human subjects
solving a challenging binary prediction task (that of detecting whether an animal is present in a camera trap image) and
study the impact of different choices for communicating the
deferring AI system’s decision. We then perform statistical
analysis on the human responses under various choices of
SPM, and show that the choice of SPM significantly impacts
human performance. Our results isolate two ingredients for
a statistically effective communication strategy, that is, com-

Recent work has shown the potential benefit of selective prediction systems that can learn to defer to a human when the
predictions of the AI are unreliable, particularly to improve
the reliability of AI systems in high-stakes applications like
healthcare or conservation. However, most prior work assumes that human behavior remains unchanged when they
solve a prediction task as part of a human-AI team as opposed to by themselves. We show that this is not the case by
performing experiments to quantify human-AI interaction in
the context of selective prediction. In particular, we study the
impact of communicating different types of information to
humans about the AI system’s decision to defer. Using realworld conservation data and a selective prediction system that
improves expected accuracy over that of the human or AI system working individually, we show that this messaging has a
significant impact on the accuracy of human judgements. Our
results study two components of the messaging strategy: 1)
Whether humans are informed about the prediction of the AI
system and 2) Whether they are informed about the decision
of the selective prediction system to defer. By manipulating
these messaging components, we show that it is possible to
significantly boost human performance by informing the human of the decision to defer, but not revealing the prediction
of the AI. We therefore show that it is vital to consider how
the decision to defer is communicated to a human when designing selective prediction systems, and that the composite
accuracy of a human-AI team must be carefully evaluated using a human-in-the-loop framework.

Introduction
Despite significant progress in machine learning-based AI
systems, applications of AI to high stakes domains remains
challenging. One of the main challenges is in assessing the
reliability of predictions made by a trained machine learning system, particularly when there is a distribution shift between the data the system was trained with and data encountered at deployment. In such situations, communicating the
uncertainty associated with ML predictions appropriately is
critical (Kompa, Snoek, and Beam 2021; Grote 2021).
Given the difficulty of communicating probabilities to
human users (Galesic and Garcia-Retamero 2010; Zhang
∗

Work done at DeepMind
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5286

