The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deformable Part Region Learning for Object Detection
Seung-Hwan Bae
Vision and Learning Laboratory, Inha University, Korea
shbae@inha.ac.kr

Abstract

to the geometric transformation, we propose a deformable
part region network (DPR-Net) that makes decomposed part
models deformable adaptively according to object scales or
poses. Our DPR-Net introduces a deformable part generation module, and it contains trainable geometric parameters
to transform spatial locations and scales of each part region
according to object scale variation. This differs with other
deformable detection methods (Girshick et al. 2015; Wan,
Eigen, and Fergus 2015; Dai et al. 2017) which learn parameters to adjust spatial locations of parts. In addition, we
present a weakly supervised learning to train DPR-Net because the ground truth of part models is unavailable. To this
end, we evaluate classification and segmentation losses of
part models by comparing scores and masks predicted from
fused part features with their counterpart ground truth. By
minimizing an integral loss including these part losses, the
gradients of the loss can affect the transformation of part
models more directly. It also makes our DPR-Net can be
end-to-end trainable without extra supervision.
In order to improve the quality of detected boxes and
masks progressively, we present multi-stage refinement via
the deformable part model learning based on a Cascade
architecture. Similar to (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018; Chen
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019), our Cascade deformable
part region detector (Cascade D-PRD) consists of a series of
consecutive detection header to predict classes or locations.
However, our Cascade D-PRD can improve those qualities
of whole and part models together by feeding the refined
boxes at previous step to DPR-Net. Subsequently, it can
improve part boxes by re-decomposing the refined boxes.
Then, Cascade D-RPD can produce stronger semantic RoI
features with the refined part and whole RoIs, and exploit
them for training consecutive box and mask headers.
To sum up, the main contributions of this paper can be
summarized as follows: (i) proposition of the DPR-Net for
transforming object part regions against object geometric
variation (ii) proposition of the weakly supervised object detection and segmentation to learn part models without extra
supervision (iii) proposition of a new cascade scheme for
refining object and part predictions progressively.
Our single D-PRD achieves the state-of-the-art results
without employing other performance improvement methods on MSCOCO19. We also make extensive implementation of D-PRDs with various feature extractors and provide

In a convolutional object detector, the detection accuracy can
be degraded often due to the low feature discriminability
caused by geometric variation or transformation of an object.
In this paper, we propose a deformable part region learning in
order to allow decomposed part regions to be deformable according to geometric transformation of an object. To this end,
we introduce trainable geometric parameters for the location
of each part model. Because the ground truth of the part models is not available, we design classification and mask losses
for part models, and learn the geometric parameters by minimizing an integral loss including those part losses. As a result,
we can train a deformable part region network without extra
super-vision, and make each part model deformable according to object scale variation. Furthermore, for improving cascade object detection and instance segmentation, we present a
Cascade deformable part region architecture which can refine
whole and part detections iteratively in the cascade manner.
Without bells and whistles, our implementation of a Cascade
deformable part region detector achieves better detection and
segmentation mAPs on COCO and VOC datasets, compared
to the recent cascade and other state-of-the-art detectors.

Introduction
The goal of object detection or instance segmentation is to
determine meaningful object locations with boxes or masks
from an image. For accurate and fast detection, the progress
has been made by developing powerful features (He et al.
2016) and effective detection architecture (Ren et al. 2015;
Redmon et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016) over the last decades.
Among them, convolutional object detectors (Bolya et al.
2019; Fu, Shvets, and Berg 2019; Tian et al. 2019; Zhao
et al. 2019) have shown significant improvements.
However, these convolutional detectors are still limited in
handling the large geometric transformations and variations
caused by object pose, scale, viewpoints, and part deformation. The main reason is that the most CNNs used for feature
extraction have fixed structures of CNN modules (i.e. convolution, pooling, and RoI pooling layers) as discussed in (Dai
et al. 2017). As a result, it is difficult to detect non-rigid objects and objects with different scales or poses by using the
convolutional detectors. In order to improve the robustness
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

95

