The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Latent Time Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
Srinivas Anumasa, P.K. Srijith
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
cs16resch11004@iith.ac.in,srijith@cse.iith.ac.in

Abstract

can grow to an arbitrary depth as defined by the end-time
T . It was shown that NODE is more robust (Hanshu et al.
2019) than traditional deep learning models, and is invertible,
parameter efficient and maintains a constant memory cost
with respect to growth in depth.
Modeling uncertainty is paramount for many high-risk applications such healthcare (Ker et al. 2017) and autonomous
driving vehicles (Fridman et al. 2019). However, standard
NODE models compute a point estimate of predictions which
fail to capture uncertainty in predictions. Like ResNets, they
tend to make high confidence wrong predictions on out-ofsample observations (Anumasa and Srijith 2021a), restricting
their use in high-risk applications. There exist very few works
trying to address the uncertainty in NODE (Anumasa and
Srijith 2021a; Kong, Sun, and Zhang 2020; Dandekar et al.
2021) and their uncertainty modelling capabilities are restricted by architectural and training assumptions. Though,
NODE models have addressed the model selection in deep
learning to a great extent, it still require the user to define the
parameters such as end time T to the ODE solver. This implicitly determines the depth of the NODE. In this work, we
propose a unique approach to model uncertainty in NODE,
latent time neural ODE (LT-NODE), which addresses these
drawbacks by learning a distribution over end-time T .
LT-NODE is based on the idea of capturing uncertainty by
treating the end time T as a latent variable. This allows us to
define a distribution over T and the representations of the data
point at different values of T sampled from the distribution
provides an estimate of uncertainty. To capture uncertainty
and to obtain a good generalization capability, it is important
to learn the distribution over T from the data and we employ
Bayesian inference techniques such as variational inference
to learn an approximate posterior. Consequently, the posterior
over T will also help in addressing the model selection in
NODE in determining an appropriate end time. The proposed
approach can get uncertainty estimates using single forward
pass and is very efficient unlike other uncertainty modelling
techniques which require multiple model evaluations. Moreover, it provides uncertainty estimates with two additional
parameters associated with the variational posterior.
Recently, it was shown that a NODE with a different depth
(end-time) for different data points can overcome the drawbacks of standard NODEs, for e.g., in solving concentric
annuli and reflection tasks (Dupont, Doucet, and Teh 2019;

Neural ordinary differential equations (NODE) have been proposed as a continuous depth generalization to popular deep
learning models such as Residual networks (ResNets). They
provide parameter efficiency and automate the model selection
process in deep learning models to some extent. However, they
lack the much-required uncertainty modelling and robustness
capabilities which are crucial for their use in several real-world
applications such as autonomous driving and healthcare. We
propose a novel and unique approach to model uncertainty in
NODE by considering a distribution over the end-time T of
the ODE solver. The proposed approach, latent time NODE
(LT-NODE), treats T as a latent variable and apply Bayesian
learning to obtain a posterior distribution over T from the
data. In particular, we use variational inference to learn an
approximate posterior and the model parameters. Prediction is
done by considering the NODE representations from different
samples of the posterior and can be done efficiently using a
single forward pass. As T implicitly defines the depth of a
NODE, posterior distribution over T would also help in model
selection in NODE. We also propose, adaptive latent time
NODE (ALT-NODE), which allow each data point to have
a distinct posterior distribution over end-times. ALT-NODE
uses amortized variational inference to learn an approximate
posterior using inference networks. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches in modelling uncertainty
and robustness through experiments on synthetic and several
real-world image classification data.

Introduction
Deep learning models such as Residual networks
(ResNet) (He et al. 2016) have brought advances in
several computer vision tasks (Ren et al. 2017; He et al.
2020; Wang, Chen, and Hu 2019). They used skip connections to allow the models to grow deeper and improve
performance without suffering from the vanishing gradient
problem. Recently, neural ordinary differential equations
(NODEs) (Chen et al. 2018) were proposed as a continuous
depth generalization to ResNets. The feature computations
in ResNet can be seen as solving an ordinary differential
equation (ODE) with Euler method (Lu et al. 2018; Haber
and Ruthotto 2017; Ruthotto and Haber 2019). Here, the
ODE is parameterized by a neural network and the NODE
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6010

