The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Expressivity of Planning with Horn Description Logic Ontologies
Stefan Borgwardt1 , Jörg Hoffmann2 , Alisa Kovtunova1 ,
Markus Krötzsch1 , Bernhard Nebel3 , Marcel Steinmetz2
1

Faculty of Computer Science, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany,
2
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
Faculty of Engineering, University of Freiburg, Germany
stefan.borgwardt@tu-dresden.de, hoffmann@cs.uni-saarland.de, alisa.kovtunova@tu-dresden.de,
markus.kroetzsch@tu-dresden.de, nebel@informatik.uni-freiburg.de, steinmetz@cs.uni-saarland.de
Abstract

One way to do this is via explicit-input Knowledge and Action Bases (eKABs) (Calvanese et al. 2016), where states (sets
of ground atoms) are interpreted using open-world semantics. All states are subject to a background ontology, which
describes high-level concepts and global state constraints.
Together, a state and an ontology describe a multitude of
possible worlds, which leaves room for unknown information
about existing and unknown objects. For example, an ontology could express that “everyone operating a machine works
for an engineering department” and “everyone who works
for a department is an employee” without explicitly identifying the department of each person or even stating that they
are employees. Action preconditions contain queries that are
evaluated under open-world semantics, e.g. the query for all
“employees” would return all machine operators among other
people. Finally, action effects add or remove atoms in the
state, e.g. reassign machines or departments. This allows for
a clean separation of what is directly observed (i.e. the state,
which contains, e.g. operational data and sensor data) from
what is indirectly inferred (using the ontology).
Calvanese et al. (2016) investigated eKABs with ontologies and queries formulated in the description logic DL-Lite,
which is a popular formalism for conceptual modeling (Calvanese et al. 2007b). Queries in this logic enjoy first-order
rewritability, which means that the queries and the ontology
can be compiled into first-order (FO) formulas that are then
evaluated under closed-world semantics. Based on this property, the authors described a compilation of DL-Lite eKABs
into classical PDDL planning tasks. Later, this compilation
was further optimized to enable practical planning with DLLite background ontologies (Borgwardt et al. 2021).
The goal of this paper is to extend the expressivity of state
constraints in eKABs from the light-weight DL-Lite to more
powerful description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2017). We
mainly consider Horn DLs, which are fragments of HornFOL (Krötzsch, Rudolph, and Hitzler 2013; Jung et al. 2019).
We investigate for which Horn DLs compilations into PDDL
exist. For this purpose, we adapt the notion of compilation
schemes (Nebel 2000; Thiébaux, Hoffmann, and Nebel 2005),
which relate the expressivity of two formalisms. On the one
hand, polynomial compilation schemes show that the expressivity of DL eKABs is not higher than that of PDDL. On the
other hand, although such eKABs could be considered syntactic sugar, they represent powerful tools that allow domain

State constraints in AI Planning globally restrict the legal
environment states. Standard planning languages make closeddomain and closed-world assumptions. Here we address openworld state constraints formalized by planning over a description logic (DL) ontology. Previously, this combination of DL
and planning has been investigated for the light-weight DL
DL-Lite. Here we propose a novel compilation scheme into
standard PDDL with derived predicates, which applies to more
expressive DLs and is based on the rewritability of DL queries
into Datalog with stratified negation. We also provide a new
rewritability result for the DL Horn-ALCHOIQ, which allows us to apply our compilation scheme to quite expressive
ontologies. In contrast, we show that in the slight extension
Horn-SROIQ no such compilation is possible unless the
weak exponential hierarchy collapses. Finally, we show that
our approach can outperform previous work on existing benchmarks for planning with DL ontologies, and is feasible on new
benchmarks taking advantage of more expressive ontologies.

Introduction
AI planning is concerned with sequential decision making
problems where an agent needs to choose actions to achieve
a goal, or to maximize reward (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso
2004). Such problems are compactly described in a declarative language. Specifically, in the most basic (“classical”)
version of planning, a planning task describes an initial state
of the agent’s environment, a set of actions that can affect
that environment, and a goal formula that is to be satisfied. In
order to reach the goal, actions can be applied whenever their
preconditions are satisfied in the current state. Here we are
interested in state constraints, constraints that should hold
globally, i.e. at every state, in difference to preconditions
which merely need to hold locally. Moreover, standard planning formalisms (based on variants of the PDDL language
(McDermott et al. 1998; Haslum et al. 2019)) follow closeddomain and closed-world assumptions, in which absent facts
are assumed to be false and no new objects can be created.
In particular, these assumptions underly state constraints as
can be specified in PDDL3 (Gerevini et al. 2009). Here we
instead target open-domain, open-world reasoning.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5503

