The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Evaluative Measure of Clustering Methods
Incorporating Hyperparameter Sensitivity
Siddhartha Mishra1 , Nicholas Monath†,1 , Michael Boratko1 ,
Ari Kobren2 , Andrew McCallum1
1

Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Oracle Labs
{siddharthami,nmonath,mboratko,mccallum}@cs.umass.edu
ari.kobren@oracle.com
Abstract

When new clustering algorithms are introduced, evaluation
is often done with respect to clustering benchmark datasets
with ground truth labeled clusters (Campello, Moulavi, and
Sander 2013; Bateni et al. 2017; Kobren et al. 2017, inter
alia). The quality of the predicted clustering is measured in
comparison to the ground truth using metrics like adjusted
Rand index (Rand 1971) or normalized mutual information
(Lancichinetti, Fortunato, and Kertész 2009). While these
metrics can effectively describe the accuracy and representational capacity of clustering methods, the fact that there are
other criteria on which a clustering method can be evaluated.
While these metrics are quite important, they only give a limited sense of how practical a given algorithm is in real-world
settings.
In the aforementioned applications, a practitioner needs to
experiment with different settings of an algorithm. Ideally,
an algorithm would give high-quality results without much
work, tuning of hyperparameters would be straightforward or
even automated so that the algorithm is usable by someone
who does not deeply understand the algorithm’s details or
even clustering in detail. However, to the best of our knowledge, no such metric for clustering incorporates this aspect
of usability.
In this paper, we evaluate the extent to which clustering
methods empirically benefit from extensive hyperparameter
tuning. To this end, we present a metric that captures the
usability of a given algorithm. We model the selection of
hyperparameters as a stochastic process, and consider the
expected value of a clustering objective (e.g., adjusted Rand
index) for the best clustering produced after t steps of hyperparameter selection. We consider both an uninformed setting,
where the practitioner selects hyperparameters uniformly randomly from a reasonable range, as well as informed, where
the stochastic process is guided by Bayesian optimization as a
proxy for how hyperparameters might be tuned by researchers
when reporting optimal performance. In both settings, the
extent to which this metric changes as t increases is a good
indication of the ease-of-tuning.
In order to evaluate the quality of our metric, we compare
5 commonly used clustering algorithms: mini-batch k-means,
BIRCH, DBSCAN, HDBSCAN, and HAC. We conduct extensive experiments on over 50 datasets, and find that

Clustering algorithms are often evaluated using metrics which
compare with ground-truth cluster assignments, such as Rand
index and NMI. Algorithm performance may vary widely for
different hyperparameters, however, and thus model selection
based on optimal performance for these metrics is discordant
with how these algorithms are applied in practice, where labels
are unavailable and tuning is often more art than science. It is
therefore desirable to compare clustering algorithms not only
on their optimally tuned performance, but also some notion of
how realistic it would be to obtain this performance in practice.
We propose an evaluation of clustering methods capturing this
ease-of-tuning by modeling the expected best clustering score
under a given computation budget. To encourage the adoption
of the proposed metric alongside classic clustering evaluations, we provide an extensible benchmarking framework. We
perform an extensive empirical evaluation of our proposed
metric on popular clustering algorithms over a large collection
of datasets from different domains, and observe that our new
metric leads to several noteworthy observations.

Introduction
Whether the application is in biology (Stassen et al. 2020)
or personalization (Zaheer et al. 2019), jet physics (Greenberg et al. 2021) or automatic knowledge-base completion
(Vashishth, Jain, and Talukdar 2018), clustering is a widely
used tool. It is used for data analysis (Dubes and Jain 1980),
visualization (Rasmussen and Karypis 2004), and to directly
solve tasks such as entity resolution (Steorts, Hall, and Fienberg 2016), community detection (Riedy et al. 2011) and image segmentation (Chuang et al. 2006). In many such settings,
there is not an explicit ground-truth clustering, and practioners may try a variety of different clustering algorithms and
hyperparameter settings for those algorithms until they are
able to find meaningful patterns in their data. Developing
evaluations of models in alignment with their real-world performance can be challenging. This is particularly difficult
for clustering, where the fundamental goal is to discover the
underlying clusters and, thus, having access to such cluster
assignments for purposes of evaluation renders the entire
enterprise irrelevant.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Now at Google.

• The performance of algorithms often changes significantly
with more substantial tuning.
7788

