The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Resistance Training Using Prior Bias: Toward Unbiased Scene Graph Generation
Chao Chen 1,2,4,5,6 * , Yibing Zhan 2 , Baosheng Yu 3 , Liu Liu 3 , Yong Luo 1† , Bo Du 1†
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
JD Explore Academy
3
The University of Sydney
4
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
6
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
{chenchao, luoyong, dubo}@whu.edu.cn,
zhanyibing@jd.com, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, liu.liu1@sydney.edu.au,
Abstract
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to build a structured
representation of a scene using objects and pairwise relationships, which benefits downstream tasks. However, current
SGG methods usually suffer from sub-optimal scene graph
generation because of the long-tailed distribution of training
data. To address this problem, we propose Resistance Training using Prior Bias (RTPB) for the scene graph generation.
Specifically, RTPB uses a distributed-based prior bias to improve models’ detecting ability on less frequent relationships
during training, thus improving the model generalizability on
tail categories. In addition, to further explore the contextual
information of objects and relationships, we design a contextual encoding backbone network, termed as Dual Transformer
(DTrans). We perform extensive experiments on a very popular benchmark, VG150, to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method for the unbiased scene graph generation. In specific, our RTPB achieves an improvement of over 10% under
the mean recall when applied to current SGG methods. Furthermore, DTrans with RTPB outperforms nearly all stateof-the-art methods with a large margin. Code is available at
https://github.com/ChCh1999/RTPB

Figure 1: (a) an input image with detected objects. (b) a generated scene graph, which is a graphical representation of
the input image with objects and pairwise relationships. (c)
the long-tail distribution of object relationships in the Visual
Genome (VG) dataset (Krishna et al. 2016).

Introduction
Scene graph generation aims to understand the semantic
content of an image via a scene graph, where nodes indicate visual objects and edges indicate pairwise object relationships. An intuitive example of scene graph generation is
shown in Figure 1. Scene graph generation is beneficial to
bridge the gap between the low-level visual perceiving data
and the high-level semantic description. Therefore, a reliable
scene graph can provide powerful support for downstream
tasks, such as image captioning (Zhong et al. 2020), image
retrieval (Johnson et al. 2015), and visual question answering (Tang et al. 2019).
Scene graph generation usually suffers from the longtail problem of relationships in training data (Tang et al.

2020; Chen et al. 2019b; Zhan et al. 2019). For example,
as shown in Figure 1(c), the widely used scene graph generation dataset, Visual Genome (Krishna et al. 2016), is
dominated by a few relationships with coarse-grained descriptions (head categories), whereas there are no sufficient
annotations available for other less frequent relationships
(tail categories). This severe imbalanced distribution makes
it difficult for an unbiased scene graph generation, considering there are only a few training samples in real-world scenarios for recognizing less frequent relationships.
To address the above-mentioned issues, many class rebalancing strategies have been introduced for unbiased
scene graph generation (Tang et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021a).
However, existing methods still struggle to achieve satisfactory performance on tail categories, and more sophisticated
solutions are desirable. Inspired that humans increase muscle strength by making their muscles work against a force,
we propose resistance training using prior bias (RTPB) to

* This work was done when Chao Chen was a research intern at

JD Explore Academy.
†
Corrsponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

212

