The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Siamese Network with Interactive Transformer for Video Object Segmentation
Meng Lan1 , Jing Zhang2 , Fengxiang He3 , Lefei Zhang1,4 *
1
Wuhan University
The University of Sydney
3
JD Explore Academy, China
4
Hubei Luojia Laboratory
{menglan, zhanglefei}@whu.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, hefengxiang@jd.com
2

Abstract
Semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) refers to
segmenting the target object in remaining frames given its annotation in the first frame, which has been actively studied in
recent years. The key challenge lies in finding effective ways
to exploit the spatio-temporal context of past frames to help
learn discriminative target representation of current frame. In
this paper, we propose a novel Siamese network with a specifically designed interactive transformer, called SITVOS, to enable effective context propagation from historical to current
frames. Technically, we use the transformer encoder and decoder to handle the past frames and current frame separately,
i.e., the encoder encodes robust spatio-temporal context of
target object from the past frames, while the decoder takes the
feature embedding of current frame as the query to retrieve
the target from the encoder output. To further enhance the
target representation, a feature interaction module (FIM) is
devised to promote the information flow between the encoder
and decoder. Moreover, we employ the Siamese architecture
to extract backbone features of both past and current frames,
which enables feature reuse and is more efficient than existing
methods. Experimental results on three challenging benchmarks validate the superiority of SITVOS over state-of-theart methods. Code: https://github.com/LANMNG/SITVOS.

Frame

(a) Backbone

(b) Self-attention

(c) Feature interaction

Figure 1: Visualized feature maps from our SITVOS. (a) The
feature map from backbone. (b) The feature map after selfattention. (c) The feature map after feature interaction. The
feature representation of target object is gradually enhanced.

guide the object segmentation process of current frame, and
many explorations have been made to implement the information propagation across frames. RGMP (Oh et al. 2018)
propagates the object context of the first and previous frames
to the current frame by concatenating the features of these
frames. This is an intuitive yet simple strategy and brings improvement in performance, although the feature-level concatenation may result in coarse segmentation and is not robust to occlusion and drifting. To obtain more accurate results, researchers propose the matching-based methods to
achieve the pixel-level object information propagation. STM
(Oh et al. 2019) encodes the past frames into a memory
and uses the current frame as a query to read the memory,
which is a non-local pixel matching, to obtain the target object representation, achieving high accuracy. However, simple global matching is vulnerable to interference from background distractors and requires large computational cost.
Recently, some researchers try to solve these problems from
new perspectives. CFBI (Yang, Wei, and Yang 2021) separates the feature embeddings into the foreground object and
background context to implicitly make them more discriminative and improve the segmentation. RMNet (Xie et al.
2021) proposes the local-to-local matching solution by constructing the local region memory and query regions based
on optical flow. Although the current matching-based approaches compute the correspondences of the pixels in the
query frame against pixels in each reference frame, they do
not explicitly model the temporal dependency of the target
object among the referenced historical frames. which cannot

Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) refers to separating the
foreground from the background in all frames of a given
video (Pont-Tuset et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018). As an important tool for video editing and many other down-stream applications, it has recently gained increasing attention (Zhang
and Tao 2020). In this work, we study the challenging semisupervised VOS problem, which aims at finding the pixellevel position of target objects in a short video, only given
the ground truth masks of the objects in the first frame. Due
to the variance in appearance and scale of the target objects
over time as well as the similar appearance ambiguity issue
in the background, semi-supervised VOS is very challenging
and actively studied. In this paper, if not specified, the term
“VOS” refers to semi-supervised VOS for simplicity.
A critical problem in VOS is how to exploit the spatiotemporal context of target objects in historical frames to
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1228

