The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Compilation of Aggregates in ASP Systems
Giuseppe Mazzotta, Francesco Ricca, Carmine Dodaro
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Calabria, Rende (CS), Italy
giuseppe.mazzotta@unical.it, francesco.ricca@unical.it, carmine.dodaro@unical.it

Abstract

less there are classes of ASP programs whose evaluation is
not efficient (sometimes not feasible) due to the combinatorial blow-up of the program produced by the grounding
step. This issue is known under the term grounding bottleneck (Ostrowski and Schaub 2012; Calimeri et al. 2016).
Many attempts have been done to approach the grounding bottleneck, from language extensions (Ostrowski and
Schaub 2012; Balduccini and Lierler 2017, 2013; Aziz,
Chu, and Stuckey 2013; Cat et al. 2015; Susman and Lierler 2016; Eiter, Redl, and Schüller 2016) to lazy grounding (Palù et al. 2009; Lefèvre and Nicolas 2009; Weinzierl
2017). These techniques obtained good preliminary results,
but lazy grounding systems are still not competitive with
ground&solve systems on common problems (Gebser et al.
2018). Recent research suggests that compilation-based
techniques can mitigate the grounding bottleneck problem
due to constraints (Cuteri et al. 2019, 2020). Essentially,
their idea is to identify the subprograms causing the grounding bottleneck, and subsequently translate them to propagators, which are custom procedures that lazily simulate the
ground&solve on the removed subprograms. Problematic
constraints are removed from the non-ground input program
and the corresponding propagator is dynamically linked to
the solver to simulate their presence at running time. This
approach is meant to speed-up computation by avoiding full
grounding and exploiting information known at compilation
time to create custom procedures that are specific to the
program at hand. However, no compilation-based technique
has been developed so far for ASP programs with aggregates (Faber, Pfeifer, and Leone 2011), which are among
the most relevant and commonly-employed constructs of
ASP (Gebser, Maratea, and Ricca 2017).

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a well-known declarative AI formalism for knowledge representation and reasoning. State-of-the-art ASP implementations employ the
ground&solve approach, and they were successfully applied
to industrial and academic problems. Nonetheless there are
classes of ASP programs whose evaluation is not efficient
(sometimes not feasible) due to the combinatorial blow-up of
the program produced by the grounding step. Recent research
suggests that compilation-based techniques can mitigate the
grounding bottleneck problem. However, no compilationbased technique has been developed for ASP programs that
contain aggregates, which are one of the most relevant and
commonly-employed constructs of ASP. In this paper, we
propose a compilation-based approach for ASP programs
with aggregates. We implement it on top of a state-of-theart ASP system, and evaluate the performance on publiclyavailable benchmarks. Experiments show our approach is effective on ground-intensive ASP programs.

Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczynski 2011) is a declarative AI formalism for knowledge representation and reasoning based on the stable model
semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991). ASP is a viable solution for representing and solving many classes of problems thanks to a standardized first-order language that has
been implemented in several efficient systems (Gebser et al.
2018). Indeed, ASP has been successfully applied to several
academic and industrial AI applications such as planning,
scheduling, robotics, decision support, natural language understanding and more (cfr. (Erdem and Öztok 2015)).
Albeit ASP is supported by efficient systems, the improvement of their performance is still an open and interesting research topic. State-of-the-art ASP systems are based
on the ground&solve approach (Kaufmann et al. 2016). The
first-order input program is transformed by the grounder
module in its propositional counterpart, whose stable models
are computed by the solver, implementing a Conflict-Driven
Clause Learning (CDCL) algorithm (Kaufmann et al. 2016).
ASP implementations based on ground&solve, basically,
enabled the development of ASP applications. Nonethe-

In this paper, we propose a compilation-based approach
for ASP programs with aggregates. We identify the syntactic conditions under which a program with aggregates can be
compiled, thus extending the definition of compilable subprogram of (Cuteri et al. 2019). Then, we implement the approach on top of the state-of-the-art ASP solver WASP (Alviano et al. 2015). Propagators are both of the eager (called
during the propagation phase) and lazy (called once an answer set candidate is found) kind (Dodaro and Ricca 2020).
Our compiler automatically selects the kind based on the
program structure. Experiments show our approach is effective on ground-intensive ASP programs.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5834

