The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Confidence Guided Distance for 3D Partial Shape Registration
Dvir Ginzburg,1 Dan Raviv 1
1

Tel Aviv University
dvirginzburg@mail.tau.ac.il, darav@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We present a novel non-iterative learnable method for partialto-partial 3D shape registration. The partial alignment task is
extremely complex, as it jointly tries to match between points,
and identify which points do not appear in the corresponding
shape, causing the solution to be non-unique and ill-posed in
most cases.
Until now, two main methodologies have been suggested to
solve this problem: sample a subset of points that are likely
to have correspondences, or perform soft alignment between
the point clouds and try to avoid a match to an occluded
part. These heuristics work when the partiality is mild or
when the transformation is small but fails for severe occlusions, or when outliers are present. We present a unique approach named Confidence Guided Distance Network (CGDnet), where we fuse learnable similarity between point embeddings and spatial distance between point clouds, inducing
an optimized solution for the overlapping points while ignoring parts that only appear in one of the shapes. The point
feature generation is done by a self-supervised architecture
that repels far points to have different embeddings, therefore
succeeds to align partial views of shapes, even with excessive internal symmetries, or acute rotations. We compare our
network to recently presented learning-based and axiomatic
methods and report a fundamental boost in performance.

1

Figure 1: Partial-to-Partial rigid alignment in the full spectrum of the rotation group SO(3) (Blue - source shape, Yellow - target shape). While other state-of-the-art methods
struggle to align under such acute rotations and severe partiality, CGD-net succeeds.

Introduction

Shape registration is essential for a wide range of applications in computer vision, being the back-bone mechanism
in numerous tasks, such as medical imaging (Hajnal and
Hill 2001), autonomous driving (Bresson et al. 2017), and
robotics (Durrant-Whyte and Bailey 2006).
A canonical work in the field is the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm (Besl and McKay 1992), which
aligns shapes in iterations until convergence, by matching
points according to spatial proximity, and then, solving a
least-squares problem for the global transformation (Kabsch 1976). ICP is extremely sensitive to noise and initial
conditions and tends to get stuck in sub-optimal solutions
(Zinsser, Schmidt, and Niemann 2003). To overcome ICP’s
drawbacks, Deep Closest Point (DCP) (Wang and Solomon
2019a) replaced the Euclidean nearest point step of ICP

with a learnable per-point embedding network, followed by
a high-dimensional feature-matching stage.
In the partial registration problem, the task is to align
partially overlapping segments of a canonical shape. Recent methods have suggested choosing a subset of points as
key points based on top-k heuristics and solving the optimal transformation between these essence points to address
the partiality problem (Wang and Solomon 2019b; Yew and
Lee 2020). A crucial problem with partial 3D shape registration arises from the internal symmetries within the objects.
Many point clouds are characterized by co-occurring segments, like the legs of a chair or an airplane’s wings. When

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

706

