The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Visual Consensus Modeling for Video-Text Retrieval
Shuqiang Cao,* 1 Bairui Wang,* 2 Wei Zhang,†1 Lin Ma†2
1

School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University
2
Meituan
sqiangcao@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {bairuiwong, forest.linma}@gmail.com, davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method to mine the commonsense knowledge shared between the video and text
modalities for video-text retrieval, namely visual consensus modeling. Different from the existing works, which
learn the video and text representations and their complicated relationships solely based on the pairwise video-text
data, we make the first attempt to model the visual consensus by mining the visual concepts from videos and exploiting their co-occurrence patterns within the video and
text modalities with no reliance on any additional concept
annotations. Specifically, we build a shareable and learnable graph as the visual consensus, where the nodes denoting the mined visual concepts and the edges connecting the nodes representing the co-occurrence relationships
between the visual concepts. Extensive experimental results
on the public benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed method, with the ability to effectively model the visual consensus, achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
bidirectional video-text retrieval task. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sqiangcao99/VCM.

Figure 1: The proposed visual consensus modeling method
based on the video-text pair data. The video clips within the
red dotted rectangles are the extracted visual concepts from
a large scale of video sequences. Given a video-text pair,
it can be observed that co-occurrence patterns of the visual
concepts (denoted by arrows with different colors) are different in the video (top row) and text (bottom row) modality.
With the consideration of visual consensus in both video and
text modalities, the constructed visual consensus graph is expected to contain much richer commonsense knowledge and
help boost the performance of video-text retrieval task.

the complicated relationships between video and text, some
methods perform fine-grained matching of the visual and
textual features at different representation levels (Chen et al.
2020; Wang, Zhu, and Yang 2021).
Although these methods achieve more effective video-text
alignment and competitive performance, only some limited
internal information in pairwise video-text data is exploited.
The external information such as commonsense knowledge,
which is hidden in vision and language, believed as an essential complement for the cross-modality retrieval task,
has not been considered. To explore commonsense knowledge, Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2020a) propose the CVSE
to model the co-occurrence relationships of textual concepts
and demonstrate that commonsense knowledge benefits the
image-text retrieval task. However, the co-occurrence relationships in the vision domain are ignored.
With the reservoir of commonsense knowledge, humans
can handle multi-modal information accurately and efficiently (Wang et al. 2020a). Since vision is the most important channel through which people obtain information,
visual commonsense knowledge has become a major component of commonsense knowledge for people (Hutmacher
2019). As a basis of visual commonsense knowledge, the
visual consensus describes the potential associations and

Introduction
As a meaningful but challenging task for bridging vision and
language, the video-text retrieval task aiming to match video
and text has been drawing more and more attention under the
rapid development of the Internet and the increasing number
of videos. It can be applied in various practical applications,
such as video search engine that returns the relevant videos
by the input text queries. Besides, this task could benefit
many downstream tasks, such as video caption (Tan et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018) and video temporal grounding (Wang, Ma, and Jiang 2020).
Although great progress has been made for the video-text
retrieval task over the past few years, the semantic gap between video and text still remains a significant challenge.
Some methods learn the video and text feature in a common
space to enforce the correlated video and text being closer
to each other (Dong et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Mithun
et al. 2018; Song and Soleymani 2019). To further exploit
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

167

