The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stochastic Goal Recognition Design Problems with Suboptimal Agents
Christabel Wayllace1 , William Yeoh2
1

University of Alberta
Washington University in St. Louis
wayllace@ualberta.ca, wyeoh@wustl.edu
2

Abstract

work, Keren, Gal, and Karpas (2014) proposed the worstcase distinctiveness (wcd) measure, which finds the maximum number of actions an agent can execute without revealing its goal. They modified the environment using action
removal. Current work on GRD considers deterministic and
stochastic settings (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2015, 2016a,b;
Keren et al. 2020; Son et al. 2016; Wayllace et al. 2016;
Wayllace, Hou, and Yeoh 2017; Wayllace et al. 2020; Keren,
Gal, and Karpas 2021) with different assumptions regarding observability, optimality, and type of goal recognition
(Cohen, Perrault, and Allen 1981). Work in the stochastic
GRD (S-GRD) framework assumes optimal acting agents in
scenarios where an observer has full or partial observability (Wayllace et al. 2016, 2020). In this paper we relax the
optimality assumption for both cases and consider boundedly rational agents that might follow suboptimal policies.
Many intelligent agents use human prediction models,
studied in psychology and economics (Rosenfeld and Kraus
2018). Like humans, AI agents cannot account for every aspect of the world’s dynamics; so they will probably need
to deviate from optimal behavior. Therefore, we decided to
consider close to rational policies with a limited number
of suboptimal actions. Accounting for slightly suboptimal
policies arguably improves the goal recognition model since
there is a higher probability that one of them explains the
agent’s criteria. This decision also aligns with work on goal
recognizers using top-k planners to improve goal recognition in domains with unreliable observations (Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016; Riabov, Araghi, and Udrea 2020).
The contributions of this paper are: (i) Generalization of
the S-GRD framework to support suboptimal agents where
observers have full or partial observability; (ii) Delivery of
a method to compute the maximal non-distinctive cost under these assumptions; (iii) Empirical evaluation of our approach on a range of benchmark applications.

Goal Recognition Design (GRD) problems identify the minimum number of environmental modifications aiming to force
an interacting agent to reveal its goal as early as possible. Researchers proposed several extensions to the original
model, some of them handling stochastic agent action outcomes. While this generalization is useful, it assumes optimal acting agents, which limits its applicability. This paper
presents the Suboptimal Stochastic GRD model, where we
consider boundedly rational agents that, due to limited resources, might follow a suboptimal policy. Inspired by theories on human behavior asserting that humans are (close to)
optimal when making perceptual decisions, we assume the
chosen policy has at most u suboptimal actions. Our contribution includes (i) Extending the stochastic goal recognition design framework by supporting suboptimal agents in
cases where an observer has either full or partial observability; (ii) Presenting methods to evaluate the ambiguity of the
model under these assumptions; and (iii) Evaluating our approach on a range of benchmark applications.

Introduction
Our ability to recognize other people’s plans and goals relies on the assumption that most human behavior is goaloriented. Nowadays, our interactions are not limited to humans but also artificial agents; as human-machine interaction and automated systems’ intelligence grows, so does the
need to understand each other’s objectives. Therefore, researchers aim to provide AI agents with goal recognizing capabilities (Sukthankar et al. 2014). Research in goal recognition (GR) studies the problem of determining an agent’s goal
by observing its behavior (Sukthankar et al. 2014; Ramı́rez
and Geffner 2010). Therefore, one of GR’s main problems
is to deal with ambiguous behavior. While most researchers
focused on inferring the true goal promptly and correctly,
Keren, Gal, and Karpas (2014) proposed to modify the environment aiming to reduce ambiguity for the observer. By doing so, the re-designed environment induces an acting agent
to reveal its goal earlier. Keren, Gal, and Karpas (2014) call
this problem Goal Recognition Design (GRD).
Typically, a GRD problem: (1) Evaluates the GR setting
using a measure and (2) Finds minimal changes to the underlying environment aiming to optimize this measure. In their

Background
Markov Decision Process (MDP): A Stochastic Shortest
Path Markov Decision Process (SSP-MDP) (Mausam and
Kolobov 2012) is represented as a tuple hS, s0 , A, T , C, Gi.
It consists of a set of states S; a start state s0 ∈ S; a set of
actions A; a transition function T : S × A × S → [0, 1]
that gives the probability T (s, a, s0 ) of transitioning from
state s to s0 when action a is executed; a cost function

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9953

