The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Exploring Safer Behaviors for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Enrico Marchesini* , Davide Corsi* , Alessandro Farinelli
Department of Computer Science, University of Verona
enrico.marchesini@univr.it, davide.corsi@univr.it

Abstract
We consider Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems where
an agent attempts to maximize a reward signal while minimizing a cost function that models unsafe behaviors. Such
formalization is addressed in the literature using constrained
optimization on the cost, limiting the exploration and leading to a significant trade-off between cost and reward. In
contrast, we propose a Safety-Oriented Search that complements Deep RL algorithms to bias the policy toward safety
within an evolutionary cost optimization. We leverage evolutionary exploration benefits to design a novel concept of safe
mutations that use visited unsafe states to explore safer actions. We further characterize the behaviors of the policies
over desired specifics with a sample-based bound estimation,
which makes prior verification analysis tractable in the training loop. Hence, driving the learning process towards safer
regions of the policy space. Empirical evidence on the Safety
Gym benchmark shows that we successfully avoid drawbacks
on the return while improving the safety of the policy.

Figure 1: Overview of SOS
in local optima or failing to learn proper behaviors, obtaining low returns (Hong et al. 2018). Such trade-off between
having efficient exploration to achieve good performance,
and the limitation induced by constraints, suggest to investigate alternative ways to overcome the typical contrast in
the design of Safe DRL algorithms that are either based on
the optimality criterion (e.g., introduce the concept of risk in
the optimization), or on the exploration process (e.g., avoid
undesirable situations) (Garcıa and Fernández 2015).
To this end, we propose Safety-Oriented Search (SOS) to
combine exploration process and optimality criterion into a
unique framework, depicted in Figure 1, that works on top
of existing DRL algorithms. Our goal is to bias policies toward safety without multi-objective or constrained optimization, hence without formalizing the problem as a CMDP.
We leverage Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) (Fogel 2006) for
SOS to augment DRL, proposing a novel concept of Safe
Mutations (SM). SM exploits the visited states deemed unsafe according to the cost to approximate the per-weight sensitivity of the actions over such undesired situations. Then,
such sensitivity is used to compute safety-informed perturbations that locally biases the agent policy to explore different behaviors (i.e., actions) in the proximity of the unsafe
states (i.e., the exploration process). In more detail, an evolutionary population is periodically generated from the DRL
policy using SM, and it is evaluated independently over a
set of trials to select the subset of individuals with returns
comparable to the DRL agent and a lower cost.
Assuming that this subset improves the auxiliary cost, we
note that such signal is typically sparse (i.e., it is not trivial to shape the risk associated with every state in a highdimensional space). Hence, the cost function does not fully
characterize the behaviors of the policy, sharing the issues

Introduction
A Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agent tries to learn a
policy maximizing a long-term objective by trials and errors
in large state spaces (Sutton and Barto 2018). This learning
paradigm achieved impressive performance in various domains (e.g., games (Silver et al. 2018)). However, several
applications (e.g., robotics (OpenAI et al. 2019)) typically
involve safety criteria that are complex to model with simple reward shaping (Amodei et al. 2016).
We consider the class of problems where unsafe behaviors are specified with an auxiliary cost signal to maintain
safety specifications separate from the task objective (e.g.,
the long-term reward) (Garcıa and Fernández 2015). In the
literature, Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDP)
(Altman 1999) are used to formalize such problems due
to the intuitive way of constraints (on the cost) to encode
safety criteria (Liu, Ding, and Liu 2020; Stooke, Achiam,
and Abbeel 2020). However, constrained DRL often violates
the constraints introduced in the optimization and naturally
limits exploration (Ray, Achiam, and Amodei 2019). Conversely, efficient exploration is crucial to avoid getting stuck
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7701

