The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Uncertainty Modeling with Second-Order Transformer for Group
Re-identification
Quan Zhang1 , Jian-Huang Lai1,2,3,4 * , Zhanxiang Feng1 , Xiaohua Xie1,2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Key Laboratory of Video and Image Intelligent Analysis and Applicaiton Technology, Ministry of Public Security, China
zhangq48@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {stsljh, fengzhx7, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Certainty Modeling

Abstract
Group re-identification (G-ReID) focuses on associating the
group images containing the same persons under different
cameras. The key challenge of G-ReID is that all the cases
of the intra-group member and layout variations are hard to
exhaust. To this end, we propose a novel uncertainty modeling, which treats each image as a distribution depending on
the current member and layout, then digs out potential group
features through random sampling. Based on potential and
original group features, uncertainty modeling can learn better decision boundaries, which is implemented by the member variation module (MVM) and layout variation module
(LVM). Furthermore, we propose a novel second-order transformer framework (SOT), which is inspired by the fact that
the position modeling in the transformer is coped with the GReID task. SOT is composed of the intra-member module and
inter-member module. Specifically, the intra-member module
extracts the first-order token for each member, and then the
inter-member module learns a second-order token as a group
feature by the above first-order tokens, which can be regarded
as the token of tokens. A large number of experiments have
been conducted on three available datasets, including CSG,
DukeGroup and RoadGroup, which show that the proposed
SOT outperforms all previous state-of-the-art methods.

Member
Feature
CNN

Data space

Feature space

Group
Feature
GNN

Existing Methods
Ours Method (SOT)
Class 1

Class 2

Member
Feature
Transformer

MVM
LVM

Group
Feature
Transformer

Uncertainty Modeling

Figure 1: Certainty modeling versus uncertainty modeling.
The pure triangles and squares represent the feature representations of the corresponding images. The textured triangles and squares represent potential group features mined
from the original image through the MVM and LVM. The
dotted circles represent the class boundaries learned from
the given images by certainty modeling. The dotted lines
represent the decision boundaries between the two classes.

on deep learning to address the above challenges, the performances are not satisfactory. The shortcomings are mainly
due to the following two reasons. 1) The features extracted
by the existing works are the specific features of the group
image under the fixed member and layout. As shown in Fig.
1, The class boundaries learned from the orange triangles
and green squares are the local representations of the whole
classes, which leads to the fact that the decision boundary
(red dotted line) based on the local boundaries cannot distinguish well between two classes. 2) The existing models
are based on a combined framework of CNN and GNN,
which are weak to describe the group layout feature due to
the drawback of structure itself in position modeling, so the
performances are limited.
In this paper, we propose a novel uncertainty modeling,
which is motivated by the fact that variations of member and
layout contained in each group are infinitely diverse. All situations cannot be exhausted no matter how elaborately sampling from the real world. Therefore, uncertainty is an inherent attribute of the group image that cannot disappear by collecting large-scale data. The proposed uncertainty modeling
treats each group image as a distribution rather than a specific sample, and then digs out several potential group fea-

Introduction
Group re-identification (G-ReID) aims to associate group
images containing the same members under different cameras with non-overlapping views based on their similarity.
G-ReID usually focuses on groups of 2 ∼ 6 members, and
images belonging to the same group class should contain
at least 60% same members. G-ReID is a more critical and
challenging task than person re-id because people usually
have group and social attributes, which indicates people prefer group moving in most real scenes. Therefore, G-ReID
needs to deal with the member and layout variation. Specifically, the member variation means the number of intra-group
members could decrease due to the member leaving or serve
occlusion, and the layout variation means that the spatial positions may change under different cameras.
Although there are some pioneering works (Huang et al.
2021; Lin et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020) based
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3318

