The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Finite Entailment of Local Queries in the Z Family of Description Logics
Bartosz Bednarczyk,1,2 Emanuel Kieroński2
1

2

Computational Logic Group, TU Dresden
University of Wrocław, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
{ bartosz.bednarczyk, emanuel.kieronski }@cs.uni.wroc.pl

Abstract

powerful KR formalisms, lying on the verge of decidability (Rudolph 2016). The logics from the Z family incorporate many different features, the most important of which is
the ability to write regular expressions as building blocks
for complex roles. The most expressive member of the Z
family is ZOIQ, offering nominals (O), inverse roles (I)
and number restrictions (Q). One of the motivations behind
ZOIQ was that another expressive DL SROIQ (Horrocks,
Kutz, and Sattler 2006) can be reduced to ZOIQ (with an
exponential blow-up). SROIQ is of practical interest, as it
serves as a base for OWL 2 the W3C Web Ontology Language (Grau et al. 2008). Querying with regular query languages in undecidable for ZOIQ and the decidability of its
knowledge base (KB) satisfiability problem (KBSat) is still
open (Rudolph 2016). By removing one of the constructors
I, Q, O, we get, resp., the logics ZOQ, ZOI, ZIQ known
to have better model-theoretic properties and E X P T I M E
(resp. 2E X P T I M E ) KBSat (resp. PEQ entailment) problems, see: (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2009; Bednarczyk and
Rudolph 2019). The proofs of these facts rely on the quasiforest model property, which admits automata-theoretic approach (a reduction to the so-called fully enriched automata).
Not much is known about finite model reasoning in the Z
family. The only result we are aware of is that ZOI has the
finite model property (Calvanese, Ortiz, and Simkus 2016),
i.e. that every satisfiable KB also has a finite model, and thus
the unrestricted and finite satisfiability coincide. It is also
easy to show that this property fails for ZIQ (and even for
ALCIF ). Regarding finite query entailment, to the best of
our knowledge, nothing is known even about Z.

In the last few years the field of logic-based knowledge representation took a lot of inspiration from database theory. A vital
example is that the finite model semantics in description logics
(DLs) is reconsidered as a desirable alternative to the classical
one and that query entailment has replaced knowledge-base
satisfiability (KBSat) checking as the key inference problem.
However, despite the considerable effort, the overall picture
concerning finite query answering in DLs is still incomplete.
In this work we study the complexity of finite entailment of
local queries (conjunctive queries and positive boolean combinations thereof) in the Z family of DLs, one of the most
powerful KR formalisms, lying on the verge of decidability.
Our main result is that the DLs ZOQ and ZOI are finitely
controllable, i.e. that their finite and unrestricted entailment
problems for local queries coincide. This allows us to reuse
recently established upper bounds on querying these logics
under the classical semantics. While we will not solve finite
query entailment for the third main logic in the Z family,
ZIQ, we provide a generic reduction from the finite entailment problem to the finite KBSat problem, working for ZIQ
and some of its sublogics. Our proofs unify and solidify previously established results on finite satisfiability and finite query
entailment for many known DLs.

1

Introduction

In the last few years the field of logic-based knowledge representation took a lot of inspiration from database theory. In
particular, finite model semantics in description logics (DLs)
is reconsidered as a desirable alternative to classical one and
query entailment has replaced knowledge base satisfiability
checking as the key inference problem (Gogacz et al. 2020).
Under classical semantics, that is when arbitrary models are
admitted, the conjunctive query (CQ) entailment problem for
DLs is already quite well understood (Glimm et al. 2008).
The situation is different if we admit only finite models. For
finite query entailment of local queries (CQs and their positive boolean combinations, known as PEQs), despite the considerable effort, the overall picture is still incomplete.
The main goal of this paper is to contribute to clarifying
Self
this picture by considering the Z (a.k.a. ALCHbreg
) family
of DLs (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2009), one of the most

Our Contribution. Our most important result is showing
that ZOQ and ZOI are finitely controllable, i.e. for any
ZOQ or ZOI KB K and any PEQ q it holds that K entails
q over all models iff K entails q over all finite models. This
allows one to reuse the existing algorithms for unrestricted
model semantics (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2009; Bednarczyk and Rudolph 2019) to infer that finite entailment of
local queries is 2E X P T I M E -complete. Note that our results
Self
cover all DLs between ALC and ALCHbOreg
(I/Q) in a
uniform way.
The proof is based on a finite model construction which
starts from an (infinite) quasi-forest model, distinguishes in
this model some finite pattern fragments, and carefully forms

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5487

