The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PrivateMail: Supervised Manifold Learning of Deep Features
with Privacy for Image Retrieval
Praneeth Vepakomma, Julia Balla, Ramesh Raskar
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
vepakom@mit.edu

Abstract

this query are used to perform the matching and retrieval
of the nearest neighbors in this privatized feature space. Differential privacy aims to prevent membership inference attacks (Shokri et al. 2017; Truex et al. 2018; Li and Zhang
2020; Song, Shokri, and Mittal 2019; Shi, Davaslioglu, and
Sagduyu 2020). It has been shown that differential privacy
mechanisms can also prevent reconstruction attacks under
a constraint on the level of utility that can be achieved as
shown in (Dwork et al. 2017; Garfinkel, Abowd, and Martindale 2018). Currently cryptographic methods for the problem of information retrieval were studied in works like (Xia
et al. 2015). These methods ensure to protect the client’s data
via homomorphic encryption and oblivious transfer. However, they also come with an impractical trade-off of computational scalability, especially when the size of the server’s
database is large and the feature size is high-dimensional as
is always the case in practice (Elmehdwi, Samanthula, and
Jiang 2014; Lei et al. 2019; Yao, Li, and Xiao 2013).

Differential Privacy offers strong guarantees such as immutable privacy under any post-processing. In this work, we
propose a differentially private mechanism called PrivateMail
for performing supervised manifold learning. We then apply
it to the use case of private image retrieval to obtain nearest
matches to a client’s target image from a server’s database.
PrivateMail releases the target image as part of a differentially
private manifold embedding. We give bounds on the global
sensitivity of the manifold learning map in order to obfuscate and release embeddings with differential privacy inducing noise. We show that PrivateMail obtains a substantially
better performance in terms of the privacy-utility trade off in
comparison to several baselines on various datasets. We share
code for applying PrivateMail at http://tiny.cc/PrivateMail.

1

Introduction

Privacy preserving computation enables distributed hosts
with ‘siloed’ away data to query, analyse or model their sensitive data and share findings in a privacy preserving manner. As a motivating problem, in this paper we focus on
the task of privately retrieving nearest matches to a client’s
target image with respect to a server’s database of images.
Consider the setting where a client would like to obtain the
k-nearest matches to its target from an external distributed
database. State of the art image retrieval machine learning
models such as (Matsui, Yamaguchi, and Wang 2020; Chen
et al. 2021; Zhou, Li, and Tian 2017; Dubey 2020) exist for
feature extraction pior to obtaining the neighbors to a given
match in the learnt space of deep feature representations.
Unfortunately, this approach is not private. The goal of our
approach is to be able to use these useful features for the purpose of image retrieval in a manner, that is formally differentially private. The seminal idea for a mathematical notion
of privacy, called differential privacy, along with its foundations is introduced quite well in (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014).
In our approach, we geometrically embed the image features
via a supervised manifold learning query that we propose.
Our query falls within the framework of supervised manifold learning as formalized in (Vural and Guillemot 2017).
We then propose a differentially private mechanism to release the outputs of this query. The privatized outputs of

Motivation
Currently available differential privacy solutions for biometric applications where content based matching of records is
performed (Steil et al. 2019; Chamikara et al. 2020) is based
on a small number of hand-crafted features. We instead consider state of the art feature extraction used by recent deep
learning architectures specialized for image retrieval such as
(Jun et al. 2019). We privatize these features and share them
in the form of differentially private embeddings that are in
turn used for the image retrieval task. Furthermore, cryptographic methods with strong security guarantees are currently not scalable computationally, for secure k-nn queries
(Elmehdwi, Samanthula, and Jiang 2014; Lei et al. 2019;
Yao, Li, and Xiao 2013) especially when the server-side
database is large as is typically the case in real-life scenarios.

2

Contributions

The main contibution of our paper is a differentially private method called PrivateMail for private release of outputs
from a supervised manifold learning query that embeds data
into a lower dimension. We test our scheme for differentially
private ‘content based image retrieval’, where the matches
to a target image requested by a client are retrieved from a
server’s database while maintaining differential privacy. We
also show a substantial improvement in the utility-privacy

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8503

