The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

One-Shot Talking Face Generation from
Single-Speaker Audio-Visual Correlation Learning
Suzhen Wang1 , Lincheng Li1 , Yu Ding1 * , Xin Yu2
1

Virtual Human Group, Netease Fuxi AI Lab
2
University of Technology Sydney
{wangsuzhen, lilincheng, dingyu01}@corp.netease.com
xin.yu@uts.edu.au
Abstract

Audio-visual Correlation Learning

Audio-driven one-shot talking face generation methods are
usually trained on video resources of various persons. However, their created videos often suffer unnatural mouth shapes
and asynchronous lips because those methods struggle to
learn a consistent speech style from different speakers. We
observe that it would be much easier to learn a consistent
speech style from a specific speaker, which leads to authentic
mouth movements. Hence, we propose a novel one-shot talking face generation framework by exploring consistent correlations between audio and visual motions from a specific
speaker and then transferring audio-driven motion fields to
a reference image. Specifically, we develop an Audio-Visual
Correlation Transformer (AVCT) that aims to infer talking
motions represented by keypoint based dense motion fields
from an input audio. In particular, considering audio may
come from different identities in deployment, we incorporate phonemes to represent audio signals. In this manner, our
AVCT can inherently generalize to audio spoken by other
identities. Moreover, as face keypoints are used to represent
speakers, AVCT is agnostic against appearances of the training speaker, and thus allows us to manipulate face images of
different identities readily. Considering different face shapes
lead to different motions, a motion field transfer module is exploited to reduce the audio-driven dense motion field gap between the training identity and the one-shot reference. Once
we obtained the dense motion field of the reference image, we
employ an image renderer to generate its talking face videos
from an audio clip. Thanks to our learned consistent speaking
style, our method generates authentic mouth shapes and vivid
movements. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our synthesized videos outperform the state-of-the-art in terms of visual quality and lip-sync.

Audio-visual
Correlation
Transformer

Relative
Motion
Transfer

One-shot Generation

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed talking head generation framework. Our approach takes one-shot reference image as input and generates audio-driven talking faces with
rhythmic head motions, natural mouth shapes and accurate
lip synchronization. Although our audio-visual correlation
model is trained on a specific speaker, our framework supports arbitrary one-shot reference image and voice as input
and renders the photo-realistic talking face videos.
One-shot talking face generation methods are designed to
animate video portraits for unseen speakers and voice. When
watching a synthetic talking head video, humans are mainly
affected by three aspects: visual quality (clear and jitterfree), natural head motions, and synced lip movements. Existing one-shot methods (Chen et al. 2019; Prajwal et al.
2020; Zhou et al. 2020, 2021; Lahiri et al. 2021) are usually trained on video resources of various persons, and their
results suffer unnatural lip shapes and bad lip-sync. This is
mainly because their networks trained on multiple speech
styles try to fit the common style among different identities
while treating personalized variations as noise. Therefore, it
is very challenging to synthesize natural and synchronous
lip movements for one-shot speakers.
We observe that it is much easier to learn a consistent
speech style from a specific speaker. Motivated by this, we
propose a new one-shot talking face generation framework,
which first learns a consistent speaking style from a single

Introduction
1

Synthesizing audio-driven photo-realistic portraits is of
great importance to various applications, such as digital human animation (Ji et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2021), visual dubbing in movies (Prajwal et al. 2020; Ha et al. 2020) and fast
short video creation (Zhou et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2020).
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/FuxiVirtualHuman/AAAI22-one-shottalking-face

2531

