The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

HEAL: A Knowledge Graph for Distress Management Conversations
Anuradha Welivita, Pearl Pu
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Switzerland
{kalpani.welivita, pearl.pu}@epfl.ch

Abstract
The demands of the modern world are increasingly responsible for causing psychological burdens and bringing adverse
impacts on our mental health. As a result, neural conversational agents with empathetic responding and distress management capabilities have recently gained popularity. However, existing end-to-end empathetic conversational agents
often generate generic and repetitive empathetic statements
such as “I am sorry to hear that”, which fail to convey specificity to a given situation. Due to the lack of controllability in such models, they also impose the risk of generating
toxic responses. Chatbots leveraging reasoning over knowledge graphs is seen as an efficient and fail-safe solution over
end-to-end models. However, such resources are limited in
the context of emotional distress. To address this, we introduce HEAL, a knowledge graph developed based on 1M distress narratives and their corresponding consoling responses
curated from Reddit. It consists of 22K nodes identifying different types of stressors, speaker expectations, responses, and
feedback types associated with distress dialogues and forms
104K connections between different types of nodes. Each
node is associated with one of 41 affective states. Statistical
and visual analysis conducted on HEAL reveals emotional
dynamics between speakers and listeners in distress-oriented
conversations and identifies useful response patterns leading
to emotional relief. Automatic and human evaluation experiments show that HEAL’s responses are more diverse, empathetic, and reliable compared to the baselines.

Figure 1: An illustration of part of HEAL. The red, purple, blue, green, and yellow nodes represent the stressors,
speaker expectations, response and feedback types, and associated affective states respectively.
on 40% of the study days. People usually tend to share such
experiences in daily conversations. Thus, embedding opendomain conversational agents or chatbots with appropriate
empathetic responding capabilities to address such distressful situations has gained much interest (Rashkin et al. 2019;
Lin et al. 2019; Majumder et al. 2020; Xie and Pu 2021).
With the development of sophisticated neural network architectures such as the transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) and
pre-trained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019a) and GPT-3 (Brown et al.
2020), fine-tuning neural response generation models on unstructured text has become one of the common approaches to
build chatbots. Though it avoids most of the limitations with
strictly rule-based methods and enables chatbots to largely
generalize to unseen domains, the lack of controllability and
the black-box nature make these models less reliable and
fail-safe (d’Avila Garcez and Lamb 2020). This is especially
problematic when the user is undergoing a distressful situation where he is sensitive to misinformation and inappropriate comments. A recent example is Microsoft’s Tay bot that
started producing unintended, offensive, and racial tweets
denying the Holocaust after learning from racist and offensive information from Twitter (Lee 2016).
As a result, there is a growing interest to use knowledge
(Zhu et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Han et al. 2015) and commonsense reasoning (Zhou et al. 2018; Young et al. 2018)

Introduction
Demands of the modern world are increasingly responsible
for causing psychological burdens and bringing adverse impacts on our mental health. Distress refers to a discomforting
emotional state experienced by an individual in response to a
specific personal stressor or demand that results in harm, either temporary or permanent to the person (Ridner 2004).
Such stressors include separation from loved ones, interpersonal conflicts, certain mental health conditions such as
depression, under-performing at work, and sleep problems
such as insomnia. A study by Almeida et al. (2002), which
measured multiple aspects of daily stressors of a U.S. national sample of 1,031 adults through daily telephone interviews, revealed they experienced at least one daily stressor
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11459

