The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Adversarial Reinforcement Learning with Dissipation Inequation
Constraint
Peng Zhai1,4 , Jie Luo1,5 , Zhiyan Dong1,2,5 * , Lihua Zhang1,3,4 * , Shunli Wang1,3 , Dingkang Yang1,4
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
Ji Hua Laboratory, Foshan, China
3
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai 200433, China
4
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Changchun, China
5
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Shanghai, China
{pzhai18, 19210860032, dongzhiyan, lihuazhang, slwang19, dkyang20}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

lund 2020). There are available methods for direct operation in actual physical tasks to collect data (Haarnoja et al.
2018; Hwangbo et al. 2019), the policy is unstable in the
initial training period, and repeated training may result in
aging and failure of the actuator (Li et al. 2020). Another
cheaper methods are to deploy the policies trained in simulation directly in the real environment. However, the differences (such as modeling error and disturbance) between
the simulation and the real environment reduce the performance of the policies (Christiano et al. 2016). To this end,
learning policies that are robust to environmental change,
mismatched configurations, and mismatched control actions
are becoming increasingly more preferable for sim-to-real
tasks (Kamalaruban et al. 2020).

Robust adversarial reinforcement learning is an effective
method to train agents to manage uncertain disturbance and
modeling errors in real environments. However, for systems
that are sensitive to disturbances or those that are difficult
to stabilize, it is easier to learn a powerful adversary than
establish a stable control policy. An improper strong adversary can destabilize the system, introduce biases in the sampling process, make the learning process unstable, and even
reduce the robustness of the policy. In this study, we consider
the problem of ensuring system stability during training in
the adversarial reinforcement learning architecture. The dissipative principle of robust H∞ control is extended to the
Markov Decision Process, and robust stability constraints are
obtained based on L2 gain performance in the reinforcement
learning system. Thus, we propose a dissipation-inequationconstraint-based adversarial reinforcement learning architecture. This architecture ensures the stability of the system during training by imposing constraints on the normal and adversarial agents. Theoretically, this architecture can be applied
to a large family of deep reinforcement learning algorithms.
Results of experiments in MuJoCo and GymFc environments
show that our architecture effectively improves the robustness
of the controller against environmental changes and adapts to
more powerful adversaries. Results of the flight experiments
on a real quadcopter indicate that our method can directly
deploy the policy trained in the simulation environment to
the real environment, and our controller outperforms the PID
controller based on hardware-in-the-loop. Both our theoretical and empirical results provide new and critical outlooks
on the adversarial reinforcement learning architecture from a
rigorous robust control perspective.

1

One effective method to learn robustness is domain randomization (Peng et al. 2018; Tobin et al. 2017) whereby
a professionally knowledgeable designer determines the uncertain model components in the task. Thereafter, a set of
training environments is constructed, and the uncertain components are randomly assigned to ensure the average robustness of the agent assigned to the set. Nevertheless, it requires significantly designers’ experience in the test domain
(Vinitsky et al. 2020); the uncertainty in the training environment will also lead to the instability of policy learning.
Another method to learn robustness that is easier to automate
is to model environmental differences as adversarial disturbances (Ilahi et al. 2020). Through the alternate update of the
normal and adversarial agents, a two-player-zero-sum game
is constructed. This makes the normal agent robust to the
disturbance of the adversary. The method does not require
much knowledge of domain. Nonetheless, it increases the
difficulty of the training domain. This may make the training unstable, causing the policy to fall into a local suboptimal solution, or resulting in a non-convergence (Tessler,
Efroni, and Mannor 2019). The instability during training is
because adversarial-policy acquisition is significantly faster
than stable-control-policy acquisition for an underactuated
or unstable system. For example, in an inverted double pendulum system, a disturbance acting on the pendulum arm
can easily make the system unstable (Mackenroth 2008). If
the adversary can always destroy the stability of the system
during learning, it will lead to task failure. In addition, the

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has become a popular method for training continuous controllers. It is widely
used in the fields of robotic control and navigation (Duan
et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2020; Hodge, Hawkins, and Alexander 2021). Although the performance of DRL is better than
that of the traditional methods in simulation, realistic application examples are rare (Zhao, Queralta, and Wester* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5431

