The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Instance-Sensitive Algorithms for Pure Exploration in Multinomial Logit Bandit
Nikolai Karpov, Qin Zhang
Indiana University Bloomington
Luddy Hall, RM 3044
700 North Woodlawn Avenue
Bloomington, IN 47408-3901, USA
nkarpov@iu.edu, qzhangcs@indiana.edu
Abstract

The MNL-bandit problem was initially motivated by fast
fashion retailing and online advertising, and finds many
applications in online learning, recommendation systems,
and operations research (see Avadhanula (2019) for an
overview). For instance, in fast fashion retailing, each item
corresponds to a product and its reward is simply the revenue generated by selling the product. The assumption that
v0 ≥ max{v1 , . . . , vN } can be justified by the fact that most
customers do not buy anything in a shop visit. A similar
phenomenon is also observed in online advertising where it
is most likely that a user does not click any of the ads on a
webpage when browsing. We naturally want to select a set
of products/ads S ⊆ [N ] to display in the shop/webpage
so that R(S, v), which corresponds to revenue generated by
customer/user per visit, is maximized.
We further pose a capacity constraint K on the cardinality
of S, since in most applications the size of the assortment
cannot exceed a certain size. For example, the number of
products presented at a retail shop is capped due to shelf
space constraints, and the number of ads placed on a webpage
cannot exceed a certain threshold.
In the MNL-bandit model, we need to simultaneously learn
the item preference vector v and find the assortment with
the maximum expected reward under v. We approach this
by repeatedly selecting an assortment to present to the user,
observing the user’s choice, and then trying to update the
assortment selection policy. We call each observation of the
user choice given an assortment a pull. We are interested in
minimizing the number of pulls, which is the most expensive
part of the learning process.
In bandit theory we are interested in two objectives. The
first is called regret minimization: given a pull budget T ,
try to minimize the accumulated difference (called regret)
between the sum of expected rewards of the optimal strategy
in the T pulls and that of the proposed learning algorithm; in
the optimal strategy we always present the best assortment
(i.e., the assortment with the maximum expected reward) to
the user at each pull. The second is called pure exploration,
where the goal is simply to identify the best assortment.
Regret minimization in MNL-bandit has been studied extensively in the literature (Rusmevichientong, Shen, and
Shmoys 2010; Sauré and Zeevi 2013; Davis, Gallego, and
Topaloglu 2013; Agrawal et al. 2016, 2017; Chen and Wang
2018). The algorithms proposed by Rusmevichientong, Shen,

Motivated by real-world applications such as fast fashion retailing and online advertising, the Multinomial Logit Bandit
(MNL-bandit) is a popular model in online learning and operations research, and has attracted much attention in the past
decade. In this paper, we give efficient algorithms for pure
exploration in MNL-bandit. Our algorithms achieve instancesensitive pull complexities. We also complement the upper
bounds by an almost matching lower bound.

Introduction
We study a model in online learning called multinomial logit
bandit (MNL-bandit for short), where we have N substitutable items {1, 2, . . . , N }, each of which is associated with
a known reward ri ∈ (0, 1] and an unknown preference parameter vi ∈ (0, 1]. We further introduce a null item 0 with
reward r0 = 0, which stands for the case of “no-purchase”.
We set v0 = 1, that is, we assume that the no-purchase decision is the most frequent case, which is a convention in
the MNL-bandit literature and can be justified by many realworld applications to be mentioned shortly.
Denote [n] , {1, 2, . . . , n}. Given a subset (called an
assortment) S ⊆ [N ], the probability that one chooses i ∈
S ∪ {0} is given by
pi (S) =

v0 +

v
Pi

j∈S vj

=

1+

v
Pi

j∈S vj

.

Intuitively, the probability of choosing the item i in S is
proportional to its preference vi . This choice model is called
the MNL choice model, introduced independently by Luce
(1959) and Plackett (1975). We are interested in finding an
assortment S ⊆ [N ] such that the following expected reward
is maximized.
Definition 1 (expected reward). Given an assortment S ⊆
[N ] and a vector of item preferences v = (v1 , . . . , vN ), the
expected reward of S with respect to v is defined to be
X
X
rv
Pi i
R(S, v) =
ri pi (S) =
.
1 + j∈S vj
i∈S

i∈S

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7096

