The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stereo Neural Vernier Caliper
Shichao Li* 1 , Zechun Liu1,2 , Zhiqiang Shen2,3,1 , Kwang-Ting Cheng1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
slicd@cse.ust.hk, timcheng@ust.hk

Abstract
We propose a new object-centric framework for learningbased stereo 3D object detection. Previous studies build
scene-centric representations that do not consider the significant variation among outdoor instances and thus lack the flexibility and functionalities that an instance-level model can offer. We build such an instance-level model by formulating and
tackling a local update problem, i.e., how to predict a refined
update given an initial 3D cuboid guess. We demonstrate
how solving this problem can complement scene-centric approaches in (i) building a coarse-to-fine multi-resolution system, (ii) performing model-agnostic object location refinement and, (iii) conducting stereo 3D tracking-by-detection.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, which achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
KITTI benchmark. Code and pre-trained models are available
at https://github.com/Nicholasli1995/SNVC.

Figure 1: Stereo Neural Vernier Caliper (SNVC) consists
of the main scale network M that models a coarse global
scene and the Vernier scale network V that models a fine
local scene. M predicts coarse location pc while V takes a
closer look around pc and makes finer measurements.

Recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) S3DOD approaches take
a scene-centric view and build a data representation for the
whole scene. We use a representative work (Chen et al.
2020) as our baseline, which uses the estimated depth to
build a voxel-based scene representation for object detection. In contrast to it, our study promotes an object-centric
viewpoint and explores instance-level analysis for S3DOD.
The following practical considerations motivate this study,
which demand the attributes of this object-centric viewpoint
that are not offered by the scene-centric counterpart.

Introduction
Accurate perception of surrounding objects’ 3D attributes
is indispensable for autonomous driving, robot navigation,
and traffic surveillance. Active range sensors such as LiDAR measures the 3D scene geometry directly to perform
precise 3D localization (Lang et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li
2019). However, LiDAR sensors incur a high cost and can
be limited in perception range where distant objects are only
captured with very few points. On the other hand, passive
sensors like cameras are inexpensive, yet the depth information is lost during the image formation process which makes
3D scene understanding a challenging inverse problem. Estimating depth from a single RGB image is ill-posed and leads
to limited 3D object detection performance (Brazil and Liu
2019; Wang et al. 2021a; Lu et al. 2021). Stereo cameras,
simulating a binocular human vision system, are the minimum sensor configuration that can exploit multi-view geometry for more reliable depth inference. Studying stereo 3D
object detection (S3DOD), thus not only is a pursuit of the
vision community that aims at visual scene understanding,
but also offers practical value to complement active sensors
through multi-sensor fusion (Liang et al. 2019).

• Cost-accuracy trade-off considering the depth variation:
a distant object usually has lower-resolution (LR) feature
representation compared to a nearby one, which makes
it difficult to precisely recover its 3D attributes. Naively
re-computing high-resolution (HR) features and using a
finer voxel grid for the whole scene lead to intimidating computational cost and cubic memory growth. This
is also unnecessary if the model performance for nearby
instances already saturates. If an instance-level model is
available, a multi-resolution (MR) system can be built
to mitigate this problem. This system benefits from a
coarse-to-fine design which computes an LR global representation and focuses on the tiny instances with complementary HR features1 .
• Capability for efficiently handling new frames: videos

* The correspondence author is Shichao Li.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Such HR features can be obtained computationally or physically with an actively zooming camera (Bellotto et al. 2009).

1376

