The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

NAREOR: The Narrative Reordering Problem
Varun Gangal * 1 Steven Y. Feng * 1 Malihe Alikhani 2 Teruko Mitamura 1 Eduard Hovy 1
1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
School of Computing and Information, University of Pittsburgh
{vgangal,syfeng,teruko,hovy}@cs.cmu.edu , malihe@pitt.edu

2

Abstract
Many implicit inferences exist in text depending on how it is
structured that can critically impact the text’s interpretation
and meaning. One such structural aspect present in text with
chronology is the order of its presentation. For narratives or
stories, this is known as the narrative order. Reordering a
narrative can impact the temporal, causal, event-based, and
other inferences readers draw from it, which in turn can have
strong effects both on its interpretation and interestingness.
In this paper, we propose and investigate the task of Narrative Reordering (NAREOR) which involves rewriting a given
story in a different narrative order while preserving its plot.
We present a dataset, NAREORC, with human rewritings of
stories within ROCStories in non-linear orders, and conduct a
detailed analysis of it. Further, we propose novel task-specific
training methods with suitable evaluation metrics. We perform
experiments on NAREORC using state-of-the-art models such
as BART and T5 and conduct extensive automatic and human
evaluations. We demonstrate that although our models can perform decently, NAREOR is a challenging task with potential
for further exploration. We also investigate two applications
of NAREOR: generation of more interesting variations of stories and serving as adversarial sets for temporal/event-related
tasks, besides discussing other prospective ones, such as for
pedagogical setups related to language skills like essay writing
and applications to medicine involving clinical narratives.

1

Figure 1: Example of our task and dataset, with original
input story S on the left, target narrative order πi′ on the top,
and human rewritten story S ′ on the right.

Introduction

From the onset of language, storytelling has been crucial
to the transmission of knowledge (Ramanujan 1991). It has
been well-established that readers remember only an abstract
representation of stories (Schank 1972). Before the printing press, classes engaged with oral teaching of scriptures,
such as rabbis, underwent extensive training to reproduce
them with no distortion (Bos 1995). Formally analyzing story
structure commenced with the ancients, through works like
Aristotle’s Poetics (Halliwell et al. 1998). These studies led
to the concept of a narrative, distinct from story events.
For a story, there are two orders: the chronological order
of events as they happened and their order as presented in
text. These have been analyzed under different names (Propp
2010). We refer to them as story order and narrative order,
*
Equal Contribution by the two authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10645

or story and narrative, respectively. Genette (1983) enlists
typical orders observed in writing. A linear order narrates
events in same sequence as story order. The in medias res
order starts with events in the middle, goes back to the start,
then proceeds to the end. Changing from near-linear to more
“interesting” orders is prevalent in cinema, e.g. The Imitation
Game starts with Turing’s post-WWII 1951 interrogation.
Memento and Naked Lunch are known for their esoteric narrative orders - loosely described as retrogade (reverse of linear)
and syllepsis (lacking chronological logic), respectively.
Morgan (2017) explains how narratives surpass “mere
chronicle”. Narrative orders of presenting materials in scientific explanations directly affects how researchers interpret
and understand them since the order implies not only temporal but other inferences about causality, processes of change,
etc. Narrative order can thus influence model explainability,
especially for explanation generation (Rajani et al. 2019), a
recent area-of-interest (Wiegreffe and Marasovic 2021).
In this work, we do not delve into the complex and somewhat subjective question of which narrative order is most suitable or “interesting”. We focus on how a given story in linear
narrative order can be rendered in a specified, non-linear,
target order while preserving plot. We call this Narrative
Reordering, or NAREOR. To the best of our knowledge, we

