The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

OctAttention: Octree-Based Large-Scale Contexts Model for
Point Cloud Compression
Chunyang Fu1,2 , Ge Li1 , Rui Song1 , Wei Gao1,2 * , Shan Liu3
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Tencent America
fuchy@stu.pku.edu.cn, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn, rsong@stu.pku.edu.cn, gaowei262@pku.edu.cn, shanl@tencent.com
Abstract

context-adaptive arithmetic encoder for bit allocation, which
can be seen as a prediction for the currently encoding node
based on the coded information. Recently, entropy encoders
based on deep learning have been shown to outperform
hand-crafted ones on rate-distortion performance. Among
them, some methods partition point clouds into voxels, then
adopt 3D convolution to learn and predict the occupancy of
each voxel (Wang et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2021a; Quach,
Valenzise, and Dufaux 2019; Que, Lu, and Xu 2021). Voxelbased models are capable of exploiting the local geometric
patterns (e.g., planes, surfaces). However, they are not robust to point cloud resolution. These methods have to divide blocks into different scales for point clouds with varying point densities to find the optimal voxel size. Meanwhile, receptive fields are limited by the computational cost,
i.e., they only extract features from voxels within a narrow
range. Other works encode the point cloud into an octree,
then encode the occupancy of octree nodes based on their
ancestor nodes (Huang et al. 2020; Biswas et al. 2020). The
octree-based model is robust to resolution, and it also utilizes
a broader range of contexts than voxel-based ones. However, prior methods ignore that sibling nodes (i.e., nodes in
the same octree level) provide low-level local geometry features, which are significant to exploit the geometry redundancy. In general, prior voxel-based and octree-based methods do not fully use much spatial context information.

In point cloud compression, sufficient contexts are significant
for modeling the point cloud distribution. However, the contexts gathered by the previous voxel-based methods decrease
when handling sparse point clouds. To address this problem, we propose a multiple-contexts deep learning framework called OctAttention employing the octree structure, a
memory-efficient representation for point clouds. Our approach encodes octree symbol sequences in a lossless way
by gathering the information of sibling and ancestor nodes.
Expressly, we first represent point clouds with octree to reduce spatial redundancy, which is robust for point clouds
with different resolutions. We then design a conditional entropy model with a large receptive field that models the
sibling and ancestor contexts to exploit the strong dependency among the neighboring nodes and employ an attention
mechanism to emphasize the correlated nodes in the context.
Furthermore, we introduce a mask operation during training and testing to make a trade-off between encoding time
and performance. Compared to the previous state-of-the-art
works, our approach obtains a 10%-35% BD-Rate gain on
the LiDAR benchmark (e.g. SemanticKITTI) and object point
cloud dataset (e.g. MPEG 8i, MVUB), and saves 95% coding
time compared to the voxel-based baseline. The code is available at https://github.com/zb12138/OctAttention.

Introduction
The point cloud is an essential data structure for 3D representation. It has been used in many fields such as virtual reality, smart city, robotics, and autonomous driving (Schwarz
et al. 2018). Since massive point clouds are generated, efficient compression techniques are necessary for point cloud
storage and transmission. However, point clouds are unordered and have various distributions; it is relatively difficult to compress point clouds compared with 2D images.
Fortunately, several schemes for point cloud geometry and
attribute compression such as voxel-based, image-based and
tree-based algorithms have been proposed and applied in research works (Chou, Koroteev, and Krivokuća 2019; Shao
et al. 2017, 2018) and standard specification (3DG 2021).
The MPEG point cloud geometry compression standard
(G-PCC) (Schwarz et al. 2018) adopted a hand-crafted

In this work, we propose a point cloud compression
method called OctAttention which generates and utilizes
a large-scale context. Voxel is inefficient for representing
sparse point clouds; thus, we encode the point cloud into an
octree. Subsequently, we improve the predictability of the
occupancy of each octree node based on large-scale context,
which contains features from ancestor nodes of the current
node, sibling nodes, and ancestors of sibling nodes. However, it should be noted that the side effect of expanding
context is to introduce redundant and irrelevant information. For example, different sibling nodes may have the same
ancestors, but they are repeated multiple times in the context; sibling nodes far from the current node may be worthless for prediction. To tackle this problem, we employ treestructured attention to weight and explicitly express the contributions of different nodes in the prediction. The siblings in
the context disable the parallelization strategy in prior works
(Huang et al. 2020; Que, Lu, and Xu 2021), hence we pro-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

625

