The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SMINet: State-Aware Multi-Aspect Interests Representation Network for
Cold-Start Users Recommendation
Wanjie Tao,1 Yu Li,2 Liangyue Li,1 Zulong Chen,1 Hong Wen,1
Peilin Chen,1 Tingting Liang,2 Quan Lu1
1
Alibaba Group,Hangzhou,China
Hangzhou Dianzi University,Hangzhou,China
{wanjie.twj,liliangyue.lly,zulong.czl,qinggan.wh,peilin.cpl,luquan.lq}@alibaba-inc.com, {liyucomp,liangtt}@hdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

low-frequency demand compared with shopping. The lack
of rich user behaviors renders the recommender system ineffective at delivering high-quality recommendation results.
Such cold start problem is one of the major challenges we
face at online travel platforms.
Recent advances in recommender systems have been focused on recommending for cold-start users (Silva et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2020; Lu, Fang, and Shi 2020; Chae
et al. 2020). To alleviate this issue, the general idea is
to leverage the side information to enrich the user representation, thereby improving the recommendation accuracy (Liang et al. 2020; Sedhain et al. 2017). To address
the issue that users with similar profiles are recommended
with same items, meta-learning has been proposed to address the cold-start problem by leveraging user’s few behaviors, with optimization-based meta-learning being the most
dominant (Dong et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2019).
Although much progress has been made, the state-of-thearts for cold-start problems are largely sub-optimal for user
representation at OTPs, as the user travel behaviors exhibit
some unique characteristics that are not taken into account
in these approaches.

Online travel platforms (OTPs), e.g., bookings.com and
Ctrip.com, deliver travel experiences to online users by providing travel-related products. Although much progress has
been made, the state-of-the-arts for cold-start problems are
largely sub-optimal for user representation, since they do not
take into account the unique characteristics exhibited from
user travel behaviors. In this work, we propose a State-aware
Multi-aspect Interests representation Network (SMINet) for
cold-start users recommendation at OTPs, which consists of
a multi-aspect interests extractor, a co-attention layer, and a
state-aware gating layer. The key component of the model
is the multi-aspect interests extractor, which is able to extract representations for the user’s multi-aspect interests. Furthermore, to learn the interactions between the user behaviors in the current session and the above multi-aspect interests, we carefully design a co-attention layer which allows
the cross attentions between the two modules. Additionally,
we propose a travel state-aware gating layer to attentively select the multi-aspect interests. The final user representation is
obtained by fusing the three components. Comprehensive experiments conducted both offline and online demonstrate the
superior performance of the proposed model at user representation, especially for cold-start users, compared with state-ofthe-art methods.

C1 spatial temporal interests: users’ travel behaviors
demonstrate general preferences with respect to a specific destination during a given time period. For instance,
as illustrated in Figure 1(a), most travellers in Beijing
prefer to view maple leaves during July while most vistors in Sanya prefer to enjoy the beach in Oct. Such spatial temporal preferences can potentially complement the
user representations, especially for users with few behaviors.
C2 user group interests: users’ travel behaviors exhibit the
herding phenomenon, i.e., people in the similar social
status tend to make similar traveling choices. For instance, as shown in Figure 1(b), the parent-child group
prefers to go to the amusement parks, while the elderly
group tends to go with a package tour. Benefiting from
the preference similarity among users in the same group,
we could utilize such user group interest to enrich the
user representations.
C3 user periodic interests: individual users traveling behaviors usually exhibit some periodic pattern. For example,
as shown in Figure 1(c), some users continue to book

Introduction
Online travel platforms (OTPs), e.g., bookings.com and
Ctrip.com, deliver travel experiences to online users by providing travel-related products (e.g., flight tickets, hotels, and
package tours, etc). With the large-scale product portfolio
available on the platform, high-quality personalized recommendations are essential for delivering superb user experiences. The recommender system usually follows the classic
two-stage paradigm, which consists of a matching phase that
generates candidate items for the user and a ranking phase
that ranks the items according to conversion rate (CVR) or
click-through rate (CTR) (Xu et al. 2021; Su et al. 2020).
During both phases, learning a good user representation is
the key.
One key characteristic of user behaviors on OTPs that
differentiate themselves from other e-commerce platforms
is that user’s behaviors are quite sparse, since travel is a
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8476

