The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DuMLP-Pin: A Dual-MLP-Dot-Product Permutation-Invariant Network for Set
Feature Extraction
Jiajun Fei,1 Ziyu Zhu,1 Wenlei Liu,1 Zhidong Deng,1 Mingyang Li,2 Huanjun Deng,2 Shuo Zhang 2
1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence at Tsinghua University (THUAI), State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and
Systems, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 310052, China
feijj20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuziyu.edward@gmail.com, {liuwl2020, michael}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingyangli,
huanjun.dhj}@alibaba-inc.com, ygzhangsoya@qq.com
Abstract

permutation-invariance. For instance, PointNet (Qi et al.
2017a) employs global max pooling, while global sum pooling is adopted in Deep Sets (Zaheer et al. 2017). In general,
there are simple structures in global aggregation methods.
But they are not good at extracting local features. Compared to these, local aggregation methods like PointNet++
(Qi et al. 2017b) and Point Transformer (Zhao et al. 2021)
overcome such limitation by defining the local aggregation
operation and scope. Accordingly, they yield better performance, though they usually have more complex structures.
In this paper, we propose a dual MLP dot-product
permutation-invariant network (DuMLP-Pin) for set feature extraction. The key to DuMLP-Pin is the use of
two multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) in order to aggregate
information globally. It does gain permutation-invariance
through the dot-product of outputs of two MLPs. We strictly
prove that the dot-product decomposition always exists
for any permutation-invariant function. Compared to other
permutation-invariant methods on the same task, DuMLPPin is highly parameter-efficient, which means that it only
needs a small number of parameters. Furthermore, we also
show that the optimization of DuMLP-Pin can be viewed
as the constrained optimization of Deep Sets under certain
conditions.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel global aggregation permutationinvariant network based on dual MLP dot-product decomposition, called DuMLP-Pin.
• We strictly prove that a dot-product decomposition
for any permutation-invariant function implemented by
DuMLP-Pin always exists if and only if the cardinality
of input sets is greater than a pre-specific threshold.
• We explain the high efficiency of DuMLP-Pin and show
that under certain conditions DuMLP-Pin can be considered as Deep Sets with strong constraints.
We evaluate DuMLP-Pin on several problems with different types of data elements. Experimental results demonstrate that DuMLP-Pin yields the best performance on both
the pixel classification and the attribute set one, compared
to other permutation-invariant methods. On the point cloud
classification, the performance of the proposed method almost reaches the best-performing local aggregation method

Existing permutation-invariant methods can be divided into
two categories according to the aggregation scope, i.e. global
aggregation and local one. Although the global aggregation
methods, e. g., PointNet and Deep Sets, get involved in simpler structures, their performance is poorer than the local
aggregation ones like PointNet++ and Point Transformer. It
remains an open problem whether there exists a global aggregation method with a simple structure, competitive performance, and even much fewer parameters. In this paper,
we propose a novel global aggregation permutation-invariant
network based on dual MLP dot-product, called DuMLPPin, which is capable of being employed to extract features
for set inputs, including unordered or unstructured pixel, attribute, and point cloud data sets. We strictly prove that any
permutation-invariant function implemented by DuMLP-Pin
can be decomposed into two or more permutation-equivariant
ones in a dot-product way as the cardinality of the given input
set is greater than a threshold. We also show that the DuMLPPin can be viewed as Deep Sets with strong constraints under
certain conditions. The performance of DuMLP-Pin is evaluated on several different tasks with diverse data sets. The experimental results demonstrate that our DuMLP-Pin achieves
the best results on the two classification problems for pixel
sets and attribute sets. On both the point cloud classification and the part segmentation, the accuracy of DuMLP-Pin
is very close to the so-far best-performing local aggregation
method with only a 1-2% difference, while the number of required parameters is significantly reduced by more than 85%
in classification and 69% in segmentation, respectively. The
code is publicly available on https://github.com/JaronTHU/
DuMLP-Pin.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have superiority in
feature extraction on structured data like text, images, or
other sequences. For unordered or unstructured set inputs,
however, permutation-invariant methods seem to be preferred.
According to the aggregation scope, existing permutationinvariant networks, hereafter referred to as Pin, can be divided into global aggregation and local aggregation methods. Pioneer work uses global aggregation to achieve
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

598

