The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

UNISON: Unpaired Cross-Lingual Image Captioning
Jiahui Gao1 , Yi Zhou2 , Philip L.H. Yu3 * , Shafiq Joty4 , Jiuxiang Gu5
1

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Johns Hopkins University, USA
3
The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 5 Adobe Research, USA
sumiler@hku.hk, yzhou188@jhu.edu, plhyu@eduhk.hk, srjoty@ntu.edu.sg, jigu@adobe.com

Abstract

each target language is infeasible, since the labeling process
is very time consuming and requires excessive human labor.
To alleviate the aforementioned problem, there have been
several attempts in relaxing the requirement of imagecaption paired data in the target language (Gu et al. 2018;
Song et al. 2019), which rely on paired image-caption data
in a pivot language to generate captions in the target language via sentence-level translation. However, even for English, the existing captioning datasets (e.g., MS-COCO (Lin
et al. 2014)) are not sufficiently large and comprise only limited object categories, making it challenging to generalize
the trained captioners to scenarios in the wild (Tran et al.
2016). In addition, sentence-level translation relies purely
on the text description and can not observe the entire image, which may ignore important contextual semantics and
lead to inaccurate translation. Thus, such pivot-based methods fail to fully address the problem.
Recently, a few works explore image captioning task in
an unpaired setting (Feng et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2019; Laina,
Rupprecht, and Navab 2019). Nevertheless, these methods
still rely on manually labeled caption corpus. For example,
Gu et al. (2019) train their model based on shuffled imagecaption pairs of MS-COCO; Feng et al. (2019) use an image
descriptions corpus from Shutterstock; Lania et al. (2019)
create training dataset by sampling the images and captions
from different image-caption datasets. Despite they belong
to unpaired methods in spirit, one could still argue that they
depend heavily on the collected caption corpus to get a reasonable cross-modal mapping between vision and language
distributions – a resource that is not always practical to assume. It therefore remains questionable how these methods
would perform when there is no caption data at all. To the
best of our knowledge, there is yet no work that investigates
image captioning without relying on any caption corpus.
Despite the giant gap between images and texts, they
are essentially different mediums to describe the same entities and how they are related in the objective world. Such
internal logic is the most essential information carried by
the medium, which can be leveraged as the bridge to connect data in different modalities. Scene graph(Wang et al.
2018), a structural representation that contains 1) the objects, 2) their respective attributes and 3) how they are related as described by the medium (image or text), which
has been developed into a mature technique for visual un-

Image captioning has emerged as an interesting research field
in recent years due to its broad application scenarios. The traditional paradigm of image captioning relies on paired imagecaption datasets to train the model in a supervised manner.
However, creating such paired datasets for every target language is prohibitively expensive, which hinders the extensibility of captioning technology and deprives a large part of
the world population of its benefit. In this work, we present a
novel unpaired cross-lingual method to generate image captions without relying on any caption corpus in the source or
the target language. Specifically, our method consists of two
phases: (i) a cross-lingual auto-encoding process, which utilizing a sentence parallel (bitext) corpus to learn the mapping from the source to the target language in the scene graph
encoding space and decode sentences in the target language,
and (ii) a cross-modal unsupervised feature mapping, which
seeks to map the encoded scene graph features from image
modality to language modality. We verify the effectiveness of
our proposed method on the Chinese image caption generation task. The comparisons against several existing methods
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Image captioning has attracted a lot of attention in recent years due to its emerging applications, including image indexing, virtual assistants, etc. Despite the impressive results achieved by the existing captioning techniques,
most of them focus on English because of the availability of image-caption paired datasets, which can not generalize for languages where such paired dataset is not available. In reality, there are more than 7,100 different languages spoken by billions of people worldwide (source: Ethnologue(2019)). Building visual-language technologies only
for English would deprive a significantly large population of
non-English speakers of AI benefits and also leads to ethical
concerns, such as unequal access to resources. Therefore,
similar to other NLP tasks (e.g. parsing, question answering) (Hu et al. 2020; Conneau et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2020),
visual-language tasks should also be extended to multiple
languages. However, creating paired captioning datasets for
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10654

