The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

From Fully Trained to Fully Random Embeddings: Improving Neural Machine
Translation with Compact Word Embedding Tables
Krtin Kumar1 * , Peyman Passban2∗ , Mehdi Rezagholizadeh3 , Yiu Sing Lau4∗ , Qun Liu3
1

Thomson Reuters,
2
Amazon,
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
4
McGill University,
{krtinkumar, passban.peyman, mehdi.rezagholizadeh, yiusinglau17}@gmail.com, qun.liu@huawei.com
Abstract
Embedding matrices are key components in neural natural language processing (NLP) models that are responsible to provide
numerical representations of input tokens (i.e. words or subwords). In this paper, we analyze the impact and utility of such
matrices in the context of neural machine translation (NMT).
We show that detracting syntactic and semantic information
from word embeddings and running NMT systems with random embeddings is not as damaging as it initially sounds. We
also show how incorporating only a limited amount of taskspecific knowledge from fully-trained embeddings can boost
the performance NMT systems. Our findings demonstrate that
in exchange for negligible deterioration in performance, any
NMT model can be run with partially random embeddings.
Working with such structures means a minimal memory requirement as there is no longer need to store large embedding
tables, which is a significant gain in industrial and on-device
settings. We evaluated our embeddings in translating English
into German and French and achieved a 5.3x compression rate.
Despite having a considerably smaller architecture, our models in some cases are even able to outperform state-of-the-art
baselines.

Introduction
One of the main challenges in NLP is to properly encode
discrete tokens into continuous vector representations. The
most common practice in this regard is to use an embedding
matrix which provides a one-to-one mapping from tokens
to n-dimensional, real-valued vectors (Mikolov et al. 2013;
Li and Yang 2018). Typically, values of these vectors are
optimized via back-propagation with respect to a particular
objective function. Learning embedding matrices with robust
performance across different domains and data distributions
is a complex task, and can directly impact quality (Tian et al.
2014; Shi et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2016).
Embedding matrices are a key component in a seq2seq
NMT model, for instance, in a transformer-base NMT model
(Vaswani et al. 2017) with a vocabulary size of 50k, 36% of
the total model parameters are utilized by embedding matrices. Thus, a significant amount of parameters are utilized only
* Work done while Krtin Kumar, Peyman Passban and Yiu Sing
Liu were at Huawei.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10930

for representing tokens in a model. Existing work on embedding compression for NMT systems (Khrulkov et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2018; Shu and Nakayama 2017), have shown that
these matrices can by compressed significantly with minor
drop in performance. Our focus in this work is to study the
importance of embedding matrices in the context of NMT.
We experiment with Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) and
LSTM based seq2seq architectures, which are the two most
popular seq2seq models in NMT. In Section , we compare
the performance of a fully-trained embedding matrix, with
a completely random word embedding (RWE), and find that
using a random embedding matrix leads to drop in about 1
to 4 BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002) points on different NMT
benchmark datasets. Neural networks have shown impressive
performance with random weights for image classification
tasks (Ramanujan et al. 2020), our experiments show similar
results for embedding matrices of NMT models.
RWE uses no trainable parameters, thus it might be possible to recover the drop in BLEU score by increasing the
number of parameters using additional layers. We increase
the number of layers in RWE model such that the number of
parameters used by the entire model is comparable to fullytrained embedding model. We find that even in comparable
parameter setting RWE model performance was inferior to
fully-trained model by 1 BLEU point for high and medium
resource datasets. Our results suggest that even though the
embedding parameters can be compressed to a large extent
with only a minor drop in accuracy, embedding matrices are
essential components for token representation, and cannot be
replaced by deeper layers of transformer based models.
RWE assumed a fully random embedding sampled from a
single Gaussian distribution; however, to control the amount
of random information, and to better understand the importance of embedding matrices, we introduce Gaussian product
quantization (GPQ). GPQ assumes that k Gaussian distributions are required to approximate the embedding matrix
for NMT models. The means and variances of the k distributions are learned from a fully-trained embedding matrix
trained on the same dataset as GPQ model. k is a hyperparameter which controls the amount of information distilled
from a pre-trained embedding to partially random embedding in GPQ model. GPQ has the ability to move from a
fully random embedding to a fully-trained embedding by

