The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Fast Algorithm for PAC Combinatorial Pure Exploration
Noa Ben-David and Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer Sheva Israel
bendanoa@post.bgu.ac.il, sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

routing path in a network (Talebi et al. 2017). The network
is modeled as a directed graph, where each edge represents
a link between two routing servers, and the cost of routing
through the link is the (random) delay in the link. The task
is to find the path from a source to a target with the smallest
expected delay. In this problem, the CPE arms are mapped
to the links (graph edges), and pulling an arm is done by
sending a packet through the corresponding link and measuring its delay. The decision class is thus the set of possible
paths between the source and the target. As another example, consider pairing online players for matches, based on
their skill compatibility. This can be represented by a maximum weight matching problem on a full graph, where the
reward measures the compatibility of the players, and it can
be sampled by running a simulation of a match.
As evident in the examples above, in many natural cases
the size of the decision class of a CPE problem is exponential in the number of arms. Algorithms for the general CPE
problem with such decision classes thus usually assume access to an oracle which can efficiently solve the combinatorial optimization problem (see, e.g., Chen et al. 2014; Gabillon et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Cao and Krishnamurthy
2019). Using such an oracle, these algorithms are efficient,
in that their computational complexity is polynomial in the
problem parameters. However, while theoretically efficient,
running the oracle is usually highly demanding in terms of
computation resources for large problems. In existing CPE
algorithms, the number of oracle calls is either similar to the
sample complexity or a high degree polynomial. As a result,
they are computationally heavy, and impractical to run even
on moderately large problems.
In this work, we propose a new CPE algorithm that is
significantly less computationally demanding than previous
algorithms, and so it is practical to run on large problems.
At the same time, it has sample complexity guarantees that
show it can be useful for many problems. The algorithm,
called CSALE (Combinatorial Successive Acceptance with
Light Elimination), uses a significantly smaller number of
oracle calls than previous algorithms, and does not use any
other computationally demanding operations. CSALE works
in the (, δ)-PAC setting, in which the algorithm is provided
with an error parameter  and a confidence parameter δ, and
finds, with a probability of 1 − δ, an arm set from the decision class with an -optimal reward. Compared with re-

We consider the problem of Combinatorial Pure Exploration
(CPE), which deals with finding a combinatorial set of arms
with a high reward, when the rewards of individual arms are
unknown in advance and must be estimated using arm pulls.
Previous algorithms for this problem, while obtaining sample complexity reductions in many cases, are highly computationally intensive, thus making them impractical even
for mildly large problems. In this work, we propose a new
CPE algorithm in the PAC setting, which is computationally light weight, and so can easily be applied to problems
with tens of thousands of arms. This is achieved since the
proposed algorithm requires a very small number of combinatorial oracle calls. The algorithm is based on successive acceptance of arms, along with elimination which is
based on the combinatorial structure of the problem. We provide sample complexity guarantees for our algorithm, and
demonstrate in experiments its usefulness on large problems,
whereas previous algorithms are impractical to run on problems of even a few dozen arms. The code is provided at
https://github.com/noabdavid/csale. The full version of this
paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04197.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial pure exploration (CPE) is an important statistical framework, used in diverse applications such as channel selection in a wireless network (Xue et al. 2018), job
applicant screening (Schumann et al. 2019), and robot decision making (Marcotte et al. 2020). In the CPE framework,
there are n arms that can be pulled, where each arm is associated with an unknown distribution of real-valued rewards.
Whenever an arm is pulled, an instantaneous reward is independently drawn from that arm’s reward distribution. An
arm set is a set of arms, and its reward is the sum of rewards
of the arms it contains. The goal is to find a valid arm set
with a high reward. The set of valid arm sets is called the
decision class, and it is typically the set of legal solutions of
a combinatorial problem. The algorithm uses individual arm
pulls (samples) to collect information on the rewards, and
attempts to select from the decision class an arm set with a
high expected reward, using a low sample complexity.
Many applications can be mapped to the CPE setting. As
an example, consider the problem of finding the shortest
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6064

