The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Diaformer: Automatic Diagnosis via Symptoms Sequence Generation
Junying Chen1 * , Dongfang Li1 * , Qingcai Chen1,2† , Wenxiu Zhou1 , Xin Liu2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{junying.chen.cs, crazyofapple, hit.liuxin}@gmail.com, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn, wen.xiu.zhou@outlook.com

Abstract

explicit symptoms (the symptoms from self-reports):
{cough:true, snot:true}

Automatic diagnosis has attracted increasing attention but remains challenging due to multi-step reasoning. Recent works
usually address it by reinforcement learning methods. However, these methods show low efficiency and require taskspecific reward functions. Considering the conversation between doctor and patient allows doctors to probe for symptoms and make diagnoses, the diagnosis process can be naturally seen as the generation of a sequence including symptoms and diagnoses. Inspired by this, we reformulate automatic diagnosis as a symptoms Sequence Generation (SG)
task and propose a simple but effective automatic Diagnosis
model based on Transformer (Diaformer). We firstly design
the symptom attention framework to learn the generation of
symptom inquiry and the disease diagnosis. To alleviate the
discrepancy between sequential generation and disorder of
implicit symptoms, we further design three orderless training mechanisms. Experiments on three public datasets show
that our model outperforms baselines on disease diagnosis by
1%, 6% and 11.5% with the highest training efficiency. Detailed analysis on symptom inquiry prediction demonstrates
that the potential of applying symptoms sequence generation
for automatic diagnosis.

implicit symptoms (the symptoms from conversation):
{sore throat:true, fever:true, harsh respiration:false}
disease tag (the target disease):
bronchitis of childhood
Table 1: An example of automatic diagnosis data.

value of symptoms in the “implicit symptoms” set or get
a “not sure” answer for outside symptoms. Thus, the disease diagnosis task can be defined as inquiring the implicit
symptoms step by step with limited interaction turns, and
then diagnosing the disease based on explicit symptoms and
the additional symptoms inquired. Note that different from
the dialogue system of automatic diagnosis, automatic diagnosis we called here is symptom checking task in (Tang
et al. 2016), which also serves as dialogue manager in taskoriented dialogue system of automatic diagnosis (Wei et al.
2018; Xu et al. 2019; Luo, Li, and Glass 2020; Xia et al.
2020; Teixeira, Maran, and Dragoni 2021).
Due to the existing of implicit symptoms, this task can be
considered as a multi-step reasoning problem. The challenge
of the task is how to capture the underlying dynamics and
uncertainties of reasoning process, then inquiry about accurate symptoms under small labeled data and limited turns.
Most previous methods usually address this problem as a
sequential decision-making process, then formulate the process as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and employ Reinforcement Learning (RL) for policy learning (Tang et al.
2016; Peng et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017; Ling et al. 2017;
Kao, Tang, and Chang 2018; Wei et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019;
Liao et al. 2020; Xia et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2021; Teixeira,
Maran, and Dragoni 2021). However, RL learns how to inquire about symptoms and make a disease diagnosis only
with final accuracy rewards, which partly deviates from the
actual doctor’s diagnostic process. In real clinical diagnosis
scenario, doctors carefully select relevant questions and ask
patients with a medical diagnostic logic (Xia et al. 2020).
The policy learning of RL tries to learn which symptom inquiry improves the rewards but not the doctor’s diagnostic
logic directly. As a result, RL relies on the random trials to

Introduction
Automatic diagnosis has recently attracted increasing attention from researchers because of its potential in simplifying diagnostic procedures (Tang et al. 2016; Kao, Tang, and
Chang 2018), helping make better and more effective diagnostic decisions (Shivade et al. 2014; Xia et al. 2020),
and even helping build a diagnostic dialogue system as a
dialogue management (Li et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2018; Xu
et al. 2019; Teixeira, Maran, and Dragoni 2021). An automatic diagnosis system is built on conversations between
the agent and the patient where allows the agent to probe
for symptoms and make diagnoses. As an example is shown
in Table 1, the agent interacts with users to inquiry about
additional symptoms (i.e., implicit symptoms) beyond their
self-reports (i.e., explicit symptoms) and make a disease diagnosis at the end. When inquiring about additional symptoms, the automatic diagnosis system can only obtain the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4432

