The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sequential Blocked Matching
Nicholas Bishop1 , Hau Chan2 , Debmalya Mandal3 , Long Tran-Thanh4
1

University of Southampton, 2 University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 3 Max Planck Institute, 4 University of Warwick
nb8g13@soton.ac.uk, hchan3@unl.edu, dmandal@mpi-sws.org, long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract

tiple agents simultaneously learn their preferences with repeated blocking or unavailability of resources.
In particular, we are interested in the repeated one-sided
matching problem where strategic agents report their ordinal preferences based on their expected rewards over a
set of alternatives, or services. The agents are matched to
the services given their reported preferences each time period or round. It is well-known that one-sided matching
can be used to model various real-world situations such
as matching patients to kidneys across health institutions
(Durlauf and Blume 2008; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004),
assigning students to rooms in residential halls (Durlauf and
Blume 2008), allocating workers to tasks in crowdsourcing (Difallah, Demartini, and Cudré-Mauroux 2013; Aldhahri, Shandilya, and Shiva 2015), and recommending users
to activities in recommender systems (Satzger, Endres, and
Kießling 2006; Ansari, Essegaier, and Kohli 2000; Isinkaye,
Folajimi, and Ojokoh 2015).
In many of these situations, there are several obstacles.
First, for a setting with reusable services, a major caveat is
that an agent-alternative match within a round can result in
blocking of some services in which the services may not be
available until a later time. For example, a recommended
activity (e.g., a special promotion offer from a restaurant)
that is matched to (or used by) a user may not be available
to all users again until a later time. Or, in cloud computing,
where tasks are matched to resources (e.g. GPUs), once a
task is assigned to a resource, that resource is blocked for a
certain number of rounds.
Second, the agents are often unaware of their exact preferences, and the planner must coordinate their explorations
without incurring a significant loss. This is often true for
recommending restaurants to customers, as the restaurants
have limited capacity and people are rarely informed of all
possible choices (Waldfogel 2008). Note that, even when the
agents are themselves using learning algorithms over time,
coordination by the planner becomes necessary to avoid different agents exploring the same service at a time – a problem which is exacerbated by blocking of the services.
Finally, in several settings, the agents are aware of their
preferences, but they might be strategic in reporting their
preferences for getting matched to better services. This
is particularly prominent in assigning rooms to students.
Rooms can be blocked due to occupancy and can be made

We consider a sequential blocked matching (SBM) model
where strategic agents repeatedly report ordinal preferences
over a set of services to a central planner. The planner’s goal
is to elicit agents’ true preferences and design a policy that
matches services to agents in order to maximize the expected
social welfare with the added constraint that each matched
service can be blocked or unavailable for a number of time
periods. Naturally, SBM models the repeated allocation of
reusable services to a set of agents where each allocated service becomes unavailable for a fixed duration.
We first consider the offline SBM setting, where the strategic
agents are aware of their true preferences. We measure the
performance of any policy by distortion, the worst-case multiplicative approximation guaranteed by any policy. For the
setting √
with s services, we establish lower bounds of Ω(s)
and Ω( s) on the distortions of any deterministic and randomised mechanisms, respectively. We complement these results by providing approximately truthful, measured by incentive ratio, deterministic and randomised policies based on
random serial dictatorship which match our lower bounds.
Our results show that there is a significant improvement if
one considers the class of randomised policies. Finally, we
consider the online SBM setting with bandit feedback where
each agent is initially unaware of her true preferences, and
the planner must facilitate each agent in the learning of their
preferences through the matching of services over time. We
design an approximately truthful mechanism based on the
explore-then-commit paradigm, which achieves logarithmic
dynamic approximate regret.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning algorithms have been extremely successful in various domains, from playing games
to screening cancer. However, despite such success, most
learning algorithms cannot be deployed directly in practice
to make decisions under uncertainty. The main reason is
that most real-world applications involve multiple agents,
and learning algorithms are often constrained due to the unavailability of resources. Motivated by such constraints in
multi-agent systems, we consider the problem of repeated
matching with blocking constraints, a scenario where mulCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4834

