The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Implicit Statistical Shape Models for 3D Medical Image Delineation
Ashwin Raju 1,2 , Shun Miao 1 , Dakai Jin 1 , Le Lu 1 , Junzhou Huang 2 , Adam P. Harrison 1 *
1
PAII Inc, Bethesda, MD, USA
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA
{ashwin.raju93, jzhuang}@uta.edu
{shwinmiao, dakai.jin, tiger.lelu, adam.p.harrison}@gmail.com
2

Abstract
3D delineation of anatomical structures is a cardinal goal in
medical imaging analysis. Prior to deep learning, statistical
shape models (SSMs) that imposed anatomical constraints
and produced high quality surfaces were a core technology.
Today’s fully-convolutional networks (FCNs), while dominant, do not offer these capabilities. We present deep implicit
statistical shape models (DISSMs), a new approach that marries the representation power of deep networks with the benefits of SSMs. DISSMs use an implicit representation to produce compact and descriptive deep surface embeddings that
permit statistical models of anatomical variance. To reliably
fit anatomically plausible shapes to an image, we introduce
a novel rigid and non-rigid pose estimation pipeline that is
modelled as a Markov decision process (MDP). Intra-dataset
experiments on the task of pathological liver segmentation
demonstrate that DISSMs can perform more robustly than
four leading FCN models, including nnU-Net + an adversarial prior: reducing the mean Hausdorff distance (HD) by
7.5-14.3 mm and improving the worst case Dice-Sørensen
coefficient (DSC) by 1.2-2.3%. More critically, cross-dataset
experiments on an external and highly challenging clinical
dataset demonstrate that DISSMs improve the mean DSC
and HD by 2.1-5.9% and 9.9-24.5 mm, respectively, and
the worst-case DSC by 5.4-7.3%. Supplemental validation
on a highly challenging and low-contrast larynx dataset further demonstrate DISSM’s improvements. These improvements are over and above any benefits from representing delineations with high-quality surfaces.

nnU-Net

DISSM

Figure 1: Top Panel: DISSMs produce high quality surfaces
without discretization. Its use of rich and explicit anatomical
priors ensure robustness, even on highly challenging crossdataset clinical samples. In this example, nnU-Net (Isensee
et al. 2021) oversegments the cardiac region (green arrow)
and mishandles a TACE-treated lesion (red arrow), causing a fragmented effect. Bottom Panel: a 2D t-SNE embedding (van der Maaten and Hinton 2008) of the DISSM shape
latent space. Shapes closer together share similar features.

spite their undisputed abilities, FCNs do lack important features compared to prior technology. For one, a surface-based
representation is usually the desired end product, but FCNs
output masks, which suffer from discretization effects (see
top panel of Fig. 1). These are particularly severe when
large inter-slice distances come into play. Conversion to a
smoothed mesh is possible, but it introduces its own artifacts. While this is an important drawback, an arguably more
critical limitation is that current FCN pipelines typically operate with no shape constraints.
Shape priors are critical for ensuring anatomically plausible delineations, but the techniques and concepts of statistical shape models (SSMs), so integral prior to deep learning (Heimann and Meinzer 2009), have fallen out of favor.
Despite the incontrovertible power of FCNs, they can produce egregious mistakes, especially when presented with

Introduction
3D delineation is a fundamental task in medical imaging analysis. Currently, medical segmentation is dominated
by fully-convolutional networks (FCNs) (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015), which segment each pixel or voxel in
a bottom-up fashion. FCNs are well-suited to the underlying convolutional neural network (CNN) technology and
are straightforward to implement using modern deep learning software. The current state has been made particularly
plain by the dominance of nnU-Net (Isensee et al. 2021),
i.e., nothing-new U-Net, in the medical segmentation decathlon (MSD) challenge (Simpson et al. 2019). Yet, de* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2135

