The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Anytime Guarantees under Heavy-Tailed Data
Matthew J. Holland
Osaka University
matthew-h@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Our problem of interest is that of efficiently minimizing R(·)
over H when the noisy feedback is potentially heavy-tailed,
i.e., for all steps t, it is unknown whether the distribution of
Gt is congenial in the sub-Gaussian sense, or heavy-tailed
in the sense of having infinite or undefined higher-order moments (Chen, Su, and Xu 2017). By “efficiently,” we mean
procedures with performance guarantees (high-probability
error bounds) on par with the case in which the learner
knows a priori that the feedback is sub-Gaussian (Devroye
et al. 2016; Nazin et al. 2019).
Recently, notable progress has been made on this front,
with a common theme of making principled modifications
(e.g., truncation, data splitting + validation, etc.) to the the
raw feedback (Gt ) before passing it to a more traditional
stochastic gradient-based update, to achieve sub-Gaussian
bounds (with optimal dependence on the confidence level)
while assuming just finite variance (Davis et al. 2019; Gorbunov, Danilova, and Gasnikov 2020; Nazin et al. 2019).
Here we focus on two key limitations to the current state
of the art: (a) many robust learning algorithms only have
such guarantees when R is strongly convex (Chen, Su, and
Xu 2017; Davis et al. 2019; Holland and Ikeda 2019); (b)
without strong convexity, sub-Gaussian guarantees are unavailable for the iterates (ht ) being queried in (2), only for
a running average of these iterates (Gorbunov, Danilova,
and Gasnikov 2020; Nazin et al. 2019). While there exist general-purpose “anytime” online-to-batch conversions
to ensure that the points being queried have guarantees
(Cutkosky 2019), even the most refined conversions either
require bounded gradients or are only in expectation (Joulani
et al. 2020), meaning that under potentially heavy-tailed gradients, a direct anytime conversion based on existing results
fails to achieve the desired guarantees.
In this paper, in order to address the issues described
above, we introduce a modified mechanism for making the
“anytime” conversion (Algorithm 1), which is both easy
to implement and robust to the underlying data distribution. More concretely, assuming only that R is convex and
smooth, and that raw gradients have finite variance, we obtain martingale concentration guarantees for truncated gradients queried at a moving average (Lemma 2), which lets us
reduce the problem of obtaining error bounds to that of regret control (section ), substantially broadening the domain
to which the anytime conversion of Cutkosky (2019) can be

Abstract
Under data distributions which may be heavy-tailed, many
stochastic gradient-based learning algorithms are driven by
feedback queried at points with almost no performance guarantees on their own. Here we explore a modified “anytime
online-to-batch” mechanism which for smooth objectives
admits high-probability error bounds while requiring only
lower-order moment bounds on the stochastic gradients. Using this conversion, we can derive a wide variety of “anytime
robust” procedures, for which the task of performance analysis can be effectively reduced to regret control, meaning that
existing regret bounds (for the bounded gradient case) can
be robustified and leveraged in a straightforward manner. As
a direct takeaway, we obtain an easily implemented stochastic gradient-based algorithm for which all queried points formally enjoy sub-Gaussian error bounds, and in practice show
noteworthy gains on real-world data applications.

Introduction
The ultimate goal of many learning tasks can be formulated
as a minimization problem:
min R(h), s.t. h ∈ H.
(1)
h

What characterizes this as a learning problem is that R
(henceforth called the true objective) is unknown to the
learner, who must choose from the hypothesis class H a final
candidate based only on incomplete and noisy (stochastic)
feedback related to R (Haussler 1992; Vapnik 1999). One of
the most ubiquitous and well-studied feedback mechanisms
is the stochastic gradient oracle (Hazan 2016; Nemirovsky
and Yudin 1983; Shalev-Shwartz 2012), in which the learner
generates a sequence of candidates (ht ) based on a sequence
of random sub-gradients (Gt ), which are unbiased in the following sense:


E Gt | G[t−1] ∈ ∂ R(ht ), for all t ≥ 1.
(2)
Here ∂ R(h) denotes the sub-differential of R evaluated at
h, and we denote sub-sequences by G[t] ..= (G1 , . . . , Gt ).1
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
More strictly speaking, for each t, this inclusion holds almost
surely over the random draw of G[t] , and the conditional expectation is that of Gt conditioned on the sigma-algebra generated by
G[t−1] . See Ash and Doléans-Dade (2000, Ch. 5–6) for additional
background on probabilistic foundations.

6918

