The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Mutual Nearest Neighbor Contrast and Hybrid Prototype Self-Training for
Universal Domain Adaptation
Liang Chen1 , Qianjin Du2 , Yihang Lou2 * , Jianzhong He2 , Tao Bai2 , Minghua Deng1†
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Intelligent Vision Dept, Huawei Technologies
{clandzyy, dengmh}@pku.edu.cn, {duqianjin, louyihang1, jianzhong.he, baitao13}@huawei.com

Abstract

generalization performance. Domain adaptation (DA) aims
to exploit the learned knowledge that is transferred from
source domain to target domain by eliminating domain bias
(Saenko et al. 2010). Closed-set domain adaptation (CDA)
assumes that the label spaces of source and target domain are
consistent, in order to facilitate learning a domain-invariant
representation (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015). As the restriction of label consistency is too harsh, researchers have begun
to allow the existence of category shift to study partial domain adaptation (PDA) (Cao et al. 2018), open-set domain
adaptation (ODA) (Saito et al. 2018) and open-partial domain adaptation (OPDA) (Fu et al. 2020). As shown in Figure 1, these three settings correspond to larger source label
space, larger target label space and the partial overlapping
between the two label spaces, respectively. The latter two
are more challenging, because we need to align the known
common categories between the two domains as well as discover the unknown private categories in the target domain.
Whether it is CDA, PDA, ODA or OPDA, we need to
know the categorical relationship between source and target domain in advance, but this is not an easy task to satisfy
in real cases. For more general situations, universal domain
adaptation (UniDA), which imposes no prior knowledge on
the target label space, was proposed (You et al. 2019). In
the UniDA setting, it is extremely troublesome to align the
common categories while separating the respective private
categories. Excessive reliance on the supervision information of source domain would result in losing the ability to
discriminate the private categories in target domain. Some
previous works like UAN (You et al. 2019) and CMU (Fu
et al. 2020) design sample-level transferability measure to
distinguish common and private categories. They determine
the category labels of target samples by means of a validated threshold. However, it is not practical to manually set a
threshold to reject the target private categories. Other related
works like DANCE (Saito et al. 2020) and DCC (Li et al.
2021) utilize the global clustering structure of target domain
to learn a discriminative target-oriented representation. But
focusing on clustering the target domain would weaken the
constraint of common categories in the source domain, potentially leading to category misalignment.
To date, few feature alignment methods are specifically
tailored to the UniDA setting (Saito et al. 2020). However,
without domain invariant representation, adapting to the

Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) aims to transfer
knowledge learned from a labeled source domain to an
unlabeled target domain under domain shift and category
shift. Without prior category overlap information, it is challenging to simultaneously align the common categories between two domains and separate their respective private categories. Additionally, previous studies utilize the source classifier’s prediction to obtain various known labels and one
generic “unknown” label of target samples. However, overreliance on learned classifier knowledge is inevitably biased
to source data, ignoring the intrinsic structure of target domain. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel two-stage
UniDA framework called MATHS based on the principle
of Mutual neArest neighbor conTrast and Hybrid prototype
diScrimination. In the first stage, we design an efficient mutual nearest neighbor contrastive learning scheme to achieve
feature alignment, which exploits the instance-level affinity
relationship to uncover the intrinsic structure of two domains.
We introduce a bimodality hypothesis for the maximum discriminative probability distribution to detect the possible target private samples, and present a data-based statistical approach to separate the common and private categories. In
the second stage, to obtain more reliable label predictions,
we propose an incremental pseudo-classifier for target data
only, which is driven by the hybrid representative prototypes.
A confidence-guided prototype contrastive loss is designed
to optimize the category allocation uncertainty via a selftraining mechanism. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks demonstrate that MATHS outperforms previous stateof-the-arts on most UniDA settings.

Introduction
In the past few years, deep learning has achieved impressive progress in image classification tasks. The impressive
efficacy of deep learning algorithms highly relies on abundant labeled training data. However, collecting abundant labeled datasets requires massive annotation resources. A natural idea is to adapt the model well-trained on a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Unfortunately,
because of the data distribution shift between different domains, the resultant model often fails to obtain acceptable
* This work is completed in Huawei Technologies.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6248

