The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TiGAN: Text-Based Interactive Image Generation and Manipulation
Yufan Zhou1 * , Ruiyi Zhang2† , Jiuxiang Gu2 , Chris Tensmeyer2 , Tong Yu2 ,
Changyou Chen1 , Jinhui Xu1 , Tong Sun2
1
State University of New York at Buffalo 2 Adobe Research
{yufanzho, changyou, jinhui}@buffalo.edu {ruizhang, jigu, tensmeye, tyu,tsun}@adobe.com

Abstract

real-use cases, as a user may want to continually refine an
image until satisfactory. While such models could be naively
applied recursively, at each round, the model would be oblivious to previously given feedback leading to high likelihood
that the model interferes with previous edits.
There also exist some works that sequentially generate images following different instructions (El-Nouby et al.
2019; Fu et al. 2020). However, these methods are not fully
interactive and less practical. For example, models in (ElNouby et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2020) are trained on predefined sequences of natural language instructions, while the
instructions are independent of generated images and follows a predefined order. However, when a real user interacts with the model, the natural-language feedback is unpredictable and depends on generated image in each round.
Thus, the use of predefined sequences is impractical for realworld interactive applications.
In this work, we focus on a new problem of interactive
image generation, which generalizes text-to-image generation and text-guided image manipulation to the multiple
round setting. It is a natural extension to existing single
round methods, and our goal is to generate desired images
with fewer interactions. Consequently, we address these two
critical challenges: (i) how to learn a better text-to-image
mapping; (ii) how to avoid undesirable image manipulations
throughout the interaction session. A better text-to-image
mapping would improve overall image quality and improve
how well the image agrees with the text. An undesirable
image manipulation would occur if the model accidentally
changes an aspect of the image that the user already specified. For instance, assume the user requests the model to
“generate a man’s face” and then issues the command “make
the hair long”. We are expecting two generated images: an
image of a man and an image of a man with long hair for this
two-round example. Receiving an image of a man and an image of a woman with long hair is a failure case which also
satisfies the user’s requirement at every round. Since user
has requested the image to be of a man in the first round, the
model should not change that aspect of the image in later
manipulations unless the user explicitly says otherwise.
To handle the aforementioned challenges, we propose
Text-based Interactive image generation and manipulation
(TiGAN). Different from existing works that focus on complicated architecture designs, we tackle the problem by di-

Using natural-language feedback to guide image generation
and manipulation can greatly lower the required efforts and
skills. This topic has received increased attention in recent
years through refinement of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs); however, most existing works are limited to singleround interaction, which is not reflective of real world interactive image editing workflows. Furthermore, previous works
dealing with multi-round scenarios are limited to predefined
feedback sequences, which is also impractical. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework for Text-based interactive image generation and manipulation (TiGAN) that responds to
users’ natural-language feedback. TiGAN utilizes the powerful pre-trained CLIP model to understand users’ naturallanguage feedback and exploits contrastive learning for a better text-to-image mapping. To maintain the image consistency
during interactions, TiGAN generates intermediate feature
vectors aligned with the feedback and selectively feeds these
vectors to our proposed generative model. Empirical results
on several datasets show that TiGAN improves both interaction efficiency and image quality while better avoids undesirable image manipulation during interactions.

Introduction
Text-to-image generation and text-guided image manipulation are important research topics, which have demonstrated
great application potentials due to the flexibility and usability of natural language. Compared to traditional image editing software that require users to learn complex tools, language driven methods can be more intuitive for novice users.
One main challenge of text-to-image generation/manipulation is that images are 2D arrays of pixels, while natural
language expressions are sequences of words with no clear
mapping between them. While existing works (Xu et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2021a; Xia et al. 2021; Patashnik et al.
2021) have proposed useful new models and loss functions,
they share the limitation that they focus on single-round
tasks, i.e., these methods generate or manipulate an image
only in the context of a single natural language instruction.
Such a restriction limits the applicability of the models for
* Work done during an internship at Adobe.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3580

