The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TLogic: Temporal Logical Rules for Explainable Link Forecasting
on Temporal Knowledge Graphs
Yushan Liu1,2 , Yunpu Ma1,2 , Marcel Hildebrandt1 , Mitchell Joblin1 , Volker Tresp1,2
1

2

Siemens AG, Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 81739 Munich, Germany
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1, 80539 Munich, Germany
{yushan.liu, yunpu.ma, marcel.hildebrandt, mitchell.joblin, volker.tresp}@siemens.com

Abstract
Conventional static knowledge graphs model entities in relational data as nodes, connected by edges of specific relation
types. However, information and knowledge evolve continuously, and temporal dynamics emerge, which are expected
to influence future situations. In temporal knowledge graphs,
time information is integrated into the graph by equipping
each edge with a timestamp or a time range. Embeddingbased methods have been introduced for link prediction on
temporal knowledge graphs, but they mostly lack explainability and comprehensible reasoning chains. Particularly, they
are usually not designed to deal with link forecasting – event
prediction involving future timestamps. We address the task
of link forecasting on temporal knowledge graphs and introduce TLogic, an explainable framework that is based on
temporal logical rules extracted via temporal random walks.
We compare TLogic with state-of-the-art baselines on three
benchmark datasets and show better overall performance
while our method also provides explanations that preserve
time consistency. Furthermore, in contrast to most state-ofthe-art embedding-based methods, TLogic works well in the
inductive setting where already learned rules are transferred
to related datasets with a common vocabulary.

Figure 1: A subgraph from the dataset ICEWS14 with the
entities Angela Merkel, Barack Obama, France, and China.
The timestamps are displayed in the format yy/mm/dd. The
dotted blue line represents the correct answer to the query
(Angela Merkel, consult, ?, 2014/08/09). Previous interactions between Angela Merkel and Barack Obama can be interpreted as an explanation for the prediction.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) structure factual information in
the form of triples (es , r, eo ), where es and eo correspond
to entities in the real world and r to a binary relation, e. g.,
(Anna, born in, Paris). This knowledge representation leads
to an interpretation as a directed multigraph, where entities
are identified with nodes and relations with edge types. Each
edge (es , r, eo ) in the KG encodes an observed fact, where
the source node es corresponds to the subject entity, the target node eo to the object entity, and the edge type r to the
predicate of the factual statement.
Some real-world information also includes a temporal dimension, e. g., the event (Anna, born in, Paris) happened
on a specific date. To model the large amount of available
event data that induce complex interactions between entities over time, temporal knowledge graphs (tKGs) have been
introduced. Temporal KGs extend the triples to quadruples
(es , r, eo , t) to integrate a timestamp or time range t, where t

indicates the time validity of the static event (es , r, eo ), e. g.,
(Angela Merkel, visit, China, 2014/07/04). Figure 1 visualizes a subgraph from the dataset ICEWS14 as an example of
a tKG. In this work, we focus on tKGs where each edge is
equipped with a single timestamp.
One of the common tasks on KGs is link prediction,
which finds application in areas such as recommender systems (Hildebrandt et al. 2019), knowledge base completion (Nguyen et al. 2018a), and drug repurposing (Liu et al.
2021). Taking the additional temporal dimension into account, it is of special interest to forecast events for future
timestamps based on past information. Notable real-world
applications that rely on accurate event forecasting are, e. g.,
clinical decision support, supply chain management, and extreme events modeling. In this work, we address link forecasting on tKGs, where we consider queries (es , r, ?, t) for
a timestamp t that has not been seen during training.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4120

