The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DPNAS: Neural Architecture Search for Deep Learning with Differential Privacy
Anda Cheng1,2 , Jiaxing Wang3 , Xi Sheryl Zhang1,4 , Qiang Chen1 , Peisong Wang1 , Jian Cheng1,2,4 *
1

2

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 JD.com, 4 AIRIA,
chenganda2017@ia.ac.cn, {wjiaxing94, sheryl.zhangxi}@gmail.com,
{qiang.chen, peisong.wang,jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

However, training DNNs with strong DP guarantees inevitably degrades model utility (Dwork and Roth 2014). To
improve the utility for meaningful DP guarantees, prior works
have proposed a wealth of strategies, e.g., gradient dimension
reduction (Yu et al. 2021; Zhou, Wu, and Banerjee 2021),
adaptive clipping (Thakkar, Andrew, and McMahan 2019;
Pichapati et al. 2019), adaptive budget allocation (Lee and
Kifer 2018), transfer learning with non-sensitive data (Tramèr
and Boneh 2021; Wang and Zhou 2020), and so forth. Whilst
all these methods focus on improving training algorithms, the
impact of model architectures on the utility of DPDL is so
far unexplored. Formally, a learning algorithm M that trains
models from the output set O = Range(M) is (, δ)-DP,
if Pr[M(D) ∈ O] ≤ e Pr[M(D0 ) ∈ O] + δ holds for all
training sets D and D0 that differ by exactly one record. For
DPSGD, its output at each step is a high-dimension gradient
vector, which is affected by model architecture. As a result,
using different model architectures do not change the privacy of DPSGD but could have effect on the output space O,
thereby affecting the model utility.

Training deep neural networks (DNNs) for meaningful differential privacy (DP) guarantees severely degrades model utility.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the architecture of DNNs
has a significant impact on model utility in the context of private deep learning, whereas its effect is largely unexplored
in previous studies. In light of this missing, we propose the
very first framework that employs neural architecture search
to automatic model design for private deep learning, dubbed
as DPNAS. To integrate private learning with architecture
search, we delicately design a novel search space and propose a DP-aware method for training candidate models. We
empirically certify the effectiveness of the proposed framework. The searched model DPNASNet achieves state-of-theart privacy/utility trade-offs, e.g., for the privacy budget of
(, δ) = (3, 1 × 10−5 ), our model obtains test accuracy of
98.57% on MNIST, 88.09% on FashionMNIST, and 68.33%
on CIFAR-10. Furthermore, by studying the generated architectures, we provide several intriguing findings of designing
private-learning-friendly DNNs, which can shed new light on
model design for deep learning with differential privacy.

To investigate the effect of model architectures, we delve
into the utility comparisons of several existing DNNs by
training them with SGD and DPSGD. The comparisons include hand-crafted models (He et al. 2016; Huang, Liu, and
Weinberger 2017; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016; Papernot
et al. 2021) and automatically searched models (Zoph et al.
2018a; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2019; Tan and Le 2019;
Real et al. 2019; Pham et al. 2018). Without loss of generality,
three observations can be summarized from Figure 1. Firstly,
for DPDL, the models designed without considering private
training, e.g. triangle cores, perform much poorer than the
model specially designed, e.g. diamond core. Secondly, there
is no clear positive correlation between the performance of a
model trained with and without DP. Lastly, the model utility
obtained with DPSGD varies greatly even though the model
size are comparable, which appears to be a different trend
comparing to the model performance in conventional deep
learning. At a high level, the above observations suggest that
(1) Model architectures can significantly affect the utility of
DPDL; (2) Instead of directly using DNNs built for conventional deep learning, it is necessary to redesign models for
DPDL to improve the utility. Whilst model architecture is
important for DPDL, there is little experience or common
knowledge to draw on to design DP-friendly models.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved massive successes in a variety of tasks, including image understanding,
natural language processing, etc (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Broadly,
on the other hand, DNNs may compromise sensitive information carried in the training data (Shokri et al. 2017; Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Zhu, Liu, and Han 2019),
thereby raising privacy issues. To counter this, learning algorithms that provide principled privacy guarantees in the line
of differential privacy (DP) (Dwork and Roth 2014; Kearns
and Roth 2020; Vadhan 2017) have been developed. For
instance, differentially private stochastic gradient descent
(DPSGD) (Abadi et al. 2016), a generally applicable modification of SGD, is widely adopted in differentially private
deep learning (DPDL) applications, ranging from medical
image recognition (Wu et al. 2019), image generation (Xie
et al. 2018), to federated learning (McMahan et al. 2017), to
name a few.
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6358

