The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Spiking Neural Networks with Improved Inherent Recurrence Dynamics
for Sequential Learning
Wachirawit Ponghiran, Kaushik Roy
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47906
wponghir, kaushik@purdue.edu

Forward
Threshold Its derivative
out function
out
1

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) with leaky integrate and fire
(LIF) neurons, can be operated in an event-driven manner and
have internal states to retain information over time, providing
opportunities for energy-efficient neuromorphic computing,
especially on edge devices. Note, however, many representative works on SNNs do not fully demonstrate the usefulness
of their inherent recurrence (membrane potential retaining information about the past) for sequential learning. Most of the
works train SNNs to recognize static images by artificially
expanded input representation in time through rate coding.
We show that SNNs can be trained for practical sequential
tasks by proposing modifications to a network of LIF neurons that enable internal states to learn long sequences and
make their inherent recurrence resilient to the vanishing gradient problem. We then develop a training scheme to train the
proposed SNNs with improved inherent recurrence dynamics. Our training scheme allows spiking neurons to produce
multi-bit outputs (as opposed to binary spikes) which help
mitigate the mismatch between a derivative of spiking neurons’ activation function and a surrogate derivative used to
overcome spiking neurons’ non-differentiability. Our experimental results indicate that the proposed SNN architecture
on TIMIT and LibriSpeech 100h speech recognition dataset
yields accuracy comparable to that of LSTMs (within 1.10%
and 0.36%, respectively), but with 2× fewer parameters than
LSTMs. The sparse SNN outputs also lead to 10.13× and
11.14× savings in multiplication operations compared to
GRUs, which are generally considered as a lightweight alternative to LSTMs, on TIMIT and LibriSpeech 100h datasets,
respectively.

1

0

in
th

0

in
th

Backward
Surrogate
Its derivative
out function out
1
0

in
th

0

in
th

Figure 1: Technique to overcome non-differentiability of the
spiking neurons with a straight-through estimator. The activation function of the spiking neuron with an ill-defined
derivative (left) is replaced with a surrogate function (right)
during backward pass. The substitution enables the use of
backpropagation to train SNNs; however, it leads to a discrepancy between actual and surrogate gradients. The gradient mismatch results in noisy gradient updates and consequently degrades learning performance. The shaded area
highlights the difference between the activation function of
the spiking neuron and its surrogate function. The role of
threshold on generating outputs is discussed in Section 2.

mobile/edge devices are typically limited by power/energy
constraints, exploiting common techniques to improve efficiency such as batch computation may not always be possible. SNNs provide an opportunity to process inputs sequentially at low-power consumption by computing in an eventdriven manner. In addition, SNNs also have internal states
(membrane potentials) to retain information over time. Such
inherent recurrence in SNNs is suitable for sequential learning, but its usefulness still has not been well demonstrated
on suitable applications.
Many prior works on training SNNs for energy-efficient
computing focus on recognition problems from static images, where the inputs are expanded in time through rate
coding (Diehl et al. 2015; Rueckauer et al. 2017; Sengupta
et al. 2019). Each pixel is mapped to a binary sequence
where the occurrence of ones in the sequence is proportional
to the pixel intensity. Even though the rate-coded inputs are
sequential, such synthetic tasks neither signify the importance of learning “time” with SNN’s inherent recurrence, nor
represent practical sequential learning problems. Recently,
Cramer et al. (2020) has successfully trained a network of
leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) spiking neurons with backpropagation through time (BPTT) for a sequential recog-

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have been considered as
a promising solution for low-power neuromorphic computing. Inspired by the biological neural networks, neurons
in the SNNs communicate asynchronously with each other
through binary values that aim to represent the actual neuron spiking activity. On event-driven hardware, the asynchronous binary communication of the neurons leads to potential power savings by requiring computation units to be
activated only when the spikes occur. This makes SNNs appealing for applications on edge devices. As operations on
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8001

