The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Modify Self-Attention via Skeleton Decomposition for
Effective Point Cloud Transformer
* Jiayi Han1 , * Longbin Zeng1 , Liang Du1,2 , Xiaoqing Ye3 , Weiyang Ding1† , Jianfeng Feng1† ,
1

Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, Key Laboratory of
Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence (Fudan University), Ministry of Education, China, MOE
Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, Zhangjiang Fudan International Innovation Center.
2
Interactive Entertainment Group, Tencent Inc., China.
3
Baidu Inc., China.
dingwy@fudan.edu.cn, jffeng@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract

ing approaches, SA has a global receptive field, which exceeds the scope of previous attention networks.
Transformers are particularly appropriate for point-cloud
processing because SA is a set operator which does not
assume any structural information over inputs. However,
deploying transformerarchitecture is expensive, since the
SA requires quadratic computational complexity and GPU
memory with respect to sequence length (Wang et al.
2020b). For example, for the commonly used segmentation dataset ShapeNet (Yi et al. 2016), a common setting
is sampling 2048 points and setting batch-size to 32. Simply
storage of the self-attention and its corresponding gradient
generated in a single layer take 1GB GPU memory, which
makes the computation of the Transformer infeasible.

Although considerable progress has been achieved regarding
the transformers in recent years, the large number of parameters, quadratic computational complexity, and memory cost
conditioned on long sequences make the transformers hard to
train and implement, especially in edge computing configurations. In this case, a dizzying number of works have sought
to make improvements around computational and memory
efficiency upon the original transformer architecture. Nevertheless, many of them restrict the context in the attention
to seek a trade-off between cost and performance with prior
knowledge of orderly stored data. It is imperative to dig deep
into an efficient feature extractor for point clouds due to their
irregularity and a large number of points. In this paper, we
propose a novel skeleton decomposition-based self-attention
(SD-SA) which has no sequence length limit and exhibits favorable scalability in long-sequence models. Due to the numerical low-rank nature of self-attention, we approximate it
by the skeleton decomposition method while maintaining its
effectiveness. At this point, we have shown that the proposed
method works for the proposed approach on point cloud classification, segmentation, and detection tasks on the ModelNet40, ShapeNet, and KITTI datasets, respectively. Our approach significantly improves the efficiency of the point cloud
transformer and exceeds other efficient transformers on point
cloud tasks in terms of the speed at comparable performance.

Introduction
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), a special network
architecture based on self-attention mechanism, has attracted immense interest since it was originally proposed
as a sequence-to-sequence model (Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014) for machine translation. Transformer-based pretrained models (PTMs) (Qiu et al. 2020) have shown to be
effective in fields such as language understanding, image
processing, and point-cloud perception (Guo et al. 2021).
The core of the transformer, namely, self-attention (SA),
is used to re-describe embedding features with global relevance for each token. Compared with traditional deep learn-

Figure 1: Qualitative and quantitative (inference speed,
memory, and mean accuracy) comparisons of our efficient
transformer-based point cloud segmentation method and
previous cutting-edge methods. With the fastest inference
speed, our method predicts more accurate and crisp results
than other methods, especially in those boundary regions.
Our approach is much faster than the baseline and Linformer
on CPU, which demonstrates our approach suits the edge
computing configurations better.
In point cloud processing, in addition to the nature of
a large number of points, another significant characteristic
is the irregularity of point cloud physical storage. Different from sentences, points are stored in an irregular way,

* These authors contributed equally.
†

indicates corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

808

