The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Attention-Aligned Transformer for Image Captioning
Zhengcong Fei1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
feizhengcong@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

bathroom

a

Recently, attention-based image captioning models, which
are expected to ground correct image regions for proper word
generations, have achieved remarkable performance. However, some researchers have argued “deviated focus” problem
of existing attention mechanisms in determining the effective and influential image features. In this paper, we present
A2 - an attention-aligned Transformer for image captioning,
which guides attention learning in a perturbation-based selfsupervised manner, without any annotation overhead. Specifically, we add mask operation on image regions through a
learnable network to estimate the true function in ultimate
description generation. We hypothesize that the necessary image region features, where small disturbance causes an obvious performance degradation, deserve more attention weight.
Then, we propose four aligned strategies to use this information to refine attention weight distribution. Under such a
pattern, image regions are attended correctly with the output
words. Extensive experiments conducted on the MS COCO
dataset demonstrate that the proposed A2 Transformer consistently outperforms baselines in both automatic metrics and
human evaluation. Trained models and code for reproducing
the experiments are publicly available.

1

with

a

sink
and

toilet

with

bathroom

a

shelf

a

and
toilet

Figure 1: Illustration of the sequence of attended image regions in generating each word for the description before
(blue) and after (red) attention alignment. At each time step,
only the top-1 attended image region is shown. The original
attended image regions are grounded less accurately, demonstrating the deficiency of previous attention mechanisms.

Introduction

The task of generating a concise textual summary of a given
image, known as image captioning, is one of the most challenges that require joint vision and language modeling. Currently, most image captioning algorithms follow an encoderdecoder paradigm in which an RNN-based decoder network
is used to predict words according to the image features extracted by the CNN-based encoder network (Vinyals et al.
2015). In particular, the incorporation of attention mechanisms has greatly advanced the performance of image captioning and can be used to provide insights for the inner
workings (Xu et al. 2015; Anderson et al. 2018; Huang et al.
2019; Li et al. 2019; Cornia et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2020). It
dynamically encodes visual information by weighting more
those regions relevant to the current word generation.
However, it is widely questioned whether highly attended
image regions have a true correlation on the caption generation. On the one hand, Serrano and Smith (2019) find that

erasing the representations accorded high attention weights
do not necessarily lead to a significant performance decrease
sometimes. On the other hand, Liu et al. (2020) state that
most attention-based image captioning models use the hidden state of the current input to attend to the image regions
and attention weights are inconsistent with other feature importance metrics (Selvaraju et al. 2019). It further proves that
attention mechanisms are incapable of precisely identifying
decisive inputs for each prediction (Zhang et al. 2021), also
referred to as “deviated focus”, which would impair the performance of image content description. As show in Figure
1, at the time step to generate the 5th word, original attention mechanisms focus most on the local “shelf” region, as
a result, the incorrect noun “sink” is generated. The unfavorable attended image region also impairs the grounding
performance and ruins the model interpretability (Cornia,
Baraldi, and Cucchiara 2019).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

607

