The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Forecasting Asset Dependencies to Reduce Portfolio Risk
Haoren Zhu,* 1 Shih-Yang Liu,* 1 Pengfei Zhao,†2 Yingying Chen,3 Dik Lun Lee 1
1 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
2 Beijing Normal University-Hong Kong Baptist University United International College,
3 London School of Economics and Political Science,

{hzhual, sliuau, dlee}@cse.ust.hk, ericpfzhao@uic.edu.cn, y.chen233@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
Financial assets exhibit dependence structures, i.e., movements of their prices or returns show various correlations.
Knowledge of assets’ price dependencies can help investors
create a diversified portfolio, which reduces portfolio risk due
to the high volatility of the financial market. Since asset dependency changes with time in complex patterns, asset dependency forecast is an essential problem in finance. In this
paper, we organize pairwise assets dependencies in an Asset
Dependency Matrix (ADM) and formulate the problem of assets dependencies forecast to predict the future ADM given
a sequence of past ADMs. We propose a novel idea viewing a sequence of ADMs as a sequence of images to capture
the spatial and temporal dependencies among the assets. Inspired by video prediction tasks, we develop a novel Asset
Dependency Neural Network (ADNN) to tackle the ADM prediction problem. Experiments show that our proposed framework consistently outperforms the baselines on both future
ADM prediction and portfolio risk reduction tasks.

(a) Assets of same industry are posited together

(b) Assets are randomly posited

Figure 1: Correlation matrix of a number of assets.
Matrix (ADM). For example, if the correlation coefficient
is used to measure the dependency of two assets, ADM is
equivalent to the well-known correlation matrix.
Various statistical methods have been proposed for predicting future ADMs. A simple prediction model uses the
correlation matrix computed from the time window ending at t as the predicted ADM for t′ > t. Later, improvements that consider asset groups, financial indexes, and beta
estimations have been proposed (Elton, Gruber, and Padberg 1977; Baesel 1974; Blume 1975; Vasicek 1973). Unfortunately, existing financial solutions suffer from many restrictive statistical assumptions and limitations on modeling
time-varying dependence structures.
Asset dependencies exhibit both spatial and temporal
properties. Spatial dependency refers to the dependence between two assets at a particular time. It reflects the complex
relationships between a group of assets. For example, hightech stocks are inherently correlated and may respond to an
event in the same way, e.g., increase of interest rates. Temporal Dependency refers to the dependency between two assets
along the timeline. That is, a fluctuation of an asset’s return
due to some events will impact the future price movements
of itself and other assets. A typical financial phenomenon
known as “sector rotation” (Conover et al. 2008) is caused
by the intertwined influences of both types of dependencies.
Figure 1(a) shows an example of spatiotemporal patterns
in ADMs. Ten assets are selected from each of the technology, investment, pharmaceuticals sectors. Assets from

Introduction
In financial market, it is well known that asset returns are
dependent on each other 1 , forming a complex dependence
structure among the assets (Elton and Gruber 1973; Ane and
Kharoubi 2003). For instance, stocks of the same industry
may move up or down together in response to market news,
and the price fluctuation in one industry at a particular time
may result in price fluctuation of its downstream industries
later. The dependency structure of a financial market is very
complex, and the ability to predict it will result in significant
financial advantages. For example, we can reduce portfolio
risk by investing in different classes of assets that are independent or negatively correlated to each other. Asset dependency can be measured in many ways, including the correlation and covariance coefficients between two assets. Given a
group of assets, the pairwise coefficients between the assets
can be represented with a matrix, termed Asset Dependency
* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Financial assets may include stocks, securities, and derivatives, etc. Further, for brevity, we use “asset dependence” to refer
to the dependence between the returns of two assets.

4397

