The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On Testing for Discrimination Using Causal Models
Hana Chockler1, 2 , Joseph Y. Halpern3
1
causaLens
Department of Informatics, King’s College London
3
Computer Science Department, Cornell University
hana.chockler@kcl.ac.uk, halpern@cs.cornell.edu

2

Abstract

The regulator has some variables that she considers sensitive. Intuitively, the bank is not supposed to use these in
making its decision (although some uses may be permitted,
as we shall see). The bank may view its model as proprietary, so wants to keep as many of the details regarding its
model private, while still convincing the regulator that it is
not discriminating.
We take the bank’s algorithm to be a “grey box”, where
some of its features must be disclosed, but the bank can still
keep many of its features proprietary. Specifically, we assume that the bank will need to disclose only which features
are inputs and how they are computed from data obtained
about the applicant, and provide the regulator with black
box access to the system, so she can see the decision made
given certain inputs. The bank will also request the regulator
to have certain input variables be explicitly allowed. Intuitively, allowed variables are inputs that are correlated with
sensitive variables but can be used by the bank’s algorithm
to make decisions. For example, gender may be considered a
sensitive variable, but salary may be an allowed variable, although it is correlated with gender. (Allowed variables have
been called resolving variables; see, e.g., (Kilbertus et al.
2017).) The regulator will have to decide whether to agree
with the bank’s request regarding allowed variables. This is
not an easy decision, and is one that ethicists and society
at large may have to resolve. Nevertheless, we believe that
there are necessary conditions that must be met for a variable
to be allowed. The issues that arise here are essentially those
that determine whether disparate impact has taken place, according to American law (Primus 2003).
Given the sensitive and allowed variables, our notion of
fairness then says, roughly speaking, that the bank’s software is fair (i.e., acceptable to the regulator) provided that
changing the values of the sensitive variables has no impact on the outcome, if all the allowed inputs are kept fixed.
While our definition is very much in the spirit of earlier definitions of fairness that use causal models (in particular, the
notion of counterfactual fairness introduced by Kusner et
al. (2017), path-dependent notions of fairness considered in
(Chiappa 2019; Nabi and Shpitser 2018), and the notion implicitly used by Kilbertus et al. (2017)), it differs in one significant way. Whereas the earlier definitions are all statistical, ours is not: it requires that outcomes are the same, not
that their probabilities are equal. We argue that for our set-

Consider a bank that uses an AI system to decide which loan
applications to approve. We want to ensure that the system is
fair, that is, it does not discriminate against applicants based
on a predefined list of sensitive attributes, such as gender and
ethnicity. We expect there to be a regulator whose job it is
to certify the bank’s system as fair or unfair. We consider issues that the regulator will have to confront when making
such a decision, including the precise definition of fairness,
dealing with proxy variables, and dealing with what we call
allowed variables, that is, variables such as salary on which
the decision is allowed to depend, despite being correlated
with sensitive variables. We show (among other things) that
the problem of deciding fairness as we have defined it is coNP-complete, but then argue that, despite that, in practice the
problem should be manageable.

Introduction
AI systems are playing a larger and larger role in decision
making these days, in applications like deciding who to interview and hire, deciding who gets paroled, and deciding
who gets credit. Moreover, AI systems can often make these
decisions better than people (Kleinberg et al. 2018a). However, as many have noted, this raises the concern that decisions are made based on sensitive attributes, such as race,
gender, or religion.
Given the laws and regulations governing discrimination
(i.e., making decisions based on the values of sensitive variables), we consider what we suspect will be an important
use case in the future. We assume that there is a regulator
that regulates financial institutions, for example, banks, and
in particular the decisions made by the banks on whether to
grant loans to applicants. (For definiteness, we assume that
the system being regulated is a bank’s system for determining who gets a loan. But the points that we make apply without change to all decision-making systems where there are
discrimination concerns.) The bank wants to make this decision based on their (possibly proprietary) causal/machine
learning model. (We do not distinguish causal models from
machine learning models, for reasons that will be come clear
shortly.) The bank comes to the regulator seeking approval.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5548

