The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

End-to-End Probabilistic Label-Specific Feature Learning
for Multi-Label Classification
Jun-Yi Hang1,2 , Min-Ling Zhang1,2 * , Yanghe Feng3 , Xiaocheng Song4
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
4
Department of Beijing Institute of Electronic Engineering, Beijing 100854, China
{hangjy, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn, fengyanghe@nudt.edu.cn, sxchitman@126.com

Abstract
Label-specific features serve as an effective strategy to learn
from multi-label data with tailored features accounting for
the distinct discriminative properties of each class label. Existing prototype-based label-specific feature transformation
approaches work in a three-stage framework, where prototype acquisition, label-specific feature generation and classification model induction are performed independently. Intuitively, this separate framework is suboptimal due to its decoupling nature. In this paper, we make a first attempt towards a unified framework for prototype-based label-specific
feature transformation, where the prototypes and the labelspecific features are directly optimized for classification. To
instantiate it, we propose modelling the prototypes probabilistically by the normalizing flows, which possess adaptive
prototypical complexity to fully capture the underlying properties of each class label and allow for scalable stochastic optimization. Then, a label correlation regularized probabilistic
latent metric space is constructed via jointly learning the prototypes and the metric-based label-specific features for classification. Comprehensive experiments on 14 benchmark data
sets show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
counterparts.

Figure 1: Intuitive illustration for the necessity of multiprototype learning for compact latent metric space construction. For clarity, we consider a learning scenario with two
labels. Label l1 is denoted by shape (circle for positive and
square for negative). Label l2 is presented by color (blue
for positive and orange for negative). (a) In single-prototype
learning case, contradictory forces exist between pairwise
clusters. For example, the clusters and are simultaneously pulled close and pushed away by label l1 and label l2
respectively. (b) In multi-prototype learning case, such contradictory forces are eliminated.

•

•

assumption that the distinct characteristics of each class label can be captured via investigating the underlying properties of the training instances, the seminal work LIFT (Zhang
and Wu 2015) proposes a three-stage framework to perform prototype-based label-specific feature transformation:
firstly, clustering analysis is performed on positive/negative
instances of each class label to obtain its positive/negative
prototypes; then, label-specific features are generated via
querying distances between the original instances and the
prototypes; finally, classifiers are induced with the metricbased label-specific features. Numerous studies have been
conducted to improve this three-stage framework by enhancing the process of prototype acquisition (Zhang, Fang, and
Li 2015; Zhan and Zhang 2017; Zhang and Li 2021) and
label-specific feature generation (Xu et al. 2016; Chen and
Zhang 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2021). However, the
three stages still work independently, which might be suboptimal as it has no opportunity to optimize the prototypes
and the label-specific features directly for classification.
A feasible way to improve this is to jointly learn the prototypes and the metric-based label-specific features in a latent metric space where an instance is close to prototypes

Introduction
Multi-label classification deals with the problem where an
instance can be associated with multiple labels simultaneously (Zhang and Zhou 2014; Liu et al. 2021). As a learning paradigm that handles objects with multiple semantics,
researches on multi-label classification have been widely
driven by real-world applications, such as multimedia annotation (You et al. 2020), text categorization (Tang et al.
2020), and bioinformatics analysis (Chen et al. 2017), etc.
The most straightforward strategy for tackling multi-label
classification is to induce classification models with the
identical representation of an instance. This strategy might
be suboptimal as it fails to account for the distinct characteristics of each class label. To improve this, the strategy of
label-specific features has been proposed to facilitate the discrimination of each class label by tailoring its own features
(Zhang and Wu 2015; Huang et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018;
Jia, Zhu, and Li 2020; Yu and Zhang 2021). With the basic
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6847

