The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Interpretable Generative Adversarial Networks
Chao Li1,3∗† , Kelu Yao1∗ , Jin Wang1∗ , Boyu Diao1 , Yongjun Xu1 , Quanshi Zhang2†
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou 311100, China
{lichao, yaokelu, wangjin20g, diaoboyu2012, xyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Learning a disentangled representation is still a challenge
in the field of the interpretability of generative adversarial
networks (GANs). This paper proposes a generic method to
modify a traditional GAN into an interpretable GAN, which
ensures that filters in an intermediate layer of the generator
encode disentangled localized visual concepts. Each filter in
the layer is supposed to consistently generate image regions corresponding to the same visual concept when generating
different images. The interpretable GAN learns to automatically discover meaningful visual concepts without any annotations of visual concepts. The interpretable GAN enables
people to modify a specific visual concept on generated images by manipulating feature maps of the corresponding filters in the layer. Our method can be broadly applied to different types of GANs. Experiments have demonstrated the
effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1: Compared with the traditional GAN, each filter in
the interpretable GAN consistently represents a meaningful
visual concept when generating different images. Different
filters represent different visual concepts.

and texture of images. However, these works failed to provide clear and symbolic features for visual concepts in the
intermediate layer of the generator.
Therefore, we aim to propose a generic method to modify
a traditional GAN into an interpretable GAN, which ensures
that filters in an intermediate layer of the generator encode
the disentangled and localized visual concepts (e.g. object
parts like eyes, noses and mouths of human faces). Specifically, each filter in the intermediate layer is expected to consistently generate image regions corresponding to the same
visual concept when generating different images. Different
filters in the intermediate layer are expected to generate image regions corresponding to different visual concepts.
Learning the disentangled and localized visual concepts is
of great value in both theory and practice. For example, Shen
et al. (2020) enabled people to manipulate various facial attributes on the generated images through varying the latent
codes. In contrast, this research enables people to modify a
specific visual concept on generated images by manipulating
feature maps of the corresponding filters, such as changing
the appearance of a specific visual concept.
However, it still presents continuous challenges to ensure
the learned visual concepts in the GAN have clear meanings,
i.e. exploring the essence of meaningful visual concepts. To
the best of our knowledge, there is no specific method to
directly guarantee filters in an intermediate layer of the generator to encode meaningful visual concepts. In particular,
we expect filters in the intermediate layer to automatically

Introduction
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
achieved huge success in generating high-resolution and realistic images (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019). In addition, the interpretability
of GANs has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
In this field, learning a disentangled representation is still
a challenge to start-of-the-art algorithms. The disentangled
representation of a GAN means that each component of the
representation only affects a distinct aspect of a generated
image. Previous studies on the disentanglement of GANs
mainly focused on two perspectives. Some studies (Radford,
Metz, and Chintala 2016; Chen et al. 2016) disentangled the
attributes of images, such as the expression and eyeglasses of the generated human face images. Other studies (Zhu
et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2018) disentangled the structure
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Chao Li and Quanshi Zhang are the corresponding authors.
Chao Li is with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and the Zhejiang Laboratory,
Hangzhou, China.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1280

