The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Mind the Gap: Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval
with Hierarchical Knowledge Enhancement
Fuwei Zhang1, 2 , Zhao Zhang3, * , Xiang Ao1, 2, 4 , Dehong Gao5 , Fuzhen Zhuang6, 7 ,
Yi Wei5 , Qing He1, 2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
4
5
Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
6
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
7
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{zhangfuwei20g, zhangzhao2021, aoxiang, heqing}@ict.ac.cn, zhuangfuzhen@buaa.edu.cn,
{dehong.gdh, yi.weiy}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Most existing solutions to tackle the CLIR task are built
upon machine translation (Dwivedi and Chandra 2016) systems (also known as MT systems). One technical route is
to translate either the query or the document to the same
language as the other side (McCarley 1999; Aljlayl and
Frieder 2001; Picchi and Peters 1998; Croft, Turtle, and
Lewis 1991). The other is to translate both the query and
the document to the same intermediate language (Kishida
and Kando 2003), e.g. English. After aligning the language
of the query and documents, monolingual retrieval is performed to accomplish the task. Hence, the performance of
the MT systems and the error accumulations may render
them inefficient in CLIR.
Recent studies strive to model CLIR with deep neural networks that encode both query and document into a shared
space rather than using MT systems (Zhang et al. 2019;
Sasaki et al. 2018; Hui et al. 2018a; Li et al. 2020). Though
these approaches achieve some remarkable successes, the intrinsic differences between different languages still exist due
to the implicit alignment of these methods. Meanwhile, the
query is not very long, leading the lack of information while
matching with candidate documents.
To tackle these issues, we aim to find a “silver bullet” to simultaneously perform explicit alignment between
queries and documents and broaden the information of
queries. The multilingual knowledge graph (KG), e.g. Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014), is our answer. As a representative multilingual KG, Wikidata1 includes more than
94 million entities and 2 thousand kinds of relations, and
most of the entities in Wikidata have multilingual aligned
names and descriptions2 . With such an external source of
knowledge, we can build an explicit bridge between the
source language and target language on the premise of the
given query information. For example, Figure 1 exhibits a
query “新 冠 病 毒” in Chinese (“COVID-19” in English)

Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval (CLIR) aims to
rank the documents written in a language different
from the user’s query. The intrinsic gap between different languages is an essential challenge for CLIR.
In this paper, we introduce the multilingual knowledge
graph (KG) to the CLIR task due to the sufficient information of entities in multiple languages. It is regarded as a “silver bullet” to simultaneously perform
explicit alignment between queries and documents and
also broaden the representations of queries. And we propose a model named CLIR with hierarchical knowledge
enhancement (HIKE) for our task. The proposed model
encodes the textual information in queries, documents
and the KG with multilingual BERT, and incorporates
the KG information in the query-document matching
process with a hierarchical information fusion mechanism. Particularly, HIKE first integrates the entities
and their neighborhood in KG into query representations with a knowledge-level fusion, then combines the
knowledge from both source and target languages to
further mitigate the linguistic gap with a language-level
fusion. Finally, experimental results demonstrate that
HIKE achieves substantial improvements over state-ofthe-art competitors.

Introduction
The escalation of globalization burgeons the great demand
for Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval (CLIR), which has
broad applications such as cross-border e-commerce, crosslingual question answering, and so on (Li et al. 2020;
Rücklé, Swarnkar, and Gurevych 2019; Xu et al. 2021). Informally, given a query in one language, CLIR is a document retrieval task that aims to rank the candidate documents
in another language according to the relevance between the
search query and the documents.
* Corresponding author: Zhao Zhang
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

4345

https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main Page
More than 260 languages are supported now.

