The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Weighted Fairness Notions for Indivisible Items Revisited*
Mithun Chakraborty,1 Erel Segal-Halevi,2 Warut Suksompong3
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Ariel University, Israel
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Abstract

In particular, envy-freeness up to one item (EF1) requires
that if an agent envies another agent, the envy should disappear upon removing one item from the envied agent’s bundle
(Lipton et al. 2004; Budish 2011). Proportionality up to one
item (PROP1) demands that if an agent falls short of the proportionality benchmark, this should be rectified after adding
one item to her bundle (Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017).
The second approach modifies the fairness threshold itself:
instead of 1/n of the total value, the threshold becomes the
maximin share (MMS), which is the maximum value that
an agent can ensure herself by partitioning the items into n
parts and receiving the worst part (Budish 2011). The existence guarantees with respect to these relaxations are quite
well-understood by now—an allocation satisfying EF1 and
PROP1 always exists, and even though the same is not true
for MMS fairness, there is always an allocation that gives
every agent a constant fraction of her MMS (Ghodsi et al.
2018; Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2018; Garg and Taki
2021).
Recently, there have been several attempts to extend these
approximate notions to agents with different entitlements.
However, the resulting notions have been shown to exhibit
a number of unintuitive and perhaps unsatisfactory features.
In the “fairness up to one item” approach, EF1 has been generalized to weighted EF1 (WEF1) (Chakraborty et al. 2020)
and PROP1 to weighted PROP1 (WPROP1) (Aziz, Moulin,
and Sandomirskiy 2020). Yet, even though (weighted) envyfreeness implies (weighted) proportionality and EF1 implies
PROP1, Chakraborty et al. (2020) have shown that, counterintuitively, WEF1 does not imply WPROP1. Moreover,
while it is always possible to satisfy each of the two notions separately, these authors have demonstrated that it may
be impossible to satisfy both simultaneously. In the “sharebased” approach, MMS has been generalized to weighted
MMS (WMMS) (Farhadi et al. 2019). A disadvantage of
WMMS is that computing its value for an agent requires
knowing not only the agent’s own entitlement, but also the
entitlements of all other agents. In addition, the definition
of WMMS is rather difficult to understand and explain (especially when compared to MMS), thereby making it less
likely to be adopted in practice.
In this paper, we expand and deepen our understanding
of weighted fair division for indivisible items by generalizing existing weighted fairness notions, introducing new

We revisit the setting of fairly allocating indivisible items
when agents have different weights representing their entitlements. First, we propose a parameterized family of relaxations for weighted envy-freeness and the same for weighted
proportionality; the parameters indicate whether smallerweight or larger-weight agents should be given a higher priority. We show that each notion in these families can always
be satisfied, but any two cannot necessarily be fulfilled simultaneously. We then introduce an intuitive weighted generalization of maximin share fairness and establish the optimal approximation of it that can be guaranteed. Furthermore,
we characterize the implication relations between the various
weighted fairness notions introduced in this and prior work,
and relate them to the lower and upper quota axioms from
apportionment.

1

Introduction

Research in fair division is quickly moving from the realm
of theory to practical applications, ranging from the division
of various assets between individuals (Goldman and Procaccia 2014) to the distribution of food to charities (Aleksandrov et al. 2015) and medical equipment among communities (Pathak et al. 2021). Two complicating factors in such
applications are that items may be indivisible, and recipients
may have different entitlements. For example, when dividing
food packs or medical supplies among organizations or districts, it is reasonable to give larger shares to recipients that
represent more individuals. This raises the need to define appropriate fairness notions taking these factors into account.
With divisible resources and equal entitlements, two
well-established fairness benchmarks are envy-freeness—no
agent prefers the bundle of another agent, and proportionality—every agent receives at least 1/n of her value for the
set of all resources, where n denotes the number of agents.
When the resources consist of indivisible items, neither of
these benchmarks can always be met, for example if one
item is extremely valuable in the eyes of all agents. This has
motivated various relaxations, which can be broadly classified into two approaches. The first approach allows adding or
removing a single item before applying the fairness notion.
* Full version available at http://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.04166.pdf
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4949

