The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Robust Scene Flow Estimation via the Alignment of
Probability Density Functions
Pan He, Patrick Emami, Sanjay Ranka, Anand Rangarajan
Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida
432 Newell Dr, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
pan.he,pemami@ufl.edu; ranka,anand@cise.ufl.edu

Abstract

training with synthetic data and rich annotations followed
by a further fine-tuning step if necessary, or the use of selfsupervised learning objectives to eliminate any dependence
on labels. Early attempts at self-supervised scene flow estimation assume that the scene flow can be approximated by a
point-wise transformation that moves the source point cloud
to the target one (Wu et al. 2020; Mittal, Okorn, and Held
2020; Kittenplon, Eldar, and Raviv 2021). The alignment of
point clouds is measured by popular similarity metrics such
as the Chamfer Distance (CD) or Earth Mover’s Distance
(EMD). However, for scene flow estimation, these metrics
are limited. CD is sensitive to outliers due to its nearest
neighbor criterion and tends to obtain a degenerate solution
as discussed in Mittal, Okorn, and Held (2020) and EMD is
computationally heavy and its approximations can achieve
poor performance in practice.
This paper presents a principled scene flow estimation objective that addresses both limitations; it is robust to missing correspondences and outliers and is efficient to compute. We accomplish this by proposing to represent discrete point clouds as continuous probability density functions (PDFs) using Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) and
recovering motion by minimizing the divergence between
two GMMs. This is in contrast to previous nearest-neighborbased objectives which assume the existence of hard correspondences between pairs of discrete points. Intuitively, if
point clouds are aligned well to each other, their resulting
mixtures should be statistically similar. We, therefore, can
obtain the approximated scene flow with a decent alignment
between the source and target point clouds. In summary, our
contributions are:

In this paper, we present a new self-supervised scene flow estimation approach for a pair of consecutive point clouds. The
key idea of our approach is to represent discrete point clouds
as continuous probability density functions using Gaussian
mixture models. Scene flow estimation is therefore converted
into the problem of recovering motion from the alignment
of probability density functions, which we achieve using a
closed-form expression of the classic Cauchy-Schwarz divergence. Unlike existing nearest-neighbor-based approaches
that use hard pairwise correspondences, our proposed approach establishes soft and implicit point correspondences
between point clouds and generates more robust and accurate scene flow in the presence of missing correspondences and outliers. Comprehensive experiments show that
our method makes noticeable gains over the Chamfer Distance and the Earth Mover’s Distance in real-world environments and achieves state-of-the-art performance among selfsupervised learning methods on FlyingThings3D and KITTI,
even outperforming some supervised methods with ground
truth annotations.

Introduction
3D scene understanding (Qi et al. 2017a; Ilg et al. 2017; Liu,
Qi, and Guibas 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Choy, Gwak, and
Savarese 2019; He et al. 2021) of a dynamic environment
has drawn increasing attention recently due to its wide applications in virtual reality, robotics, and autonomous driving.
One fundamental task is scene flow estimation that aims at
obtaining a 3D motion field of a dynamic scene (Vedula et al.
1999). Traditional scene flow methods focus on learning representations from stereo or RGB-D images (Basha, Moses,
and Kiryati 2013; Jaimez et al. 2015; Teed and Deng 2021).
Recently, researchers have started to design deep scene flow
estimation networks for 3D point clouds (Gu et al. 2019;
Liu, Qi, and Guibas 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Puy, Boulch, and
Marlet 2020; Mittal, Okorn, and Held 2020; Gojcic et al.
2021; He et al. 2021).
However, major scene flow approaches rely on supervised
learning with massive labeled training data that are expensive and difficult to obtain in real-world environments (Gu
et al. 2019; Liu, Qi, and Guibas 2019; Puy, Boulch, and Marlet 2020). Consequently, researchers have turned to model

• A new perspective on self-supervised scene flow estimation as minimizing the divergence between two GMMs.
The obtained soft correspondence between point cloud
pairs differs from the existing nearest-neighbor-based approaches with the assumption of an explicit hard correspondence.
• A self-supervised objective that leverages the CauchySchwarz divergence for aligning two GMMs. It admits
an efficient closed-form expression and leads to more robust and accurate flow estimation over CD and EMD in
the presence of missing correspondences and outliers on
real-world datasets.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

861

