The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SSAST: Self-Supervised Audio Spectrogram Transformer
Yuan Gong, Cheng-I Jeff Lai, Yu-An Chung, James Glass
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA 02139
{yuangong, clai24, andyyuan, glass}@mit.edu

Abstract

inductive bias such as spatial locality or translation equivariance, and are more data-driven. In the audio and speech
domain, the recently proposed Audio Spectrogram Transformer (AST) (Gong, Chung, and Glass 2021) and the Keyword Transformer (Berg, O’Connor, and Cruz 2021) also
achieve new state-of-the-art performance on audio scene
classification and keyword spotting. Despite the strong performance, a critical issue of such pure self-attention based
models is they tend to require more training data than
CNNs (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). For example, the ViT outperforms CNNs only when the training data volume is larger
than about 100 million samples. AST also does not perform well when it is trained from scratch, and the success of
AST strongly relies on supervised pretraining. Since labeled
speech and audio data is limited, AST uses cross-modal pretraining with ImageNet data (Deng et al. 2009). However, in
practice, supervised pretraining on ImageNet data is complex (He et al. 2019) and expensive, and also constrains the
vision and audio models to have a similar architecture and
use the same patch size and shape. Further, the validity and
transferability of such cross-modal pretraining for a specific
audio or speech task are unclear.
While annotating audio and speech data is expensive,
we can easily get web-scale unlabeled audio and speech
data from radio or YouTube. This motivates us to explore Self-Supervised AST (SSAST) that leverages unlabeled data to alleviate the data requirement problem. In
this paper, we present a novel joint discriminative and
generative Masked Spectrogram Patch Modeling (MSPM)
based self-supervised learning (SSL) framework that can
significantly improve AST performance with limited labeled data. Previous self-supervised learning methods such
as wav2vec (Schneider et al. 2019) or autoregressive predictive coding (APC) (Chung et al. 2019) use an objective that
predicts future or masked temporal spectrogram frames, thus
potentially learning only the temporal structure of the spectrogram. In contrast, the objective of MSPM is to predict
a specific frequency band in a specific time range (i.e., a
“spectrogram patch”) given the neighboring band and time
information, which allows the model to learn both the temporal and frequency structure. The spectrogram patch can
be an arbitrary shape and size, e.g., it can be a conventional
time frame or a square patch.
In addition, most previous SSL research considers either

Recently, neural networks based purely on self-attention,
such as the Vision Transformer (ViT), have been shown to
outperform deep learning models constructed with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on various vision tasks, thus
extending the success of Transformers, which were originally
developed for language processing, to the vision domain. A
recent study showed that a similar methodology can also be
applied to the audio domain. Specifically, the Audio Spectrogram Transformer (AST) achieves state-of-the-art results
on various audio classification benchmarks. However, pure
Transformer models tend to require more training data compared to CNNs, and the success of the AST relies on supervised pretraining that requires a large amount of labeled data
and a complex training pipeline, thus limiting the practical
usage of AST. This paper focuses on audio and speech classification, and aims to reduce the need for large amounts of labeled data for the AST by leveraging self-supervised learning
using unlabeled data. Specifically, we propose to pretrain the
AST model with joint discriminative and generative masked
spectrogram patch modeling (MSPM) using unlabeled audio from AudioSet and Librispeech. We evaluate our pretrained models on both audio and speech classification tasks
including audio event classification, keyword spotting, emotion recognition, and speaker identification. The proposed
self-supervised framework significantly boosts AST performance on all tasks, with an average improvement of 60.9%,
leading to similar or even better results than a supervised
pretrained AST. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first
patch-based self-supervised learning framework in the audio
and speech domain, and also the first self-supervised learning
framework for AST.

1

Introduction

Pure self-attention based deep learning architectures, such as
the Vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021) and its variants (e.g., DeiT (Touvron et al. 2020), T2T-ViT (Yuan et al.
2021)) have been shown to outperform CNN models (LeCun
and Bengio 1995) of similar size on various vision tasks.
Such models differ from CNN models or CNN-attention
hybrid models in that they do not contain non-degenerated
convolutions (Chen, Xie, and He 2021) and thus have less
* Code and models at https://github.com/YuanGongND/ssast

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10699

