The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Probing Word Syntactic Representations in the Brain
by a Feature Elimination Method
Xiaohan Zhang1,2 , Shaonan Wang1,2 , Nan Lin3,4 , Jiajun Zhang1,2 , Chengqing Zong1,2,5
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioural Sciences, Institute of Psychology
4
Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{xiaohan.zhang, shaonan.wang, jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; linn@psych.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Due to the complexity of extracting and representing syntactic features, there are still hot debates on whether and
how syntax is represented in the brain (Pylkkänen 2019).
Previous work mainly studied the overall syntactic processing demands of sentences (Hagoort and Indefrey 2014) and
the specific syntactic structures of sentences, such as relative clauses (Chen et al. 2006). These studies showed that
the processing of syntactic features is associated with brain
regions located within the inferior frontal cortex, the lateral
temporal cortex, and the inferior parietal cortex. However, it
remains unclear how fine-grained syntactic features are represented and whether the neural correlates of different syntactic features overlap or dissociate from each other.
The main difficulty of studying the above problem is to
separate a specific syntactic feature from the others. Different from the mainstream neuroimaging studies that employ
manually designed disassociate-stimuli, this paper proposes
an alternative framework to study the brain representations
of word syntactic features. Specifically, we propose a feature elimination method, called Mean Vector Null space Projection (MVNP), to separate different features. This method
can remove a target feature from word embeddings by projecting them into a subspace in which contains minimum
information of the target feature. Based on the original and
one-feature-removed word embeddings, we explore how the
brain encodes syntactic features by associating these vectors
with brain imaging data. The motivation of removing one
feature from representations is that if a specific feature is
removed from the original word embeddings and if this feature is represented in the brain, the predictability of the brain
areas associated with this feature will be severely damaged.
Our results show that word syntactic features are distributively represented across the temporal, frontal, and parietal
lobe and their brain networks are largely overlapped with the
classic semantic networks. Furthermore, for the first time,
this paper studies the relations of various syntactic features
represented in the brain, suggests a hierarchical organization
of brain areas in syntactic processing, and illustrates a more
detailed division in the classic syntactic network.
To summarize, our main contributions include:

Neuroimaging studies have identified multiple brain regions
that are associated with semantic and syntactic processing
when comprehending language. However, existing methods
cannot explore the neural correlates of fine-grained word syntactic features, such as part-of-speech and dependency relations. This paper proposes an alternative framework to study
how different word syntactic features are represented in the
brain. To separate each syntactic feature, we propose a feature elimination method, called Mean Vector Null space Projection (MVNP). This method can remove a specific feature
from word representations, resulting in one-feature-removed
representations. Then we respectively associate one-featureremoved and the original word vectors with brain imaging
data to explore how the brain represents the removed feature. This paper for the first time studies the cortical representations of multiple fine-grained syntactic features simultaneously and suggests some possible contributions of several
brain regions to the complex division of syntactic processing.
These findings indicate that the brain foundations of syntactic information processing might be broader than those suggested by classical studies.

Introduction
Word semantics and its syntactic features form the whole
picture of word representations and enable the flexibility of
human language. Therefore, investigating how the brain encodes semantic and syntactic features of words is crucial to
studying brain language-comprehension mechanisms.
The mainstream theory of lexical semantics assumes that
words can be represented by sets of features, but it is still an
open question as to what constitutes a primitive word feature. Brain imaging studies have accumulated evidence supporting that word semantic representations are at least partly
“embodied” in the modal neural systems through which concepts are experienced. For example, the word “cat” is composed of primitive features such as furry (vision), fast (motion), mew (sound), and so on (Binder et al. 2016). They
have found that several semantic features are associated with
activation in corresponding sensory-motor regions and convergence regions that integrate multi-modal features (Fernandino et al. 2016).

• We propose a new framework that employs the latest
computational models to study word syntactical representations in the brain.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11721

