The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Class Guided Channel Weighting Network for Fine-Grained Semantic
Segmentation
Xiang Zhang, Wanqing Zhao * , Hangzai Luo, Jinye Peng, Jianping Fan
Northwest University, Xi’an, China
{ZhangXiang2015@stumail., zhaowq@, hzluo@, pjy@, jfan@}nwu.edu.cn

Black Footed
Albatross

Intra-class
inconsistency

Abstract

Black Footed
Albatross

Scarlet Tanager

Inter-class
indistinction

Deep learning has achieved promising performance on semantic segmentation, but few works focus on semantic segmentation at the fine-grained level. Fine-grained semantic
segmentation requires recognizing and distinguishing hundreds of sub-categories. Due to the high similarity of different
sub-categories and large variations in poses, scales, rotations,
and color of the same sub-category in the fine-grained image set, the performance of traditional semantic segmentation
methods will decline sharply. To alleviate these dilemmas, a
new approach, named Class Guided Channel Weighting Network (CGCWNet), is developed in this paper to enable finegrained semantic segmentation. For the large intra-class variations, we propose a Class Guided Weighting (CGW) module, which learns the image-level fine-grained category probabilities by exploiting second-order feature statistics, and use
them as global information to guide semantic segmentation.
For the high similarity between different sub-categories, we
specially build a Channel Relationship Attention (CRA) module to amplify the distinction of features. Furthermore, a Detail Enhanced Guided Filter (DEGF) module is proposed to
refine the boundaries of object masks by using an edge contour cue extracted from the enhanced original image. Experimental results on PASCAL VOC 2012 and six fine-grained
image sets show that our proposed CGCWNet has achieved
state-of-the-art results.

Summer Tanager
Image

SPNet

Ours

Groundtruth

Figure 1: Main challenges of fine-grained semantic segmentation, i.e., intra-class inconsistency and inter-class indistinction. The second column is the SPNet based model. The
third column is the output of our approach. The last column
is the ground truth.

the first and second row of Figure 1). We describe this property as “intra-class inconsistency”. Meanwhile, objects of
different sub-categories from the same super-category usually have quite similar visual appearances, which will cause
the prediction to be confused (see the third and fourth row
of Figure 1). We describe this property as “inter-class indistinction”. Most existing traditional semantic segmentation methods (Yu et al. 2018b; Zhang et al. 2019a; Li et al.
2019; Hou et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Arani et al. 2021)
have obtained promising results. However, in our experiments, we found that the performance of these methods will
decline sharply in fine-grained semantic segmentation. The
main reasons come from the following two aspects: 1) These
methods regard the semantic segmentation as an intensive
recognition problem and usually generate predictions based
on the local receptive field of CNN. Among different subcategories, some parts of objects usually have the same appearance, which will bring difficulties to traditional segmentation methods; 2) Since the goal of fine-grained semantic
segmentation needs to distinguish complex boundaries from
hundreds or thousands of sub-categories, the previous feature representation lacks the ability to distinguish such subtle differences. As shown in Figure 1, traditional segmentation methods like SPNet (Hou et al. 2020) may produce
false predictions when suffering from the two confusions

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in semantic segmentation (Chen et al. 2018b,a; Wang et al. 2020; Arani
et al. 2021), while semantic segmentation at the fine-grained
level (i.e., sub-category level) has received little attention.
Fine-grained semantic segmentation is a fundamental and
challenging problem, whose goal is to recognize and distinguish multiple subordinate categories (e.g., “Boeing 737200” and “Boeing 737-500”) of a super-category (e.g., “Aircraft”). The study of this task can be applied to many practical applications, such as new retail, automatic driving, robot
sensing, and image editing.
In fine-grained semantic segmentation, due to large variations in poses, scales, rotations, and color of the same subcategory, some parts of the prediction will be incorrect (see
* Wanqing Zhao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3344

