The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Type Urban Crime Prediction
Xiangyu Zhao1 , Wenqi Fan2∗ , Hui Liu3 , Jiliang Tang3
1

City University of Hong Kong, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 3 Michigan State University
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, wenqifan03@gmail.com, {liuhui7,tangjili}@msu.edu

Abstract

vandalism or graffiti might cause the increase of more severe crimes like assaults and weapon violence; while relations between different types of crime in London are investigated, where bicycle theft, burglary, robbery and theft
from the person are observed to be closely related in terms
of spatial distribution. The above theories and observations
indicate that different types of crime are intrinsically related
to each other, and exploiting the correlations among crime
types could boost accurate crime prediction.
Recently, driven by the advances in big urban data collection and integration techniques, a great quantity of urban
data has been collected such as crime complaint data, stopand-frisk data and 311 public-service complaint data (Zhao
et al. 2016, 2017; Liu et al. 2017, 2020). Such data contains
rich and useful context information about crime. For example, in the near future, more crimes tend to occur in the areas with many crime complaints; while public-service complaint data reveal citizens’ dissatisfaction with government
service, thus it is associated with crimes (Huang et al. 2018).
In addition, big urban data contains fine-grained information about where and when the data is collected (Guo et al.
2016; Xu et al. 2016, 2018, 2019). Such spatio-temporal
information not only enables us to study the geographical
factors of crimes such as urban configuration, but also allows us to understand the dynamics and evolution of crimes
over time (Leong and Sung 2015). According to environmental criminologies like awareness theory (Brantingham
and Brantingham 1981) and crime pattern theory (Felson
and Clarke 1998), the distribution of urban crimes is highly
influenced by space and time. Thus, the spatio-temporal understandings from big urban data provide unprecedented opportunities for us to construct accurate crime predictions.
In this paper, we jointly explore cross-type and spatiotemporal correlations for crime prediction by leveraging big
urban data. Specifically, we mainly seek answers for two
challenging questions: (1) what correlations can be observed
among different types of crime, and (2) how to mathematically model cross-type and spatio-temporal correlations for
crime prediction. For cross-type correlations, we investigate
temporal and spatial patterns of different types of crimes as
well as their relationships; for spatio-temporal correlations,
we focus our investigation on mathematically modeling (1)
intra-region temporal correlation that suggests how crime
evolves over time in a region, and (2) inter-region spatial cor-

Crime prediction plays an impactful role in enhancing public security and sustainable development of urban. With recent advances in data collection and integration technologies, a large amount of urban data with rich crime-related
information and fine-grained spatio-temporal logs have been
recorded. Such helpful information can boost our understandings of the temporal evolution and spatial factors of urban
crimes and can enhance accurate crime prediction. However,
the vast majority of existing crime prediction algorithms either do not distinguish different types of crime or treat each
crime type separately, which fails to capture the intrinsic
correlations among different types of crime. In this paper,
we perform crime prediction exploiting the cross-type and
spatio-temporal correlations of urban crimes. In particular,
we verify the existence of correlations among different types
of crime from temporal and spatial perspectives, and propose
a coherent framework to mathematically model these correlations for crime prediction. Extensive experiments on realworld datasets validate the effectiveness of our framework.

Introduction
It is well recognized that crime prediction is of great importance for enhancing the public security of urban so
as to improve the life quality of citizens (Couch and
Dennemann 2000). Efforts have been made on constructing crime prediction models to predict either the total
crime amount (Zhao and Tang 2017b) or several specific types of crime such as Burglary (Wang and Liu
2017), Felony Assault (Barrett, Katsiyannis, and Zhang
2006), Grand Larceny (Fisher 1999), Murder (Revitch
and Schlesinger 1978), Rape (Thornhill and Thornhill
1983), Robbery (Roesch and Winterdyk 1986), and Vehicle
Larceny (Henry and Bryan 2000). In other words, most existing crime prediction methods either do not distinguish different types of crime or consider each crime type separately.
According to criminology and recent studies, different
types of crime behave differently but are intrinsically correlated. For instance, social disorganization theory (Sampson and Groves 1989) and broken windows theory (Wilson
and Kelling 1982) suggest that a series of minor crimes like
∗

Wenqi Fan is corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4388

