The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepAuth: A DNN Authentication Framework by Model-Unique and Fragile
Signature Embedding
Yingjie Lao1 * , Weijie Zhao2 , Peng Yang2 , Ping Li2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, USA
2
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
ylao@clemson.edu, {weijiezhao, pengyang01, liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract

To this end, embedding signatures or watermarks is a
promising direction. Watermarking is widely used for IP
protection in the photo and multimedia domains (Hartung
and Kutter 1999; Lu 2004), which can be classified depending on the application requirements. For instance, a conventional digital watermark on a photo can be either “robust”
(survives a wide variety of transformations, e.g., a photo filter and conversion to a different format) or “fragile” (disappears when the photo is processed, e.g., compressing and resizing). The “robust” watermarks are capable of tracing the
source of the content, while the “fragile” watermarks can be
used to verify the integrity of the original content that has
not been tampered with.
Recently, several works have extended watermarking into
DNN models (Adi et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Li
et al. 2019b,a; Szyller et al. 2021; Uchida et al. 2017;
Darvish Rouhani, Chen, and Koushanfar 2019; Le Merrer,
Perez, and Trédan 2020; Zhong et al. 2020; Fan, Ng, and
Chan 2019; Yang, Lao, and Li 2021). Most of these existing works seek to embed a relatively “robust” signature
that can withstand transformation attacks such as fine-tuning
and pruning (Darvish Rouhani, Chen, and Koushanfar 2019;
Chen et al. 2018), for the purpose of tracing the IP ownership. In contrast, this paper exploits the less studied direction
of “fragile” DNN watermarks or signatures, which will behave distinctively in illegitimate or maliciously altered models. The “fragile” characteristic can be leveraged to verify
the identity of the user or ensure the trustworthiness of the
deployed models. To better differentiate from prior DNN
watermarking works, we will use signature to describe such
“fragile” watermarks in the rest of the paper. Consequently,
authentication schemes can be added on top of these signatures to assess the trustworthiness of an unknown model.
In this paper, we propose DeepAuth, a novel DNN framework for authenticating the trustworthiness of DNNs, which
is capable of embedding a unique yet “fragile” signature for
each protected model. We use “protected models” to refer to
models that have been embedded by our signatures. The objective is to produce unique yet diverse predictions for a set
of selected “key samples” across different protected models
while retaining the same predictions for the natural inputs.
After embedding, correct and unique signatures for all the
protected models are stored on a trusted server, which will
later be used for authentication.

Along with the evolution of deep neural networks (DNNs) in
many real-world applications, the complexity of model building has also dramatically increased. It is thus vital to protect
the intellectual property (IP) of the model builder and ensure
the trustworthiness of the deployed models. Meanwhile, adversarial attacks on DNNs (e.g., backdoor and poisoning attacks) that seek to inject malicious behaviors have been investigated recently, demanding a means for verifying the integrity of the deployed model to protect the users. In this paper, we present a novel DNN authentication framework DeepAuth which embeds a unique and fragile signature to each
protected DNN model. Our approach exploits sensitive key
samples that are well crafted from the input space to latent
space and then to logit space for producing signatures. After embedding, each model will respond distinctively to these
key samples, which creates a model-unique signature as a
strong tool for authentication and user identity. The signature
embedding process is also designed to ensure the fragility of
the signature, which can be used to detect malicious modifications such that an illegitimate user or an altered model
should not have the intact signature. Extensive evaluations on
various models over a wide range of datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed DeepAuth.

Introduction
Through the development of powerful algorithms and design
tools, deep neural network (DNN) is becoming the stateof-the-art in various fields. As the amount of available data
is vastly increasing and applications are becoming tremendously sophisticated, the cost of model building has also
drastically increased. Since the process of model building
requires a substantial investment in very powerful computing resources, vast quantities of data collection and annotation, and specialized expertise, it is crucial to provide the
model builders a means for authentication and integrity verification so that malicious modification of a model can be
easily detected. Such techniques can also be leveraged as a
proactive defense against causative attacks, e.g., backdoor
attacks (Chen et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2019;
Doan et al. 2021; Doan, Lao, and Li 2021).
* The work of Yingjie Lao was conducted as a consulting researcher at Baidu Research – 10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue WA USA.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9595

