The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Almost Full EFX Exists for Four Agents*
Ben Berger, Avi Cohen, Michal Feldman, Amos Fiat
Tel Aviv University
benberger1@tauex.tau.ac.il, avicohen2@mail.tau.ac.il, michal.feldman@cs.tau.ac.il, fiat@tau.ac.il

Abstract

up to some item (EF1) — an allocation is EF1 if for every
pair of agents Alice and Bob, there is an item that we can
remove from Alice’s allocation such that Bob will not be
interested in swapping his allocation with what remains of
Alice’s allocation.
EF1 allocations always exist but their fairness guarantees
are questionable. Consider for example a setting where Alice
and Bob have identical valuations over 3 items a, b, c with
respective values 1, 1, 2. Arguably, a fair allocation would
assign a, b to one of the players, and c to the other one, giving each a value 2. However, the allocation that assigns a, c
to Alice and b to Bob is also EF1.
The notion of envy freeness up to any item (EFX) was introduced by (Caragiannis et al. 2016, 2019). An allocation is
EFX if for every pair of agents, Alice and Bob, Bob does not
want to swap with what remains of Alice’s allocation when
any item is discarded. I.e., it suffices to consider removing
the item with minimal marginal value (to Bob) from Alices’s
allocation. Indeed, in the example above, the only EFX allocations are those that allocate a, b to one player and c to the
other player.
A major open problem is “when do EFX allocations exist?”. The current state of our knowledge is somewhat embarrassing. We do not know how to rule out EFX allocations
in any setting, and yet, they are known to exist only in several restricted cases. In particular, Plaut and Roughgarden
(2020) prove that EFX valuations exist for 2 agents with arbitrary valuations, and for any number of agents with identical valuations. Even for the simple case of additive valuations (where the value of a bundle of items is simply the sum
of values of individual goods), EFX is only known to exist
in settings with 3 agents (Chaudhury, Garg, and Mehlhorn
2020), in settings with only one of two types of additive valuations (Mahara 2020), or when the value of every agent to
every item can take one of two permissible values (Amanatidis et al. 2021).
Indeed, Procaccia (2020) recently wrote:

The existence of EFX allocations of goods is a major open
problem in fair division, even for additive valuations. The current state of the art is that no setting where EFX allocations
are impossible is known, and yet, existence results are known
only for very restricted settings, such as: (i) agents with identical valuations, (ii) 2 agents, and (iii) 3 agents with additive
valuations. It is also known that EFX exists if one can leave
n − 1 items unallocated, where n is the number of agents.
We develop new techniques that allow us to push the boundaries of the enigmatic EFX problem beyond these known results, and (arguably) to simplify proofs of earlier results. Our
main result is that every setting with 4 additive agents admits
an EFX allocation that leaves at most a single item unallocated. Beyond our main result, we introduce a new class of
valuations, termed nice cancelable, which includes additive,
unit-demand, budget-additive and multiplicative valuations,
among others. Using our new techniques, we show that both
our results and previous results for additive valuations extend
to nice cancelable valuations.

1

Introduction

The question of justness, fairness and division of resources
and commitments dates back to Aristotle (Chroust 1942).
Distributional justice, the “just” allocation of limited resources, is fundamental in the work of (Rawls 1999). Some
evidence of the great interest in Rawls’ work is that numerous editions of his book have been cited over 100,000 times.
The mathematical study of fair division is due to Hugo
Steinhaus, Bronislaw Knaster and Stefan Banach (Steinhaus
1949) who considered proportional allocations, in which every one of the n agents gets at least a 1/n fraction of her
total value for all the goods.
A stronger notion of fairness is that of an envy free (EF) allocation — introduced by (Gamow and Stern 1958) for cake
cutting, and in the context of general resource allocation by
(Foley 1967). Unfortunately, if goods are indivisible, envy
free allocations need not exist. Consider the trivial case of
one indivisible good — if some agent gets the good, others
will be envious. Lipton et al. (2004) and Budish (2011) consider a relaxed notion of envy freeness, namely envy freeness

In my view, it (EFX existence) is the successor of
envy-free cake cutting as fair division’s biggest problem.
Given that EFX valuations are known to exist in so few
cases, the following question arises: Can one find a good
partial EFX allocation? I.e., an EFX allocation in which

* See (Berger et al. 2021) for the full version of this paper.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4826

