The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hyperverlet: A Symplectic Hypersolver for Hamiltonian Systems
Frederik Baymler Mathiesen1,2 , Bin Yang2 , Jilin Hu2 *
1

Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands
2
Aalborg University, Denmark
frederik@baymler.com, {byang, hujilin}@cs.aau.dk

Non-symplectic solver: Euler

Abstract

Prediction

q

Hamiltonian systems represent an important class of dynamical systems such as pendulums, molecular dynamics, and cosmic systems. The choice of solvers is significant to the accuracy when simulating Hamiltonian systems, where symplectic solvers show great significance. Recent advances in neural network-based hypersolvers, though achieve competitive
results, still lack the symplecity necessary for reliable simulations, especially over long time horizons. To alleviate this,
we introduce Hyperverlet, a new hypersolver composing the
traditional, symplectic velocity Verlet and symplectic neural
network-based solvers. More specifically, we propose a parameterization of symplectic neural networks and prove that
hyperbolic tangent is r-finite expanding the set of allowable
activation functions for symplectic neural networks, improving the accuracy. Extensive experiments on a spring-mass and
a pendulum system justify the design choices and suggest that
Hyperverlet outperforms both traditional solvers and hypersolvers.

p
Pendulum

Prediction

q

q
p

Symplectic solver: Velocity Verlet

m

p
Non-symplectic hypersolver: HyperEuler
Euler

Prediction

 
q
p

Neural net
p

Sympletic hypersolver: Hyperverlet

Prediction

q
Dataset

Velocity
Verlet

SympNet

Figure 1: Comparison architectures and impact on energy
conservation of Euler, velocity Verlet, HyperEuler, and
Symplectic Hyperverlet. (q, p) is position and momentum,
i.e. the state of the system. In the prediction plots on the
right, the blue, solid line is energy of the prediction computed from (q, p), and the dashed, orange line is the ground
truth energy. Symplecticity and deep learning allows hyperverlet to accurately predict the temporal evolution of separable Hamiltonian systems.

Introduction
Systems identification of frictionless dynamical systems
such as pendulums and molecular dynamics through deep
learning has seen a surge in recent years, particularly Hamiltonian Neural Networks (Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski
2019). To simulate the temporal evolution of these systems,
most of methods are agnostic to the numerical solver or rely
on a simple Euler solver. However, as shown in (Chen et al.
2020b) the choice of solver is important to the accuracy.
Recent efforts at improving single-step solvers like Euler
solvers include hypersolvers (Shen, Cheng, and Liang 2020;
Poli et al. 2020), which proposes to use a neural network
to correct the error induced by the time discretization of the
base solver. However, for the class of Hamiltonian systems,
this structure fails at capturing the energy conservation and
symplecticity, both of which are key for reliably predicting
the long-term evolution. Our method, Symplectic Hyperverlet, adopts the perspective of hypersolvers with a base solver
and a neural network corrector for improving the accuracy.
We differ from hypersolvers (Shen, Cheng, and Liang 2020;
Poli et al. 2020) by focusing only on Hamiltonian systems

and show that a symplectic base solver and neural network
is important. To support this goal, we utilize velocity Verlet,
a symplectic solver, as the base solver, and augment it with
a SympNet-based corrector (Jin et al. 2020). In Figure 1, we
compare the architectural differences and the impact on the
energy conservation.
To improve the accuracy of our method, we parameterize
SympNets based on time invariant properties such as mass,
pendulum length, etc. Finally, we improve the accuracy by
employing the hyperbolic tangent activation function in the
SympNet architecture, and formally prove that it satisfies the
conditions under which SympNet is a universal approximation of all symplectic transformations. Table 1 compares the
properties of hyperverlet against existing solvers.

* Corresponding Author: Jilin Hu.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4575

