The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Kernel Graph Neural Network
Mingxuan Ju1,2 , Shifu Hou2 , Yujie Fan2 , Jianan Zhao1,2 , Yanfang Ye1,2 * , Liang Zhao3
1
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106
3
Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322
{mju2, jzhao8, yye7}@nd.edu, {sxh1055,yxf370}@case.edu, liang.zhao@emory.edu
2

Abstract

Günnemann 2019; Veličković et al. 2017). Current stateof-the-art frameworks could be categorized as graph convolutions, where nodes aggregate information from their direct neighbors with fixed guiding kernels, e.g., different versions of adjacency or Laplacian matrices. And information
of high-order neighbors could be captured in an iterative
manner by stacked convolution layers.
Although the results are promising, recent researches have
shown that such a propagation mechanism entails certain
challenges. Firstly, (Chen et al. 2020a; Oono and Suzuki
2019) illustrate that the performance of GNNs could be deteriorated by over-smoothing if excessive layers are stacked.
As proved in the work of (Zhu et al. 2021), graph convolution could be summarized as a case of Laplacian smoothing, in which adjacent nodes become inseparable after multiple layers. (Oono and Suzuki 2019) shows that multiple
non-linearity functions between stacked convolution layers further antagonize this problem. Moreover, these aforementioned propagation layers cause the over-fitting problem
(Wang et al. 2019). In current GNNs, each layer serves as a
parameterized filter where graph signals are first amplified
or diminished and then combined. Adding more layers aims
to capture high-order information beneficial for the downstream classification but it meanwhile introduces the number of trainable parameters, which might cancel out the intended benefits as real-world data is often scarcely labeled
(Zhao et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a). Effective frameworks
such as JK-Nets (Xu et al. 2018b) and DAGNN (Liu, Gao,
and Ji 2020) overcome the over-smoothing issue by a global
readout function between propagation layers, making local
information from early layers directly accessible during the
inference phase. And the over-fitting issue is conquered by a
single learnable matrix, placed before all propagation layers,
to approximate parameters of all layers (Wu et al. 2019).
Another far less researched issue rests in the fixed graph
kernels (e.g., adjacency matrix, Laplacian matrix, or their
variants) that current GNNs model on, which restricts their
generalization to different graphs. (Ma et al. 2020; Zhu
et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2016) prove that the current GNNs
could be explained in a unified framework, where the output node representation minimizes two terms: 1) the distances between adjacent nodes and 2) the similarities between the input and output signals. Some GNNs such as
GCN (Kipf and Welling 2016) mainly focus on the lat-

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated great success in representation learning for graph-structured data. The
layer-wise graph convolution in GNNs is shown to be powerful at capturing graph topology. During this process, GNNs
are usually guided by pre-defined kernels such as Laplacian matrix, adjacency matrix, or their variants. However, the
adoptions of pre-defined kernels may restrain the generalities to different graphs: mismatch between graph and kernel
would entail sub-optimal performance. For example, GNNs
that focus on low-frequency information may not achieve
satisfactory performance when high-frequency information
is significant for the graphs, and vice versa. To solve this
problem, in this paper, we propose a novel framework - i.e.,
namely Adaptive Kernel Graph Neural Network (AKGNN) which learns to adapt to the optimal graph kernel in a unified
manner at the first attempt. In the proposed AKGNN, we first
design a data-driven graph kernel learning mechanism, which
adaptively modulates the balance between all-pass and lowpass filters by modifying the maximal eigenvalue of the graph
Laplacian. Through this process, AKGNN learns the optimal
threshold between high and low frequency signals to relieve
the generality problem. Later, we further reduce the number of parameters by a parameterization trick and enhance
the expressive power by a global readout function. Extensive experiments are conducted on acknowledged benchmark
datasets and promising results demonstrate the outstanding
performance of our proposed AKGNN by comparison with
state-of-the-art GNNs. The source code is publicly available
at: https://github.com/jumxglhf/AKGNN.

Introduction
Graph-structured data have become ubiquitous in the real
world, such as social networks, knowledge graphs, and
molecule structures. Mining and learning expressive node
representations on these graphs can contribute to a variety of realistic challenges and applications. The emphasis
of this work lies in the node representation learning on
graphs, aiming to generate node embeddings that are expressive with respect to downstream tasks such as node classification (Kipf and Welling 2016; Klicpera, Bojchevski, and
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7051

