The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Algorithmic Fairness Verification with Graphical Models*
Bishwamittra Ghosh1 , Debabrota Basu2 , Kuldeep S. Meel1
1

2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, CNRS, Centrale Lille, France

Abstract

decides the eligibility of an individual for health insurance
given their income and fitness (Figure 1). Here, the sensitive
feature ‘age’ (A) follows a Bernoulli distribution, and income
(I) and fitness (F ) follow Gaussian distributions. We generate 1000 samples from these distributions and use them to
train a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier. The decision
boundary of this classifier is 9.37I + 9.75F − 0.34A ≥ 9.4,
where A = 1 denotes the sensitive group ‘age ≥ 40’. This
classifier selects an individual above and below 40 years
of age with probabilities 0.24 and 0.86, respectively. This
illustrates a disparate treatment of individuals of two age
groups by the SVM classifier.

In recent years, machine learning (ML) algorithms have been
deployed in safety-critical and high-stake decision-making,
where the fairness of algorithms is of paramount importance.
Fairness in ML centers on detecting bias towards certain demographic populations induced by an ML classifier and proposes
algorithmic solutions to mitigate the bias with respect to different fairness definitions. To this end, several fairness verifiers
have been proposed that compute the bias in the prediction of
an ML classifier—essentially beyond a finite dataset—given
the probability distribution of input features. In the context
of verifying linear classifiers, existing fairness verifiers are
limited by accuracy due to imprecise modeling of correlations
among features and scalability due to restrictive formulations
of the classifiers as SSAT/SMT formulas or by sampling.
In this paper, we propose an efficient fairness verifier, called
FVGM, that encodes the correlations among features as a
Bayesian network. In contrast to existing verifiers, FVGM proposes a stochastic subset-sum based approach for verifying
linear classifiers. Experimentally, we show that FVGM leads
to an accurate and scalable assessment for more diverse families of fairness-enhancing algorithms, fairness attacks, and
group/causal fairness metrics than the state-of-the-art fairness
verifiers. We also demonstrate that FVGM facilitates the computation of fairness influence functions as a stepping stone to
detect the source of bias induced by subsets of features.

1

age < 40

0.0

0.5
income

1.0 0.0

age

40

0.5
fitness

1.0

Figure 1: Age-dependent distributions of income and fitness
in Example 1.1.
In order to identify and mitigate the bias of ML classifiers,
different fairness definitions and fairness algorithms have
been proposed (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Kusner et al.
2017; Mehrabi et al. 2019). In this paper, we focus on two
families of fairness definitions: group and causal fairness.
Group fairness metrics, such as disparate impact and equalized odds constrain the probability of the positive prediction
of the classifier to be (almost) equal among different sensitive
groups (Dwork et al. 2012; Feldman et al. 2015). On the other
hand, causal fairness metrics assess the difference in positive predictions if every feature in the causal relation remains
identical except the sensitive feature (Nabi and Shpitser 2018;
Zhang and Bareinboim 2018). The early works on fairness
verification focused on measuring fairness metrics of a classifier for a given dataset (Bellamy et al. 2018). Naturally, such
techniques were limited in enhancing confidence of users
for wide deployment. Consequently, recent verifiers seek to
achieve verification beyond finite dataset and in turn focus
on the probability distribution of features (Albarghouthi et al.
2017; Bastani, Zhang, and Solar-Lezama 2019; Ghosh, Basu,
and Meel 2021). More specifically, the input to the verifier is

Introduction

The significant improvement of machine learning (ML) over
the decades has led to a host of applications of ML in
high-stake decision-making such as college admission (Martinez Neda, Zeng, and Gago-Masague 2021), hiring of employees (Ajunwa et al. 2016), and recidivism prediction (Tollenaar and Van der Heijden 2013; Dressel and Farid 2018).
ML algorithms often have an accuracy-centric learning objective, which may cause them to be biased towards certain part
of the dataset belonging to a certain economically or socially
sensitive groups (Landy, Barnes, and Murphy 1978; Zliobaite
2015; Berk 2019). The following example illustrates a plausible case of unfairness induced by ML algorithms.
Example 1.1. Following (Ghosh, Basu, and Meel 2021, Example 1.), let us consider an ML problem where the classifier
* Source code: https://github.com/meelgroup/justicia
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9539

