The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SSAT: A Symmetric Semantic-Aware Transformer Network for Makeup Transfer
and Removal
Zhaoyang Sun1 , Yaxiong Chen1, 2 , Shengwu Xiong1, 3, ∗
1

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070
2
Wuhan University of Technology Chongqing Research Institute, Chongqing, 401122
3
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park of Wuhan University of Technology, Sanya, 572000
zhaoyangsun0304@outlook.com, chenyaxiong@whut.edu.cn, xiongsw@whut.edu.cn
Abstract

Makeup transfer is not only to extract the makeup style of the
reference image, but also to render the makeup style to the
semantic corresponding position of the target image. However, most existing methods focus on the former and ignore
the latter, resulting in a failure to achieve desired results. To
solve the above problems, we propose a unified Symmetric
Semantic-Aware Transformer (SSAT) network, which incorporates semantic correspondence learning to realize makeup
transfer and removal simultaneously. In SSAT, a novel Symmetric Semantic Corresponding Feature Transfer (SSCFT)
module and a weakly supervised semantic loss are proposed
to model and facilitate the establishment of accurate semantic correspondence. In the generation process, the extracted
makeup features are spatially distorted by SSCFT to achieve
semantic alignment with the target image, then the distorted
makeup features are combined with unmodified makeup irrelevant features to produce the final result. Experiments show
that our method obtains more visually accurate makeup transfer results, and user study in comparison with other state-ofthe-art makeup transfer methods reflects the superiority of our
method. Besides, we verify the robustness of the proposed
method in the difference of expression and pose, object occlusion scenes, and extend it to video makeup transfer.

Figure 1: The diagram of our motivation and PSGAN comparison. The spatial mapping of the same color points between the target image and the reference image is the semantic correspondence expected to be established in this paper.

significant progress in extracting makeup style and generating realistic makeup results.
However, little attention has been paid to semantic correspondence, which plays an important role in makeup transfer. Consider the actual makeup process following the tutorial: 1) choose cosmetics of the same color (extract makeup
style); 2) apply this cosmetics to the semantic corresponding position of the face (semantic correspondence), see Figure 1. Ignoring the semantic correspondence would result
in the makeup style being transferred to the wrong position,
such as lipstick leaking lips. At the same time, inaccurate semantic correspondence will lead to the averaging of makeup
colors (Jiang et al. 2020), so that the resulting makeup style
is visually different from the reference makeup. In addition,
the robustness of expression and pose and the robustness of
object occlusion are greatly reduced.
The motivation of this paper is to establish accurate semantic correspondence between the target and the reference
facial images to improve the quality of makeup transfer.
Note that the dense semantic correspondence of the makeup regions is established, not the sparse semantic correspon-

Introduction
Makeup transfer aims to transfer the makeup style of any
reference image to the target image while preserving the identity of the target person. With the booming development
of the cosmetics market, makeup transfer is widely demanded in many popular beautifying applications and has been received extensive attention in the computer vision and graphics. In the early years, traditional approaches (Guo and Sim
2009; Tong et al. 2007; Li, Zhou, and Lin 2015) mostly used
image gradient editing or physical-based modification to realize makeup transfer. Recently, combining generative adversarial network (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and disentangled
representation (Lee et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2018), many
makeup transfer approaches (Li et al. 2018; Chang et al.
2018; Chen et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2020;
Deng et al. 2021; Nguyen, Tran, and Hoai 2021) have made
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2325

