The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TransMEF: A Transformer-Based Multi-Exposure Image Fusion Framework
Using Self-Supervised Multi-Task Learning
Linhao Qu* , Shaolei Liu* , Manning Wang† , Zhijian Song†
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China
Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
{lhqu20, slliu, mnwang, zjsong}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Recently, deep learning-based algorithms have gradually
become mainstream in the MEF field. In these methods,
two source images with different exposures are directly input into a fusion network, and the fused image is obtained
from the output of the network. The fusion networks can
be trained in a common supervised way using ground truth
fusion images (Zhang et al. 2020b; Wang et al. 2018; Li
and Zhang 2018) or in an unsupervised way by encouraging the fused image to retain different aspects of the important information in the source images (Xu et al. 2020a;
Ram Prabhakar, Sai Srikar, and Venkatesh Babu 2017; Xu
et al. 2020b; Zhang et al. 2020a; Ma et al. 2019). However, both supervised and unsupervised MEF methods require a large amount of multi-exposure data for training. Although many researchers (Ram Prabhakar, Sai Srikar, and
Venkatesh Babu 2017; Cai, Gu, and Zhang 2018; Zeng et al.
2014) have collected various multi-exposure datasets, their
quantities are not comparable to large natural image datasets
such as ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) or MS-COCO (Lin
et al. 2014). The absence of large amounts of training data
generally leads to overfitting or tedious parameter optimization. In addition, ground truth is also in high demand for
supervised MEF methods but is not commonly available in
the field (Zhang 2021). Some researchers synthesize ground
truth images (Wang et al. 2018) or use the fusion results from
other methods as ground truth for training (Yin et al. 2020;
Chen and Chuang 2020; Xu, Ma, and Zhang 2020). However, these ground truth images are not real, and using them
leads to inferior performance.
Moreover, all the existing deep learning-based MEF
methods utilize convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for
feature extraction, but it is difficult for CNNs to model longrange dependencies due to their small receptive field, which
is an inherent limitation. In image fusion, the quality of the
fused images is related to the pixels within the receptive field
as well as to the pixel intensity and texture of the entire image. Therefore, modeling both global and local dependencies is required.
To address the above issues, we propose TransMEF, a
transformer-based multi-exposure image fusion framework
that uses self-supervised multi-task learning. The framework
is based on an encoder-decoder network and is trained on a
large natural image dataset using self-supervised image reconstruction to avoid training with multi-exposure images.

In this paper, we propose TransMEF, a transformer-based
multi-exposure image fusion framework that uses selfsupervised multi-task learning. The framework is based on
an encoder-decoder network, which can be trained on large
natural image datasets and does not require ground truth fusion images. We design three self-supervised reconstruction
tasks according to the characteristics of multi-exposure images and conduct these tasks simultaneously using multi-task
learning; through this process, the network can learn the characteristics of multi-exposure images and extract more generalized features. In addition, to compensate for the defect in
establishing long-range dependencies in CNN-based architectures, we design an encoder that combines a CNN module with a transformer module. This combination enables
the network to focus on both local and global information.
We evaluated our method and compared it to 11 competitive traditional and deep learning-based methods on the latest released multi-exposure image fusion benchmark dataset,
and our method achieved the best performance in both subjective and objective evaluations. Code will be available at
https://github.com/miccaiif/TransMEF.

1

Introduction

Due to the low dynamic range (LDR) of common imaging
sensors, a single image often suffers from underexposure
or overexposure and fails to depict the high dynamic range
(HDR) of luminance levels in natural scenes. The multiexposure image fusion (MEF) technique provides an economical and effective solution by fusing LDR images with
different exposures into a single HDR image and thus is
widely used in HDR imaging for mobile devices (Reinhard
et al. 2010; Hasinoff et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2011).
The study of MEF has a long history, and a series of traditional methods have been proposed (Li, Manjunath, and Mitra 1995; Liu and Wang 2015; Lee, Park, and Cho 2018; Ma
and Wang 2015; Ma et al. 2017b,a). However, their performances are limited because weak hand-crafted representations have low generalizability and are not robust to varying
input conditions (Zhang 2021; Zhang et al. 2020b; Xu et al.
2020a).
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2126

