The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

UFPMP-Det: Toward Accurate and Efficient Object Detection on Drone Imagery
Yecheng Huang1, 2 , Jiaxin Chen2 , Di Huang1, 2 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{ychuang, jiaxinchen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel approach to object detection on
drone imagery, namely Multi-Proxy Detection Network with
Unified Foreground Packing (UFPMP-Det). To deal with the
numerous instances of very small scales, different from the
common solution that divides the high-resolution input image
into quite a number of chips with low foreground ratios to perform detection on them each, the Unified Foreground Packing (UFP) module is designed, where the sub-regions given
by a coarse detector are initially merged through clustering to
suppress background and the resulting ones are subsequently
packed into a mosaic for a single inference, thus significantly
reducing overall time cost. Furthermore, to address the more
serious confusion between inter-class similarities and intraclass variations of instances, which deteriorates detection performance but is rarely discussed, the Multi-Proxy Detection
Network (MP-Det) is presented to model object distributions
in a fine-grained manner by employing multiple proxy learning, and the proxies are enforced to be diverse by minimizing a Bag-of-Instance-Words (BoIW) guided optimal transport loss. By such means, UFPMP-Det largely promotes both
the detection accuracy and efficiency. Extensive experiments
are carried out on the widely used VisDrone and UAVDT
datasets, and UFPMP-Det reports new state-of-the-art scores
at a much higher speed, highlighting its advantages. The code
is available at https://github.com/PuAnysh/UFPMP-Det.

(a) Instance scales in MS COCO (left) vs. VisDrone (right)

Awning-tricycle

Person

Pedestrian

Partially Zoomed View from (a)

Tricycle

(b) Semantically similar categories on VisDrone

Figure 1: Challenges in object detection on drone imagery.
ratio of such instances is rather high, as Fig.1 (a) depicts.
Meanwhile, computing resources are usually inadequate in
drones, current time-consuming solutions, like image pyramid, which proves effective in general object detection, are
no longer competent. Instead, a coarse-to-fine pipeline is often followed (Li et al. 2020a; Yang et al. 2019), where a
coarse detector is launched to locate the large-scale instances
and sub-regions that contain densely distributed small ones
and a fine detector is further applied to those regions to find
instances of small sizes. These methods show promising results; however the sub-regions delivered by the coarse detectors are relatively rough, with a large portion of backgrounds
included, incurring inefficient computations. Furthermore,
since they partition the input image into multiple chips, they
have to individually process each sub-region, leading to several times of inferences for final decision. The two drawbacks hence suggest room for efficiency improvement.
Another considerable challenge is that some object categories defined in drone datasets, e.g. VisDrone (Zhu et al.
2018), are semantically close to each other, for instance,

Introduction
Recently, the drone, also known as UAV, has become a popular equipment for its trade-off between mobility and stability in many applications, such as security surveillance, aerial
photography, express delivery, and agricultural production,
where drone image based object detection is the fundamental issue. Although object detection on natural images has
been greatly developed by Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) during the past several years, that on drone imagery
is still limited in terms of both accuracy and efficiency.
One major challenge to detect objects using drone images lies in that there exist a large amount of instances of
very small sizes, and compared with the case in the benchmarks of general object detection, e.g., PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al. 2010) and MS COCO (Lin et al. 2014), the
* indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1026

