The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Propositional Encodings of Acyclicity and Reachability
by Using Vertex Elimination
Masood Feyzbakhsh Rankooh and Jussi Rintanen
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland
jussi.rintanen@aalto.fi, masood.feyzbakhshrankooh@aalto.fi

Abstract

the difficult trade-off between size and propagation strength
in existing encodings of these constraints (Gebser, Janhunen,
and Rintanen 2020) on one hand, and the effort in implementing specialized graph constraint propagators (Gebser,
Janhunen, and Rintanen 2014b), and adapting and embedding them in SAT solvers, on the other.
Our goal is to develop encoding methods for graph constraints such as acyclicity and reachability, that are competitive with specialized ad hoc graph constraint propagators,
and which suffer less from the large size of those traditional
clausal encodings that have good propagation properties. We
particularly address sparse graphs.
Our idea is to use vertex elimination graphs (Rose and
Tarjan 1975) as a structure that preserves reachability and
acyclicity properties of the underlying graph, and also allows succinct encoding of graph constraints into propositional formulas, particularly when a related graph measure named directed elimination width (Hunter and Kreutzer
2007) is low in comparison to number of vertices. The
current state-of-the-art method for satisfying acyclicity and
reachability constraints in the SAT context is GraphSAT
(Gebser, Janhunen, and Rintanen 2014b). While GraphSAT
relies on a specialized algorithm for satisfying graph constraints, our methods explicitly encode the constraints into
propositional formulas, and therefore allow an easy reuse of
the method with any other state-of-the-art SAT solver without additional implementation effort.
We provide theoretical arguments for correctness of our
methods, and also, deliver theoretical evidence of efficiency
of the methods by undertaking a parameterized complexity analysis. Moreover, our empirical results show that by
employing an efficient SAT solver, our methods can outperform GraphSAT and other encoding methods when underlying graphs have a low directed elimination width.

We introduce novel methods for encoding acyclicity and st-reachability constraints for propositional formulas with underlying directed graphs, based on vertex elimination graphs,
which makes them suitable for cases where the underlying
graph has a low directed elimination width. In contrast to
solvers with ad hoc constraint propagators for graph constraints such as GraphSAT, our methods encode these constraints as standard propositional clauses, making them directly applicable with any SAT solver. An empirical study
demonstrates that our methods do often outperform both earlier encodings of these constraints as well as GraphSAT especially when underlying graphs have a low directed elimination width.

Introduction
Many AI approaches incorporate graphs to maintain conceptual relations among their elements. Graphs introduce
structure to AI methods. Once such a structure has been assumed, investigating the existence and exploitation of structural properties is only natural. Reachability and acyclicity
are two of the most important structural properties of graphs.
Graph constraints are important in knowledge representation languages. For example, acyclicity constraints are part
of reductions of Answer Set Programming to SAT (Lin
and Zhao 2004; Gebser, Janhunen, and Rintanen 2014a),
and implicit in fixpoint semantics of inductive definitions
(Denecker and Ternovska 2008). In AI planning, acyclicity is needed for SAT encodings for classical planning that
use partial orders (Rintanen, Heljanko, and Niemelä 2006),
and for non-deterministic and partially observable planning
(Chatterjee, Chmelik, and Davies 2016; Pandey and Rintanen 2018). Moreover, constraint-based methods for structure
learning of Bayesian networks need the acyclicity of the networks with graph constraints (Cussens 2008).
The above-mentioned approaches have motivated the development of better encodings of acyclicity and other graph
constraints in the propositional logic, as well as the study of
specialized propagators for these constraints.
In this work we address the satisfiability of propositional
formulas with underlying directed graphs, under reachability and acyclicity constraints. The motivation for our work is

Preliminaries
In this section we provide formal definitions for propositional formulas with underlying directed graphs, encoding
of graph constraints, and vertex elimination graphs.

Propositional Formulas with Underlying Directed
Graphs
Assume that φ is a propositional formula over the set of
propositional variables X. Let G = (V, E) be a digraph and

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5861

