The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Anisotropic Additive Quantization for Fast Inner Product Search
Jin Zhang1 , Qi Liu1 , Defu Lian1 * , Zheng Liu2 , Le Wu3 , Enhong Chen1
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Hefei University of Technology
{abczj, qiliu67}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
Zheng.Liu@microsoft.com, lewu.ustc@gmail.com
To define the MIPS problem, consider a large set S of
collecting candidate items, where S ⊂ Rd , and a given
query point q ∈ Rd . The goal is to search for x ∈ S which
maximizes (or approximately maximizes) the inner product
hq, xi. Formally, we are interested in efficiently computing

Abstract
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) plays an important
role in many applications ranging from information retrieval,
recommender systems to natural language processing and
machine learning. However, exhaustive MIPS is often expensive and impractical when there are a large number of
candidate items. The state-of-the-art approximated MIPS is
product quantization with a score-aware loss, which weighs
more heavily on items with larger inner product scores. However, it is challenging to extend the score-aware loss for
additive quantization due to parallel-orthogonal decomposition of residual error. Learning additive quantization with respect to this loss is important since additive quantization can
achieve a lower approximation error than product quantization. To this end, we propose a quantization method called
Anisotropic Additive Quantization to combine the scoreaware anisotropic loss and additive quantization. To efficiently update the codebooks in this algorithm, we develop
a new alternating optimization algorithm. The proposed algorithm is extensively evaluated on three real-world datasets.
The experimental results show that it outperforms the stateof-the-art baselines with respect to approximate search accuracy while guaranteeing a similar retrieval efficiency.

x∗ = arg max hq, xi .
x∈S

Exhaustively computing the exact inner product between
query and the set S is often expensive and even impractical when the cardinality of the set is large. Several techniques have been proposed in the literature including hashing (Chen et al. 2019; Neyshabur and Srebro 2015; Shrivastava and Li 2014), graph-based search (Liu et al. 2020; Morozov and Babenko 2018), or quantization (Guo et al. 2020,
2016; Babenko and Lempitsky 2014; Ge et al. 2013) to solve
the approximate MIPS problem efficiently.
The quantization-based techniques have shown strong
performance. Particularly, in (Guo et al. 2020), the authors
proposed a new family of anisotropic loss functions for the
MIPS task called score-aware quantization loss, where is
armed with a weight function to weigh more heavily on
items with larger inner product scores a specific weight
function. Therefore, the anisotropic loss is considered to be
more suitable for the MIPS task so it is applied for learning product quantization. The product quantization with the
anisotropic loss has achieved state-of-the-art MIPS performance. However, it has a lot of room for improvements
since additive quantization has a more strong representation capacity and has been empirically shown to remarkably outperform product quantization in approximation and
search accuracy. However, the codebooks in additive quantization are more difficult to learn, particularly with the
anisotropic loss due to parallel-orthogonal decomposition
of residual error. Therefore, it is worth investigating how to
adapt anisotropic loss to additive quantization.
To this end, we propose Anisotropic Additive Quantization to combine anisotropic loss and additive quantization.
To efficiently learn the codebooks, we develop a new alternating optimization algorithm after analyzing the parallel
and orthogonal errors in detail. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on three real-world datasets. The results
show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-theart baselines with respect to approximate search accuracy
while guaranteeing similar retrieval efficiency.

Introduction
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) has wide applicability in recommender systems, information retrieval, natural language processing and machine learning. For example,
the inner product has been widely used in recommender systems to estimate users’ preference for items (Krichene et al.
2018; Li et al. 2017; Xue et al. 2017; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Cremonesi, Koren, and Turrin 2010), in information retrieval to estimate the relevance between query and
response (Weston, Bengio, and Usunier 2010; Luan et al.
2021) and in natural language process to estimate the likelihood of the next word given the context (Vaswani et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2018). Lately, MIPS has also been applied
for training tasks such as scalable gradient computation in
large output spaces (Yen et al. 2018), efficient sampling for
speeding up softmax computation (Mussmann and Ermon
2016) and sparse updates in end-to-end trainable memory
systems (Pritzel et al. 2017).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4354

