The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cosine Model Watermarking against Ensemble Distillation
Laurent Charette1 * , Lingyang Chu2 * , Yizhou Chen3 , Jian Pei3 , Lanjun Wang4 , Yong Zhang1
1

Huawei Technologies Canada, Burnaby, Canada,
2
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada,
3
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada,
4
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
{laurent.charette, yong.zhang3}@huawei.com, chul9@mcmaster.ca, yca375@sfu.ca, jpei@cs.sfu.ca,
wang.lanjun@outlook.com
Abstract

owner of the teacher model can identify and reclaim ownership of a student model.
Some model watermarking methods have been proposed
to identify student models produced by single model distillation (Szyller et al. 2019; Lukas, Zhang, and Kerschbaum
2019; Jia et al. 2021). However, as we discuss in the Related
Works section, watermarks produced by these methods can
be significantly weakened or even erased by ensemble distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), which uses the
average of outputs queried from multiple different teacher
models to train a replicate model.
Ensemble distillation has been well-demonstrated to be
highly effective at compressing multiple large models into
a small size student model with high performance (Buciluǎ,
Caruana, and Niculescu-Mizil 2006; Ba and Caruana 2014).
On the other hand, the effectiveness of ensemble distillation
also poses a critical threat to the safety of deployed models.
As shown by extensive experimental results in the Experiments section, ensemble distillation not only generates
student models with better prediction performance, but also
significantly reduces the effectiveness of existing model watermarking methods in identifying student models. As a result, accurately identifying student models produced by ensemble distillation is an emergent task with top priority to
protect teacher models from being stolen.
In this paper, we focus on defending against model distillation, and we successfully tackle this task by introducing a
novel model watermarking method named CosWM. To the
best of our knowledge, our method is the first model watermarking method with a theoretical guarantee to accurately
identify student models produced by ensemble distillation.
We make the following contributions.
First, we present a novel method named CosWM that embeds a watermark as a cosine signal within the output of a
teacher model. Since the cosine signal is difficult to erase
by averaging the outputs of multiple models, student models produced by ensemble distillation will still carry a strong
watermark signal.
Second, under reasonable assumptions, we prove that a
student model with a smaller training loss value will carry
a stronger watermark signal. This means a student model
will have to carry a stronger watermark in order to achieve
a better performance. Therefore, a student model intending
to weaken the watermark will not be able to achieve a good

Many model watermarking methods have been developed to
prevent valuable deployed commercial models from being
stealthily stolen by model distillations. However, watermarks
produced by most existing model watermarking methods can
be easily evaded by ensemble distillation, because averaging
the outputs of multiple ensembled models can significantly
reduce or even erase the watermarks. In this paper, we focus on tackling the challenging task of defending against ensemble distillation. We propose a novel watermarking technique named CosWM to achieve outstanding model watermarking performance against ensemble distillation. CosWM
is not only elegant in design, but also comes with desirable
theoretical guarantees. Our extensive experiments on public
data sets demonstrate the excellent performance of CosWM
and its advantages over the state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
High-performance machine learning models are valuable assets of many large companies. These models are typically
deployed as web services where the outputs of models can
be queried using public application programming interfaces
(APIs) (Ribeiro, Grolinger, and Capretz 2015).
A major risk of deploying models through APIs is that the
deployed models are easy to steal (Tramèr et al. 2016). By
querying the outputs of a deployed model through its API,
many model distillation methods (Orekondy, Schiele, and
Fritz 2019; Jagielski et al. 2019; Papernot et al. 2017) can be
used to train a replicate model with comparable performance
as the deployed model. Following the context of model distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), a replicate model
is called a student model; and the deployed model is called
a teacher model.
A model distillation process is often imperceptible because it queries APIs in the same way as a normal
user (Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz 2019). To protect teacher
models from being stolen, one of the most effective ways is
model watermarking (Szyller et al. 2019). The key idea is
to embed a unique watermark in a teacher model, such that
a student model distilled from the teacher model will also
carry the same watermark. By checking the watermark, the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9512

