The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fair and Efficient Allocations of Chores under Bivalued Preferences
Jugal Garg, Aniket Murhekar, John Qin
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
{jugal, aniket2, johnqin2}@illinois.edu

Abstract

Arguably, the most popular notion of fairness is envyfreeness (EF) (Foley 1967; Varian 1974), which requires that
every agent weakly prefers the bundle of items allocated to
her over the bundle of any other agent. When items are divisible, i.e., can be shared among agents, EF allocations are
known to exist. However, in the case of indivisible items,
EF allocations need not exist. For instance, while dividing
one chore between two agents, the agent who is assigned the
chore will envy the other. Since the fair division of indivisible items remains an important problem, several relaxations
of envy-freeness have been defined, first in the context of
goods, and later adapted to chores.
A widely studied relaxation of envy-freeness is envyfreeness up to one item (EF1), defined by (Budish 2011) in
the context of goods. For chores, an allocation is said to be
EF1 if for every agent, the envy disappears after removing
one chore assigned to her. It is known that an EF1 allocation of chores exists and can be efficiently computed (Lipton
et al. 2004; Bhaskar, Sricharan, and Vaish 2020). However,
an EF1 allocation may be highly inefficient. Consider for example two agents A1 and A2 and 2 chores j1 and j2 where
Ai has almost zero cost for ji and high cost for the other
chore. The allocation in which j1 is assigned to A2 and j2
is assigned to A1 is clearly EF1. However both agents incur high cost, which is highly inefficient. The allocation in
which ji is assigned to Ai is more desirable since it is both
fair as well as efficient.
The standard notion of economic efficiency is Pareto optimality (PO). An allocation is said to be PO if no other allocation makes an agent better off without making someone else
worse off. Fractional Pareto optimality (fPO) is a stronger
notion requiring that no other fractional allocation makes an
agent better off without making someone else worse off. Every fPO allocation is therefore PO, but not vice-versa.
An important question is whether the fairness and efficiency notions of EF1 and PO (or fPO) can be achieved in
conjunction, and if so, can they be computed in polynomialtime. For the case of goods, (Barman, Krishnamurthy, and
Vaish 2018a) showed that an EF1+PO allocation exists and
can be computed in pseudopolynomial-time. Improving this
result, (Murhekar and Garg 2021) showed that an EF1+fPO
allocation can be computed in pseudopolynomial-time. For
the case of chores, it is unclear whether EF1+PO allocations
even exist, except for simple cases like identical valuations.

We study the problem of fair and efficient allocation of a set
of indivisible chores to agents with additive cost functions.
We consider the popular fairness notion of envy-freeness
up to one good (EF1) with the efficiency notion of Paretooptimality (PO). While it is known that an EF1+PO allocation exists and can be computed in pseudo-polynomial time
in the case of goods, the same problem is open for chores.
Our first result is a strongly polynomial-time algorithm for
computing an EF1+PO allocation for bivalued instances,
where agents have (at most) two disutility values for the
chores. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first nontrivial class of indivisible chores to admit an EF1+PO allocation and an efficient algorithm for its computation.
We also study the problem of computing an envy-free (EF)
and PO allocation for the case of divisible chores. While
the existence of EF+PO allocation is known via competitive
equilibrium with equal incomes, its efficient computation is
open. Our second result shows that for bivalued instances, an
EF+PO allocation can be computed in strongly polynomialtime.

1

Introduction

The problem of fair division is concerned with allocating
items to agents in a fair and efficient manner. Formally introduced by (Steinhaus 1949), fair division is an active area of
research studied across fields like computer science and economics. Most work has focused on the fair division of goods:
items which provide non-negative value (or utility) to the
agents to whom they are allocated. However, several practical scenarios involve chores (or bads). Chores are items
which impose a cost (or disutility) to the agent to whom they
are allocated. For instance, household chores such as cleaning and cooking often need to be fairly distributed among
members of the household. Likewise, teachers have to divide
teaching load, stakeholders have to divide liabilities upon
dissolution of a firm, etc. These examples highlight the importance of allocating chores in a fair and efficient manner.
Agencies responsible for designing such allocations must
take into account the differences in preferences of agents in
order for the allocation to be acceptable to all those involved.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5043

