The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Real-Time Driver-Request Assignment in Ridesourcing
Hao Wang, Xiaohui Bei
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
wang1242@e.ntu.edu.sg, xhbei@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

In the literature, there are mainly two approaches for solving the driver-request assignment problem. The first line of
works (Cordeau and Laporte 2007; Bei and Zhang 2018)
adopts a static and offline approach. That is, they focus on
a single snapshot of the system and aims to find an optimal
matching between all available drivers and the active requests
in the snapshot. When dealing with real-time assignments, a
common approach is then to divide the whole time horizon
into small intervals (say one minute per interval) and apply
the offline algorithm at the end of each interval (Anshelevich
et al. 2013; Alonso-Mora et al. 2017; Lesmana, Zhang, and
Bei 2019; Ke et al. 2020). With the information of all the
drivers and requests at hand, the algorithm is usually able to
find very efficient assignments through methods like maximum weight matching. However, in order to accumulate a
sufficiently large pool of drivers and requests, the platform
needs to set a long enough interval length, which will in turn
incur a large waiting cost for the requests. In addition, because all assignments are being made at the end of an interval,
requests that arrived at the beginning and at the end of an
interval will experience a significantly different amount of
waiting time. For example, a request arriving at the beginning
of a one-minute interval needs to wait for a whole minute before it can be assigned, even if there is a nearby driver waiting
at the very start. This will create significant inefficiency to
the assignment, as well as a very unbalanced user experience
for different riders, which will in turn harm the sustainability
of the platform in the long run.

Online on-demand ridesourcing service has played a huge
role in transforming urban transportation. A central function
in most on-demand ridesourcing platforms is to dynamically
assign drivers to rider requests that could balance the request
waiting times and the driver pick-up distances. To deal with
the online nature of this problem, existing literature either
divides the time horizon into short windows and applies a static
offline assignment algorithm within each window or assumes
a fully online setting that makes decisions for each request
immediately upon its arrival. In this paper, we propose a more
realistic model for the driver-request assignment that bridges
the above two settings together. Our model allows the requests
to wait after their arrival but assumes that they may leave at
any time following a quitting function. Under this model, we
design an efficient algorithm for assigning available drivers
to requests in real-time. Our algorithm is able to incorporate
future estimated driver arrivals into consideration and make
strategic waiting and matching decisions that could balance the
waiting time and pick-up distance of the assignment. We prove
that our algorithm is optimal ex-ante in the single-request
setting, and demonstrate its effectiveness in the general multirequest setting through experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets.

Introduction
On-demand ridesourcing has become a pillar in urban transportation due to its efficiency and flexibility in connecting
available drivers with on-demand riders. One of the essential components for a successful ridesourcing service is the
real-time assignment of drivers to riding requests. However,
the dynamic nature of on-demand ridesourcing brings several major challenges. More specifically, on a ridesourcing
platform, drivers and riding requests are constantly arriving
at unpredictable times. Upon the arrival of a riding request,
its driver assignment needs to be computed in a very short
time while considering the often conflicting objectives of
minimizing request’s waiting time, minimizing the driver’s
pick-up distance, as well as maximizing the number of served
requests. The research community has only recently started
to look at these problems, and many issues have not been
addressed in satisfactory by existing works.

A second approach applies a fully online model that requires each request to be assigned (or rejected) immediately
after its arrival. This approach has the advantage of reducing
a request’s waiting time to essentially zero. There is also a
large body of literature on online matching from other domains, such as online bipartite matching (Karp, Vazirani, and
Vazirani 1990; Mehta et al. 2007) and AdWords display (Aggarwal et al. 2011), from which the ridesourcing algorithm
could draw inspirations. On the other hand, by completely
removing the waiting time, the algorithm has to make haste
and local decisions which will compromise the efficiency of
the assignment, which we define as the distance between the
request and the assigned driver in the assignment. In particular, a request that is assigned right upon its arrival loses the
opportunity to be matched to closer drivers that might arrive
in the near future.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3840

