The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Liquid Democracy with Ranked Delegations
Markus Brill,1 Théo Delemazure,2 Anne-Marie George,3
Martin Lackner,4 Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin1
1

3

Research Group Efficient Algorithms, TU Berlin, Germany 2 LAMSADE, Université Paris-Dauphine, France
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway 4 Databases and Artificial Intelligence Group, TU Wien, Austria
brill@tu-berlin.de, theo.delemazure@ens.fr, annemage@ifi.uio.no, lackner@dbai.tuwien.ac.at,
u.schmidt-kraepelin@tu-berlin.de
Abstract

generally, delegated votes travel along delegation paths until they reach an agent who votes directly. This agent at the
endpoint of the path (sometimes referred to as “guru”) then
has a voting weight corresponding to all the agents whose
delegation paths end up with him or her.
Introducing the option of delegating one’s vote arguably
lowers the bar for participation, as it does not require agents
to get informed about an issue before making their vote
count (Ford 2002; Boldi et al. 2011; Valsangiacomo 2021).
This is particularly true if delegations can be declared globally and/or for whole subject areas.1 As a result, liquid
democracy has the potential to achieve substantially higher
rates of (direct and indirect) participation than direct voting.
However, vote delegations do not always work out as intended. For instance, if a delegation path ends in an agent
who abstains (i.e., neither delegates nor votes directly), the
vote is inevitably lost. Moreover, if a group of agents delegate to each other in a cyclic fashion and no group member
votes directly, they form a “delegation cycle” and all their
votes, together with the votes of agents whose delegation
paths lead to the cycle, are lost. Finally, delegation paths can
potentially get very long, calling into question the degree of
trust between the agents at the beginning and end of the path.
To address these issues, we consider an extension of liquid democracy that lets agents declare multiple potential delegates, together with a ranking among them specifying the
agent’s delegation preferences: By ranking potential delegate X higher than potential delegate Y , an agent indicates
that she would prefer delegating her vote to X, but would
also be happy with a delegation to Y in the case that the
delegation to X leads to one of the problems mentioned in
the previous paragraph. This functionality was implemented,
e.g., in a liquid democracy experiment at Google (Hardt and
Lopes 2015). Allowing agents to declare ranked delegations
enlarges the space of possible delegation paths and thereby
increases the likelihood of “successful” delegation paths. In
the case that multiple such paths exist, however, we need a
principled way to choose among them. This is accomplished
by so-called delegation rules, which select delegation paths
based on the delegation preferences of agents.

Liquid democracy is a novel paradigm for collective decisionmaking that gives agents the choice between casting a direct
vote or delegating their vote to another agent. We consider
a generalization of the standard liquid democracy setting by
allowing agents to specify multiple potential delegates, together with a preference ranking among them. This generalization increases the number of possible delegation paths and
enables higher participation rates because fewer votes are lost
due to delegation cycles or abstaining agents. In order to implement this generalization of liquid democracy, we need to
find a principled way of choosing between multiple delegation paths. In this paper, we provide a thorough axiomatic
analysis of the space of delegation rules, i.e., functions assigning a feasible delegation path to each delegating agent.
In particular, we prove axiomatic characterizations as well
as an impossibility result for delegation rules. We also analyze requirements on delegation rules that have been suggested by practitioners, and introduce novel rules with attractive properties. By performing an extensive experimental
analysis on synthetic as well as real-world data, we compare
delegation rules with respect to several quantitative criteria
relating to the chosen paths and the resulting distribution of
voting power. Our experiments reveal that delegation rules
can be aligned on a spectrum reflecting an inherent trade-off
between competing objectives.

1

Introduction

Liquid democracy is a novel decision-making paradigm that
aims to reconcile the idealistic appeal of direct democracy
with the practicality of representative democracy by giving
agents a choice regarding their mode of participation: For
every given issue, agents can choose whether they want to
vote directly or whether they want to delegate their vote to
another agent. The mode of participation can differ for different issues and the choice of mode (including the choice
of whom to delegate to) can be altered at any time. This enables a flexible and dynamic scheme of representation on a
per-issue basis (Blum and Zuber 2016).
An important principle of liquid democracy is the transitivity of delegation (sometimes called metadelegation): if A
delegates to B and B delegates to C, then C has a total voting weight of 3 (her own vote plus those of A and B). More

1
For instance, this is possible in the open-source software LiquidFeedback (Behrens et al. 2014), where more fine-grained delegations override global delegations, and direct voting on any particular issue overrides all delegations.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4884

