The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-Modal Answer Validation for Knowledge-Based VQA
Jialin Wu1 , Jiasen Lu2 , Ashish Sabharwal2 , Roozbeh Mottaghi2
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Allen Institute for AI
jialinwu@utexas.edu, {jiasenl, ashishs, roozbehm}@allenai.org

Q: Which movie featured a
Wikipedia facts
man in this position telling • Forrest gump, named after general
his life story to strangers?
Nathan Bedford Forrest, narrates the
Baseline: Cloth
story of his life.
• Gump is portrayed as viewing the …
Ours: Forrest Gump

Abstract
The problem of knowledge-based visual question answering
involves answering questions that require external knowledge in addition to the content of the image. Such knowledge typically comes in various forms, including visual, textual, and commonsense knowledge. Using more knowledge
sources increases the chance of retrieving more irrelevant or
noisy facts, making it challenging to comprehend the facts
and find the answer. To address this challenge, we propose
Multi-modal Answer Validation using External knowledge
(MAVEx), where the idea is to validate a set of promising
answer candidates based on answer-specific knowledge retrieval. Instead of searching for the answer in a vast collection of often irrelevant facts as most existing approaches do,
MAVEx aims to learn how to extract relevant knowledge from
noisy sources, which knowledge source to trust for each answer candidate, and how to validate the candidate using that
source. Our multi-modal setting is the first to leverage external
visual knowledge (images searched using Google), in addition to textual knowledge in the form of Wikipedia sentences
and ConceptNet concepts. Our experiments with OK-VQA,
a challenging knowledge-based VQA dataset, demonstrate
that MAVEx achieves new state-of-the-art results. Our code is
available at https://github.com/jialinwu17/MAVEX

Q: Is this a healthy dish?
Baseline: No
Ours: Yes

Q: What breed of dog is
the dog in this photo?
Baseline: Shepherd
Ours: Golden retriever

ConceptNet relations
• Vegetarian food HasProperty Healthy
• Eating vegetables HasProperty Healthy
RelatedTo
Healthy
• Beans
Image knowledge

Figure 1: We address the problem of knowledge-based question answering. Retrieving relevant knowledge among diverse knowledge sources (visual knowledge, textual facts,
concepts, etc.) is quite challenging. This paper aims to learn
what knowledge source should be used for a particular question and how to validate a set of potential answer candidates
using different knowledge sources.

his life story to strangers, we need to link the image content
and question to some textual facts; Vegetarian food and eating
vegetables are related to the concept of health; the retrieved
images for a “golden retriever.” are visually similar to the
dog in the question image. The challenge is to retrieve and
correctly incorporate such external knowledge effectively in
an open domain question answering framework.
We also witness a shift in knowledge-based VQA datasets
from structured retrieved knowledge such as triplets and
dense captions (Wang et al. 2017, 2018) to unstructured open
knowledge (Marino et al. 2019). Most current knowledgebased VQA systems (Marino et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018;
Zhu et al. 2020; Marino et al. 2021) follow a two-stage framework, where a retriever first looks up knowledge relevant to
the question and the image, and then a separate comprehension model predicts the answer.
However, knowledge retrieved directly for the question and
image is often noisy and not helpful in predicting the correct
answer. For example, as shown in Figure 2, the sentences
retrieved using only the words in questions and objects in
images (top) or a wrong answer (middle) are hardly helpful to

Introduction
Over the past few years, the domain of Visual Question Answering (VQA) has witnessed significant progress (Antol
et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2016; Hudson and Manning 2019).
However, there is a recent trend towards knowledge-based
VQA (Wang et al. 2017, 2018; Marino et al. 2019) which requires information beyond the content of the images. Besides
visual recognition, the model needs to perform logical reasoning and incorporate external knowledge about the world to
answer these challenging questions correctly. These knowledge facts can be obtained from various sources, such as
image search engines, encyclopedia articles, and knowledge
bases about common concepts and their relations.
Figure 1 illustrates a few visual questions and the knowledge from different external sources that helps answer them.
Each question needs a different type of external knowledge.
For example, to identify the movie that featured a man telling
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2712

