The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neuro-Symbolic Inductive Logic Programming with Logical Neural Networks
Prithviraj Sen, Breno W. S. R. de Carvalho, Ryan Riegel, Alexander Gray
IBM Research

Abstract

seems to lead to the best ILP result. This indicates that the
learning approach, rather than the user, should be in charge
of substituting logical connectives besides learning the rules
themselves. Neural logic machine (NLM) (Dong et al. 2019)
achieves this but at the cost of interpretability. More precisely,
it models propositional formulae (consisting of conjunctions,
disjunctions and/or negations) with multi-layer perceptrons
(MLP). Once trained, it may not be possible to interpret NLM
as rules since there exists no standard translation from MLP
to logic. What is needed is an extension of classical logic
with ties strong enough to be amenable to interpretation and
can learn not only rules but also the logical connectives using
gradient-based optimization.
In this paper, we propose ILP with the recently proposed
logical neural networks (LNN) (Riegel et al. 2020). Instead
of forcing the user to choose a function that mimics a logical
connective, LNNs employ constraints to ensure that neurons
behave like conjunctions or disjunctions. By decoupling neuron activation from the mechanism to ensure that it behaves
like a logical connective, LNNs offer tremendous flexibility
in how to parameterize neurons thus ensuring that they fit the
data better while maintaining close connections with classical
Boolean logic which, in turn, facilitates principled interpretation. We propose first-order extensions of LNNs that can
tackle ILP. Since vanilla backpropagation is insufficient for
constraint optimization, we propose flexible learning algorithms capable of handling a variety of (linear) inequality and
equality constraints. We experiment with diverse benchmarks
for ILP including gridworld and knowledge base completion (KBC) that call for learning of different kinds of rules
and show how our approach can tackle both effectively. In
fact, our KBC results represents a 4-16% relative improvement (in terms of mean reciprocal rank) upon the current
best rule-based KBC results on popular KBC benchmarks.
Additionally, we show that joint learning of rules and logical
connectives leads to LNN rules that are easier to interpret vs.
other neuro-symbolic ILP approaches.

Recent work on neuro-symbolic inductive logic programming
has led to promising approaches that can learn explanatory
rules from noisy, real-world data. While some proposals approximate logical operators with differentiable operators from
fuzzy or real-valued logic that are parameter-free thus diminishing their capacity to fit the data, other approaches are
only loosely based on logic making it difficult to interpret
the learned “rules”. In this paper, we propose learning rules
with the recently proposed logical neural networks (LNN).
Compared to others, LNNs offer a strong connection to classical Boolean logic thus allowing for precise interpretation of
learned rules while harboring parameters that can be trained
with gradient-based optimization to effectively fit the data. We
extend LNNs to induce rules in first-order logic. Our experiments on standard benchmarking tasks confirm that LNN rules
are highly interpretable and can achieve comparable or higher
accuracy due to their flexible parameterization.

1

Introduction

Inductive logic programming (ILP) (Muggleton 1996) has
been of long-standing interest where the goal is to learn
logical rules from labeled data. Since rules are explicitly
symbolic, they provide certain advantages over black-box
models. For instance, learned rules can be inspected, understood and verified forming a convenient means of storing
learned knowledge. Consequently, a number of approaches
have been proposed to address ILP including, but not limited
to, statistical relational learning (Getoor and Taskar 2007)
and more recently, neuro-symbolic methods.
Since logical operators such as conjunction and disjunction
are not differentiable, one issue that most neuro-symbolic
ILP techniques have to address is how to learn rules using
gradient-based optimization. A popular solution is to employ
extensions from fuzzy or real-valued logic that are either
differentiable or have subgradients available. For instance,
NeuralLP (Yang, Yang, and Cohen 2017) substitutes logical
conjunction with product t-norm (x ∧ y ≡ xy) and logic
tensor networks (Donadello, Serafini, and d’Avila Garcez
2017) with Łukasiewicz t-norm (x ∧ y ≡ max(0, x + y −
1)). In an interesting experiment, Evans and Grefenstette
(2018) show that among the various options, product t-norm

2

Related Work

∂ILP (Evans and Grefenstette 2018) is another neurosymbolic ILP technique whose main parameter is a tensor with one cell per candidate logic program. Since the
number of candidates is exponential in both the number
of available predicates and the number of constituent rules

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8212

