The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Improving 360◦ Monocular Depth Estimation
via Non-local Dense Prediction Transformer
and Joint Supervised and Self-Supervised Learning
Ilwi Yun1 , Hyuk-Jae Lee 1 , Chae Eun Rhee 2
1

Seoul National University, Korea
2
Inha University, Korea
yuniw@capp.snu.ac.kr, hjlee@capp.snu.ac.kr, chae.rhee@inha.ac.kr
Abstract
Due to difficulties in acquiring ground truth depth of equirectangular (360◦ ) images, the quality and quantity of equirectangular depth data today is insufficient to represent the various
scenes in the world. Therefore, 360◦ depth estimation studies, which relied solely on supervised learning, are destined
to produce unsatisfactory results. Although self-supervised
learning methods focusing on equirectangular images (EIs)
are introduced, they often have incorrect or non-unique solutions, causing unstable performance. In this paper, we propose 360◦ monocular depth estimation methods which improve on the areas that limited previous studies. First, we
introduce a self-supervised 360◦ depth learning method that
only utilizes gravity-aligned videos, which has the potential
to eliminate the needs for depth data during the training procedure. Second, we propose a joint learning scheme realized
by combining supervised and self-supervised learning. The
weakness of each learning is compensated, thus leading to
more accurate depth estimation. Third, we propose a nonlocal fusion block, which can further retain the global information encoded by vision transformer when reconstructing
the depths. With the proposed methods, we successfully apply the transformer to 360◦ depth estimations, to the best of
our knowledge, which has not been tried before. On several
benchmarks, our approach achieves significant improvements
over previous works and establishes a state of the art.

Figure 1: The effect of joint learning. Unlike the network
trained via supervised learning only (middle row), the network trained via joint learning is able to distinguish windows from the walls (bottom row)

Therefore, learning 360◦ depths in a supervised manner is
destined to produce unsatisfactory results because the performance of supervised learning is highly dependent on the
dataset. To overcome the lack of data, learning 360◦ depths
in a self-supervised manner has been attempted. However,
previous methods require either calibrated stereo EI pairs
(Payen de La Garanderie, Atapour Abarghouei, and Breckon
2018; Zioulis et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020b) or conversion to cubemap projection (Wang et al. 2018a), both of
which have limitations with regard to further improvements.
Moreover, self-supervised learning often delivers incorrect
or non-unique solutions (e.g., light reflected object), which
cause unstable performance.
In this paper, we propose 360◦ monocular depth estimation methods which improve on the areas that limited previous studies. First, we propose a self-supervised method for
the learning of depth that only utilizes gravity-aligned video
sequences, which has the potential to eliminate the needs
of depth data during the training procedure. Similar to prior
work (Zioulis et al. 2019), we utilize the relationships between consecutive scenes but improve it through consistency
between depths. Second, we propose a joint learning scheme
realized by combining supervised and self-supervised learning. Despite the limitations of each learning scheme, all pre-

Introduction
Recently, research interest in processing equirectangular
(360◦ ) images has increased as virtual reality enters the
limelight. Equirectangular images (EIs) have advantages
over traditional rectilinear images (RIs) in that they enable
a 360° field of view. This benefit, however, complicates the
acquisition of ground truth depths. Aside from the technical
difficulties associated with 360° depth scanners, one practical difficulty is that sensors would be visible from the 360°
RGB cameras, leading to partially obscured images (Matzen
et al. 2017; Zioulis et al. 2018). Moreover, to acquire diverse
and realistic synthesized data, numerous things should be set
exquisitely, which often requires professional designers and
tools (Zheng et al. 2020). Due to such problems, the quality and quantity of equirectangular depth data today is insufficient to represent fully the various scenes in the world.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3224

