The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Barely-Supervised Learning:
Semi-supervised Learning with Very Few Labeled Images
Thomas Lucas1 , Philippe Weinzaepfel1 , Gregory Rogez1
1

Naver Labs Europe*
thomas.lucas@naverlabs.com, philippe.weinzaepfel@naverlabs.com, gregory.rogez@naverlabs.com.

Abstract

supervised learning when the set of labeled samples is reduced to a very small number, typically 4 or 8 per class,
which we refer to as barely-supervised learning.
The recently proposed FixMatch approach (Sohn et al.
2020) unifies two trends in semi-supervised learning:
pseudo-labeling (Lee 2013) and consistency regularization (Bachman, Alsharif, and Precup 2014; Rasmus et al.
2015). Pseudo-labeling, also referred to as self-training, consists in accepting confident model predictions as targets for
previously unlabeled images, as if they were true labels.
Consistency regularization methods obtain training signal
using a modified version of an input, e.g. using another augmentation, or a modified version of the model being trained.
In FixMatch, a weakly-augmented version of an unlabeled
image is used to obtain a pseudo-label as distillation target for a strongly-augmented version of this same image. In
practice, the pseudo-label is only set if the prediction is confident enough, as measured by the peakiness of the softmax
predictions. If no confident prediction can be made, no loss
is applied to the image sample. FixMatch obtains state-ofthe-art semi-supervised results, and was the first to demonstrate performance in barely-supervised learning close to
fully-supervised methods on CIFAR-10. However, it does
not perform as well with more realistic images, e.g. on the
STL-10 dataset when the set of labeled images is small.
In this paper, we first analyze the causes that hurt performance in this regime. In practice, we find the choice of
confidence threshold, beyond which a prediction is accepted
as pseudo-label, to have a high impact on performance. A
high threshold leads to pseudo-labels that are more likely to
be correct, but also to fewer unlabeled images being considered. Thus in practice a smaller subset of the unlabeled
data receives training signal, and the model may not be able
to make high quality predictions outside of it. If the threshold is set too low, many images will receive pseudo-labels
but with the risk of using wrong labels, that may then propagate to other images, a problem known as confirmation
bias (Arazo et al. 2020). In other words, FixMatch faces a
distillation dilemma between allowing more exploration but
with possibly noisy labels, or exploring fewer images with
more chances to have correct pseudo-labels.
For barely-supervised learning, a possibility is to leverage a self-then-semi paradigm, i.e., to first train a model with
self-supervision then with semi-supervised learning, as pro-

This paper tackles the problem of semi-supervised learning
when the set of labeled samples is limited to a small number
of images per class, typically less than 10, problem that we
refer to as barely-supervised learning. We analyze in depth
the behavior of a state-of-the-art semi-supervised method,
FixMatch, which relies on a weakly-augmented version of
an image to obtain supervision signal for a more stronglyaugmented version. We show that it frequently fails in barelysupervised scenarios, due to a lack of training signal when
no pseudo-label can be predicted with high confidence. We
propose a method to leverage self-supervised methods that
provides training signal in the absence of confident pseudolabels. We then propose two methods to refine the pseudolabel selection process which lead to further improvements.
The first one relies on a per-sample history of the model predictions, akin to a voting scheme. The second iteratively updates class-dependent confidence thresholds to better explore
classes that are under-represented in the pseudo-labels. Our
experiments show that our approach performs significantly
better on STL-10 in the barely-supervised regime, e.g. with 4
or 8 labeled images per class.

1

Introduction

While early deep learning methods have reached outstanding performance in fully-supervised settings (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015;
He et al. 2016), a recent trend is to focus on reducing this
need for labeled data. Self-supervised models take it to the
extreme by learning models without any labels; in particular recent works based on the paradigm of contrastive learning (He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a; Grill et al. 2020;
Caron et al. 2020), learn features that are invariant to classpreserving augmentations and have shown transfer performances that sometimes surpass that of models pretrained on
ImageNet with label supervision. In practice, however, labels are still required for the transfer to the final task. Semisupervised learning aims at reducing the need for labeled
data in the final task, by leveraging both a small set of labeled samples and a larger set of unlabeled samples from
the target classes. In this paper, we study the case of semi* www.europe.naverlabs.com
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1881

