The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

From Dense to Sparse: Contrastive Pruning for Better Pre-trained
Language Model Compression
Runxin Xu1 * , Fuli Luo2 * , Chengyu Wang2 , Baobao Chang1† ,
Jun Huang2 , Songfang Huang2† , Fei Huang2
1

Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
2
Alibaba Group
runxinxu@gmail.com, chbb@pku.edu.cn
{lfl259702,chengyu.wcy,huangjun.hj, songfang.hsf,f.huang}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

+1.0

+1.9

Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) have achieved great
success in various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks
under the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm. With large
quantities of parameters, PLMs are computation-intensive
and resource-hungry. Hence, model pruning has been introduced to compress large-scale PLMs. However, most prior
approaches only consider task-specific knowledge towards
downstream tasks, but ignore the essential task-agnostic
knowledge during pruning, which may cause catastrophic forgetting problem and lead to poor generalization ability. To
maintain both task-agnostic and task-specific knowledge in
our pruned model, we propose ContrAstive Pruning (C AP)
under the paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning. It is designed as a general framework, compatible with both structured and unstructured pruning. Unified in contrastive learning, C AP enables the pruned model to learn from the pretrained model for task-agnostic knowledge, and fine-tuned
model for task-specific knowledge. Besides, to better retain
the performance of the pruned model, the snapshots (i.e., the
intermediate models at each pruning iteration) also serve as
effective supervisions for pruning. Our extensive experiments
show that adopting C AP consistently yields significant improvements, especially in extremely high sparsity scenarios.
With only 3% model parameters reserved (i.e., 97% sparsity),
C AP successfully achieves 99.2% and 96.3% of the original
BERT performance in QQP and MNLI tasks. In addition, our
probing experiments demonstrate that the model pruned by
C AP tends to achieve better generalization ability.

+1.3

+4.3

Structured Pruning

+2.0

Unstructured Pruning

Figure 1: Comparison between BERT pruning with and
without C AP. We report the average score across MNLI,
QQP, and SQuAD tasks with different model sparsity (50%,
90%, and 97%). C AP consistently yield improvements for
different pruning criterions, with larger gains in higher sparsity (1.0 → 1.3 → 2.0). Please refer to Table 2 for details.

In fact, recent studies have observed that PLMs are overparameterized with many redundant weights (Frankle and
Carbin 2019; Prasanna, Rogers, and Rumshisky 2020). Motivated by this, one major line of works to compress largescale PLMs and speed up the inference is model pruning,
which focuses on identifying and removing those unimportant parameters. However, when adapting the pre-trained
models to downstream tasks, most studies simply adopt
the vanilla pruning methods, but do not make full use of
the paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning. Specifically,
most works only pay attention to the task-specific knowledge towards the downstream task during pruning, but ignore whether the task-agnostic knowledge of the origin
PLM is well maintained in the pruned model. Losing such
task-agnostic knowledge can cause severe catastrophic forgetting problem (Lee, Cho, and Kang 2020; Chen et al.
2020a), which further damages the generalization ability of
the pruned model. Moreover, when facing extremely high
sparsity scenarios (e.g., 97% sparsity with only 3% parameters reserved), the performance of the pruned model decreases sharply compared with the original dense model.

Introduction
Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), have achieved great success in a variety of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. PLMs are pretrained in a self-supervised way, and then adapted to the
downstream tasks through fine-tuning. Despite the success,
PLMs are usually resource-hungry with a large number of
parameters, ranging from millions (e.g., BERT) to billions
(e.g., GPT-3), which leads to high memory consumption and
computational overhead in practice.
*

Equal Contribution. Joint work between Alibaba and Peking
University.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11547

