The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AdaptivePose: Human Parts as Adaptive Points
Yabo Xiao,1 Xiao Juan Wang, 1, * Dongdong Yu, 2 Guoli Wang, 3 Qian Zhang, 4 Mingshu He 1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
ByteDance Inc.
3
Tsinghua University
4
Horizon Robotics
{xiaoyabo, wj2718, hemingshu}@bupt.edu.cn, yudongdong@bytedance.com, wangguoli1990@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,
qian01.zhang@horizon.ai
Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation methods generally follow topdown and bottom-up paradigms, both of which can be considered as two-stage approaches thus leading to the high computation cost and low efficiency. Towards a compact and efficient pipeline for multi-person pose estimation task, in this
paper, we propose to represent the human parts as points and
present a novel body representation, which leverages an adaptive point set including the human center and seven humanpart related points to represent the human instance in a more
fine-grained manner. The novel representation is more capable of capturing the various pose deformation and adaptively factorizes the long-range center-to-joint displacement
thus delivers a single-stage differentiable network to more
precisely regress multi-person pose, termed as AdaptivePose.
For inference, our proposed network eliminates the grouping
as well as refinements and only needs a single-step disentangling process to form multi-person pose. Without any bells
and whistles, we achieve the best speed-accuracy trade-offs
of 67.4% AP / 29.4 fps with DLA-34 and 71.3% AP / 9.1 fps
with HRNet-W48 on COCO test-dev dataset.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e) Speed and Accuracy

Figure 1: (a) Conventional body representation generally
used in top-down methods such as Mask-RCNN (He et al.
2017) and Rmpe (Fang et al. 2017) as well as bottomup methods such as CMU-pose (Cao et al. 2017) and AE
(Newell, Huang, and Deng 2017). (b) Center-to-joint body
representation proposed by CenterNet (Zhou, Wang, and
Krähenbühl 2019). (c) Hierarchical body representation introduced by SPM (Nie et al. 2019). (d) An adaptive point
set representation proposed by our method. (e) Inference
time (s) versus precision (AP). Our method achieves the best
speed-accuracy trade-offs compared with the representative
bottom-up and single-stage methods.

Introduction
With the prevalence of deep learning technique, Pose estimation (Xiao et al. 2020; Newell, Yang, and Deng 2016)
has drawn much attention in computer vision area. It’s an
essential step for many high-level vision tasks such as activity understanding (Shi et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019), pose
tracking (Xiao, Wu, and Wei 2018) and so on. Most existing
methods for multi-person pose estimation can be summarized in two ways including the top-down methods (Chen
et al. 2018; Su et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Fang et al. 2017)
and the bottom-up methods (Cao et al. 2017; Kreiss, Bertoni,
and Alahi 2019; Newell, Huang, and Deng 2017; Papandreou et al. 2018; Cheng et al. 2020). The top-down methods
crop and resize the region of detected person firstly and then
locate the single-person keypoints in each cropped region.
These methods may have the following drawbacks: 1) The
performance of joint detection is strongly tied to the quality of the human bounding boxes. 2) Detection-first pattern

leads to high memory cost and low efficiency and is not feasible for applications. The bottom-up methods firstly locate
the keypoints for the all persons simultaneously and then
group them for each person. Although bottom-up methods
generally run faster than top-down methods, the grouping
process is still computationally complexity and redundant,
and always involves many tricks to refine the final results.
Aforementioned two-stage methods generally use the
conventional representation that models the human pose via
absolute keypoint position as shown in Figure 1(a), which
separates the associations between the human instance and
keypoints thus requires an extra stage to model the relationship. Recent research works preliminarily explore the representation methods to model the relation between human
instance and corresponding keypoints while suffer some obstacles thus leading to the limited performance. For exam-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2813

