The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Two-Stage Octave Residual Network for End-to-End Image Compression
Fangdong Chen1* , Yumeng Xu1 , Li Wang
Hikvision Research Institute
{chenfangdong, xuyumeng, wangli7}@hikvision.com

Abstract

end-to-end neural network based scheme has been a popular
and effective way to compress images.
The most common end-to-end image compression network base on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is consist of a nonlinear analysis transformation, a uniform quantizer, and a nonlinear synthesis transformation (Ballé, Laparra, and Simoncelli 2016). To pursue less coding bit rate
and higher quality of reconstructed images, lots of methods
have been raised and incorporated into the encoder-decoder
network in recent years. For reducing the coding rate of
bit stream, hyperprior model (Ballé et al. 2018) based on
variational autoencoder is introduced as a powerful entropy
model on the local scale parameters of the latent representation. 2D and 3D context model (Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici
2018; Lee, Cho, and Beack 2018) are developed to reduce
the redundancy of latents. Probabilistic generative models
(Ballé et al. 2018) are proposed to parameterize the distribution of latents for the arithmetic encoding/decoding. Attention module (Li et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019) is introduced
to this network for adapting bit allocation. In addition, for
enhancing the quality of reconstructed images, ResNet (He
et al. 2016) is incorporated into this network for preventing network degeneration. Based on these studies, the endto-end image compression has already outperformed most
classical standard codecs.
In the field of image compression, it is found that features
with high frequency differ from those with low frequency in
coding characteristics (Devore, Jawerth, and Lucier 1992).
High frequency features refer to the areas that gray value
changes rapidly, while low frequency features refer to the
areas that gray value changes smoothly. However, most endto-end methods omit the differences of multi-frequency, and
simply mix and process the different features using a set
of unified kernels. In recent years, octave convolution (OctConv) (Chen et al. 2019), which has achieved great success
in many computer vision tasks (Fan et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2020), shows great potential for solving this problem. It is
proposed to factorize feature maps into high and low frequency groups (with different resolutions of feature maps),
and process them separately with different kernels. Moreover, a modified OctConv called generalized octave convolution (GoConv) (Akbari et al. 2020) is developed and applied
in the image compression model (Ballé et al. 2018), which
shows processing low- and high-frequency features sepa-

Octave Convolution (OctConv) is a generic convolutional unit
that has already achieved good performances in many computer vision tasks. Recent studies also have shown the potential of applying the OctConv in end-to-end image compression. However, considering the characteristic of image
compression task, current works of OctConv may limit the
performance of the image compression network due to the
loss of spatial information caused by the sampling operations of inter-frequency communication. Besides, the correlation between multi-frequency latents produced by OctConv is not utilized in current architectures. In this paper, to
address these problems, we propose a novel Two-stage Octave Residual (ToRes) block which strips the sampling operation from OctConv to strengthen the capability of preserving
useful information. Moreover, to capture the redundancy between the multi-frequency latents, a context transfer module
is designed. The results show that both ToRes block and the
incorporation of context transfer module help to improve the
Rate-Distortion performance, and the combination of these
two strategies makes our model achieve the state-of-the-art
performance and outperform the latest compression standard
Versatile Video Coding (VVC) in terms of both PSNR and
MS-SSIM.

Introduction
Image compression is essential for image transmission and
storage, and has been studied for a long period. During the
passing decades, image coding standard, including JPEG
(Wallace 1992), JPEG 2000 (Rabbani and Joshi 2002),
HEVC/H.265 (Sullivan et al. 2012) and VVC/H.266 (Bross
et al. 2020) have been persistently developed to pursue a better Rate-Distortion performance. However, the compression
rate is still proceeding slowly, and even the latest coding
standard is unable to meet the fast-growing image traffic.
Traditional compression codec is composed of several independently optimized modules, namely, prediction, transform, quantization, entropy coding, and loop filters. Intuitively,
it is promising to achieve higher performance if the codec
can be optimized as a whole. Since neural network can adjust each module automatically under a unity of purpose, the
1

Equal contribution, * corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3922

