The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Task-Level Self-Supervision for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Wang Yuan1† , Zhizhong Zhang1† , Cong Wang3 , Haichuan Song1 , Yuan Xie1* , Lizhuang Ma1,2,4*
1

East China Normal University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Huawei Technologies
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wangyuan05@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zzzhang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, wangcong64@huawei.com, hcsong@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, lzma@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

(a) Domain Generalization
Source (train)
Target (test)

Abstract
𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗′

Learning with limited labeled data is a long-standing problem. Among various solutions, episodic training progressively classifies a series of few-shot tasks and thereby is assumed to be beneficial for improving the model’s generalization ability. However, recent studies show that it is even
inferior to the baseline model when facing domain shift between base and novel classes. To tackle this problem, we propose a domain-independent task-level self-supervised (TLSS) method for cross-domain few-shot learning. TL-SS strategy promotes the general idea of label-based instance-level
supervision to task-level self-supervision by augmenting multiple views of tasks. Two regularizations on task consistency
and correlation metric are introduced to remarkably stabilize the training process and endow the generalization ability into the prediction model. We also propose a high-order
associated encoder (HAE) being adaptive to various tasks.
By utilizing 3D convolution module, HAE is able to generate proper parameters and enables the encoder to flexibly to
any unseen tasks. Two modules complement each other and
show great promotion against state-of-the-art methods experimentally. Finally, we design a generalized task-agnostic test,
where our intriguing findings highlight the need to re-think
the generalization ability of existing few-shot approaches.

𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗′′

𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗′′′

…
…
…

𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗′
𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗′′

Encoder

𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑗𝑗′′′

(b) 5-Way 5-shot mini->CUB
Methods
Strategy
Matching
Episode
LGM
Task-Specific
Baseline Fine Tune
T3S(ours)
TL-SS

Unstable Concept

Stable Concept

Task
Consistency

Metric
Alignment

(c1) Unstable Subspace

(c2) Unstable Discrimination

(c) Task-level Self-supervision

ACC
51.37%
60.85%
64.97%
69.16%

(c3) Stable Concept

Figure 1: The motivation. Traditional few-shot methods are
greatly affected by domain shift. Some task-specific methods initially show some potential, but still have a gap with
the baseline (b). We attribute it to its “unstable concept”. Our
insight is to propose a task-level self-supervised strategy to
improve generalization (c). By constraining the task consistency (c1) and metric alignment between different views of
the same task, the stability and discrimination (c2) of the
subspace are guaranteed respectively.

continuous heterogeneous tasks (i.e., N-way K-shot tasks),
episode emulates the process that progressively classifies a
series of datasets, each including disjoint categories. It is expected that the learned representation can generalize to novel
classes. However, as indicated by (Su et al. 2019), episode
technique might discard semantic information that is irrelevant for base classes but critical for novel classes. Despite
the data availability, training for base class classification on
the source data would not be reflective.
To tackle this issue, we find recent proposed “task-specific
adaptation” (Ye et al. 2020; Oreshkin et al. 2018; Li et al.
2019; Guo et al. 2020) methods show a promising direction.
A key point lies on that these methods raise their focus on
the concept of “task”, instead of instance-level classification.
They utilize the task statistics, e.g., mean and variance in a
episode, to abstract a specific task with a brief context description. It allows the model to generate task-specific encoder parameters, and therefore encourages the model to focus on current task. Since various task descriptions results in
various task-specific encoders, it provides great diversity for
training, and is more in line with the essence of the episodic

Introduction
Learning effective prediction model with limited labeled
data is a long-standing problem. As a significant advance, few-shot learning (FSL), which generalizes the metaknowledge in base classes (sufficient samples) to novel
classes (few labeled data), has attracted considerable attention. With the prevalence of meta-learning training strategy
“episode” (Vinyals et al. 2016), the baseline of few-shot
learning has been continuously improved. However, recent
studies (Chen et al. 2019b; Tseng et al. 2020; Triantafillou
et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2019) show that, when there exists domain shift between training and test data, episodic training
will be greatly affected or even inferior to the primary model
(i.e., frozen the ConvNet and fine-tune the fully-connected
layer with few target data).
Intuitively, “episode” strategy is naturally assumed to be
beneficial for the cross-domain problem. By establishing
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1∗
corresponding author. † equal contribution.

3215

