The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TempoQR: Temporal Question Reasoning over Knowledge Graphs
Costas Mavromatis1 * † , Prasanna Lakkur Subramanyam2‡† , Vassilis N. Ioannidis3 , Adesoji
Adeshina3 , Phillip R. Howard4 , Tetiana Grinberg4 , Nagib Hakim4 , George Karypis3
2

1
University of Minnesota
University of Massachusetts Amherst
3
Amazon Web Services
4
Intel Labs

Abstract

Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA) attempts to answer a natural question using the KG as a knowledge base (Lan et al. 2021). Natural questions often include temporal constraints, e.g., “Which movie won the Best
Picture in 1973?” and to aid temporal question answering,
TKGs are utilized. The first step is to identify and link the
entities, relations and timestamps of the questions to the corresponding ones in the TKG, e.g., “Which movie won the
Best Picture in 1973?” to (Best Picture, WonBy, ?, 1973).
This problem is known as entity linking (Kolitsas, Ganea,
and Hofmann 2018).

Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA) involves retrieving facts from a Knowledge Graph (KG) using natural
language queries. A KG is a curated set of facts consisting
of entities linked by relations. Certain facts include also temporal information forming a Temporal KG (TKG). Although
many natural questions involve explicit or implicit time constraints, question answering (QA) over TKGs has been a relatively unexplored area. Existing solutions are mainly designed for simple temporal questions that can be answered
directly by a single TKG fact. This paper puts forth a comprehensive embedding-based framework for answering complex
questions over TKGs. Our method, called temporal question
reasoning (TempoQR), exploits TKG embeddings to ground
the question to the specific entities and time scope it refers
to. It does so by augmenting the question embeddings with
context, entity and time-aware information via three specialized modules. The first computes a textual representation
of a given question, the second combines it with the entity embeddings for entities involved in the question, and the
third generates question-specific time embeddings. Finally, a
transformer-based encoder learns to fuse the generated temporal information with the question representation, which is
used for answer predictions. Extensive experiments show that
TempoQR improves accuracy by 25–45 percentage points on
complex temporal questions over state-of-the-art approaches
and it generalizes better to unseen question types.

Recently, (Saxena, Chakrabarti, and Talukdar 2021) proposed CronKGQA that solves QA over TKGs by leveraging TKG embedding methods, e.g., TComplEx (Lacroix,
Obozinski, and Usunier 2020). TKG embedding methods
learn low-dimensional embeddings for the entities, relations and timestamps by minimizing a link prediction objective attuned at completing facts of the form (subject,
relation, ?, timestamps) and (subject, relation, object, ?).
CronKGQA answers the mapped question (Best Picture,
WonBy, ?, 1973) as a link prediction task over the TKG.
CronKGQA performs very well on simple questions that are
answerable by a single TKG fact (Hits@1 of 0.988). However, on more complex questions, that involve additional
temporal constraints and require information from multiple
TKG facts (e.g., “Which movie won the Best Picture after
The Godfather?”), CronKGQA performs poorly (Hits@1 of
0.392).

Introduction
A knowledge graph (KG) is a set of facts that are known
to be true in the world or in a specific domain. The facts
are usually represented as tuples (subject, relation, object),
where the subject and object correspond to KG entities. Certain KGs include additional attributes such as temporal information forming a temporal knowledge graph (TKG). In
TKGs, each fact is associated with a timestamp or time interval, and is represented as (subject, relation, object, timestamp) or (subject, relation, object, [start time, end time]),
respectively.

To effectively handle both simple and complex temporal
questions, we design a new method called temporal question reasoning (TempoQR). TempoQR exploits TKG embeddings to ground the question to the specific entities and
time scope the question refers to. To illustrate the key idea
of our approach, consider the question “Which movie won
the Best Picture after The Godfather?” which involves the
TKG entities ‘Best Picture’ and ‘The Godfather’. The highlevel approach of TempoQR is shown in Figure 1. The first
reasoning step is to understand the context of the question (context-aware step). The context of the question here
involves a movie (“Which movie...”). The next step is to
ground the question to the entities it refers to (entity-aware
step). The question refers to a movie that has won the Best
Picture. Finally, the question needs to be grounded with cer-

* Corresponding Author: {mavro016@umn.edu}. Work done
while interning at Amazon Web Services.
†
These authors contributed equally.
‡
Work done while interning at Intel.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5825

