The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DOC2PPT: Automatic Presentation Slides Generation from Scientific Documents
Tsu-Jui Fu1 , William Yang Wang1 , Daniel McDuff2 , Yale Song2
1

UC Santa Barbara 2 Microsoft Research
{tsu-juifu,william}@cs.ucsb.edu {damcduff, yalesong}@microsoft.com

Input: A Document

Abstract

DOC2PPT
Document Reader

Creating presentation materials requires complex multimodal
reasoning skills to summarize key concepts and arrange them
in a logical and visually pleasing manner. Can machines learn
to emulate this laborious process? We present a novel task
and approach for document-to-slide generation. Solving this
involves document summarization, image and text retrieval,
and slide structure to arrange key elements in a form suitable for presentation. We propose a hierarchical sequence-tosequence approach to tackle our task in an end-to-end manner. Our approach exploits the inherent structures within documents and slides and incorporates paraphrasing and layout
prediction modules to generate slides. To help accelerate research in this domain, we release a dataset of about 6K paired
documents and slide decks used in our experiments. We show
that our approach outperforms strong baselines and produces
slides with rich content and aligned imagery.

Text
Encoder

Image
Encoder

Slide Generator

Multimodal Summarizer
Text
Paraphraser

Layout
Designer

Output: A Slide Deck

…

Introduction
Figure 1: We introduce DOC2PPT, a novel task of generating a slide deck from a document. This requires solving
several challenges in the vision-and-language domain, e.g.,
visual-semantic embedding and multimodal summarization.
In addition, slides exhibit unique properties such as concise
text (bullet points) and stylized layout.

Creating presentations is often a work of art. It requires skills
to abstract complex concepts and conveys them in a concise and visually pleasing manner. Consider the steps involved in creating presentation slides based on a white paper or manuscript: One needs to 1) establish a storyline that
will connect with the audience, 2) identify essential sections
and components that support the main message, 3) delineate
the structure of that content, e.g., the ordering/length of the
sections, 4) summarize the content in a concise form, e.g.,
punchy bullet points, and 5) gather figures that help communicate the message accurately and engagingly.
Can machines emulate this laborious process by learning from the plethora of example manuscripts and slide
decks created by human experts? Building such a system
poses unique challenges in vision-and-language understanding. Both the input (a manuscript) and output (a slide deck)
contain tightly coupled visual and textual elements; thus, it
requires multimodal reasoning. Further, there are significant
differences in the presentation: compared to manuscripts,
slides tend to be more concise (e.g., containing bullet points
rather than full sentences), structured (e.g., each slide has a
fixed screen real estate and delivers one or few messages),

and visual-centric (e.g., figures are first-class citizens, the
visual layout plays an important role, etc.).
Existing literature only partially addresses some of the
challenges above. Document summarization (Cheng and Lapata 2016; Chopra, Auli, and Rush 2016) aims to find a concise text summary of the input, but it does not deal with
images/figures and lacks multimodal understanding. Crossmodal retrieval (Frome et al. 2013; Kiros, Salakhutdinov,
and Zemel 2014) focuses on finding a multimodal embedding space but does not produce summarized outputs. Multimodal summarization (Zhu et al. 2019) deals with both
(summarizing documents with text and figures), but it lacks
the ability to produce structured output (as in slides). Furthermore, none of the above addresses the challenge of finding an optimal visual layout of each slide. While assessing
visual aesthetics have been investigated (Marchesotti et al.
2011), exiting work focuses on photographic metrics for images that would not translate to slides. These aspects make

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Project webpage: https://doc2ppt.github.io/

634

