The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimized Potential Initialization for Low-Latency Spiking Neural Networks
Tong Bu1, 2 , Jianhao Ding2 , Zhaofei Yu1, 2 * , Tiejun Huang1, 2
1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
putong30@pku.edu.cn, djh01998@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yuzf12,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have been attached great
importance due to the distinctive properties of low power
consumption, biological plausibility, and adversarial robustness. The most effective way to train deep SNNs is through
ANN-to-SNN conversion, which have yielded the best performance in deep network structure and large-scale datasets.
However, there is a trade-off between accuracy and latency.
In order to achieve high precision as original ANNs, a long
simulation time is needed to match the firing rate of a spiking
neuron with the activation value of an analog neuron, which
impedes the practical application of SNN. In this paper, we
aim to achieve high-performance converted SNNs with extremely low latency (fewer than 32 time-steps). We start by
theoretically analyzing ANN-to-SNN conversion and show
that scaling the thresholds does play a similar role as weight
normalization. Instead of introducing constraints that facilitate ANN-to-SNN conversion at the cost of model capacity,
we applied a more direct way by optimizing the initial membrane potential to reduce the conversion loss in each layer.
Besides, we demonstrate that optimal initialization of membrane potentials can implement expected error-free ANN-toSNN conversion. We evaluate our algorithm on the CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets and achieve state-ofthe-art accuracy, using fewer time-steps. For example, we
reach top-1 accuracy of 93.38% on CIFAR-10 with 16 timesteps. Moreover, our method can be applied to other ANNSNN conversion methodologies and remarkably promote performance when the time-steps is small.

Time to first spike

Without Potential Initialization
With Potential Initialization

Layer #

Figure 1: Comparison of the propagation delay of converted
SNN from VGG-16 with/without membrane potential initialization on the CIFAR-10 dataset. The converted SNN
without potential initialization suffers a much longer propagation delay than that with potential initialization.

Davies et al. 2018; Pei et al. 2019). In addition, SNNs have
inherent adversarial robustness. The adversarial accuracy of
SNNs under gradient-based attacks is higher than ANNs
with the same structure (Sharmin et al. 2020). Nevertheless,
the use of SNNs is still limited as it remains challenging to
train high-performance SNNs.
Generally, there are two main approaches to train a multilayer SNN: (1) gradient-based optimization and (2) ANNto-SNN conversion. The gradient-based optimization takes
the idea of ANNs and computes the gradient through backpropagation (Lee, Delbruck, and Pfeiffer 2016; Lee et al.
2020). Although the surrogate gradient methods have been
proposed to mitigate the non-differentiable problem of the
threshold-triggered firing of SNNs (Shrestha and Orchard
2018; Wu et al. 2018; Neftci, Mostafa, and Zenke 2019), it is
still limited to shallow SNNs as the gradient becomes much
unstable when the layer goes deeper (Zheng et al. 2021). Besides, the gradient-based optimization method requires more
GPU computing than ANN training.
Unlike the gradient-based optimization method, ANN-to-

Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), as the third generation of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) (Maass 1997),
have attracted great attention in recent years. Unlike traditional ANNs transmitting information at each propagation cycle, SNNs deliver information through spikes only
when the membrane potential reaches the threshold (Gerstner and Kistler 2002). Due to the event-driven calculation, sparse activation, and multiplication-free characteristics (Roy, Jaiswal, and Panda 2019), SNNs have greater energy efficiency than ANNs on neuromorphic chips (Schemmel et al. 2010; Furber et al. 2012; Merolla et al. 2014;
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11

