The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Price of Selfishness:
Conjunctive Query Entailment for ALC Self is 2E X P T I M E -Hard
Bartosz Bednarczyk,1,2 Sebastian Rudolph1
1

Computational Logic Group, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
2
Institute of Computer Science, University of Wrocław, Poland
{ bartosz bednarczyk, sebastian.rudolph }@tu-dresden.de

Abstract

out to be problematic (Ngo, Ortiz, and Simkus 2016). Nevertheless, there are also more benign DL constructs regarding the complexity of CQ entailment. Examples are counting (Q) (Lutz 2008) (the complexity stays the same even
for expressive arithmetical constraints (Baader, Bednarczyk,
and Rudolph 2020)), role-hierarchies alone (H) (Eiter, Ortiz, and Simkus 2012) or even a tamed use of higher-arity
relations (Bednarczyk 2021a).

In logic-based knowledge representation, query answering has
essentially replaced mere satisfiability checking as the inferencing problem of primary interest. For knowledge bases in
the basic description logic ALC, the computational complexity of conjunctive query (CQ) answering is well known to be
E X P T I M E -complete and hence not harder than satisfiability.
This does not change when the logic is extended by certain features (such as counting or role hierarchies), whereas adding
others (inverses, nominals or transitivity together with rolehierarchies) turns CQ answering exponentially harder.
We contribute to this line of results by showing the surprising fact that even extending ALC by just the Self operator –
which proved innocuous in many other contexts – increases
the complexity of CQ entailment to 2E X P T I M E . As common
for this type of problem, our proof establishes a reduction from
alternating Turing machines running in exponential space, but
several novel ideas and encoding tricks are required to make
the approach work in that specific, restricted setting.

1

Our results. We study CQ entailment in ALC Self , an extension of ALC with the Self operator, i.e. a modelling feature
that allows us to specify the situation when an element is
related to itself by a binary relationship. Among other things,
this allows us to formalise the concept of a “narcissist”:
Narcissist v ∃loves.Self
or to express that no person is their own parent:
Person v ¬∃hasParent.Self.
The Self operator is supported by the OWL 2 Web Ontology Language and the DL SROIQ (Horrocks, Kutz, and
Sattler 2006). Due to the simplicity of the Self operator (it
only refers to one element), it is easy to accommodate for
automata techniques (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2009) or
consequence-based methods (Ortiz, Rudolph, and Simkus
2010) and thus, so far, there has been no real indication that
the added expressivity provided by Self may change anything, complexity-wise. Arguably, this impression is further
corroborated by the observation that Self features in two profiles of OWL 2 (the EL and the RL profile), again without
harming tractability (Krötzsch, Rudolph, and Hitzler 2008).
In this work, however, we show a rather counter-intuitive
result, namely that CQ entailment for ALC Self is exponentially harder than for ALC. Hence, it places the seemingly
innocuous Self operator among the “malign” modelling
features, like (I), (SH) or (O). Moreover, this establishes
2E X P T I M E -hardness of query entailment for the Z famSelf
ily (a.k.a. ALCHbreg
) of DLs (Calvanese, Eiter, and Ortiz 2009), which until now remained open as well as the
2E X P T I M E -hardness of querying the forward guarded fragment (Bednarczyk 2021a) with equality.
Our proof goes via encoding of computation trees of alternating Turing machines working in exponential space and
follows the general hardness-proof-scheme by Lutz 2008.

Introduction

Formal ontologies are of significant importance in artificial
intelligence, playing a central role in the Semantic Web,
ontology-based information integration, or peer-to-peer data
management. In such scenarios, an especially prominent role
is played by description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2017) – a
robust family of logical formalisms used to describe ontologies and serving as the logical underpinning of contemporary
standardised ontology languages. To put knowledge bases to
full use as core part of intelligent information systems, much
attention is being devoted to the area of ontology-based dataaccess, with conjunctive queries (CQs) being employed as a
fundamental querying formalism (Ortiz and Simkus 2012).
In recent years, it has become apparent that various modelling features of DLs affect the complexity of CQ answering
in a rather strong sense. Let us focus on the most popular
DL, ALC. It was first shown in (Lutz 2008) that CQ entailment is exponentially harder than the consistency problem
for ALC extended with inverse roles (I). Shortly after, a
combination of transitivity and role-hierarchies (SH) was
shown as a culprit of higher worst-case complexity of reasoning (Eiter et al. 2009). Finally, also nominals (O) turned
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5495

