The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Single-Domain Generalization in Medical Image Segmentation via
Test-Time Adaptation from Shape Dictionary
Quande Liu1 , Cheng Chen1 , Qi Dou1 , Pheng-Ann Heng1,2
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract

available for model learning. Under this constraint, previous
DG methods depending heavily on accessing multi-domain
data can hardly work well or lack feasibility in the SDG setting. For instance, the adversarial learning method (Li et al.
2018a) learns domain-invariant representations by regularizing the feature space of multiple data sources, which is
infeasible in the case when only one domain is provided for
training. Recently, a few studies have started to address SDG
problem with the typical solution of adversarial data augmentation (Volpi et al. 2018; Qiao, Zhao, and Peng 2020; Li
et al. 2021), which aims to synthesize fictitious samples from
single-domain data to potentially simulate the data distributions of unseen domains. However, since it is extremely difficult to anticipate the distribution of test data, these methods
are less effective in medical imaging where the domain discrepancies could be large due to complex factors and hardly
be simulated from source data (e.g., the domain shift caused
by whether using endorectal coil in prostate MRI scanning).
Moreover, medical data are usually high-dimensional with
tremendous tissue details, making it non-trivial to create
high-quality virtual data even after careful model tuning.
Regarding these limitations, we instead aim to address
the challenging SDG problem in a simple yet effective way,
which is inspired by two key observations in medical image segmentation tasks. First, though the image appearances
differ across clinical centers, the semantic shape of segmentation is highly consistent across data sources reflecting the
general anatomical structures in medical images. Encouragingly, such shape information can be well-represented even
within one single domain, without necessarily aggregating
data from multiple clinical sources. Second, though the target distributions of large discrepancies can hardly be simulated during model training, they can instead be explored
at test time by considering the given inference sample as a
hint. This enables us to mitigate the image distribution bias
of single-domain training by adjusting model parameters for
each unseen data distribution accordingly at test time.
Based on these insights, we present a new method for addressing SDG named Test-time Adaptation from Shape Dictionary (TASD). The core idea is to integrate the general
semantic shapes extracted from single-domain data into the
segmentation network, and further effectively leverage these
prior information through test-time adaptation to generalize
the single-domain model to any unseen domains. To this

Domain generalization typically requires data from multiple
source domains for model learning. However, such strong
assumption may not always hold in practice, especially in
medical field where the data sharing is highly concerned and
sometimes prohibitive due to privacy issue. This paper studies the important yet challenging single domain generalization problem, in which a model is learned under the worstcase scenario with only one source domain to directly generalize to different unseen target domains. We present a novel
approach to address this problem in medical image segmentation, which extracts and integrates the semantic shape prior
information of segmentation that are invariant across domains
and can be well-captured even from single domain data to facilitate segmentation under distribution shifts. Besides, a testtime adaptation strategy with dual-consistency regularization
is further devised to promote dynamic incorporation of these
shape priors under each unseen domain to improve model
generalizability. Extensive experiments on two medical image segmentation tasks demonstrate the consistent improvements of our method across various unseen domains, as well
as its superiority over state-of-the-art approaches in addressing domain generalization under the worst-case scenario.

Introduction
Deep networks are notoriously difficult to generalize to new
domains due to distribution shift between training and testing data acquired at different situations. Domain generalization (DG) has recently emerged to improve the generalizability of deep networks on unseen domains. Most existing DG methods typically require to learn from multi-source
distributions to extract representations that are robust to distribution shifts (Li et al. 2017b). However, the prerequisite to
aggregate multi-domain data may not be always achievable
in practice. In the field of medical imaging, for example,
the data present privacy concerns and are prohibitive to be
shared before taking complex procedures including ethical
approval and patient consent (Price and Cohen 2019). In this
regard, directly generalizing a deep model trained with only
single-domain data to any unseen domain is increasingly important and has wider applicability in medical applications.
This problem is single domain generalization (SDG), the
worst-case scenario of DG with only one source domain
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1756

