The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Naming the Most Anomalous Cluster in Hilbert Space for Structures with
Attribute Information
Janis Kalofolias, Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, University of Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany
{janis.kalofolias,vreeken}@cispa.de

much as possible, either from the rest of the dataset or from
the entirety of it. We express these subsets with deviating
structure as either a clustering (of 2 clusters) in the given reproducing kernel Hilbert space, or the most anomalous subset within that space. Either way, the result is a named subset of the data that, in addition to the members of the subset
itself, is equipped with a meaningful and easily understandable description of this subset.
As an example, consider the active research field of
computer-aided drug discovery, where molecules are scrutinised based on their structure and general chemical properties to find potential drug candidates for a given medical condition. A great amount of information on chemical properties for molecules is available, or can be inferred
with relative ease via simulations based on the molecule
shape, e.g., electronic density, number of atoms, benzene
rings, etc; importantly, such chemical and structural properties of molecules can be captured by an appropriate kernel on molecule shapes. However, only a relatively small
set of drug-like substances has been meticulously annotated
with their drug-related properties by lab specialists. These
latter properties could be suggestive traits like toxicity, bioavailability, affinity to a specific target, etc, which can be
highly indicative of the fitness of a substance for a medical
condition. It would then be of great use to find groups that
stand out with respect to their shape-based properties, but
that at the same time share a common set of drug-related,
revealing traits. In this paradigm, we shift from the discovery of a list of molecules, like paracetamol, ibuprofen, etc,
to a set which, in addition, has an easily accessible description based a set of useful properties, like: ‘painkillers with
high bio-availability and low toxicity’. Aside from the clear
usefulness of this description to a human researcher per se,
the molecules that fulfil this description define a landmark
in the Hilbert Space, whose proximity to non-annotated data
can be assessed with the kernel on molecules.
This paradigm deviates from having one single suggestive trait like toxicity, for which one could fit a
classifier on the suggestive traits or the structure, with
several methods from supervised learning available to
this task. Instead, our goal differs in that there is no
singled-out regression or classification trait. We also seek
for a simple, concise and exact description, which thus
prohibits the use of a linear combination of proper-

Abstract
We consider datasets consisting of arbitrarily structured entities (e.g., molecules, sequences, graphs, etc) whose similarity can be assessed with a reproducing kernel (or a
family thereof). These entities are assumed to additionally
have a set of named attributes (e.g.: number_of_atoms,
stock_price, etc). These attributes can be used to
classify the structured entities in discrete sets (e.g.,
‘number_of_atoms < 3’, ‘stock_price ≤ 100’, etc)
and can effectively serve as Boolean predicates. Our goal is
to use this side-information to provide named kernel-based
anomaly detection. To this end, we propose a method which
is able to find among all possible entity subsets that can be
described as a conjunction of the available predicates either
a) the optimal cluster within the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space, or b) the most anomalous subset within the same
space. Our method employs combinatorial optimisation of an
adaptation of the Maximum-Mean-Discrepancy measure that
captures the above intuition. Additionally, we propose a criterion to select the optimal one out of a family of kernels in
a way that preserves the available side-information. Finally,
we provide several real world datasets that demonstrate the
usefulness of our proposed method.

Introduction
In the setting we consider we are given a dataset of entities, each of which contains an arbitrary structure that can
be represented in a flexible form and consist of multiple dimensions, that can even vary from one entity to the other.
For example, proteins, molecules, graphs, images, time series, or effectively any out of the large variety of structures
on which a meaningful positive definite kernel can be defined. In addition, we assume that a set of relevant attributes
is available for each of the given entities; as such we consider named properties that describe the entities in a way
that is sensible and useful to a human user. More specifically, these attributes should (latently, or explicitly) capture
interesting traits of the studied entities by which it is possible to meaningfully group them.
Our aim is to find, out of all possible subsets of entities
that we can possibly identify by defining conditions on these
attributes, that particular subset whose structure deviates as
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4057

