The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

What Can We Learn Even from the Weakest?
Learning Sketches for Programmatic Strategies
Leandro C. Medeiros,1 * David S. Aleixo,1 * Levi H. S. Lelis2
1

2

Departamento de Informática, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta, Canada

Abstract

of MicroRTS. We show that our methods can be effective
even when cloning the behavior of weak players, such as
a player that chooses their actions at random in the game
of Can’t Stop. Our sketch learning method can be effective
when the cloned strategy is weak because even such strategies might convey information that is helpful for the synthesis of programmatic strategies, such as the program structure required to decide when to stop playing in Can’t Stop
or when to build a specific structure in MicroRTS.
We evaluated our sketch-based SA and UCT methods by
synthesizing approximated best responses to a known programmatic strategy for Can’t Stop (Glenn and Aloi 2009)
and to COAC, the winner of the latest MicroRTS Competition (Ontañón 2020), on four maps. Our sketch-based SA
synthesized strong strategies in all settings tested. As a highlight, it synthesized a strategy that defeats COAC on large
maps of MicroRTS; none of the strategies synthesized by
the baselines were able to defeat COAC on large maps.

In this paper we show that behavioral cloning can be used
to learn effective sketches of programmatic strategies. We
show that even the sketches learned by cloning the behavior of weak players can help the synthesis of programmatic
strategies. This is because even weak players can provide
helpful information, e.g., that a player must choose an action in their turn of the game. If behavioral cloning is not
employed, the synthesizer needs to learn even the most basic
information by playing the game, which can be computationally expensive. We demonstrate empirically the advantages of
our sketch-learning approach with simulated annealing and
UCT synthesizers. We evaluate our synthesizers in the games
of Can’t Stop and MicroRTS. The sketch-based synthesizers
are able to learn stronger programmatic strategies than their
original counterparts. Our synthesizers generate strategies of
Can’t Stop that defeat a traditional programmatic strategy for
the game. They also synthesize strategies that defeat the best
performing method from the latest MicroRTS competition.

Related Works

Introduction

Our work is related to methods for synthesizing programmatic policies, in particular those that use some form of behavioral cloning such as imitation learning (Schaal 1999).
Bastani, Pu, and Solar-Lezama (2018) presented an algorithm that uses a variant of the imitation learning algorithm
DAgger (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011) to distill a highperforming neural policy into an interpretable decision tree.
Verma et al. (2018) use DAgger and a neural policy
to help with the synthesis of programmatic policies. The
actions the neural policy chooses on a set of states are
used in a Bayesian optimization procedure for finding suitable constant values for the programmatic policies. Verma
et al. (2019) use a similar approach, but the neural model is
trained so that it is not “too different” from the synthesized
policies, with the goal of easing the optimization task.
We differ from previous work in that we do not assume
the oracle is available for queries as in DAgger-like methods.
We also do not assume that the oracle is a neural network as
Verma et al. (2019) do. For example, in our experiments we
use a data set from a human oracle. We also do not require
the strategy to be cloned to be high performing; we are able
to learn effective sketches even from weak strategies.
Mariño et al. (2021) introduced Lasi, a method that uses
behavioral cloning to simplify the language used for syn-

One needs to search in large program spaces to synthesize effective programmatic strategies. In addition to dealing
with large spaces, synthesizers often lack effective functions
for guiding the search. This is in contrast with neural methods, where gradient information is available to guide the
search. The problem of neural methods is their lack of interpretability. Despite being elusive, we can often understand,
verify, and even manually modify programmatic strategies.
In this paper we show that behavioral cloning (Bain and
Sammut 1996) can be used to learn program sketches (SolarLezama 2009) to speed up the synthesis of strong programmatic strategies. Sketches are incomplete programs that
serve as starting points for synthesis. We investigate the use
of this sketch learning approach with synthesizers employing Simulated Annealing (SA) (Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, and Vecchi 1983) and UCT (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006) as search
algorithms and evaluate them in the context of computing
a best response for a target strategy in two-player zero-sum
games. Specifically, we evaluate our methods in the board
game of Can’t Stop and in the real-time strategy (RTS) game
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7761

