The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

BiRdQA: A Bilingual Dataset for Question Answering on Tricky Riddles
Yunxiang Zhang, Xiaojun Wan
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{yx.zhang,wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

en

Abstract
A riddle is a question or statement with double or veiled
meanings, followed by an unexpected answer. Solving riddle is a challenging task for both machine and human, testing the capability of understanding figurative, creative natural language and reasoning with commonsense knowledge.
We introduce BiRdQA, a bilingual multiple-choice question
answering dataset with 6614 English riddles and 8751 Chinese riddles. For each riddle-answer pair, we provide four
distractors with additional information from Wikipedia. The
distractors are automatically generated at scale with minimal bias. Existing monolingual and multilingual QA models fail to perform well on our dataset, indicating that there
is a long way to go before machine can beat human on
solving tricky riddles. The dataset is publicly available at
https://forms.gle/NvT7DfWhAPhvoFvH7.

1



zh

As far as I run, I never meet my brother on my right. What am I?
carriage

A carriage is a private four-wheeled vehicle for people …

wheel

A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate …

steering

Steering is a system of components, linkages …

brake

A brake is a mechanical device that inhibits …

piston

A piston is a component of reciprocating …
一只黑鸡立台上，用嘴啄食点头忙，
不啄青菜不啄米，专啄花布做衣裳。

A black chicken on the table is pecking for food and nodding its head. It
pecks neither vegetables nor rice grains, but only cotton for clothes.

钩针
crochet hook

钩针是进行钩针编织的重要工具…
Crochet needle is an important tool for crochet knitting …

弹棉花
fluffing cotton

弹棉花…目的是让棉花更加松软，适合使用…
The aim of fluffing cotton is to make cotton softer and …

缝纫机

缝纫机能缝制棉、麻、丝、毛、人造纤维等织物…
Sewing machine can sew cotton, hemp, silk, wool …

编织品
knitting

编织品是指人或机器所编织的产品…
Knitting refers to the products woven by people or machines …

纺车
spinning wheel

纺车通常有一个用手或脚驱动的轮子…
A spinning wheel usually has a wheel driven by hands or feet …

 sewing machine

Introduction

Question Answering (QA) is a challenging task in the field
of Natural Language Processing (NLP). Existing literature
on QA has addressed various kinds of questions, including extractive questions (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Seo et al.
2016), multi-hop questions (Yang et al. 2018; Pan et al.
2021a), commonsense questions (Talmor et al. 2019; Yasunaga et al. 2021) and logical questions (Liu et al. 2020b;
Huang et al. 2021). While there is a trend that question answering involves more complicated reasoning, the community overlooks the importance of understanding the question
itself before reasoning for the answer. Understanding language requires both linguistic knowledge and commonsense
knowledge (LoBue and Yates 2011). However, existing QA
datasets are commonly sourced from Wikipedia (Yang, Yih,
and Meek 2015; Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and news articles
(Trischler et al. 2017), inevitably leading to the creation of
superficial, literal questions, which are easy to comprehend.
In order to find more challenging questions with diverse linguistic styles and rich commonsense knowledge, we turn to
riddles for help.

打一物

Guess an
object

Figure 1: Examples from the English (the upper one) and
Chinese (the lower one) part of BiRdQA. There are four distractors and one correct answer for a riddle and an introduction from English Wikipedia or Chinese Baidu Baike is provided for each candidate. Note that Chinese riddles have additional hints. The checkmark indicates the correct answer.
A riddle is a traditional verbal expression which contains
one or more descriptive elements, a pair of which may be
in opposition; the referent of the elements is to be guessed
(Georges and Dundes 1963). As a classical form of guessing game, riddle has been a popular part of folk literature
across many countries. One of the most wide-spread riddles appears in Sophocles’s play Oedipus the King (Sophocles 1994), where Oedipus is tasked with saving the city of
Thebes from a Sphinx by solving her riddle, “What goes on
four legs in the morning, on two legs at noon, and on three
legs in the evening? – human”. While it is a matter of life
and death for Oedipus to answer the riddle correctly, it is interesting to investigate the potential of AI for solving riddle,
given the rise of deep learning and pretraining based methods in NLP.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11748

