The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Assessing a Single Image in Reference-Guided Image Synthesis
Jiayi Guo1 , Chaoqun Du1 , Jiangshan Wang2 , Huijuan Huang3 , Pengfei Wan3 , Gao Huang1,4 *
1

Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{guo-jy20, dcq20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hill@bupt.edu.cn, {huanghuijuan, wanpengfei}@kuaishou.com,
gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

To enhance user experience in RIS applications, it is of
great practical significance to quantitatively evaluate the images generated by GANs. Although several sample-based
GAN evaluation metrics have been proposed (Xu et al.
2018), e.g., Kernel MMD (Gretton et al. 2012), Inception
Score (IS) (Salimans et al. 2016), Mode Score (MS) (Che
et al. 2016), Wasserstein distance and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al. 2017), they mainly focus on assessing the whole generated image distribution. In specific,
the discrepancy between feature distributions of real and
generated images is computed as a quality measure.
However, these metrics are not applicable to evaluate a
single generated image. In interactive RIS applications, a
user may submit one source image (or a pair of source image and reference image) at a time and expects to obtain a
satisfying generated image. Unfortunately, due to the notoriously unstable training procedure of GANs, it is challenging
to guarantee that each generated image is synthesized with
high quality, especially when the source image and the reference image have a large style discrepancy.
Hence, it is important to design an assessment metric for
a single image in RIS to improve user experience. Once
the quality of each generated image could be effectively
assessed, we could simultaneously deploy several different
models to generate images for a task and automatically render the image of the highest quality score to users. If all these
images are synthesized with low quality, we could refuse to
provide any image. However, recent works on single image
assessment are either designed to report the average quality
score with dozens of images (Shaham, Dekel, and Michaeli
2019) or not able to capture the style similarity between a
generated image and its reference (Bosse et al. 2016; Talebi
and Milanfar 2018; Zhang et al. 2018a; Gu et al. 2020).
In this paper, we propose a general learning-based
framework, Reference-guided Image Synthesis Assessment
(RISA), through which the quality of a single generated image can be effectively assessed. As illustrated in Figure 1,
given a generated image and its reference image, RISA first
extracts their style codes via the style encoder. Then the difference of style codes is calculated as the input of multiple
binary classifiers. Finally, the quality score is obtained by
averaging the predictions of all classifiers.
RISA works in a weakly supervised scheme, i.e., it does
not require any human annotations. As illustrated in Figure

Assessing the performance of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has been an important topic due to its practical
significance. Although several evaluation metrics have been
proposed, they generally assess the quality of the whole generated image distribution. For Reference-guided Image Synthesis (RIS) tasks, i.e., rendering a source image in the style
of another reference image, where assessing the quality of a
single generated image is crucial, these metrics are not applicable. In this paper, we propose a general learning-based
framework, Reference-guided Image Synthesis Assessment
(RISA) to quantitatively evaluate the quality of a single generated image. Notably, the training of RISA does not require
human annotations. In specific, the training data for RISA are
acquired by the intermediate models from the training procedure in RIS, and weakly annotated by the number of models’
iterations, based on the positive correlation between image
quality and iterations. As this annotation is too coarse as a
supervision signal, we introduce two techniques: 1) a pixelwise interpolation scheme to refine the coarse labels, and 2)
multiple binary classifiers to replace a naı̈ve regressor. In addition, an unsupervised contrastive loss is introduced to effectively capture the style similarity between a generated image
and its reference image. Empirical results on various datasets
demonstrate that RISA is highly consistent with human preference and transfers well across models.

Introduction
Reference-guided Image Synthesis (RIS) aims to utilize
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) to modify the style of a source image to that of
a reference image. As described in recent image translation
works (Lee et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2018; Choi et al. 2020),
style refers to the unique appearance of a single image, while
the underlying spatial structure is defined as content. Style
also coincides with the definition of texture in some other
works (Park et al. 2020). Nowadays, generative models are
widely deployed to provide various RIS services, such as
modifying a user’s facial features to that of a super star, or
changing a building’s original appearance to another.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

753

