The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Feature Importance Explanations for Temporal Black-Box Models
Akshay Sood, Mark Craven
Department of Computer Sciences
Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, Wisconsin, U.S.A.
sood@cs.wisc.edu, craven@biostat.wisc.edu
Abstract

terizations (Lee, Alvarez-Melis, and Jaakkola 2018). However, these approaches require specific model architectures
or training-time alterations, limiting their applicability.
Model-agnostic methods such as LIME (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016) and SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017)
avoid this limitation by treating models as black-boxes but
are designed for tabular representations. Recent work has
begun to address model-agnostic explanation for temporal
models. Tonekaboni et al. (2020) propose FIT, a method
to assign importance scores for sequence-sequence models,
and Bento et al. (2020) propose TimeSHAP, an extension
of SHAP to temporal models. Importantly, all these methods focus on local interpretability, which seeks to explain
individual predictions in terms of their important features,
rather than global interpretability, which seeks to characterize
a model’s decisions across a population of instances.
Whereas most work in explanation methods has focused on
local explanations, we focus on global explanations because
they are important for clinical and many scientific domains.
In clinical domains, it is important to provide an overall description of what a model does before it is deployed, not just
be able to explain individual predictions after deployment.
Moreover, global explanations offer the possibility of identifying previously unrecognized risk or protective factors,
and important windows of exposure for a given condition.
While local explanations may be used to justify specific decisions, global explanations are often advantageous for model
diagnostics, feature engineering, bias detection, trust, and
discovery (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Ibrahim et al. 2019).
Our approach falls under the class of perturbation or
removal-based methods for model explanation (Covert, Lundberg, and Lee 2020a). This class includes other modelagnostic and global methods such as Feature Occlusion
(FO) (Zeiler and Fergus 2014) and CXPlain (Schwab and
Karlen 2019), which perturb features by setting their values
to zero but which are focused on tabular data, with a few
exceptions (Suresh et al. 2017; Tonekaboni et al. 2020). Our
approach is most similar to permutation-based feature importance methods. Breiman (2001) uses permutations to identify
important features in random forests, and many variants of
feature importance using permutations have since been studied (Strobl et al. 2008; Ojala and Garriga 2010; Altmann
et al. 2010; Gregorutti, Michel, and Saint-Pierre 2015; Fisher,
Rudin, and Dominici 2019; Zhou and Hooker 2020). The

Models in the supervised learning framework may capture rich
and complex representations over the features that are hard for
humans to interpret. Existing methods to explain such models
are often specific to architectures and data where the features
do not have a time-varying component. In this work, we propose TIME, a method to explain models that are inherently
temporal in nature. Our approach (i) uses a model-agnostic
permutation-based approach to analyze global feature importance, (ii) identifies the importance of salient features with
respect to their temporal ordering as well as localized windows of influence, and (iii) uses hypothesis testing to provide
statistical rigor.

Introduction
The last decade has seen an explosion in models that learn
rich representations over large, complex parameter spaces.
These have increasingly been applied in domains with a high
degree of social impact, such as healthcare, but this very
complexity makes them black-boxes whose decision-making
is hard to explain, a critical deficit in many such domains.
There has thus been a concomitant rise in methods to generate
explanations for black-box models. Existing research has
largely focused on explaining models trained over tabular
data, where each feature takes a single value per instance,
instead of explaining temporal models, where the instances
consist of sequences or time series. In this work, we present a
method that advances the state of the art in model explanation
by being specifically focused on temporal models, being
model-agnostic, and providing global explanations.
Most existing explanation methods are designed for tabular,
as opposed to temporal, representations. Ismail et al. (2020)
demonstrate the unreliability and inaccuracy of commonly
used model-agnostic and gradient-based methods when used
to explain temporal models. Some approaches have focused
on interpreting recurrent neural networks (Karpathy, Johnson,
and Fei-Fei 2015; Suresh et al. 2017; Ismail et al. 2019) and
attention-based models (Choi et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2019),
while others have explored methods to encourage temporal
models during training to be more interpretable using tree
regularization (Wu et al. 2017) and game-theoretic characCopyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8351

