The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reinforcement Learning of Causal Variables Using Mediation Analysis
Tue Herlau,1 Rasmus Larsen2
1

Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark
2
Alexandra Institute, 2300 Copenhagen, Denmark
tuhe@dtu.dk, ralars@dtu.dk

Observation

Abstract
We consider the problem of acquiring causal representations
and concepts in a reinforcement learning setting. Our approach defines a causal variable as being both manipulable by
a policy, and able to predict the outcome. We thereby obtain a
parsimonious causal graph in which interventions occur at the
level of policies. The approach avoids defining a generative
model of the data, prior pre-processing, or learning the transition kernel of the Markov decision process. Instead, causal
variables and policies are determined by maximizing a new
optimization target inspired by mediation analysis, which differs from the expected return. The maximization is accomplished using a generalization of Bellman’s equation which is
shown to converge, and the method finds meaningful causal
representations in a simulated environment.

Internal causal model

General causal agent

Policy goal
Actions

Figure 1: In the D OORKEY environment, the agent (red)
must learn to pick up a key to open the door and get to the
goal. Our causal agent learns a small, coarse-grained causal
network, and uses it when training its policy.

Introduction

offer a generative process of the underlying temporal phenomena (i.e. patient history). The variables are said to be in
a descriptive relationship to the underlying phenomena, to
emphasize that they are not identified as high-level variables
in a generative process, but rather features computed from a
more complicated underlying phenomena.
The reduction of the data-generating process to a few abstract primitives in a causal relationship is central to concept acquisition (Tenenbaum et al. 2011), and more broadly
to knowledge representation (Davis, Shrobe, and Szolovits
1993).
We aim to answer the following question: Can we automatically learn a parsimonious causal model which is descriptive, rather than generative, of the underlying problem,
while still capturing relevant causal knowledge?
To illustrate, consider the D OORKEY environment, fig. 1.
The agent must pick up the key, open the door and go to the
goal state in order to receive the reward. Instead of identifying a generative process of the agent moving around the
maze, our approach identifies a binary causal variable (for
instance, whether the door is opened or not) and builds a
small causal graph representing the causal relationship between the identified variable, policy choice and return. The
agent is thereby imbued with the causal knowledge that the
identified variable is in a causal relationship with the return.
Our approach1 has two central features: First, that we do

Hard open problems in reinforcement learning, such as distributional shift, generalization from small samples, disentangled representations and counter-factual reasoning, are
intrinsically related to causality (Schölkopf 2019). Furthermore, causal representations have been emphasized as
central to concept acquisition and knowledge representation (Tenenbaum et al. 2011).
Statistical causal analysis, as developed and popularized
by Judea Pearl, assumes that data arises as transformations
of noise sources according to a causal graph (Pearl 2009).
From a practical perspective, describing data generatively as
arising from non-linear transformations of i.i.d. noise is an
approach that underlies the most successful machine learning models today (Shrestha and Mahmood 2019). Such an
approach has been successfully applied for example in fast
concept acquisition (Tenenbaum et al. 2011; Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015), as well as in control (Deisenroth and Rasmussen 2011; Levine et al. 2016).
Our approach differs from these in terms of the scale of
modeling, a term coined by Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf
(2017):
Although traditional examples of causal modeling, such
as the SMOKING → TAR DEPOSITS → CANCER example (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018), do offer a generative process of the few variables included in the analysis, they do not
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6910

Code: https://gitlab.compute.dtu.dk/tuhe/causal nie

