The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ZINB-Based Graph Embedding Autoencoder for Single-Cell RNA-Seq
Interpretations
Zhuohan Yu1 * , Yifu Lu1 * , Yunhe Wang2 , Fan Tang1 , Ka-Chun Wong3 , Xiangtao Li1†
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Jilin, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
zhuohan20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, luyf20@mails.jlu.edu.cn, wangyh082@hebut.edu.cn,
tangfan@jlu.edu.cn, kc.w@cityu.edu.hk, lixt314@jlu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

research, traditional clustering methods such as K-means
(MacQueen et al. 1967), hierarchical clustering (Johnson
1967) and density-based clustering (Kriegel et al. 2011) have
been applied to address clustering tasks. However, clustering analysis of scRNA-seq data remains a statistical and
computational challenge, owing to the high heterogeneity
of genome coverage and some technical limitations rendering scRNA-seq data very sparse and having a large number of zero elements (Angerer et al. 2017; Grün, Kester, and
Van Oudenaarden 2014). Therefore, it is imperative to develop effective computational methods to unleash the full
potential of scRNA-seq.
Several clustering methods have been developed to address these limitations. Most studies use sophisticated techniques that involve iterative clustering, for instance, CIDR
is a fast PCA-based algorithm for imputation and clustering
based on a dissimilarity matrix (Lin, Troup, and Ho 2017).
SC3 proposes a consensus-clustering framework for singlecell RNA-seq data, which reduces gene dimensions using
PCA and Laplacian transformation (Kiselev et al. 2017).
SIMLR uses multi-kernel learning to find a more robust distance metric and to address the high levels of dropout events
(Wang et al. 2017). However, these computational methods usually tend to provide suboptimal results on scRNAseq data because of the extreme sparsity caused by lack of
gene expression levels. Moreover, most of them rely on full
graph Laplacian matrices, which have high computational
and storage costs.
In recent years, deep embedding clustering approaches
have successfully developed to model the high-dimensional
and sparse scRNA-seq data; such as, scDeepcluster (Tian
et al. 2019), scDCC (Tian et al. 2021), scziDesk (Chen
et al. 2020), scDHA (Tran et al. 2021), and DCA (Eraslan
et al. 2019). They can iteratively refine clusters by learning
highly confident assignments using an auxiliary target distribution to achieve better clustering results. However, these
deep embedding clustering methods often ignore the structural information propagation and node relationships. Recently, emerging graph neural networks (GNNs) have been
demonstrated to naturally capture graph structure information propagated through neighbor information (Zeng et al.
2020). Graph embedding clustering often combines deep autoencoder and graph clustering algorithms, which can learn

Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) provides
high-throughput information about the genome-wide
gene expression levels at the single-cell resolution,
bringing a precise understanding on the transcriptome
of individual cells. Unfortunately, the rapidly growing
scRNA-seq data and the prevalence of dropout events
pose substantial challenges for cell type annotation.
Here, we propose a single-cell model-based deep graph
embedding clustering (scTAG) method, which simultaneously learns cell–cell topology representations and
identifies cell clusters based on deep graph convolutional network. scTAG integrates the zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) model into a topology adaptive graph convolutional autoencoder to learn the lowdimensional latent representation and adopts Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence for the clustering tasks.
By simultaneously optimizing the clustering loss, ZINB
loss, and the cell graph reconstruction loss, scTAG
jointly optimizes cluster label assignment and feature
learning with the topological structures preserved in
an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments on 16
single-cell RNA-seq datasets from diverse yet representative single-cell sequencing platforms demonstrate the
superiority of scTAG over various state-of-the-art clustering methods.

Introduction
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) techniques enable elucidating the genetic heterogeneity of individual
cells, which is essential for characterizing cell types based
on the transcriptome (Kolodziejczyk et al. 2015), studying developmental biology (Chowdhury 2021), discovering
complex diseases (Costa et al. 2013), and inferring cell trajectories (Tran and Bader 2020). Therefore, accurate identification of cell types has become a key step in singlecell RNA-seq analysis (Macosko et al. 2015). Clustering
has been proven to be the most effective method for cell
type annotation, as it can identify cell types in an unbiased
manner (Kiselev, Andrews, and Hemberg 2019). In early
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4671

