The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neural Marionette: Unsupervised Learning of Motion Skeleton
and Latent Dynamics from Volumetric Video
Jinseok Bae, Hojun Jang, Cheol-Hui Min, Hyungun Choi, Young Min Kim
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
{capoo95, j12040208, mch5048, woody101, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present Neural Marionette, an unsupervised approach that
discovers the skeletal structure from a dynamic sequence and
learns to generate diverse motions that are consistent with the
observed motion dynamics. Given a video stream of point
cloud observation of an articulated body under arbitrary motion, our approach discovers the unknown low-dimensional
skeletal relationship that can effectively represent the movement. Then the discovered structure is utilized to encode the
motion priors of dynamic sequences in a latent structure,
which can be decoded to the relative joint rotations to represent the full skeletal motion. Our approach works without
any prior knowledge of the underlying motion or skeletal
structure, and we demonstrate that the discovered structure
is even comparable to the hand-labeled ground truth skeleton
in representing a 4D sequence of motion. The skeletal structure embeds the general semantics of possible motion space
that can generate motions for diverse scenarios. We verify that
the learned motion prior is generalizable to the multi-modal
sequence generation, interpolation of two poses, and motion
retargeting to a different skeletal structure.

Figure 1: Overview of Neural Marionette. Our model learns
to discover adaptive skeleton from volumetric video, and
finds rules of motion by observing movements of skeletons.

2021; Li et al. 2021b; Lin et al. 2020). But they are not designed to understand the motion semantics that can cover a
large variation of plausible motion of a subject with an unknown skeletal structure.
In this paper, we propose Neural Marionette, a fully unsupervised framework that discovers a semantically consistent
skeleton from a 3D motion sequence and learns the general
motion dynamics of the discovered structure, which is illustrated in Figure 1. Our framework consists of two main
stages: a skeleton module that determines explicit skeleton
for motion, and a dynamics module that learns to propagate the skeletons along the time axis. Given point cloud
sequence capturing the dynamic movement of an articulated
body, our proposed model first learns to detect a skeleton
tree without any prior knowledge of the topology. To detect candidate nodes of a skeletal graph, we adapt the keypoint detectors, which have been demonstrated to be simple yet powerful in reasoning motions from video (Minderer
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Suwajanakorn et al. 2018; Chen,
Abbeel, and Pathak 2021). Our work extends the unsupervised keypoint detection and explicitly models the parentchild relationship between the detected keypoints to build a
skeletal tree, which serves as a powerful prior of structure

Introduction
The skeletal structure of an articulated body (Ceccarelli
2004) has been widely deployed for robotics control (Veerapaneni et al. 2020; Ha, Xu, and Song 2020) or character animations (Xu et al. 2019b; Liu et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020).
The low-dimensional motion structure can act as an important cue to detect accurate movement and provide interaction between a human and an intelligent agent in a complex
environment. Successful applications usually rely on strong
priors such as human body joints, hands, or faces (Zuffi and
Black 2015; Pavlakos et al. 2019; Zimmermann, Argus, and
Brox 2021; Schmidtke et al. 2021) incorporated with the
recent deep learning architecture. However, it is challenging to obtain the accurate structure of an unknown subject
from raw observation. Some works extract skeleton using
geometric priors, such as medial axis transform (Lin et al.
2021) or low-dimensional primitives (Paschalidou, Ulusoy,
and Geiger 2019; Paschalidou et al. 2021), while others discover the unknown motion prior for 4D tracking or motion prediction in temporally dense observation (Bozic et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

86

