The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Large-Neighbourhood Search for Optimisation in Answer-Set Solving
Thomas Eiter1 , Tobias Geibinger1 , Nelson Higuera Ruiz1 , Nysret Musliu1,2 , Johannes Oetsch1 ,
Daria Stepanova3
1

Institute for Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Favoritenstraße 9–11, 1040 Vienna, Austria,
2
CD-Lab Artis, TU Wien, Favoritenstraße 9–11, 1040 Vienna, Austria,
3
Bosch Center for AI, Robert Bosch Campus 1, 71272 Renningen, Germany
{eiter, nhiguera, oetsch}@kr.tuwien.ac.at, {tgeibing, musliu}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, daria.stepanova@de.bosch.com
Abstract

For ASP however, to the best of our knowledge this potential
is by and largely untapped. Recent work (Geibinger, Mischek, and Musliu 2021) touched LNS using it with the solver
clingcon for a solution of a specific problem. However, a
principled and systematic use of LNS in ASP is unexplored.
This is of particular interest, as ASP is offering problemsolving capacities beyond other solving paradigms such as
MIP and CP (Dantsin et al. 2001; Leone et al. 2006).
Our main contribution is a framework for LNS optimisation for answer-set solving. To effectively explore different
neighbourhoods, we build on the recent solver features of
multi-shot solving and solving under assumptions (Gebser
et al. 2019). Multi-shot solving allows us to embed ASP in a
more complex workflow that involves tight control over the
solver’s grounding and solving process. Learned heuristics
and constraints can be kept between solver calls and repeated
program grounding is effectively avoided. Solving under assumptions is a mechanism by which we can temporally fix
parts of a solution between solver calls. While the underlying
ideas are generic, we present our framework for the solvers
clingo and its extension clingo-dl for difference logic,
as well as clingcon for ASP with integer constraints from
the Potassco family.1
We introduce two principled ways of using LNS with ASP.
• First, we present a system that can be used out of the box
with all the supported ASP solvers. Different neighbourhoods
can be seamlessly specified in a declarative way as part of
the ASP encoding itself. To this end, dedicated predicates are
used (no language extension is needed). If no neighbourhood
is specified, an automatically generated random neighbourhood is the default. Already the latter turns out to be quite
effective for many problems. We demonstrate this solver and
its effectiveness for different optimisation problems. In particular, we use the well-known problems Social Golfer and
Travelling Salesperson Problem, as well as generating smallest sets of clues for Sudoku. Furthermore, we consider an
optimisation variant of the Strategic Companies problem and
Shift Design (Abseher et al. 2016) as a real-world inspired
benchmark. Throughout, LNS with ASP yields improved
bounds compared to plain ASP with no or little extra effort.
• The second way to use LNS with ASP in our framework
is by instantiating an abstract Python class that realises the

While Answer-Set Programming (ASP) is a prominent approach to declarative problem solving, optimisation problems
can still be a challenge for it. Large-Neighbourhood Search
(LNS) is a metaheuristic for optimisation where parts of a
solution are alternately destroyed and reconstructed that has
high but untapped potential for ASP solving. We present a
framework for LNS optimisation in answer-set solving in
which neighbourhoods can be specified either declaratively as
part of the ASP encoding or automatically generated by code.
To effectively explore different neighbourhoods, we focus on
multi-shot solving as it allows to avoid program regrounding.
We illustrate the framework on different optimisation problems some of which are notoriously difficult, including shift
planning and a parallel machine scheduling problem from
semi-conductor production, which demonstrate the effectiveness of the LNS approach.

Introduction
Efficient solver technology and a simple modelling language
have put Answer-Set Programming (ASP) (Lifschitz 2019)
at the forefront of approaches to declarative problem solving
with a growing number of applications in academia and industry. Many practical applications require optimisation of some
objective function. This often is a challenge as making ASP
encodings scale and perform well for the problem instances
encountered can be tricky. While the performance of ASP
can be improved by various means like manual or automatic
tuning of solver parameters (Hoos, Lindauer, and Schaub
2014), adding domain-specific heuristics (Dodaro et al. 2016;
Gebser et al. 2013), or manual code rewriting for exploiting
symmetries or achieving a smaller program grounding, these
approaches might often need considerable time or expertise.
Large Neighbourhood Search (LNS) (Shaw 1998; Pisinger
and Ropke 2010) is a metaheuristic that proceeds in iterations by successively destroying and reconstructing parts
of a given solution with the goal to obtain better values for
an objective function. For the reconstruction part, complete
solvers can be used, and it is in fact common to effectively
combine LNS with, e.g., MIP (Danna, Rothberg, and Pape
2005; Rothberg 2007) and CP (Shaw 1998; Perron, Shaw,
and Furnon 2004; Berthold et al. 2011; Björdal et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5616

https://potassco.org/.

