The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Are Vision-Language Transformers Learning Multimodal Representations? A
Probing Perspective
Emmanuelle Salin1 , Badreddine Farah2 , Stéphane Ayache1 , Benoit Favre1
1

Aix Marseille Univ, Université de Toulon, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
2
École Sup Galilée, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, France
{emmanuelle.salin,sephane.ayache,benoit.favre}@lis-lab.fr, badreddine.farah@edu.univ-paris13.fr

Abstract

While the results are impressive, it is important to understand how multimodal information is encoded in the representations learned by those models, and how affected they
are by various bias and properties of their training data.
A few studies have been conducted to better understand
those models and their representations. (Cao et al. 2020)
have probed attention heads at various layers of the models, showing that textual modality is more important than
visual modality for model decisions. This prevalence of
language over vision in multimodal models is not specific
to transformer-based representation models, as noticed by
(Goyal et al. 2017a). (Li, Gan, and Liu 2020) have looked
into the robustness of the representations to manipulations
of the input, compared to more traditional models. (Hendricks and Nematzadeh 2021) relied on probing tasks to
study verb understanding in pre-trained transformer-based
models and determined that models learn less multimodal
concepts associated to verbs than to subjects and objects.
While these studies have shed light on some particular aspects of transformer-based VL models, they lack a more systematic analysis of monomodal biases that impede the nature
of the learned representations.

In recent years, joint text-image embeddings have significantly improved thanks to the development of transformerbased Vision-Language models. Despite these advances, we
still need to better understand the representations produced by
those models. In this paper, we compare pre-trained and finetuned representations at a vision, language and multimodal
level. To that end, we use a set of probing tasks to evaluate
the performance of state-of-the-art Vision-Language models
and introduce new datasets specifically for multimodal probing. These datasets are carefully designed to address a range
of multimodal capabilities while minimizing the potential for
models to rely on bias. Although the results confirm the ability of Vision-Language models to understand color at a multimodal level, the models seem to prefer relying on bias in text
data for object position and size. On semantically adversarial
examples, we find that those models are able to pinpoint finegrained multimodal differences. Finally, we also notice that
fine-tuning a Vision-Language model on multimodal tasks
does not necessarily improve its multimodal ability. We make
all datasets and code available to replicate experiments.

Introduction

In that light, we are interested in studying the multimodal
capacity of VL representations, and in exploring what information is learned and forgotten between pre-training and
fine-tuning, as we think this could show the current limits
of the pre-training process. Inspired by probing tasks developed in the Natural Language Processing field, we probe
three VL models: UNITER, LXMERT and ViLT to answer
those questions. We probe both pre-trained and fine-tuned
models. We propose probing tasks and collect associated
datasets to evaluate the monomodal and multimodal capabilities of those models over a range of concepts. We find
that UNITER reaches better overall results on the language
modality, while ViLT reaches better results on the vision
modality. Finally, we notice that while the models show their
ability to identify colors, they do not yet have multimodal
capacity to distinguish object size and position. We make
the set of monomodal and multimodal probing tasks, as well
as all software developed for this study, available for further
research1 .

Vision-Language (VL) tasks consist in jointly processing a
picture and a text related to the picture. VL tasks, such as
visual question answering, cross modal retrieval or generation, are notoriously difficult because of the necessity for
models to build sensible multimodal representations that can
relate fine-grained elements of the text and the picture. Following the success of pre-trained transformers for language
modeling such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018), the community
has proposed various transformer-based models, such as VilBERT (Lu et al. 2019), LXMERT (Tan and Bansal 2019),
VLBERT (Su et al. 2019), UNITER (Chen et al. 2020), OSCAR (Li et al. 2020b), VinVL (Zhang et al. 2021), ViLT
(Kim, Son, and Kim 2021) or ERNIE-VIL (Yu et al. 2021),
that combine representations from both the text and image
modalities to reach state-of-the-art results in several multimodal tasks. Similar models have been developed in the field
of video-language pre-training, such as ClipBERT (Lei et al.
2021) and HERO (Li et al. 2020a).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11248

https://github.com/ejsalin/vlm-probing

