The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Locally Private k-Means Clustering with Constant Multiplicative Approximation
and Near-Optimal Additive Error
Anamay Chaturvedi, Matthew Jones, Huy Lê Nguyễn
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
chaturvedi.a@northeastern.edu, jones.m@northeastern.edu, nguyen.hu@northeastern.edu

any two neighboring datasets D1 , D2 ∈ X n ,

Abstract
Given a data set of size n in d0 -dimensional Euclidean space,
the k-means problem asks for a set of k points (called centers) such that the sum of the `22 -distances between the data
points and the set of centers is minimized. Previous work on
this problem in the local differential privacy setting shows
how to achieve multiplicative approximation factors arbitrarily close to optimal, but suffers high additive error. The
additive error has also been seen to be an issue in implementations of differentially private k-means clustering algorithms in both the central and local settings. In this work,
we introduce a new locally private k-means clustering algorithm that achieves near-optimal additive error whilst retaining constant multiplicative approximation√factors and round
complexity. Concretely, given any c > 2, our algorithm
√
2
achieves O(k1+Õ(1/(c −2)) d0 n log d0 poly log n) additive
2
error with an O(c ) multiplicative approximation factor.

P (A(D1 ) ∈ S) ≤ exp()P (A(D2 ) ∈ S).
Informally, differential privacy asks for a guarantee that
the likelihood of any possible output does not change too
much by adding to or dropping from our data set any single value from the data universe. In practice, this guarantee
is fulfilled by adding carefully calibrated noise to quantities that are information-theoretically sensitive to the private
data, and the goal is to achieve relatively low error under
these privacy constraints. Perfect answers to a problem typically violate privacy; as a consequence, the constraints of
privacy usually enforce harsher lower bounds on accuracy
or utility than those imposed by the limits of time or sample
efficient computation.
In local differential privacy (LDP) the constraints are even
more severe; the entity solving the algorithmic problem only
gets access to noisy, privatized data. Formally,

Introduction

Definition 2 (Local differential privacy (LDP), (Kasiviswanathan et al. 2011)). Consider a protocol which
queries some functions of individual records in a distributed
private dataset over r rounds of interaction, and let the response to the queries for the private datum p be A(p) =
(A1 (p), . . . , Ar (p)), where Ai (p) is the response in the ith
round. We say that this protocol is -locally differentially
private (LDP) if the algorithm that outputs privatized responses for any agent, i.e. p 7→ A(p), is -DP.

Given a set D0 of n points in a d0 -dimensional ball with unit
diameter in Euclidean space, the k-means clustering problem asks for a set of k points S such that the sum of `22 distances from each data point to the closest respective point
in S, which we denote fD0 (S), is minimized. Although kmeans clustering in the non-private setting is well-studied,
over the past few years there have been several developments
in the differentially private (DP) setting. Differential privacy
(Dwork et al. 2006) provides a framework to characterize
the loss in privacy which occurs when sensitive data is processed and the output of this computation is revealed publicly. Although there are different ways to define and capture
this loss in privacy, broadly speaking these characterizations
tend to be either central or local in nature. The definition of
central DP is formalized as follows:

This constraint forces strong lower bounds
√ for locally private protocols; a lower bound of Ω((k + n)/) is known
for the additive error of any -LDP interactive constantfactor multiplicative approximation algorithm for the kmeans clustering problem that operates in a constant number of rounds (Stemmer 2020; Nguyen, Chaturvedi, and
Xu 2021). Despite the lower bounds known for this and
other problems, local differential privacy is often utilized
in practice (Erlingsson, Pihur, and Korolova 2014; Thakurta
et al. 2017). Making progress for LDP k-means clustering,
a fundamental subroutine for many big-data applications, is
hence of real-world interest as well.

Definition 1 (Differential privacy (DP), (Dwork et al.
2006)). Two datasets D1 , D2 ∈ X n are neighboring if they
differ in at most one record. An algorithm A : X n → Y is
said to be -differentially private (DP) if for any S ⊂ Y and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
0
An extended version of this paper with all proofs and missing
details may be found at (Chaturvedi, Jones, and Nguyen 2021).

Recent work on LDP k-means It was observed by Feldman et al. that there is a general algorithm that solves the
private k-means problem given access to a private solution
6167

