The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

End-to-End Transformer Based Model for Image Captioning
Yiyu Wang1 , Jungang Xu2 * , Yingfei Sun1
1

School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangyiyu18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xujg@ucas.ac.cn, yfsun@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

encoder-decoder framework with the visual attention mechanism. The encoder encodes input images into fix-length
vector features, and the decoder decodes image features into
descriptions word by word (Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al.
2015; Anderson et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019; Pan et al.
2020).
Initially, researchers adopted a pre-trained Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) as an encoder to extract image gridlevel features and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) as a decoder (Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2015). (Anderson et al.
2018) first adopted Faster R-CNN to extract region-level features. Due to its overwhelming advantage, most subsequent
works followed this pattern, and grid-level features extracted
by CNN were discarded. Nevertheless, there are still some
inherent defects in region-level features and encoder of object detector: 1) region-level features may not cover the entire image, which results in the lack of fine-grained information (Luo et al. 2021); 2) extracting region features is high
time consuming, and the object detector needs an extra Visual Genome (Krishna et al. 2017) dataset for pre-training,
which makes it difficult to train image captioning model
end-to-end from image pixels to descriptions, and also limits
potential applications in the actual scene (Jiang et al. 2020).
Decoder of LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
with soft attention (Xu et al. 2015) mechanism has remained the common and dominant approach in the past few
years. However, the shortcomings of training efficiency and
expression ability of LSTM also limit the effect of relevant models. Inspired by the success of Multi-head SelfAttention (MSA) mechanism and Transformer architecture
in NLP tasks (Vaswani et al. 2017), many researchers began
to introduce MSA into decoder of LSTM (Huang et al. 2019;
Pan et al. 2020) or directly adopt Transformer architecture as
decoder (Cornia et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2020; Luo et al. 2021;
Ji et al. 2021) of image captioning models.
Especially, Transformer architecture gradually shows extraordinary potential in CV tasks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2021) and multi-modal tasks (Lu et al. 2019; Zhu
and Yang 2020; Radford et al. 2021), which provides a new
choice for encoding images into vector features. Different
from Faster R-CNN, features extracted by a visual transformer are grid-level features, which have a higher computing efficiency and allows expediently exploring more effective and complex designs for image captioning.

CNN-LSTM based architectures have played an important
role in image captioning, but limited by the training efficiency and expression ability, researchers began to explore
the CNN-Transformer based models and achieved great success. Meanwhile, almost all recent works adopt Faster RCNN as the backbone encoder to extract region-level features from given images. However, Faster R-CNN needs a
pre-training on an additional dataset, which divides the image captioning task into two stages and limits its potential applications. In this paper, we build a pure Transformer-based
model, which integrates image captioning into one stage and
realizes end-to-end training. Firstly, we adopt SwinTransformer to replace Faster R-CNN as the backbone encoder to
extract grid-level features from given images; Then, referring
to Transformer, we build a refining encoder and a decoder.
The refining encoder refines the grid features by capturing
the intra-relationship between them, and the decoder decodes
the refined features into captions word by word. Furthermore,
in order to increase the interaction between multi-modal (vision and language) features to enhance the modeling capability, we calculate the mean pooling of grid features as the
global feature, then introduce it into refining encoder to refine with grid features together, and add a pre-fusion process
of refined global feature and generated words in decoder. To
validate the effectiveness of our proposed model, we conduct
experiments on MSCOCO dataset. The experimental results
compared to existing published works demonstrate that our
model achieves new state-of-the-art performances of 138.2%
(single model) and 141.0% (ensemble of 4 models) CIDEr
scores on ‘Karpathy’ offline test split and 136.0% (c5) and
138.3% (c40) CIDEr scores on the official online test server.
Trained models and source code will be released.

Introduction
Image captioning aims to automatically describe the visual content of a given image with fluent and credible sentences. It is a typical multi-modal learning task, which connects Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing (NLP). Inspired by the success of deep learning
methods in machine translation (Papineni et al. 2002; Cho
et al. 2014), almost all image captioning models adopt the
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2585

