The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learn Goal-Conditioned Policy with Intrinsic Motivation
for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jinxin Liu1,2,3 , Donglin Wang2,3∗ , Qiangxing Tian1,2,3 , Zhengyu Chen1,2,3
1

Zhejiang University. 2 Westlake University. 3 Westlake Institute for Advanced Study.
{liujinxin, wangdonglin, tianqiangxing, chenzhengyu}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

goals) over the state space or the embedding space (Higgins
et al. 2017; Nair et al. 2018; Sermanet et al. 2018; WardeFarley et al. 2019). However, these approaches taking the
prior non-parametric measure function may limit the repertoires of behaviors and impose manual engineering burdens.
On the contrary, latent variable based methods assume
that goals (latent variables) and states come from different spaces and the distribution of goals (latent variables)
is known a priori. In parallel, such methods autonomously
learn a reward function and a latent-conditioned policy
through the lens of empowerment (Salge, Glackin, and
Polani 2014; Eysenbach et al. 2018; Sharma et al. 2020).
However, such policy is conditioned on latent variables
rather than perceptually-specific goals. Applying this procedure to goal-reaching tasks, similar to the parameter initialization or hierarchical RL, needs an external reward function
for new tasks; otherwise the learned latent-conditioned policy cannot be applied directly to perceptually-specific goals.
In this paper, we incorporate a latent variable based objective into the perceptual goal-reaching tasks. Specifically,
we decouple the task generation (including perceptual goals
and associated reward functions) and goal-conditioned policy optimization, which are often intertwined in prior approaches. For the task generation, we employ a latent variable based objective (Eysenbach et al. 2018) to learn a latentconditioned policy, run to generate goals, and a discriminator, serve as the reward function. Then our goal-conditioned
policy is rewarded by the discriminator to imitate the trajectories, relabeled as goals, induced by the latent-conditioned
policy. This procedure enables the acquired discriminator
as a proxy to reward the goal-conditioned policy for various relabeled goals. In essence, the latent-conditioned policy
can reproducibly influence the environment, and the goalconditioned policy perceptibly imitates these influences.
The main contribution of our work is an unsupervised
RL method that can learn a perceptual goal-conditioned policy via intrinsic motivation (GPIM). Our training procedure
decouples the task (goals and rewards) generation and policy optimization, which makes the obtained reward function
universal and effective for various relabeled goals, including images and texts. We formally analyze the effectiveness
of our relabeling procedure, and empirically find that our intrinsic reward is well shaped by environment’s dynamics and
as a result benefits the training efficiency on extensive tasks.

It is of significance for an agent to autonomously explore
the environment and learn a widely applicable and generalpurpose goal-conditioned policy that can achieve diverse
goals including images and text descriptions. Considering
such perceptually-specific goals, one natural approach is to
reward the agent with a prior non-parametric distance over
the embedding spaces of states and goals. However, this may
be infeasible in some situations, either because it is unclear
how to choose suitable measurement, or because embedding
(heterogeneous) goals and states is non-trivial. The key insight of this work is that we introduce a latent-conditioned
policy to provide goals and intrinsic rewards for learning the
goal-conditioned policy. As opposed to directly scoring current states with regards to goals, we obtain rewards by scoring
current states with associated latent variables. We theoretically characterize the connection between our unsupervised
objective and the multi-goal setting, and empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method which substantially outperforms prior techniques in a variety of tasks.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) makes it possible to drive
agents to achieve sophisticated goals in complex and uncertain environments, from computer games (Badia et al. 2020;
Berner et al. 2019) to real robot control (Lee et al. 2018;
Lowrey et al. 2019; Vecerik et al. 2019; Popov et al. 2017),
which usually involves learning a specific policy for individual task relying on hand-specifying reward function. However, autonomous agents are expected to exist persistently
in the world and have the ability to reach diverse goals. To
achieve this, one needs to design a mechanism to spontaneously generate diverse goals and the associated rewards,
over which the goal-conditioned policy is trained.
Based on the space of goal manifold, previous works can
be divided into two categories: perceptually-specific goal
based approaches and latent variable based methods. In the
former, previous approaches normally assume the spaces
of perceptual goals and states are same, and sample goals
from the historical trajectories of the policy to be trained. It
is convenient to use a prior non-parametric measure function, such as L2 norm, to provide rewards (current states vs.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7558

