The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Causal Debiasing Framework for Unsupervised Salient Object Detection
Xiangru Lin1,2 , Ziyi Wu1 , Guanqi Chen1 , Guanbin Li1 * , Yizhou Yu2,3
1
Sun Yat-sen University
The University of Hong Kong
3
Deepwise AI Lab
lin0111@connect.hku.hk, wuzy39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chengq26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org
2

Abstract

USOD is an alternative method to solve this problem, aiming
to learn a salient object detection model without using any
ground-truth labels. Self-supervised learning based methods have achieved remarkable success recently and have become the dominant approach. The majority of such research
typically follow a common pipeline: (1) Traditional handcrafted methods, such as DSR (Li et al. 2013), RBD (Zhu
et al. 2014), and MC (Jiang et al. 2013) etc., are utilized
to generate pseudo labels that serve as supervisory signals
for the training of a more accurate deep neural network
based method; (2) Self-supervised training is further performed until the model performance saturates. The performance gain mainly lies in the fact that the pseudo labels contain roughly correct localization and shape of the salient objects. That is, the distribution of visual contrast information
and the spatial distribution of salient objects on the image
plane are still maintained, guiding the training of a saliency
model to capture such dominant information, while being
affected as little as possible by the label noise.

Unsupervised Salient Object Detection (USOD) is a promising yet challenging task that aims to learn a salient object detection model without any ground-truth labels. Selfsupervised learning based methods have achieved remarkable
success recently and have become the dominant approach in
USOD. However, we observed that two distribution biases
of salient objects limit further performance improvement of
the USOD methods, namely, contrast distribution bias and
spatial distribution bias. Concretely, contrast distribution bias
is essentially a confounder that makes images with similar
high-level semantic contrast and/or low-level visual appearance contrast spuriously dependent, thus forming data-rich
contrast clusters and leading the training process biased towards the data-rich contrast clusters in the data. Spatial distribution bias means that the position distribution of all salient
objects in a dataset is concentrated on the center of the image plane, which could be harmful to off-center objects prediction. This paper proposes a causal based debiasing framework to disentangle the model from the impact of such biases. Specifically, we use causal intervention to perform deconfounded model training to minimize the contrast distribution bias and propose an image-level weighting strategy that
softly weights each image’s importance according to the spatial distribution bias map. Extensive experiments on 6 benchmark datasets show that our method significantly outperforms
previous unsupervised state-of-the-art methods and even surpasses some of the supervised methods, demonstrating our
debiasing framework’s effectiveness.

Contrast Distribution Bias
Visual Appearance Contrast

1

Introduction
Salient Object Detection (SOD) is a fundamental yet challenging computer vision problem that attempts to identify
the most visually distinctive parts in an image (Shelhamer,
Long, and Darrell 2017; Shetty, Fritz, and Schiele 2018;
Simakov et al. 2008; Marchesotti, Cifarelli, and Csurka
2009; Ji et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Li and Yu 2015, 2016).
Although the performance of state-of-the-art(SOTA) SOD
models has enjoyed a significant improvement in the wave
of deep neural networks, training a SOD model usually requires a large amount of pixel-level labeled images, the collection process of which is laborious and time-consuming.

0

s
Bia

Semantic Contrast

1

Figure 1: An illustration of the contrast distribution bias.
Data-rich clusters (the purple and the orange ones) dominate
the model training and thus make the model biased towards
them.
Although a model trained with the aforementioned
pipeline shows competitive performance, we observed that
the bias from the distribution of visual contrast information (which we term as contrast distribution bias) forces

* Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1610

