The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Retrieve, Caption, Generate: Visual Grounding for Enhancing Commonsense in
Text Generation Models
Steven Y. Feng1 , Kevin Lu2 , Zhuofu Tao3 , Malihe Alikhani4 , Teruko Mitamura1 , Eduard Hovy1 ,
Varun Gangal1
1

3

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Waterloo
University of California, Los Angeles 4 School of Computing and Information, University of Pittsburgh
syfeng@cs.cmu.edu, kevin.lu1@uwaterloo.ca, z24tao@g.ucla.edu, malihe@pitt.edu
teruko@cs.cmu.edu, hovy@cs.cmu.edu, vgangal@cs.cmu.edu
{stand, hold, umbrella, street}

{food, eat, hand, bird}

baseline: A holds an umbrella while standing on the street
capt: a woman walking down a street holding an umbrella
VisCTG: A woman stands on a street holding an umbrella.
{cat, bed, pet, lay}

baseline: hand of a bird eating food
capt: a person holding a small bird in their hand
VisCTG: A bird eats food from a hand.

baseline: A cat is laying on a bed and petting it.
capt: a cat laying on a bed with a stuffed animal
VisCTG: A cat laying on a bed being petted.

baseline: A rider jumps over a fence.
capt: a horse is jumping over a wooden fence
VisCTG: A rider jumps a fence on a horse.

Abstract
We investigate the use of multimodal information contained
in images as an effective method for enhancing the commonsense of Transformer models for text generation. We perform
experiments using BART and T5 on concept-to-text generation, specifically the task of generative commonsense reasoning, or CommonGen. We call our approach VisCTG: Visually
Grounded Concept-to-Text Generation. VisCTG involves captioning images representing appropriate everyday scenarios,
and using these captions to enrich and steer the generation process. Comprehensive evaluation and analysis demonstrate that
VisCTG noticeably improves model performance while successfully addressing several issues of the baseline generations,
including poor commonsense, fluency, and specificity.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models have seen increasing popularity
for NLP tasks and applications. This includes SOTA text
generation models such as BART (Lewis et al. 2020) and
T5 (Raffel et al. 2020). Larger corpora and better pretraining losses are major reasons driving these gains. However,
despite increasing attention on the commonsense of models
through works like COMET (Bosselut et al. 2019), studies
have shown that even large pretrained models still struggle
with commonsense tasks that humans can reason through
very easily (Talmor et al. 2020). We believe that there is
commonsense information in other modalities like vision,
beyond what is reported (Gordon and Van Durme 2013) in
text, which can possibly augment commonsense and enhance
decision-making processes of text generation models.
In this paper, we show this is true by improving the performance of Transformer-based text generation models on
concept-to-text generation using visual grounding, which we
call VisCTG: Visually Grounded Concept-to-Text Generation. Concept-to-text generation is a high-level formulation
of several constrained text generation and data-to-text natural language generation (NLG) tasks. These are challenging
tasks that have seen increasing interest, and involve generating natural language outputs given certain pre-conditions,
e.g. specific words in the outputs, and structured or semistructured inputs. They typically involve converting a set of
inputs into natural language text. These inputs can normally
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Table 1: Examples of retrieved images, captions, baseline and
VisCTG (our model’s) generations. The images and captions
are used as an intermediary to guide the final generation and
it need not be faithful to them. E.g. nobody is petting the cat
in the image, but since the VisCTG output is conditioned on
both the concept set and caption, it includes being petted.

be thought of as concepts, or high-level words or structures,
that play an important role in the generated text. Multimodal
work has seen increasing popularity, but its exploration for
constrained and data-to-text NLG has been limited (Baltrusaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019; Gao et al. 2020).1
We investigate the task of generative commonsense reasoning, or CommonGen (Lin et al. 2020), which involves
generating sentences that effectively describe everyday scenarios from concepts sets, which are words that must appear
in the output. CommonGen is challenging as effective relational reasoning ability using commonsense knowledge is
required. Models must also possess the compositional generalization capabilities to piece together different concepts.
CommonGen is an effective benchmark for constrained text
generation and commonsense as its task formulation and
evaluation methodology are rather broadly applicable.
We experiment on CommonGen using BART and T5. An
1

10618

{fence, jump, horse, rider}

Code: https://github.com/styfeng/VisCTG

