The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Patch Diffusion: A General Module for Face Manipulation Detection
Baogen Zhang1 , Sheng Li1∗ , Guorui Feng2 , Zhenxing Qian1 , Xinpeng Zhang1
1

Fudan University
Shanghai University
{bgzhang19, lisheng, zxqian, zhangxinpeng}@fudan.edu.cn, grfeng@shu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Detection of manipulated face images has attracted a lot of interest recently. Various schemes have been proposed to tackle
this challenging problem, where the patch-based approaches
are shown to be promising. However, the existing patch-based
approaches tend to treat different patches equally, which do
not fully exploit the patch discrepancy for effective feature
learning. In this paper, we propose a Patch Diffusion (PD)
module which can be integrated into the existing face manipulation detection networks to boost the performance. The PD
consists of Discrepancy Patch Feature Learning (DPFL) and
Attention-Aware Message Passing (AMP). The DPFL effectively learns the patch features by a newly designed Pairwise
Patch Loss (PPLoss), which takes both the patch importance
and correlations into consideration. The AMP diffuses the
patches through attention-aware message passing in a graph
network, where the attentions are explicitly computed based
on the patch features learnt in DPFL. We integrate our PD
module into four recent face manipulation detection networks, and carry out the experiments on four popular datasets. The
results demonstrate that our PD module is able to boost the
performance of the existing networks for face manipulation
detection.

Figure 1: Our Patch Diffusion module diffuses the patches
such that the manipulated region gradually merges to prompt
the detection. From left to right, a manipulated face image
with the boundary of the fake area marked in white, the intermediate prediction results during the patch diffusion. The
masks shown in red refer to the patches predicted as fake.
Better viewed in color.
and Yin 2020) and emotions (Mittal et al. 2020) are proposed to achieve satisfactory performance. However, when
the input is only a single image, the video-based methods
may fail due to the loss of sequential information. This can
be addressed by using the image-based method, whose main
idea is to detect the manipulated traces inside a single image. Researchers have devoted efforts in developing effective image-based face manipulation techniques. Various manipulation traces have been investigated to facilitate the detection, including the anomaly in color (Li et al. 2020a), the
blending boundary (Li et al. 2020b; Tarasiou and Zafeiriou
2020; Wang et al. 2020b), the anomaly in frequency (Qian
et al. 2020), and etc. These schemes explore the inconsistency of the traces from the whole image for face manipulation
detection, which may not work well when the manipulation
traces are subtle.
Some studies (Chai et al. 2020; Mayer and Stamm 2019)
have shown that, the subtle traces located inside small local
patches such as manipulation contours or anomaly in texture (Zhang, Karaman, and Chang 2019), would be helpful
for differentiating the genuine and fake area. Most recently, Chen et al. (Chen et al. 2021) and Zhao et al. (Zhao
et al. 2021b) consider the similarity among different patches
to boost the performance. Despite the advantage, these approaches treat the patches equally, which neglect the diverse
impact of different patches for the task of face manipulation detection. More efforts are required to fully exploit the
discrepancy among different patches in face manipulation
detection.
In this paper, we propose a module named Patch Diffu-

Introduction
In recent years, with the tremendous progress made in computer vision and deep learning, it becomes easy to generate
real-look alike fake face images. People can manipulate the
face images by softwares such as ZAO, FaceApp, FakeApp,
etc. Along with the fun offered by these softwares, malicious face manipulations would mislead the public, which
may result in unforeseeable consequences, especially when
relevant techniques are applied on celebrities. Therefore, we
urgently need advanced and effective methods for manipulated face detection.
The schemes for face manipulation detection can be mainly divided into two categories, the video-based methods and
the image-based methods. The video-based methods focus
on the differences among different frames to find temporal manipulation traces for classification. Several interesting
ideas such as eye blinking (Li, Chang, and Lyu 2018), physiological measurement (Fernandes et al. 2019; Ciftci, Demir,
∗

Sheng Li is the corresponding author: lisheng@fudan.edu.cn
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3243

