The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Provable Guarantees for Understanding Out-of-Distribution Detection
Peyman Morteza, Yixuan Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{peyman, sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

emerged recently, their inherent connections and theoretical
understandings are largely lacking. To the best of our knowledge, there is limited prior work providing provable guarantees for OOD detection methods from a rigorous mathematical point of view.
This paper takes an important step to bridge the gap by
providing a unified framework that allows the research community to understand the theoretical connections among recent model-based OOD detection methods. Our framework
further enables devising new methodology, theoretical and
empirical insights on OOD detection. Our key contributions are three folds:

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is important for deploying machine learning models in the real world, where test
data from shifted distributions can naturally arise. While a
plethora of algorithmic approaches have recently emerged
for OOD detection, a critical gap remains in theoretical understanding. In this work, we develop an analytical framework that characterizes and unifies the theoretical understanding for OOD detection. Our analytical framework motivates
a novel OOD detection method for neural networks, GEM,
which demonstrates both theoretical and empirical superiority. In particular, on CIFAR-100 as in-distribution data,
our method outperforms a competitive baseline by 16.57%
(FPR95). Lastly, we formally provide provable guarantees
and comprehensive analysis of our method, underpinning
how various properties of data distribution affect the performance of OOD detection.

1

• First, we provide an analytical framework that precisely
characterizes and unifies the theoretical interpretation
of several representative OOD scoring functions (Section 2). We derive analytically an optimal form of OOD
scoring function called GEM (Gaussian mixture based
Energy Measurement), which is provably aligned with
the true log-likelihood for capturing OOD uncertainty.
In contrast, we show mathematically that prior scoring
functions can be sub-optimal.

Introduction

When deploying machine learning models in the open
world, it becomes increasingly critical to ensure the
reliability—models are not only accurate on their familiar
data distribution, but also aware of unknown inputs outside
the training data distribution. Out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples can naturally arise from an irrelevant distribution
whose label set has no intersection with training categories,
and therefore should not be predicted by the model. This
gives rise to the importance of OOD detection, which determines whether an input is in-distribution (ID) or OOD.
The main challenge in OOD detection stems from the fact
that modern deep neural networks can easily produce overconfident predictions on OOD inputs (Nguyen, Yosinski,
and Clune 2015). This phenomenon makes the separation
between ID and OOD data a non-trivial task. OOD detection approaches commonly rely on an OOD scoring function
that derives statistics from the pre-trained neural networks
and performs OOD detection by exercising a threshold comparison. For example, (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017) use
the maximum softmax probability (MSP) and classifies inputs with smaller MSP scores as OOD data. While improved
OOD scoring functions (Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018; Lee
et al. 2018b; Liu et al. 2020; Sun, Guo, and Li 2021) have

• Second, our analytical framework motivates a new OOD
detection method for deep neural networks (Section 3).
By modeling the feature space as a class-conditional multivariate Gaussian distribution, we propose a GEM score
based on the Gaussian generative model. Empirical evaluations demonstrate the competitive performance of the
new scoring function. In particular, on CIFAR-100 as indistribution data, GEM outperforms (Liu et al. 2020) by
16.57% (FPR95). Our method is theoretically more rigorous than maximum Mahalanobis distance (Lee et al.
2018b) while achieving equally strong performance.
• Lastly, our work provides both provable guarantees and
empirical analysis to understand how various properties
of data representation in feature and input space affect
the performance of OOD detection (Section 4). Previous
OOD detection methods can be difficult to analyze due
to the stochasticity in neural network optimization. Our
framework offers key simplifications that allow us to (1)
isolate the effect of data representation from model optimization, and (2) flexibly modulate properties of data
representation in feature and input space. Through both
synthetic simulations and theoretical analysis, our study

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7831

