The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Eye of the Beholder: Improved Relation Generalization
for Text-Based Reinforcement Learning Agents
Keerthiram Murugesan, Subhajit Chaudhury, Kartik Talamadupula
IBM Research

Abstract
Text-based games (TBGs) have become a popular proving
ground for the demonstration of learning-based agents that
make decisions in quasi real-world settings. The crux of the
problem for a reinforcement learning agent in such TBGs is
identifying the objects in the world, and those objects’ relations with that world. While the recent use of text-based
resources for increasing an agent’s knowledge and improving
its generalization have shown promise, we posit in this paper
that there is much yet to be learned from visual representations of these same worlds. Specifically, we propose to retrieve
images that represent specific instances of text observations
from the world and train our agents on such images. This improves the agent’s overall understanding of the game scene
and objects’ relationships to the world around them, and the
variety of visual representations on offer allow the agent to
generate a better generalization of a relationship. We show
that incorporating such images improves the performance of
agents in various TBG settings.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has seen a resurgence in recent
years thanks to advances in representation, inference, and
learning techniques – led by a massive scale-up and investment in deep neural network-based methods. Successful applications of RL have included domains such as Chess (Silver
et al. 2018), Go (Silver et al. 2017), and Atari games (Mnih
et al. 2016). However, with the emergence of natural language
processing (NLP) as a key AI application area, research attention has turned towards text-based applications and domains.
These domains offer their complexity challenges for RL algorithms, including large and intractable action spaces – the
space of all possible words and combinations; partial observability of the world state; and under-specified goals and
rewards.
Text-based games (TBGs) have emerged as prime exemplars of the above challenges. Inspired by games such as
Dungeons & Dragons and Zork, researchers have worked
on putting together challenging environments that offer the
*

Corresponding Author: keerthiram.murugesan@ibm.com. Code
and data can be found at https://github.com/IBM/IFSceneIT.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11094

complexities of real-world interactions but in sandbox settings suitable for the training of RL agents. The foremost
such example is TextWorld (Côté et al. 2018), an open-source
text-based game engine that allows for the generation of
text-based game instances and the evaluation of agents on
those games. Much of the recent work on text-based RL (Ammanabrolu and Riedl 2019; Dambekodi et al. 2020; Murugesan et al. 2021) has focused on the TextWorld environment,
and on imbuing agents with additional information to make
them learn, scale, and act more efficiently.
However, much of the information that has been used in the
prior art to improve the performance of AI agents in TBGs
is still restricted to the medium of text. In contrast, when
humans encounter games such as Zork and TextWorld, they
do not restrict themselves to only textual information. Indeed,
they are able to generalize to environments and the actions
within them by considering not just the form of information
provided by the environment; but also by imagining or visualizing various forms of that information. This imagination is
key to generalizing beyond merely the information present in
the instance currently under consideration. In this work, we
posit that using images – either retrieved or imagined (generated) – that represent information from the game instance
can help improve the performance of RL agents in TBGs.
Specifically, we consider RL agents in the TextWorld and
Jericho TBG environments; and additional information that
can be provided to such agents to improve their performance.
Past work has focused on trying to use external knowledge to
either limit (Chaudhury et al. 2020) or enhance (Murugesan
et al. 2021) the space of actions: however, this has also been
restricted to the text modality. At their crux, these efforts
are all trying fundamentally to solve the problem of relationships within the environment – how are different things
in the world related to each other? And how can the agent
manipulate these relations to convert the initial state of the
world – via a sequence of observations – into the desired goal
state (or to maximize reward)? Purely text-based information
is extremely sparse and is unable to sufficiently abstract the
notion of relationships.
Consider for example the relationship at - a patio
chair is at the backyard. What does this relation mean
- what is the at-ness? Text cannot convey this information
effectively on its own: as the size of the underlying vocabulary increases, the natural language space gets sparser and it

