The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PlanVerb: Domain-Independent Verbalization and Summary of Task Plans
Gerard Canal,1 Senka Krivić,1 Paul Luff,2 Andrew Coles1
1

Department of Informatics, King’s College London
King’s Business School, King’s College London
gerard.canal@kcl.ac.uk, senka.krivic@kcl.ac.uk, paul.luff@kcl.ac.uk, andrew.coles@kcl.ac.uk
2

Abstract

(Fox and Long 2003) and RDDL (Sanner 2010). For this,we
first propose semantic tagging for planning domains that
specify the building blocks of the verbalized sentences (verb,
subject, and complements). The tags are used by PlanVerb
to generate the sentences, but may also be useful for readers
of the domain to get a quick idea of what each action represents. We also present an action compression method to
summarise plans by joining together actions that act on the
same parameters. An example of this are compressions of
navigation actions going through an intermediate point. Finally, we propose an extension to the verbalization space parameters from Rosenthal, Selvaraj, and Veloso (2016), previously used to narrate robot navigation. These parameters
allow the generation of verbalizations at different levels of
detail including only certain actions or objects, and with
more or fewer causality explanations. A user evaluation with
42 participants has demonstrated that the proposed approach
generates understandable plan verbalizations.

For users to trust planning algorithms, they must be able to
understand the planner’s outputs and the reasons for each action selection. This output does not tend to be user-friendly,
often consisting of sequences of parametrised actions or task
networks. And these may not be practical for non-expert users
who may find it easier to read natural language descriptions.
In this paper, we propose PlanVerb, a domain and plannerindependent method for the verbalization of task plans. It
is based on semantic tagging of actions and predicates. Our
method can generate natural language descriptions of plans
including causal explanations. The verbalized plans can be
summarized by compressing the actions that act on the same
parameters. We further extend the concept of verbalization
space, previously applied to robot navigation, and apply it to
planning to generate different kinds of plan descriptions for
different user requirements. Our method can deal with PDDL
and RDDL domains, provided that they are tagged accordingly. Our user survey evaluation shows that users can read
our automatically generated plan descriptions and that the explanations help them answer questions about the plan.

Related Work
This work on task plan verbalization extends the work by
Rosenthal, Selvaraj, and Veloso (2016), where verbalization
is applied to the narration of mobile robot navigation routes.
In that work, the authors introduce a verbalization space that
covers the variability in utterances that can be used to describe the route to different users. The route and map of the
robot are used to instantiate sentences that narrate the robot
experience. They then performed a user study in Perera et al.
(2016) where they analysed the kinds of questions that the
users can request to the robots to obtain the desired explanations, to then learn a mapping between user queries and
verbalization space parameters. This approach was further
adapted in Zhu et al. (2017) to narrate manipulation tasks
along with navigation, including PDDL actions. We have extended this notion of verbalization and verbalization spaces
and applied it to task plans in a domain-independent fashion, integrating causality information to explain the relations
between actions, with applications beyond robotics. Furthermore, we do not use pre-written sentence templates, but only
tagging of the actions’ syntactic elements.
Verbal communication of plans has been deemed necessary in robotic scenarios involving humans. Fiore et al.
(2016) verbalize the actions in the plan for the user, explaining which actions will be executed and in what order. Canal

Introduction
Plans produced by a task planner may not be easy to understand by non-expert users. This plan output, usually written as a sequence of parametrised actions, does not integrate
enough information for users not familiar with the domain to
understand it and the possible reasons for the plan’s actions.
These users may be more familiar with natural language
descriptions of the plans, narrated as a sequence of sentences
describing the actions and involving the parameters. Furthermore, this narration of the plan can include causality information to link the actions together, making more explicit
why each action was taken. We believe this would make it
easier for those users to understand the plan, possibly increasing their trust in the planner. Additionally, this may
also enable planning systems to narrate the plan themselves,
fostering interaction with the user. A clear example of this
would be that of a robot acting in human environments and
explaining its plans to the users around.
In this paper, we present PlanVerb, a domain-independent
method to verbalize task plans for planners based on PDDL
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9698

