The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FPAdaMetric: False-Positive-Aware Adaptive Metric Learning for Session-Based
Recommendation
Jongwon Jeong1 , Jeong Choi2 , Hyunsouk Cho3 * † , Sehee Chung1
1

Knowledge AI Lab, NCSOFT Corp., Republic of Korea
2
NAVER Corp., Republic of Korea
3
Ajou University, Republic of Korea
jwjeong@ncsoft.com, jeong.choi@navercorp.com, hyunsouk@ajou.ac.kr, seheechung@ncsoft.com
Abstract
Modern recommendation systems are mostly based on implicit feedback data which can be quite noisy due to false
positives (FPs) caused by many reasons, such as misclicks or
quick curiosity. Numerous recommendation algorithms based
on collaborative filtering have leveraged post-click user behavior (e.g., skip) to identify false positives. They effectively
involved these false positives in the model supervision as
negative-like signals. Yet, false positives had not been considered in existing session-based recommendation systems
(SBRs) although they provide just as deleterious effects. To
resolve false positives in SBRs, we first introduce FP-Metric
model which reformulates the objective of the session-based
recommendation with FP constraints into metric learning regularization. In addition, we propose FP-AdaMetric that enhances the metric-learning regularization terms with an adaptive module that elaborately calculates the impact of FPs inside sequential patterns. We verify that FP-AdaMetric improves several session-based recommendation models’ performances in terms of Hit Rate (HR), MRR, and NDCG on
datasets from different domains including music, movie, and
game. Furthermore, we show that the adaptive module plays
a much more crucial role in FP-AdaMetric model than in
other baselines.

Figure 1: Example about Importance of False-Positive(FP)
on SBRs in Movie service. FPs depend on playtime of items,
and the user does not like “Teen” movie.

consuming an item to some degree. Users show their preference by either continuing or skipping in the early section.
This behavior is even stronger in subscription-based services
because users have full access of items at zero additional
cost. For example, 50% of positive signals are false positives
(FPs) in music streaming services, such as skips or backward
button clicks within 10 seconds, meaning that half of click
logs are triggered out of simple curiosity (Wen, Yang, and
Estrin 2019). Therefore, several works on collaborate filtering dealt with how to consider FPs better by dwell-time (Yi
et al. 2014), skip (Wen, Yang, and Estrin 2019) or other
ways (Wu et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b).
Meanwhile, the sequential patterns in user feedbacks have
become a major factor of the recommendation problem, and
have been extensively studied in the field of session-based
recommendation system (SBRs) (Fang et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2021a). Since gradual changes take place in user preferences over time, SBRs splits each user’s entire log sequence into a number of session-level segments to conjugate both local and global preferences. Although the SBRs
models have been successful in capturing user preferences,
the noisiness or the underlying FPs of the implicit feedback
data are mostly neglected. We argue that they could be just as
harmful in SBRs tasks as in non-sequential cases (Yi et al.
2014; Wen, Yang, and Estrin 2019; Wu et al. 2020; Wang

Introduction
Recommendation Systems based on collaborative filtering
have received great attention due to their outstanding performance in numerous personalized services (Zhang et al.
2019). Although explicit feedback data such as user ratings
can give direct supervision regarding user preferences, they
are often expensive and lack in size in real world scenarios (Rendle et al. 2012). Alternatively, implicit feedback data
have been widely adopted as the main resource for training
recommendation models (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008;
Yi et al. 2014; He et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2017). They are
solely based on user behavior logs and thus much easier to
collect (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Rendle et al. 2012).
However, in multimedia streaming services such as music
or movies, the user preference may not be revealed in the
click logs because users often make decisions after they try
* This work was done while working at NCSOFT.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4039

