The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DDGCN: Dual Dynamic Graph Convolutional Networks for
Rumor Detection on Social Media
Mengzhu Sun1 , Xi Zhang1 * , Jiaqi Zheng1 , Guixiang Ma2
1

Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (MoE),
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
University of Illinois at Chicago
{2019110945, zhangx, zjq1}@bupt.edu.cn, guixiang.ma@intel.com

Abstract

provide useful clues for distinguishing rumors from nonrumors. They thus propose kernel-based models (Wu, Yang,
and Zhu 2015; Ma, Gao, and Wong 2017), recursive neural
network (Ma, Gao, and Wong 2018) or graph-based models (Huang et al. 2019; Bian et al. 2020) to learn highlevel spatial structural representations. However, these spatial structure based approaches largely overlooked or oversimplified the temporal structure associated with the message propagation.
The temporal structure refers to the sequence and interval of the (replied or forwarded) messages along the timeline, which can be used to further differentiate the diffusion
patterns (Huang et al. 2020; Xia, Xuan, and Yu 2020). For
example, considering two comments ra and rb which corresponds to the same post. ra is taking place before rb or
after rb can lead to the same spatial structure but different
temporal structures. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of incorporating the temporality for rumor detection as it can model more fine-grained dynamics of the message stream, achieving better detection performance, especially in early detection situations. Therefore, it is desirable
to consider both spatial and temporal structures in message
propagation, which is rarely covered by previous studies.
Meanwhile, another parallel line of works focus on introducing the extra knowledge (e.g., knowledge graph) for
rumor identification (Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020;
Hu et al. 2021). They commonly utilize the knowledge information associated with the post contents to complement
semantic information and thus improve the high-level post
representations. The intuition behind is that different from
conventional classification tasks, the rumor detection models have to deal with many new and unseen events. Due to
the limited words posted on social media, the extra background knowledge can greatly assist in judging the credibility of a post, which is also a common paradigm used by
human judgement. However, most of these knowledge based
methods only use the background knowledge information in
the source post, ignoring that from the user comments. Additionally, the knowledge information would also evolve as
the message spreads. However, such knowledge dynamics is
not exploited by existing models.
In this paper, we aim to simultaneously model the dynamics of messages in propagation as well as the dynamics of
the associated background knowledge in one unified frame-

Detecting rumors on social media has become particular important due to the rapid dissemination and adverse impacts on
our lives. Though a set of rumor detection models have exploited the message propagation structural or temporal information, they seldom model them altogether to enjoy the best
of both worlds. Moreover, the dynamics of knowledge information associated with the comments are not involved, either.
To this end, we propose a novel Dual-Dynamic Graph Convolutional Networks, termed as DDGCN, which can model the
dynamics of messages in propagation as well as the dynamics of the background knowledge from Knowledge graphs
in one unified framework. Specifically, two Graph Convolutional Networks are adopted to capture the above two types of
structure information at different time stages, which are then
combined with a temporal fusing unit. This allows for learning the dynamic event representations in a more fine-grained
manner, and incrementally aggregating them to capture the
cascading effect for better rumor detection. Extensive experiments on two public real-world datasets demonstrate that our
proposal yields significant improvements compared to strong
baselines and can detect rumors at early stages.

Introduction
With the proliferation of social media, it is convenient for
users to obtain information, express opinions and communicate with each others. However, social media also enables
the widespread of false rumor information at a high rate,
bringing threats to society and causing disorders, especially
during big events such as the U.S. presidential election election (Allcott and Gentzkow 2017) and the COVID-19 pandemic (Islam et al. 2020). Therefore, it is of prominent importance to detect rumors on social media at very early stage.
In order to scale with the increasing amount of misinformation, massive efforts have been devoted to automatic rumor detection. Conventional detection methods mainly focus on text mining with textual contents, either based on
feature engineering (Castillo, Mendoza, and Poblete 2011;
Kwon et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2015; Ma et al. 2015) or deep
learning models (Ma et al. 2016; Ruchansky, Seo, and Liu
2017). Recent studies have shown that the diffusion patterns modeled as propagation tree or graph structures can
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4611

