The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shard Systems: Scalable, Robust and Persistent Multi-Agent Path Finding
with Performance Guarantees
Christopher Leet, Jiaoyang Li, Sven Koenig
USC Department of Computer Science
cjleet@usc.edu, jiaoyanl@usc.edu, skoenig@usc.edu

Abstract

simulates agents being able to avoid collisions with stationary objects using simple proximity sensors. Let an agent ai ’s
path pi be the sequence of move and wait agents the agent
takes to visit each of its goals in turn. Let the cost of pi be
the number of actions |pi | it contains. The goal is to generate a conflict-free
P path for each agent such that these paths’
sum-of-costs i |pi | is minimized. If an agent is assigned a
new goal or experiences movement failure, its path must be
updated in real-time (i.e., a small fraction of a second).
One important special case of the robust, persistent MAPF
problem is the one-shot MAPF problem, where each agent is
initialized with a single goal, no further goals are assigned,
and movement never fails.
An increasing number of real world autonomous systems need to solve instances of the robust, persistent MAPF
problem with thousands of agents to operate. Ideally, moreover, these solutions should have close-to-optimal sum-ofcosts. Warehouse operators, such as Amazon, use thousands of agents grouped into 800+ agent teams to retrieve items stored in large warehouse complexes (Simon
2019). Entertainment companies, such as Spaxels, produce
aerial spectaculars featuring thousands of UAVs flying in
concert (Schranz et al. 2020). Airport scheduling requires
coordinating the movement of thousands of planes (Yu
and LaValle 2016a). Unfortunately, while robust, persistent
MAPF solvers exist, none can simultaneously scale to thousands of agents while producing solutions with close-tooptimal sum-of-costs. As such, the question:

Modern multi-agent robotic systems increasingly require
scalable, robust and persistent Multi-Agent Path Finding
(MAPF) with performance guarantees. While many MAPF
solvers that provide some of these properties exist, none provides them all. To fill this need, we propose a new MAPF
framework, the shard system. A shard system partitions the
workspace into geographic regions, called shards, linked by
a novel system of buffers. Agents are routed optimally within
a shard by a local controller to local goals set by a global
controller. The buffer system novelly allows shards to plan
with perfect parallelism, providing scalability. A novel global
controller algorithm can rapidly generate an inter-shard routing plan for thousands of agents while minimizing the traffic routed through any shard. A novel workspace partitioning algorithm produces shards small enough to replan rapidly.
These innovations allow a shard system to adjust its routing
plan in real time if an agent is delayed or assigned a new goal,
enabling robust, persistent MAPF. A shard system’s local optimality and optimized inter-shard routing bring the sum-ofcosts of its solutions to single-shot MAPF problems to between 25% and 70% of optimal on a diversity of workspaces.
Its scalability allows it to plan paths for thousands of agents
in seconds. If any of their goals change or move actions fails,
a shard system can replan in under a second.

Introduction
In the robust, persistent Multi-Agent Path Finding problem,
we are given a set of k agents A := {a1 , . . . , ak } positioned
at k unique vertices in a workspace G := (V, E). At any
time, a user may issue at task (ai , vj ) ∈ A × V directing an
agent ai ∈ A to visit a goal vj ∈ V . Agents service tasks
first-come-first-served. An agent with no outstanding tasks
is said to be idle. Idle agents can be moved freely.
Time is discretized into timesteps. At each timestep, an
agent ai must either move to an adjacent vertex vj using a
move action ai .move(vj ) or wait at its current vertex ai .v
using a wait action. Two agents conflict if they either occupy the same vertex or traverse the same edge on the same
timestep. A move action may randomly fail. If an agent
ai ’s movement fails, any move action which would move
an agent aj onto the vertex ai occupies ai .v also fails. This

Is it possible to build a robust, persistent MAPF solver
which can produce solutions with close-to-optimal
sum-of-costs for teams of thousands of agents?
is both open and of great practical relevance.
Shard System. We answer this question in the affirmative
by developing a new MAPF framework, the shard system.
Figure 1(a) shows the architecture of a shard system. A shard
system partitions a workspace into subgraphs called shards
sj ∈ S (green boxes) linked by short, unidirectional paths
called buffers bk ∈ B (brown boxes). An agent in a shard is
routed by the shard’s local controller. An agent in a buffer
is routed along the buffer’s path to the buffer’s head. Buffers
and shards exchange agents using transfer protocols.
A global controller (yellow box) receives each task issued by a user (white box). The global controller executes

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9386

