The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Chunk Dynamic Updating for Group Lasso with ODEs
Diyang Li1 , Bin Gu2,1
1

School of Computer & Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
2
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
DiyoungLee@gmail.com, bin.gu@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract

important extension of Lasso (Tibshirani 1996) model. Considering attractive features and their good generalization performance, group Lasso have received considerable interest
in machine learning community and has been intensively
studied. Some relevant models include group Lasso for logistic regression (Meier, Van De Geer, and Bühlmann 2008),
overlapped group Lasso (Jacob, Obozinski, and Vert 2009)
and sparse group Lasso (Simon et al. 2013). More than that,
(Casella et al. 2010) proposed a fairly general fully Bayesian
formulation which could accommodate various Lasso variations (e.g. Bayesian group Lasso), and (Simon and Tibshirani 2012) put up the standardized group Lasso.
In lots of real-world application scenarios, e.g., cloud
computing (Armbrust et al. 2010) and federated learning
system (McMahan et al. 2017), the new chunk of data is continuously being generated at unpredictable rates and comes
in different sizes. One way to handle the coming data stream
is to perform online training as new samples come. Therefore, the training of a system must be conducted sequentially in online fashion (also called dynamic updating). More
than that, to train in a dynamic scene, we are demanded to
drop some wrong or obsolete historical data from the existing set. Thus incremental and decremental learning (GiraudCarrier 2000; Gepperth and Hammer 2016) are very important learning paradigm, because the model can refine its
knowledge without re-training from scratch.
Nowadays most of existing algorithms for group Lasso
are trained offline in batch-mode (Ida, Fujiwara, and
Kashima 2019; Zhang et al. 2020), which is not applicable
for real-time scenario, thus developing an efficient algorithm
that copes with input data supplied in sequence is a desirable
but challenging task for researchers. The online optimization
framework (Zinkevich 2003; Bottou and LeCun 2004) is an
important learning system to handle incremental learning,
but to the best of our knowledge, existing online algorithms
for group Lasso, DA-GL (Yang et al. 2010) and ADA-GL
(Li et al. 2014) give an inexact solution and has been confined to incremental updating only. Some related works are
summarized in Table 1. Due to the complexity of `2,1 -norm,
it is still unknown how to achieve accurate chunk incremental and decremental learning efficiently for group Lasso.
To fill this gap, in this paper we contribute with a novel
updating algorithm about group Lasso for a chunk of new
samples, Chunk Incremental (Decremental) Group Lasso

Group Lasso is an important sparse regression method in machine learning which encourages selecting key explanatory
factors in a grouped manner because of the use of `2,1 -norm.
In real-world learning tasks, some chunks of data would be
added into or removed from the training set in sequence due
to the existence of new or obsolete historical data, which is
normally called dynamic or lifelong learning scenario. However, most of existing algorithms of group Lasso are limited to
offline updating, and only one is online algorithm which can
only handle newly added samples inexactly. Due to the complexity of `2,1 -norm, how to achieve accurate chunk incremental and decremental learning efficiently for group Lasso
is still an open question. To address this challenging problem, in this paper, we propose a novel accurate dynamic updating algorithm for group Lasso by utilizing the technique
of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs), which can incorporate or eliminate a chunk of samples from original training
set without retraining the model from scratch. Specifically,
we introduce a new formulation to reparameterize the adjustment procedures of chunk incremental and decremental
learning simultaneously. Based on the new formulation, we
propose a path following algorithm for group Lasso regarding to the adjustment parameter. Importantly, we prove that
our path following algorithm can exactly track the piecewise
smooth solutions thanks to the technique of ODEs, so that the
accurate chunk incremental and decremental learning can be
achieved. Extensive experimental results not only confirm the
effectiveness of proposed algorithm for the chunk incremental and decremental learning, but also validate its efficiency
compared to the existing offline and online algorithms.

Introduction
Group Lasso (Yuan and Lin 2006) considers the problem
of selecting grouped variables for explanatory prediction in
regression, which has been successful in many practical applications of machine learning (Ma, Song, and Huang 2007;
Chatterjee et al. 2012; Rao et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2019;
Huo et al. 2020) and statistical analysis (Yuan and Lin 2006;
Bach 2008; Lim and Hastie 2015). The utilizing of group
Lasso penalty (also called `2,1 -norm penalty) leads coefficient that only contains a few of wanted groups rather than
sparsity in individual elements, which can be viewed as an
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7408

