The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Episodic Policy Gradient Training
Hung Le, Majid Abdolshah, Thommen K. George, Kien Do, Dung Nguyen, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{thai.le, m.abdolshah, thommen.karimpanalgeorge, k.do, dung.nguyen, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

2019). Automatic hyperparameter tuning has been well explored for supervised learning. Simple methods such as grid
search and random search are effective although computationally expensive (Bergstra and Bengio 2012; Larochelle
et al. 2007). Other complex methods such as Bayesian Optimization (BO (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012)) and
Evolutionary Algorithms (EA (Fiszelew et al. 2007)) can efficiently search for optimal hyperparameters. Yet, they still
need multiple training runs, have difficulty scaling to highdimensional settings (Rana et al. 2017) or require extensive parallel computation (Jaderberg et al. 2017). Recent
attempts introduce online hyperparameter scheduling, that
jointly optimizes the hyperparameters and parameters in single run overcoming local optimality of training with fixed
hyperparameters and showing great potential for supervised
and reinforcement learning (Jaderberg et al. 2017; Xu, van
Hasselt, and Silver 2018; Paul, Kurin, and Whiteson 2019;
Parker-Holder, Nguyen, and Roberts 2020).

We introduce a novel training procedure for policy gradient methods wherein episodic memory is used to optimize
the hyperparameters of reinforcement learning algorithms onthe-fly. Unlike other hyperparameter searches, we formulate
hyperparameter scheduling as a standard Markov Decision
Process and use episodic memory to store the outcome of
used hyperparameters and their training contexts. At any policy update step, the policy learner refers to the stored experiences, and adaptively reconfigures its learning algorithm
with the new hyperparameters determined by the memory.
This mechanism, dubbed as Episodic Policy Gradient Training (EPGT), enables an episodic learning process, and jointly
learns the policy and the learning algorithm’s hyperparameters within a single run. Experimental results on both continuous and discrete environments demonstrate the advantage of
using the proposed method in boosting the performance of
various policy gradient algorithms.

However, one loophole remains. These approaches do
not model the context of training in the optimization process, and the problem is often treated as a stateless bandit
or greedy optimization (Paul, Kurin, and Whiteson 2019;
Parker-Holder, Nguyen, and Roberts 2020). Ignoring the
context prevents the use of episodic experiences that can be
critical in optimization and planning. As an example, we humans often rely on past outcomes of our actions and their
contexts to optimize decisions (e.g. we may use past experiences of traffic to not return home from work at 5pm).
Episodic memory plays a major role in human brains, facilitating recreation of the past and supporting decision making
via recall of episodic events (Tulving 2002). We are motivated to use such a mechanism in training wherein, for
instance, the hyperparameters that helped overcome a past
local optimum in the loss surface can be reused when the
learning algorithm falls into a similar local optimum. This is
equivalent to optimizing hyperparameters based on training
contexts. Patterns of bad or good training states previously
explored can be reused, and we refer to this process as selecting hyperparameters. To implement this mechanism we use
episodic memory. Compared to other learning methods, the
use of episodic memory is non-parametric, fast and sampleefficient, and quickly directs the agents towards good behaviors (Lengyel and Dayan 2008; Kumaran, Hassabis, and
McClelland 2016; Blundell et al. 2016).

Introduction
The current success of deep reinforcement learning relies
on the ability to use gradient-based optimizations for policy
and value learning (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2017).
Approaches such as policy gradient (PG) methods have
achieved remarkable results in various domains including
games (Mnih et al. 2016; Schulman et al. 2017; Wu et al.
2017; Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018), robotics (Kohl and
Stone 2004; Peters and Schaal 2006) or even natural language processing (Ziegler et al. 2019). However, the excellent performance of PG methods is heavily dependent on
tuning the algorithms’ hyperparameters (Duan et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2021). Applying a PG method to new environments often requires different hyperparameter settings and
thus retuning (Henderson et al. 2018). The large amount of
hyperparameters severely prohibits machine learning practitioners from fully utilizing PG methods in different reinforcement learning environments.
As a result, there is a huge demand for automating hyperparameter selection for policy gradient algorithms, and
it remains a critical part of the Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) movement (Hutter, Kotthoff, and Vanschoren
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7317

