The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Parallel and High-Fidelity Text-to-Lip Generation
Jinglin Liu* 1 , Zhiying Zhu* 1 , Yi Ren* 1 ,
Wencan Huang1 , Baoxing Huai2 , Nicholas Yuan2 , Zhou Zhao†1
1

Zhejiang University, China
2
Huawei Cloud
{jinglinliu,zhyingzh,rayeren,huangwencan,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn,
{huaibaoxing,nicholas.yuan}@huawei.com
Abstract
As a key component of talking face generation, lip movements generation determines the naturalness and coherence
of the generated talking face video. Prior literature mainly focuses on speech-to-lip generation while there is a paucity in
text-to-lip (T2L) generation. T2L is a challenging task and existing end-to-end works depend on the attention mechanism
and autoregressive (AR) decoding manner. However, the AR
decoding manner generates current lip frame conditioned on
frames generated previously, which inherently hinders the inference speed, and also has a detrimental effect on the quality
of generated lip frames due to error propagation. This encourages the research of parallel T2L generation. In this work, we
propose a parallel decoding model for fast and high-fidelity
text-to-lip generation (ParaLip). Specifically, we predict the
duration of the encoded linguistic features and model the target lip frames conditioned on the encoded linguistic features
with their duration in a non-autoregressive manner. Furthermore, we incorporate the structural similarity index loss and
adversarial learning to improve perceptual quality of generated lip frames and alleviate the blurry prediction problem.
Extensive experiments conducted on GRID and TCD-TIMIT
datasets demonstrate the superiority of proposed methods.

1

random
selection

arbitrary text
place white by u
three again

…

identity lip
ground truth
generated lip video
sil

place white

by

u

three again

sil

( by AR T2L model )

Figure 1: The task description of T2L generation. The model
takes in an arbitrary source text sequence and a single identity lip image to synthesize the target lip movements video.
And in this figure we can see that the generated video loses
the linguistic information gradually and finally becomes
fuzzy and motionless (lip frames in the red box), which is
the intractable problem existing in AR T2L models due to
error propagation.

learning techniques are so developed that a single sentence
speech could expose an unimaginable amount of personal
information.

Introduction

In the modern service industries, talking face generation has
broad application prospects such as avatar, virtual assistant,
movie animation, teleconferencing, etc. (Zhu et al. 2020). As
a key component of talking face generation, lip movements
generation (a.k.a. lip generation) determines the naturalness
and coherence of the generated talking face video. Lip generation aims to synthesize accurate mouth movements video
corresponding to the linguistic content information carried
in speech or pure text.
Mainstream literature focuses on speech-to-lip (S2L) generation while there is a paucity in text-to-lip (T2L) generation. Even so, T2L generation is very crucial and has considerable merits compared to S2L since 1) text data can be
obtained or edited more easily than speech, which makes
T2L generation more convenient; and 2) T2L extremely
preserves privacy especially in the society where the deep

However, end-to-end T2L task (shown in Figure 1) is
challenging. Unlike S2L task where the mapping relationship between the sequence length of source speech and target video is certain (according to audio sample rate and
fps), there is an uncertain sequence length discrepancy between source and target in T2L task. The traditional temporal convolutional networks become impractical. Hence, existing works view T2L as a sequence-to-sequence task and
tackle it by leveraging the attention mechanism and autoregressive (AR) decoding manner. The AR decoding manner
brings two drawbacks: 1) it inherently hinders the inference
speed since its decoder generates target lips one by one autoregressively with the causal structure. Consequently, generating a single sentence of short video consumes about 0.51.5 seconds even on GPU, which is not acceptable for industrial applications such as real-time interactions with avatar or
virtual assistant, real-time teleconferencing and documentlevel audio-visual speech synthesis, etc. 2) It has a detrimental effect on the quality of generated lips due to error prop-

* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1738

