The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SmartIdx: Reducing Communication Cost in Federated Learning by Exploiting
the CNNs Structures
Donglei Wu1 , Xiangyu Zou1 , Shuyu Zhang1 , Haoyu Jin1 , Wen Xia1,2 * , Binxing Fang1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{donglei.wu, xiangyu.zou, shuyu.zhang97, haoyu.jin97}@hotmail.com, xiawen@hit.edu.cn, fangbx@cae.cn

Abstract

begin the next training round by continually training the received model with their private datasets. These four steps
are iteratively performed between clients and server until the
global reaches the required accuracy.
One of FL’s mainstream scenarios is that the server locates
in a data center with good Internet resources, and clients
are edge devices (e.g., smartphones, IoTs, or wearable devices) (Konecný et al. 2016a,b; McMahan et al. 2017; Sattler et al. 2020; Smith et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2020) which
are limited in low bandwidth and unstable network. Existing studies show that residential Internet connections tend
to reach far higher download than upload speeds (Goga and
Teixeira 2012; Konecný et al. 2016a; Kairouz et al. 2019;
Cui et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a, 2022), thus there exist
a serious bottleneck in FL when a huge number of clients
send their local model to the server, especially when the uploaded models are the complicated and large-scale convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
To alleviate the communication bottleneck of FL, a natural idea is to compress the network traffic by reducing
the total size of uploaded model parameters. Recently, Topk sparsification-based compression techniques significantly
reduce communication overheads of federated/distributed
learning without sacrificing the training convergence speed
and inference accuracy (Dryden et al. 2016; Strom 2015;
Sattler et al. 2020; Sattler et al. 2019; Aji and Heafield 2017;
Lin et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018; Abdi and Fekri 2020;
Zhang et al. 2020). In these approaches, instead of transmitting the whole local model, weight updates or gradients
(denoted as parameters) with the largest variations after local training will be selected and uploaded to the parameters
server for reducing the network traffic. Here the selected parameters are regarded as individuals and they are usually organized in pairs (e.g., <the value, the index> of a selected
parameter). The index is used to indicate a selected parameter’s position in the model (i.e., which parameter is selected),
and the value is the specific numerical value of this parameter. In the server, the value will be used to update the previous global model’s parameters at the corresponding position
according to the index. Thus only the value participants in
model training while the index does not.
Many previous works attempt to employ quantization
techniques (Aji and Heafield 2017; Dryden et al. 2016; Wen
et al. 2017) and encoding schemes (Sattler et al. 2020; Strom

Top-k sparsification method is popular and powerful for
reducing the communication cost in Federated Learning
(FL). However, according to our experimental observation,
it spends most of the total communication cost on the index
of the selected parameters (i.e., their position information),
which is inefficient for FL training. To solve this problem,
we propose a FL compression algorithm for convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), called SmartIdx, by extending the
traditional Top-k largest variation selection strategy into the
convolution-kernel-based selection, to reduce the proportion
of the index in the overall communication cost and thus
achieve a high compression ratio. The basic idea of SmartIdx is to improve the 1:1 proportion relationship between
the value and index of the parameters to n:1, by regarding
the convolution kernel as the basic selecting unit in parameter selection, which can potentially deliver more information
to the parameter server under the limited network traffic. To
this end, a set of rules are designed for judging which kernel
should be selected and the corresponding packaging strategies are also proposed for further improving the compression
ratio. Experiments on mainstream CNNs and datasets show
that our proposed SmartIdx performs 2.5×−69.2× higher
compression ratio than the state-of-the-art FL compression
algorithms without degrading training performance.

Introduction
Federated Learning (denoted as FL) (McMahan et al. 2017;
Konecný et al. 2016b) allows many clients to collaboratively
train a model while keeping their private datasets in their local, and has become a popular privacy-preserving machine
learning approach (Wei et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020; Ng
et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a,b; Smith et al. 2017). Broadly
speaking, the main processes of FL can be described as below: 1 Clients download the current global model from the
central parameter server. 2 Clients train the downloaded
global model on their private datasets in parallel, and generate a new local model. 3 Clients upload their new local
model to the parameter server. 4 The server aggregates the
received local models, and generates a new global model
as the result of the current training round. When the server
sends back the averaged global model to clients, and clients
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4254

