The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Flexible Instance-Specific Rationalization of NLP Models
George Chrysostomou, Nikolaos Aletras
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield
gchrysostomou1@sheffield.ac.uk, n.aletras@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

2019; Chrysostomou and Aletras 2021b) to identify important (i.e. salient) segments of the input to subsequently extract them as rationales (Jain et al. 2020; Treviso and Martins
2020). However, a single feature scoring method is typically
applied across the whole dataset (i.e. globally). This might
not be optimal for individual instances resulting into less
faithful explanations (Jacovi and Goldberg 2020; Atanasova
et al. 2020). Additionally, rationales are usually extracted
using a pre-defined fixed length (i.e. the ratio of a rationale
compared to the full input sequence) and type (i.e. top k
terms or contiguous) globally. We hypothesize that using
a fixed length or type for different instances could result
into shorter (i.e. not sufficient for explaining a model’s prediction) or longer than needed rationales reducing rationale
faithfulness, whilst finding the explanation length is an open
problem (Zhang et al. 2021). Moreover to extract rationales,
practitioners are currently required to make assumptions for
the rationale parameters (i.e. feature scoring method, length
and type), whilst different choice of parameters might substantially affect the faithfulness of the rationales.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method
that operates at instance-level and mitigates the a priori selection of a specific (1) feature scoring method; (2) length
and (3) type when extracting faithful rationales. Our proposed method is flexible and allows the automatic selection of some of these instance-specific parameters or all. Inspired by erasure methods, it functions by computing differences between a model’s output distributions obtained using the full input sequence and the input without the rationale respectively. We base this on the assumption that by
removing important tokens from the sequence, we should
observe large divergences in the model’s predicted distribution (Nguyen 2018; Serrano and Smith 2019; DeYoung et al.
2020) resulting into more faithful rationales (Atanasova
et al. 2020; Chen and Ji 2020). The contributions of our work
are thus as follows:

Recent research on model interpretability in natural language
processing extensively uses feature scoring methods for identifying which parts of the input are the most important for
a model to make a prediction (i.e. explanation or rationale).
However, previous research has shown that there is no clear
best scoring method across various text classification tasks
while practitioners typically have to make several other adhoc choices regarding the length and the type of the rationale
(e.g. short or long, contiguous or not). Inspired by this, we
propose a simple yet effective and flexible method that allows selecting optimally for each data instance: (1) a feature
scoring method; (2) the length; and (3) the type of the rationale. Our method is inspired by input erasure approaches
to interpretability which assume that the most faithful rationale for a prediction should be the one with the highest difference between the model’s output distribution using the full
text and the text after removing the rationale as input respectively. Evaluation on four standard text classification datasets
shows that our proposed method provides more faithful, comprehensive and highly sufficient explanations compared to using a fixed feature scoring method, rationale length and type.
More importantly, we demonstrate that a practitioner is not
required to make any ad-hoc choices in order to extract faithful rationales using our approach.

1

Introduction

Large pre-trained transformer-based language models such
as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019; Bommasani et al. 2021), currently dominate performance across language understanding
benchmarks (Wang et al. 2019). These developments have
opened up new challenges on how to extract faithful explanations (i.e. rationales1 ), which accurately represent the true
reasons behind a model’s prediction when adapted to downstream tasks (Jacovi and Goldberg 2020).2 3
Recent studies use feature scoring (i.e. attribution) methods such as gradient and attention-based scores (Arras et al.
2016; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Jain and Wallace

• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a
method for instance-specific faithful rationale extraction;

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use these terms interchangeably throughout the paper.
2
Code for experiments available at: https://github.com/
GChrysostomou/instance-specific-rationale
3
We provide an extended version of our work with an appendix
at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08219

• We empirically demonstrate that rationales extracted
with instance-specific flexible feature scoring method,
length and type using our proposed method are more
comprehensive than rationales with fixed, pre-defined parameters;
10545

