The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Zeroth-Order Optimization for Composite Problems with Functional Constraints
Zichong Li1 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Sijia Liu3 , Songtao Lu2 , Yangyang Xu1
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
IBM Research
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
liz19@rpi.edu, Pin-Yu.Chen@ibm.com, liusiji5@msu.edu, songtao@ibm.com, xuy21@rpi.edu

addition of IX to the nonsmooth term h in the objective f0 ,
where IX (x) = 0 if x ∈ X and +∞ otherwise.

Abstract
In many real-world problems, first-order (FO) derivative evaluations are too expensive or even inaccessible. For solving
these problems, zeroth-order (ZO) methods that only need
function evaluations are often more efficient than FO methods or sometimes the only options. In this paper, we propose
a novel zeroth-order inexact augmented Lagrangian method
(ZO-iALM) to solve black-box optimization problems, which
involve a composite (i.e., smooth+nonsmooth) objective and
functional constraints. This appears to be the first work that develops an iALM-based ZO method for functional constrained
optimization and meanwhile achieves query complexity results
matching the best-known FO complexity results up to a factor
of variable dimension.With an extensive experimental study,
we show the effectiveness of our method. The applications of
our method span from classical optimization problems to practical machine learning examples such as resource allocation
in sensor networks and adversarial example generation.

Contributions
Our contributions are three-fold. First, we design a zerothorder accelerated proximal coordinate update (ZO-APCU)
method for solving coordinate-structured strongly-convex
composite (i.e., smooth+nonsmooth) problems. ZO-APCU
appears to be the first PCU method with acceleration by
just using function values. It can be viewed as a ZO variant
of the APCG in (Lin, Lu, and Xiao 2014). To solve blackbox optimization in the form of (1), we propose a novel
zeroth-order inexact augmented Lagrangian method (ZOiALM), by using ZO-APCU to design a zeroth-order inexact
proximal point method (ZO-iPPM) to approximately solve
each ALM subproblem. Though any ZO method can be used
as a subroutine in the iALM, the use of ZO-iPPM with the
developed ZO-APCU is crucial to yield best-known query
complexity results and also good numerical performance, as
we demonstrate in the experiments.
Second, query complexity analysis is conducted on
the √
proposed methods. We show that ZO-APCU needs
O(d κ log 1ε ) queries to produce an ε-stationary point of
a d-dimensional strongly-convex composite problem with a
condition number κ. The ZO-iPPM has an Õ(dε−2 ) complexity to give an ε-stationary point of a nonconvex composite
problem. On solving (1) that satisfies a regularity condition,
the ZO-iALM has an Õ(dε−3 ) overall complexity to produce an ε-KKT point, and the complexity can be reduced
5
to Õ(dε− 2 ) if the constraints are affine. All our complexity
results are (near) optimal or the best known. To the best of
our knowledge, complexity of ZO methods on nonconvex
functional constrained problem (1) has not been studied in
the literature, thus our Õ(dε−3 ) result is completely new.
Third, we use a coordinate gradient estimator while implementing the core solver ZO-APCU. To be able to yield
high-accuracy solutions, we give a multi-point coordinatewise gradient estimator and analyze its error bound. Under
the j-th order smoothness assumption for some j ∈ Z+ , we
show that the error of a max{2, 2(j − 1)}-point coordinatewise gradient estimator is upper bounded by O(aj ), where a
is the sampling radius. This result is meaningful and important to yield high accuracy, because in practice a cannot be

Introduction
In many practical optimization problems such as black-box
attack (Chen et al. 2017), we only have access to zerothorder (ZO) function values but no access to first-order (FO)
or higher order derivatives (Liu et al. 2020a). In this paper,
we consider nonconvex problems with possibly nonconvex
constraints:

f0∗ := min f0 (x) := g(x) + h(x), s.t. c(x) = 0 , (1)
x∈Rd

where g is smooth but possibly nonconvex, c = (c1 , . . . , cl ) :
Rd → Rl is a vector function with continuously differentiable components, and h is closed convex but possibly
nonsmooth and has a coordinate structure, i.e., h(x) =
Pd
i=1 h(xi ). This formulation follows from (Li et al. 2021),
except that in this paper, only the function evaluations of g
and c, but not their gradients, are accessible. Such a formulation includes a large class of nonlinear constrained problems.
We remark that an inequality constraint t(x) ≤ 0 can be
equivalently formulated as an equality constraint t(x)+s = 0
by enforcing the nonnegativity of s, with equivalent stationarity conditions (c.f. (Li et al. 2021)). Note in (1), the inclusion
of a coordinate-separable constraint set X is equivalent to the
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7453

