The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

“I Don’t Think So”: Summarizing Policy Disagreements for Agent Comparison
Yotam Amitai, Ofra Amir
Faculty of Industrial Engineering & Management, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
yotama@campus.technion.ac.il ,oamir@technion.ac.il

Abstract

agent attends to (Greydanus et al. 2017), and (2) “global” explanation methods that describe the policy of an agent more
generally, such as strategy summaries that demonstrate the
agents’ behavior in a selected set of states (Amir, DoshiVelez, and Sarne 2019). While such global approaches have
been shown to improve people’s understanding of agent behavior, they are not optimized for specific user needs.
In this work, we aim to enhance users’ ability to distinguish between the behavior of different agents. Such scenarios arise when people are required to select an agent
from a set of alternatives. E.g., a user might need to choose
from a variety of smart home assistants or self-driving cars
available on the market. Importantly, there often isn’t a
clear “ground-truth” for which agent is superior, as agents
may prioritize different outcomes and users may differ in
their preferences. For example, some users may prefer selfdriving cars that value safety very highly, while others might
be willing to relax safety considerations to a degree to allow for faster driving. The ability to distinguish policies is
also important for model developers, as different configurations of reward functions and algorithm parameters can
lead to different behaviors in unexpected ways, especially
in domains where the reward function is not obvious, such
as healthcare (Gottesman et al. 2019).
One possible approach for helping users distinguish between policies of agents is to use strategy summarization
methods (Amir, Doshi-Velez, and Sarne 2018, 2019). Using
these methods, a summary is generated for each agent, allowing the user to compare their behavior. However, these
approaches are not optimized for the task of agent comparison, as each summary is generated independently. For instance, the HIGHLIGHTS algorithm (Amir and Amir 2018)
selects states based on their importance as determined by
the differences in Q-values for alternative actions in a given
state. If two high-quality agents are compared, it is possible
that they will consider the same states as most important,
and will choose the same (optimal) action in those states, resulting in similar strategy summaries. In such a case, even if
the agents’ policies differ in numerous regions of the statespace, it will not be apparent from the summaries.
This work presents the DISAGREEMENTS algorithm
which is optimized for comparing agent policies. Our algorithm compares agents by simulating them in parallel
and identifying disagreements between them, i.e. situations

With Artificial Intelligence on the rise, human interaction
with autonomous agents becomes more frequent. Effective
human-agent collaboration requires users to understand the
agent’s behavior, as failing to do so may cause reduced productivity, misuse or frustration. Agent strategy summarization methods are used to describe the strategy of an agent
to users through demonstrations. A summary’s objective is
to maximize the user’s understanding of the agent’s aptitude
by showcasing its behaviour in a selected set of world states.
While shown to be useful, we show that current methods are
limited when tasked with comparing between agents, as each
summary is independently generated for a specific agent. In
this paper, we propose a novel method for generating dependent and contrastive summaries that emphasize the differences between agent policies by identifying states in which
the agents disagree on the best course of action. We conducted user studies to assess the usefulness of disagreementbased summaries for identifying superior agents and conveying agent differences. Results show disagreement-based summaries lead to improved user performance compared to summaries generated using HIGHLIGHTS, a strategy summarization algorithm which generates summaries for each agent
independently.

Introduction
With the maturing of reinforcement learning (RL) methods,
RL-based agents are being trained to perform complex tasks
in various domains, including robotics, healthcare and transportation. Importantly, these agents do not operate in a vaccum – people interact with agents in a wide range of settings.
Effective interaction between an agent and a user requires
from the latter the ability to anticipate and understand its behavior. For example, clinicians should understand treatment
regimes recommended by agents to determine their viability.
To facilitate improved user understanding of agents’ behavior, a range of explainable RL methods have been developed (Puiutta and Veith 2020; Heuillet, Couthouis, and
Dı́az-Rodrı́guez 2021). These can be divided into two explanation categories: (1) “local” explanation approaches explaining why an agent chose a particular action in a given
state, e.g., saliency maps highlighting the information an
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5269

