The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shadow Generation for Composite Image in Real-World Scenes
Yan Hong1 , Li Niu1 * , Jianfu Zhang2
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Tensor Learning Team, RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
yanhong.sjtu@gmail.com, ustcnewly@sjtu.edu.cn, jianfu.zhang@riken.jp.

Abstract
Image composition targets at inserting a foreground object
into a background image. Most previous image composition
methods focus on adjusting the foreground to make it compatible with background while ignoring the shadow effect
of foreground on the background. In this work, we focus on
generating plausible shadow for the foreground object in the
composite image. First, we contribute a real-world shadow
generation dataset DESOBA by generating synthetic composite images based on paired real images and deshadowed
images. Then, we propose a novel shadow generation network SGRNet, which consists of a shadow mask prediction
stage and a shadow filling stage. In the shadow mask prediction stage, foreground and background information are thoroughly interacted to generate foreground shadow mask. In
the shadow filling stage, shadow parameters are predicted to
fill the shadow area. Extensive experiments on our DESOBA
dataset and real composite images demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Our dataset and code are available at https://github.com/bcmi/Object-Shadow-GenerationDataset-DESOBA.

1

Figure 1: 1) The green arrows illustrate the process of acquiring paired data. We select a foreground object in the
ground-truth target image Ig , and replace its shadow area
with the counterpart in deshadowed image Id to synthesize a
composite image Ic . 2) The red arrow illustrates our shadow
generation task. Given Ic and its foreground mask Mf o , we
aim to generate the target image Ĩg with foreground shadow.

Introduction

Image composition (Niu et al. 2021) targets at copying a
foreground object from one image and pasting it on another
background image to produce a composite image. In recent
years, image composition has drawn increasing attention
from a wide range of applications in the fields of medical science, education, and entertainment (Arief, McCallum, and
Hardeberg 2012; Zhang, Liang, and Wang 2019; Liu et al.
2020). Some deep learning methods (Lin et al. 2018a; Azadi
et al. 2020; van Steenkiste et al. 2020; Azadi et al. 2019)
have been developed to improve the realism of composite
image in terms of color consistency, relative scaling, spatial layout, occlusion, and viewpoint transformation. However, the above methods mainly focus on adjusting the foreground while neglecting the effect of inserted foreground on
the background such as shadow or reflection. In this paper,
we focus on dealing with the shadow inconsistency between
the foreground object and the background, that is, generating
shadow for the foreground object according to background
information, to make the composite image more realistic.

To accomplish this image-to-image translation task, deep
learning techniques generally require adequate paired training data, i.e., a composite image without foreground shadow
and a target image with foreground shadow. However, it
is extremely difficult to obtain such paired data in the real
world. Therefore, previous works (Zhang, Liang, and Wang
2019; Liu et al. 2020) insert a virtual 3D object into 3D
scene and generate shadow for this object using rendering
techniques. In this way, a rendered dataset with paired data
can be constructed. However, there exists large domain gap
between rendered images and real-world images, which results in the inapplicability of rendered dataset to real-world
image composition problem.
Therefore, we tend to build our own real-world shadow
generation dataset by synthesizing composite image from
a ground-truth target image with object-shadow pairs. We
build our dataset on the basis of Shadow-OBject Association (SOBA) dataset (Wang et al. 2020), which collects
real-world images in complex scenes and provides annotated
masks for object-shadow pairs. SOBA contains 3,623 pairs
of shadow-object associations over 1000 images. Based on
SOBA dataset, we remove all the shadows to construct our

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

914

