The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Demystifying Why Local Aggregation Helps: Convergence Analysis of
Hierarchical SGD
Jiayi Wang1 , Shiqiang Wang2 , Rong-Rong Chen1 , Mingyue Ji1
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
2
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
jiayi.wang@utah.edu, wangshiq@us.ibm.com, rchen@ece.utah.edu, mingyue.ji@utah.edu

Abstract

be non-IID, to avoid model divergence, the number of local
iterations P cannot be too large, which limits its advantage
of reducing communication cost.
In practical scenarios, networks often have a hierarchical
structure in nature, such as edge computing systems (Li, Ota,
and Dong 2018) and software defined networks (SDN) (Kim
and Feamster 2013). In these networks, workers often directly communicate with their local server rather than global
server. Motivated by this hierarchical structure, a few works
(Castiglia, Das, and Patterson 2021; Liu et al. 2020) proposed
hierarchical SGD (H-SGD). In H-SGD, workers are partitioned into N groups, where each group has a local server.
To reduce communication cost, workers send their models to
local servers to do several local aggregations before communicating with global server. They perform I local iterations
(referred to as local period) between local aggregations, and
G (referred to as global period) local iterations (G > I)
between global aggregations. In this paper, we call the connection between local servers and workers as “downward”
network and the connection between local servers and the
global server as “upward” network.
Recently, there have been a few works analyzing the convergence behavior of H-SGD. A structure where the upward
network is a peer-to-peer network while downward network
is a server-worker network was considered by Castiglia, Das,
and Patterson (2021). However, it only considers IID data.
The work by Liu et al. (2020) considers non-IID data but
it uses full-batch (non-stochastic) gradient descent and the
convergence bound is an exponential function of G. In both
works, a comprehensive comparison between H-SGD and
local SGD is missing and none of them analyzes the effect of
local aggregation on overcoming data heterogeneity, which
is the key merit of H-SGD. Therefore, a more general and
tighter analysis for H-SGD with non-convex objective function, non-IID data and stochastic gradient descent is needed.
The effect of local aggregation on overcoming data heterogeneity lacks theoretical understanding.
In this paper, to provide a better theoretical understanding to H-SGD, we devise a novel characterization of the
data heterogeneity of H-SGD by “upward” divergence and
“downward” divergence, respectively. Furthermore, we show
that the global divergence can be partitioned into upward
and downward divergences. H-SGD can be seen as performing distributed SGD both within a group and across groups.

Hierarchical SGD (H-SGD) has emerged as a new distributed
SGD algorithm for multi-level communication networks. In
H-SGD, before each global aggregation, workers send their
updated local models to local servers for aggregations. Despite recent research efforts, the effect of local aggregation
on global convergence still lacks theoretical understanding. In
this work, we first introduce a new notion of “upward” and
“downward” divergences. We then use it to conduct a novel
analysis to obtain a worst-case convergence upper bound for
two-level H-SGD with non-IID data, non-convex objective
function, and stochastic gradient. By extending this result to
the case with random grouping, we observe that this convergence upper bound of H-SGD is between the upper bounds
of two single-level local SGD settings, with the number of
local iterations equal to the local and global update periods
in H-SGD, respectively. We refer to this as the “sandwich
behavior”. Furthermore, we extend our analytical approach
based on “upward” and “downward” divergences to study the
convergence for the general case of H-SGD with more than
two levels, where the “sandwich behavior” still holds. Our theoretical results provide key insights of why local aggregation
can be beneficial in improving the convergence of H-SGD.

Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a widely used optimization technique in machine learning applications. In distributed
SGD, all n workers collaboratively learn a global model w
by minimizing the empirical loss with their local data:
n

min f (w) :=

w∈Rd

1X
Fj (w),
n j=1

(1)

where Fj (·) is the local loss function of worker j. Traditionally, workers send their models or gradients to the central
server after one local iteration, which is inefficient due to
frequent model aggregations. This may cost high communication latency in practice. Recently, a form of distributed
SGD was proposed to reduce communication cost by allowing multiple local iterations during one communication round
(McMahan et al. 2017). This is referred to as local SGD (Stich
2019; Lin et al. 2020). However, since data on workers can
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8548

