The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

End-to-End Line Drawing Vectorization
Hanyuan Liu,1 Chengze Li,2 Xueting Liu,2 Tien-Tsin Wong1 *
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Caritas Institute of Higher Education
liuhy@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, czli@cihe.edu.hk, tliu@cihe.edu.hk, ttwong@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Vector graphics is broadly used in a variety of forms, such as
illustrations, logos, posters, billboards, and printed ads. Despite its broad use, many artists still prefer to draw with pen
and paper, which leads to a high demand of converting raster
designs into the vector form. In particular, line drawing is a
primary art and attracts many research efforts in automatically converting raster line drawings to vector form. However,
the existing methods generally adopt a two-step approach,
stroke segmentation and vectorization. Without vector guidance, the raster-based stroke segmentation frequently obtains unsatisfying segmentation results, such as over-grouped
strokes and broken strokes. In this paper, we make an attempt
in proposing an end-to-end vectorization method which directly generates vectorized stroke primitives from raster line
drawing in one step. We propose a Transformer-based framework to perform stroke tracing like human does in an automatic stroke-by-stroke way with a novel stroke feature representation and multi-modal supervision to achieve vectorization with high quality and fidelity. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations show that our method achieves state of the
art performance.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Input. (b) Guo et al. (c) Ours.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: (a) Input. (b) Egiazarian et al. (c) Ours.

Introduction
from the raster image and stroke vectorization to convert the
identified strokes into the vectorized curve form. The existing methods generally tackle the above two challenges with
a two-step approach, i.e., first identifying the strokes and
then converting to the vector form. This highly limits the
quality of stroke segmentation results without vector guidance. In particular, one stream of existing methods attempts
to directly identify complete strokes via junction analysis
(Guo et al. 2019), local neighborhood similarity (Kim et al.
2018), or region detection (Inoue and Yamasaki 2019), but
these methods generally fail to separate strokes that locally
similar and lead to over-grouped strokes (Fig. 1(b)). Another
stream of methods first identifies smooth stroke segments
and then connects the stroke segments into strokes based
on local properties, such as proximity and continuity (Bessmeltsev and Solomon 2019; Egiazarian et al. 2020; Noris
et al. 2013; Stanko et al. 2020; Mo et al. 2021). However,
the quality of stroke connection generally cannot be guaranteed, leading to obvious broken stroke segments (Fig. 2(b)).
Different from the existing methods that use two-step
approaches, in this paper, we propose an end-to-end vec-

Vector graphics play an important role in graphic design.
The resolution independence and easy-for-editing features
allow vector graphics to be used in a variety of forms, such
as illustrations, logos, posters, billboards, and printed ads.
Despite the broad use of vector graphics, many artists still
prefer to draw with pen and paper which is more natural and
easier to control. This leads to a high demand of converting
raster designs into the vector form, especially for vectorizing
line drawings which is a primary art form of graphic design.
There exist many vector graphics editing softwares to help
artists trace the vector lines from a raster line drawing, such
as Adobe Illustrator and CorelDRAW, but the manual tracing process is still tedious and time-consuming.
Several research attempts have been made to automatically vectorize a raster line drawing. These methods generally face two key challenges in the line drawing vectorization task, stroke segmentation to identify individual strokes
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4559

