The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Calibrated Nonparametric Scan Statistics for Anomalous Pattern Detection in
Graphs
Chunpai Wang,1 Daniel B. Neill, 2 Feng Chen 3
1

University at Albany - SUNY
2
New York University
3
The University of Texas at Dallas
cwang25@albany.edu, daniel.neill@nyu.edu, feng.chen@utdallas.edu
Abstract

ratio statistic. The connectivity constraint is important because it ensures that subgraphs reflect changes due to localized anomalous processes (e.g., disease outbreaks, water
pollution events). In particular, nonparametric scan statistic
(NPSS) methods (Neill and Lingwall 2007; McFowland III,
Speakman, and Neill 2013; Chen and Neill 2014) are designed without assuming any known background process on
the graph. These approaches use historical data (assuming
no anomalous patterns are present) to compute an empirical
p-value for each graph node, and then compare the observed
and expected number of significantly low p-values contained
in connected subgraphs. Those with the largest scores are
returned as the most anomalous subgraphs. However, as we
show, NPSSs fail to account for the multiple hypothesis testing effects of searching over the huge space of connected
subgraphs, reducing detection performance. In this work, we
conduct a systematic study of this challenging problem and
make the following key contributions:

We propose a new approach, the calibrated nonparametric
scan statistic (CNSS), for more accurate detection of anomalous patterns in large-scale, real-world graphs. Scan statistics identify connected subgraphs that are interesting or unexpected through maximization of a likelihood ratio statistic;
in particular, nonparametric scan statistics (NPSSs) identify
subgraphs with a higher than expected proportion of individually significant nodes. However, we show that recently proposed NPSS methods are miscalibrated, failing to account for
the maximization of the statistic over the multiplicity of subgraphs. This results in both reduced detection power for subtle signals, and low precision of the detected subgraph even
for stronger signals. Thus we develop a new statistical approach to recalibrate NPSSs, correctly adjusting for multiple
hypothesis testing and taking the underlying graph structure
into account. While the recalibration, based on randomization
testing, is computationally expensive, we propose both an efficient (approximate) algorithm and new, closed-form lower
bounds (on the expected maximum proportion of significant
nodes for subgraphs of a given size, under the null hypothesis
of no anomalous patterns). These advances, along with the integration of recent core-tree decomposition methods, enable
CNSS to scale to large real-world graphs, with substantial improvement in the accuracy of detected subgraphs. Extensive
experiments on both semi-synthetic and real-world datasets
are demonstrated to validate the effectiveness of our proposed
methods, in comparison with state-of-the-art counterparts.

1

• We show that recently proposed NPSS methods are miscalibrated, failing to account for the maximization of the
statistic over the multiplicity of subgraphs. This results
in both reduced detection power for subtle signals, and
low precision of the detected subgraph.
• We develop a new statistical approach to recalibrate
NPSS, correctly adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing
and taking the underlying graph structure into account,
substantially improving detection performance.
• We propose an efficient (approximate) algorithm and
new, closed-form lower bounds on the expected maximum proportion of significant nodes for subgraphs of a
given size, under the null hypothesis of no anomalous
patterns. These advances, along with integration of recent
core-tree decomposition methods, enable the CNSS approach to scale to large real-world graphs, with substantial improvement in the accuracy of detected subgraphs.
• Extensive experiments on semi-synthetic and real-world
datasets show that our methods can detect anomalous
subgraphs more accurately than state-of-the-art counterparts, while maintaining comparable time efficiency.

Introduction

Detecting “hotspots” or anomalous patterns in graphs is an
important but challenging problem, with numerous critical
applications in areas such as epidemiology, law enforcement, finance, and security. Among the powerful and widely
used methods, the paradigm of scan statistics is one of the
few that has a sound and general statistical basis (for related surveys see Glaz, Pozdnyakov, and Wallenstein (2009);
Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra (2015); and Cadena, Chen, and
Vullikanti (2018)). Graph-based scan statistics (Speakman,
McFowland III, and Neill 2015; Speakman, Zhang, and
Neill 2013; Chen and Neill 2014; Cadena, Chen, and Vullikanti 2019) identify connected subgraphs that are interesting or unexpected through maximization of a likelihood

2

Related Work

As anomaly detection in graphs has a large literature, we refer to Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra (2015) and Cadena, Chen,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4201

