The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Training a Resilient Q-network against Observational Interference
Chao-Han Huck Yang1 , I-Te Danny Hung2 , Yi Ouyang3 , Pin-Yu Chen4
Georgia Institute of Technology1 , Columbia University2 , Preferred Networks America3 , IBM Research4
huckiyang@gatech.edu, ih2320@columbia.edu, ouyangyi@gmail.com, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract

rewards in complex environments. Therefore, DRL-based
systems are likely to propagate and even enlarge risks (e.g.,
delay and noisy pulsed-signals on sensor-fusion (Yurtsever
et al. 2020; Johansen et al. 2015)) induced from the uncertain
interference.
In this paper, we investigate the resilience ability of an
RL agent to withstand unforeseen, rare, adversarial and potentially catastrophic interferences, and to recover and adapt
by improving itself in reaction to these events. We consider
a resilient generative RL framework with observational interferences as an auxiliary task. At each time, the agent’s
observation is subjected to a type of sudden interference at
a predefined possibility. Whether or not an observation has
interfered is referred to as the interference label.
Specifically, to train a resilient agent, we provide the agent
with the interference labels during training. For instance, the
labels could be derived from some uncertain noise generators recording whether the agent observes an intervened state
at the moment as a binary causation label. By applying the
labels as an intervention into the environment, the RL agent
is asked to learn a binary causation label and embed a latent state into its model. However, when the trained agent
is deployed in the field (i.e., the testing phase), the agent
only receives the interfered observations but is agnostic to
interference labels and needs to act resiliently against the
interference.
For an RL agent to be resilient against interference, the
agent needs to diagnose observations to make the correct
inference about the reward information. To achieve this, the
RL agent has to reason about what leads to desired rewards
despite the irrelevant intermittent interference. To equip an
RL agent with this reasoning capability, we exploit the causal
inference framework. Intuitively, a causal inference model
for observation interference uses an unobserved confounder
(Pearl 2009, 2019, 1995; Saunders et al. 2018; Bareinboim,
Forney, and Pearl 2015; Zhang, Zhang, and Li 2020; Khemakhem et al. 2021) to capture the effect of the interference on the rewards (outcomes) collected from the environment. In recent works, RL is also showing additional
benefits incorporating generative causal modeling, such as
providing interpretability (Madumal et al. 2020), treatment
estimation (Zhang and Bareinboim 2020, 2021), imitation
learning (Zhang, Kumor, and Bareinboim 2020), enhanced invariant prediction (Zhang et al. 2020), and generative model

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has demonstrated impressive performance in various gaming simulators and real-world
applications. In practice, however, a DRL agent may receive
faulty observation by abrupt interferences such as black-out,
frozen-screen, and adversarial perturbation. How to design a
resilient DRL algorithm against these rare but mission-critical
and safety-crucial scenarios is an essential yet challenging task.
In this paper, we consider a deep q-network (DQN) framework
training with an auxiliary task of observational interferences
such as artificial noises. Inspired by causal inference for observational interference, we propose a causal inference based
DQN algorithm called causal inference Q-network (CIQ). We
evaluate the performance of CIQ in several benchmark DQN
environments with different types of interferences as auxiliary
labels. Our experimental results show that the proposed CIQ
method could achieve higher performance and more resilience
against observational interferences.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods have shown enhanced performance, gained widespread applications (Mnih
et al. 2015, 2016; Silver et al. 2017), and improved robot
learning (Gu et al. 2017) in navigation systems (Tai, Paolo,
and Liu 2017; Nagabandi et al. 2018). However, most successful demonstrations of these DRL methods are usually
trained and deployed under well-controlled situations. In contrast, real-world use cases often encounter inevitable observational uncertainty (Grigorescu et al. 2020; Hafner et al. 2018;
Moreno et al. 2018) from an external attacker (Huang et al.
2017) or noisy sensor (Fortunato et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2018).
For examples, playing online video games may experience
sudden black-outs or frame-skippings due to network instabilities, and driving on the road may encounter temporary
blindness when facing the sun. Such an abrupt interference
on the observation could cause serious issues for DRL algorithms. Unlike other machine learning tasks that involve
only a single mission at a time (e.g., image classification), an
RL agent has to deal with a dynamic (Schmidhuber 1992) or
even learn from latent states with generative models (Schmidhuber 1991; Jaderberg et al. 2017; Ha and Schmidhuber 2018;
Hafner et al. 2018; Lynch et al. 2020) to anticipate future
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8814

