The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fully Spiking Variational Autoencoder
Hiromichi Kamata 1 , Yusuke Mukuta 1,2 , Tatsuya Harada 1,2
1

The University of Tokyo
2
RIKEN
{kamata, mukuta, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) can be run on neuromorphic devices with ultra-high speed and ultra-low energy consumption because of their binary and event-driven nature.
Therefore, SNNs are expected to have various applications,
including as generative models being running on edge devices to create high-quality images. In this study, we build
a variational autoencoder (VAE) with SNN to enable image
generation. VAE is known for its stability among generative models; recently, its quality advanced. In vanilla VAE,
the latent space is represented as a normal distribution, and
floating-point calculations are required in sampling. However, this is not possible in SNNs because all features must
be binary time series data. Therefore, we constructed the
latent space with an autoregressive SNN model, and randomly selected samples from its output to sample the latent variables. This allows the latent variables to follow the
Bernoulli process and allows variational learning. Thus, we
build the Fully Spiking Variational Autoencoder where all
modules are constructed with SNN. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to build a VAE only with SNN layers. We experimented with several datasets, and confirmed
that it can generate images with the same or better quality
compared to conventional ANNs. The code is available at
https://github.com/kamata1729/FullySpikingVAE.

Figure 1: Illustration of our FSVAE. Entire model is constructed with SNNs. All features are represented as spike
trains, and the latent spike trains follow Bernoulli processes.
TrueNorth (Akopyan et al. 2015), and Neurogrid (Benjamin
et al. 2014). For example, on TrueNorth, the computational
time is approximately 1/100 lower and the energy consumption is approximately 1/100,000 times lower than on conventional ANNs (Cassidy et al. 2014).
With the recent breakthroughs on ANNs, research on
SNNs has been progressing rapidly. Additionally, SNNs are
outperforming ANNs in accuracy in MNIST, CIFAR10, and
ImageNet classification tasks (Zheng et al. 2021; Zhang and
Li 2020). Moreover, SNNs are used for object detection
(Kim et al. 2020), sound classification (Wu et al. 2018), optical flow estimation (Lee et al. 2020); however, their applications are still limited.
In particular, image generation models based on SNNs
have not been studied sufficiently. Spiking GAN (Kotariya
and Ganguly 2021) built a generator and discriminator with
shallow SNNs, and generated images of handwritten digits
by adversarial learning. However, its generation quality was
low, and some undesired images were generated that could
not be interpreted as numbers. In (Skatchkovsky, Simeone,
and Jang 2021), SNN was used as the encoder and ANN
as the decoder to build a VAE (Kingma and Welling 2014);
however, the main focus of their research was efficient spike
encoding, and not the image generation task.
In ANNs, image generation models have been extensively studied and can generate high-quality images (Razavi,
van den Oord, and Vinyals 2019; Karras et al. 2020). However, in general, image generation models are computationally expensive, and some problems must be solved for edge
devices, or for real-time generation. If SNNs can generate
images comparably to ANNs, their high speed and low energy consumption can solve these problems.
Therefore, we propose Fully Spiking Variational Autoen-

Introduction
Recently, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have been
evolving rapidly, and have achieved considerable success
in computer vision and NLP. However, ANNs often require
significant computational resources, which is a challenge in
situations where computational resources are limited, such
as on edge devices.
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are neural networks that
more accurately mimic the structure of a biological brain
than ANNs; notably, SNNs are referred to as the third generation of artificial intelligence (Maass 1997). In a SNN, all
information is represented as binary time series data, and is
driven by event-based processing. Therefore, SNNs can run
with ultra-high speed and ultra-low energy consumption on
neuromorphic devices, such as Loihi (Davies et al. 2018),
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7059

