The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Style Mixing and Patchwise Prototypical Matching for One-Shot Unsupervised
Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Xinyi Wu1 , Zhenyao Wu1 , Yuhang Lu1 , Lili Ju2,∗ , Song Wang1,∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, USA
2
Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina, USA
{xinyiw, zhenyao, yuhang}@email.sc.edu, ju@math.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract

scenarios/domains, e.g., different cities or different illumination conditions. As a result, the generalization ability of a
trained model is limited, i.e., it usually suffers from a drastic
performance drop on an unseen testing domain due to the
different data distributions from the training set.
Recently, some unsupervised domain adaptation approaches were proposed to overcome the domain discrepancy
and reduce the demand for labeled data in new unseen test
domains. Synthetic-to-real is a common setting in domain
adaptive semantic segmentation, which was first proposed
by Hoffman et al. (2016). In this setting, source domains
with labeled synthetic data (Richter et al. 2016; Ros et al.
2016) are constructed by using computer graphics techniques
and in the meantime, a sufficient number of samples in the
target domain are also provided without labels. In many applications, such as medical imaging, a large collection of
unlabeled target data may be unavailable or difficult to obtain, which leads to the introduction of a new setting, the
one-shot unsupervised domain adaptation (OSUDA) (Luo
et al. 2020) for semantic segmentation. The difference of
the general unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), domain
generalization (DG) and OSUDA is illustrated in Fig. 1. In
this paper, we aim to tackle this challenging but practical
setting of OSUDA.
Existing UDA approaches, especially those which employ
discriminators to distinguish whether the content, e.g., image
feature (Hoffman et al. 2016), segmentation prediction (Tsai
et al. 2018) or entropy map (Vu et al. 2019), is from the source
or target domains (Fig. 1(a)), are prone to over-fitting on only
one target sample – discriminators can easily distinguish
the over-fit target domain from the source domain. Other
style-transfer-based approaches cannot handle this one-shot
setting either, since the source images can only be stylized
by only one target sample. To solve this problem, Luo et.al
proposed an adversarial style mining (ASM) algorithm (Luo
et al. 2020), as illustrated in Fig. 1(c), by mutually optimizing
the style-transfer module and the semantic segmentation network via an adversarial regime. However, the style-transfer
module itself requires additional data for pre-training and
also increases the demand for GPU memory for adaptation.
In this paper, we propose a new OSUDA approach, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(d), which does not require additional data
to pre-train a style-transfer module and explicitly synthesizes
stylized images for semantic segmentation. First, we design

In this paper, we tackle the problem of one-shot unsupervised domain adaptation (OSUDA) for semantic segmentation
where the segmentors only see one unlabeled target image
during training. In this case, traditional unsupervised domain
adaptation models usually fail since they cannot adapt to the
target domain with over-fitting to one (or few) target samples.
To address this problem, existing OSUDA methods usually
integrate a style-transfer module to perform domain randomization based on the unlabeled target sample, with which multiple domains around the target sample can be explored during
training. However, such a style-transfer module relies on an
additional set of images as style reference for pre-training
and also increases the memory demand for domain adaptation.
Here we propose a new OSUDA method that can effectively
relieve such computational burden. Specifically, we integrate
several style-mixing layers into the segmentor which play the
role of style-transfer module to stylize the source images without introducing any learned parameters. Moreover, we propose
a patchwise prototypical matching (PPM) method to weighted
consider the importance of source pixels during the supervised training to relieve the negative adaptation. Experimental
results show that our method achieves new state-of-the-art
performance on two commonly used benchmarks for domain
adaptive semantic segmentation under the one-shot setting and
is more efficient than all comparison approaches.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a basic computer vision task to
identify the semantic category of each pixel from a set of
pre-defined categories. It benefits a variety of tasks such
as autonomous driving (Treml et al. 2016), medical imaging (Taghanaki et al. 2021), and image editing (Aksoy et al.
2018). Using deep learning, state-of-the-art semantic segmentation can be obtained in the form of good prediction at each
pixel by training the well-designed segmentor network (Chen
et al. 2017a) on large-scale labeled datasets and testing on
the same domain. However, constructing datasets for such
a dense prediction task is both very time-consuming and
labor-intensive, which makes it often impossible to prepare a
high-quality large-scale labeled training set for all different
∗
Co-corresponding authors. Code is available at
https://github.com/W-zx-Y/SM-PPM.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2740

