The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SGD-X: A Benchmark for Robust Generalization in Schema-Guided Dialogue
Systems
Harrison Lee, Raghav Gupta, Abhinav Rastogi, Yuan Cao, Bin Zhang, Yonghui Wu
Google Research
{harrisonlee,raghavgupta,abhirast,yuancao,zbin,yonghui}@google.com

Abstract

ated on both seen and unseen services. While results were
promising, with the top team achieving 87% joint goal accuracy (92% seen, 85% unseen), we observed a major shortcoming with SGD - the dataset’s schemas are unrealistically
uniform compared to the diverse writing styles encountered
“in the wild”, where schemas are written by API developers
of various backgrounds.
The uniformity of SGD is evident in its schema element
names. Of the names in the test set schemas “unseen” in the
train set, 71% of intent names and 65% of slot names exactly
match names appearing in the train schemas, meaning most
names in “unseen” schemas are actually already seen by
the model during training. MultiWOZ (Budzianowski et al.
2018), another popular dialogue state tracking benchmark,
faces similar issues in the zero-shot leave-one-domain-out
setup (Wu et al. 2019), with 60-100% of slot names in the
held-out domain seen by the model during training. SGD
descriptions are also uniformly written. For example, all
descriptions for boolean slots either begin with the phrase
“Boolean flag...” or “Whether...”.
We hypothesize that the uniformity of SGD schemas allows models to overfit on specific linguistic styles without penalty in evaluation, leading to an overestimate of the
generalizability of models. Additionally, “seen” schemas in
evaluation are identical to the ones seen in training, meaning
SGD does not evaluate how well models handle changes in
seen schemas, however minor.
In this work, we investigate the robustness of schemaguided models to linguistic styles of schemas. Our contributions are as follows:

Zero/few-shot transfer to unseen services is a critical challenge in task-oriented dialogue research. The Schema-Guided
Dialogue (SGD) dataset introduced a paradigm for enabling
models to support any service in zero-shot through schemas,
which describe service APIs to models in natural language.
We explore the robustness of dialogue systems to linguistic
variations in schemas by designing SGD-X - a benchmark
extending SGD with semantically similar yet stylistically diverse variants for every schema. We observe that two top
state tracking models fail to generalize well across schema
variants, measured by joint goal accuracy and a novel metric
for measuring schema sensitivity. Additionally, we present a
simple model-agnostic data augmentation method to improve
schema robustness.

Introduction
Task-oriented dialogue systems have begun changing how
we interact with technology, from personal assistants to customer support. One obstacle preventing their ubiquity is the
resources and expertise needed for their development. Traditional approaches operate on a fixed ontology (Henderson,
Thomson, and Young 2014; Mrkšić et al. 2017), which is
not suited for a dynamic environment. For every new service that arises or modification to an existing service, training data must be re-collected and systems re-trained.
The Schema-Guided Dialogue paradigm, introduced in
Rastogi et al. (2020b), advocates for the creation of a universal dialogue system which can interface with any service,
without service or domain-specific optimization. Each service is represented by a schema, which enumerates the slots
and intents of the service and describes their functionality
in natural language (see Figure 1). Schema-guided systems
interpret conversations, execute API calls, and respond to
users based on the schemas provided to it. In theory, this
enables a single system to support any service; in practice,
whether this is feasible hinges on how robustly models can
generalize beyond services seen during training.
In the Schema-Guided Dialogue challenge at DSTC8
(Rastogi et al. 2020a), participants developed schemaguided dialogue state tracking models, which were evalu-

• We introduce SGD-X, an extension to the SGD dataset
that contains crowdsourced stylistic variants for every
schema in the original dataset1
• Based on SGD-X, we propose schema sensitivity - a metric to evaluate model sensitivity to schema variations
• We show that two top schema-guided dialogue state
tracking (DST) models based on BERT and T5 are highly
sensitive to schema variations, dropping 12-18% in joint
goal accuracy for the average SGD-X variant
1
We release SGD-X and an evaluation script for schemaguided dialogue state tracking models on GitHub at
https://github.com/google-research-datasets/dstc8-schema-guideddialogue

∗

Equal contribution from first two authors
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10938

