The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Exploiting Mixed Unlabeled Data for Detecting Samples of
Seen and Unseen Out-of-Distribution Classes
Yi-Xuan Sun, Wei Wang*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{sunyixuan, wangw}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection is essential in realworld applications, which has attracted increasing attention
in recent years. However, most existing OOD detection methods require many labeled In-Distribution (ID) data, causing a
heavy labeling cost. In this paper, we focus on the more realistic scenario, where limited labeled data and abundant unlabeled data are available, and these unlabeled data are mixed
with ID and OOD samples. We propose the Adaptive In-Outaware Learning (AIOL) method, in which we employ the appropriate temperature to adaptively select potential ID and
OOD samples from the mixed unlabeled data and consider
the entropy over them for OOD detection. Moreover, since the
test data in realistic applications may contain OOD samples
whose classes are not in the mixed unlabeled data (we call
them unseen OOD classes), data augmentation techniques
are brought into the method to further improve the performance. The experiments are conducted on various benchmark
datasets, which demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Figure 1: OOD detection with labeled and mixed unlabeled
data. Unlabeled data are mixed with samples of ID classes
(cat and dog) and seen OOD classes (tree and flower). Test
data contain samples of ID classes (cat and dog), seen OOD
classes (tree and flower) and unseen OOD classes (kettle and
cup which are not in the mixed unlabeled data).

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in various applications, but the success heavily relies on the
assumption that the training and test data are drawn from the
same distribution. In realistic scenarios, however, some Outof-Distribution (OOD) samples may lead DNNs to make
completely incorrect predictions, which is essentially harmful in many real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving or medical diagnosis. Therefore, it is demanded that the
trained model can at least correctly detect these OOD samples during the inference process, and then human intervention can be involved to deal with them.
Recently, Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017) considered the
OOD detection problem and proposed a baseline method
with the output confidence, i.e., the maximum softmax probability. The method is based on the observation that InDistribution (ID) samples tend to have higher output confidence than OOD samples. Some other methods (Liang, Li,
and Srikant 2018; Lee et al. 2018; Sastry and Oore 2020;
Hsu et al. 2020) made further improvements with some posthoc techniques. However, these methods need many labeled
ID data for training, causing a heavy labeling cost.

To mitigate the labeling overload, the advanced works
tried to utilize abundant unlabeled data. Some methods
(Hendrycks et al. 2019; Tack et al. 2020; Sehwag, Chiang, and Mittal 2021) employed self-supervised learning
on the pure unlabeled ID data, while some other methods
(Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019; Liu et al. 2020)
were proposed to exploit the pure unlabeled OOD data.
However, these methods require that the unlabeled data must
be pure ID or OOD, which is hardly met in realistic applications. Recently, a few works (Chen et al. 2020b; Yu et al.
2020; Guo et al. 2020) attempted to utilize unlabeled data
that consist of ID and OOD samples. But these works were
not developed for OOD detection, and there was no OOD
sample in the test data during the inference process.
For the OOD detection problem, the unlabeled data can be
mixed with ID and OOD samples. During the inference process, the test data may contain OOD samples whose classes
are in the mixed unlabeled data (we call them seen OOD
classes), as well as OOD samples whose classes are not
in the mixed unlabeled data (we call them unseen OOD
classes). The goal is to train a model which can classify ID
samples and detect all OOD samples. This OOD detection

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8386

