The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sequence Level Contrastive Learning for Text Summarization
Shusheng Xu, 1 * Xingxing Zhang, 2 Yi Wu, 1,3 Furu Wei 2
1

IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai China
xuss20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
xizhang@microsoft.com
jxwuyi@gmail.com
fuwei@microsoft.com
2

Abstract
Contrastive learning models have achieved great success in
unsupervised visual representation learning, which maximize
the similarities between feature representations of different
views of the same image, while minimize the similarities between feature representations of views of different images.
In text summarization, the output summary is a shorter form
of the input document and they have similar meanings. In
this paper, we propose a contrastive learning model for supervised abstractive text summarization, where we view a
document, its gold summary and its model generated summaries as different views of the same mean representation
and maximize the similarities between them during training. We improve over a strong sequence-to-sequence text
generation model (i.e., BART) on three different summarization datasets. Human evaluation also shows that our model
achieves better faithfulness ratings compared to its counterpart without contrastive objectives. We release our code at
https://github.com/xssstory/SeqCo.

Introduction
Document summarization is the task of rewriting a long document into a shorter form while still preserving its important
content, which requires the model to understand the entire
document. Many approaches for summarization has been explored in the literature and the most popular ones are extractive summarization and abstractive summarization (Nenkova
and McKeown 2011). Summaries in their nature are abstractive. The summaries generated by extractive summarization
methods are usually long and redundant, which bring bad
reading experience. Therefore, we focus on abstractive summarization in this paper. Abstractive summarization is usually
modeled as a sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) learning problem (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014), where a document
is viewed as a sequence of words and its summary another
sequence of words (Nallapati et al. 2016).
Although abstractive models have been more and more
powerful due to recent introduction of large pre-trained Transformers (Liu and Lapata 2019; Raffel et al. 2020; Dong et al.
* Work done during the first author’s internship at Microsoft
Research Asia.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11556

2019; Lewis et al. 2020), the training paradigm for abstractive models is still not changed, which is to minimize the
negative log-likelihood (NLL) between the model predicted
word distributions and the gold summary. One great property
of the summarization task is that a document and its summary should convey the same meaning, which is not modeled
explicitly by the NLL loss.
In computer vision, contrastive learning methods for unsupervised image representation learning advanced the stateof-the-art in object detection and image segmentation (He
et al. 2020b). The key idea is to minimize distances (or maximize similarities) between feature representations of different
views of the same image (positive examples), while to maximize the distances between feature representations of views
of different images (negative examples) (He et al. 2020b;
Chen et al. 2020). As mentioned earlier, in summarization a
document and its summary should convey the same meaning.
Therefore, we view a document, its gold summary and its
model generated summaries as different views of the same
meaning representation and during training, we maximize
the similarities between them. To achieve that, we propose
SeqCo (as shorthand for Sequence Level Contrastive Learning), which is based on contrastive learning. In addition to
the gold summaries, we also use the dynamically generated
summaries from our model during training to increase the diversity of inputs to SeqCo. In text summarization, an abstractive summarization model needs to first encode the document
and then generate the summary. The contrastive objective in
SeqCo tries to map representations of a document and its summary (or generated summary) to the same vector space, which
intuitively helps the generation of summaries. Specifically, a
document may contain distinct (or unnecessary) information
from its summary. During training time, the contrastive objective between the document and summary actually encourages
the model to encode important (and necessary) information
from the document, otherwise the distance between the representations of document and summary will be large (the
objective updates model parameters to make it small). Intuitively, the capability of encoding important information
from documents would help to generate better summaries.
In experiments, we find our proposed contrastive learning
based model SeqCo consistently improves upon a strong abstractive summarization model based on BART (Lewis et al.

