The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Walk with Dual Agents for Knowledge Graph Reasoning
Denghui Zhang1† , Zixuan Yuan1† , Hao Liu2 , Xiaodong Lin1 , Hui Xiong1 *
1

Rutgers University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
{denghui.zhang, zy101, lin, hxiong}@rutgers.edu, liuh@ust.hk
2

existing indirect links and the query relation rq = ”LocatedIn”, one is possible to infer the fact (B OSTON, L OCATED I N,
U.S.).
In the past several years, extensive research has been conducted on learning latent representations of entities (e ∈ E)
and relations (r ∈ R) for knowledge graph reasoning by using tensor factorization or neural networks (Wang et al. 2014;
Yang et al. 2014; Trouillon et al. 2016). Such embeddingbased approaches mainly focus on preserving the structural
information in the KG and are effective for single-hop reasoning. Also, recent works have considered exploiting reinforcement learning (RL) (Das et al. 2017; Xiong, Hoang,
and Wang 2017; Shen et al. 2018) for KGC reasoning tasks,
where a walking agent is leveraged over KG paths to compose single-hop triplets into multi-hop reasoning chains. For
instance, MINERVA (Das et al. 2017) is an end-to-end model
that adopts REINFORCE algorithm (Sutton et al. 1999) to
train the RL agent to search over KGs starting from the source
and arrive at the candidate answers.
However, a noteworthy issue of these walking-based models is that they rely heavily on short reasoning chains (e.g.,
maximum path length=3 in MINERVA), where the performance drops drastically if short indirect paths are also absent.
Indeed, such single-agent approaches often get stuck when
reasoning on a long path. The reasons are two-fold. First,
KGs consist of massive entities and relations, the dimension
of the discrete action space at each step is typically large
(Das et al. 2017). As a result, the difficulty of reasoning (i.e.,
making right decisions constantly) increases drastically with
the increasing number of reasoning steps. Without narrowing
down the scope of representative entities and relations, the
underlying agent may conduct unnecessary traverse among
similar objects, and thus has low efficiency for path finding.
Second, prior approaches train the agent with sparse rewards.
Specifically, they only return a positive reward when the
agent reaches the target entity by the end of a walking, and
penalizes all actions within the path otherwise. This may
result in false-negative rewards to the intermediate actions
which are reasonable, and hinders the policy network from
learning trustworthy long-term patterns.
To tackle the above problems, in this paper, we propose
a Collaborative Dual-agent Reinforcement Learning framework, named CURL. Unlike existing walking-based RL models, which rely on one single agent to explore reasoning paths

Abstract
Graph walking based on reinforcement learning (RL) has
shown great success in navigating an agent to automatically
complete various reasoning tasks over an incomplete knowledge graph (KG) by exploring multi-hop relational paths. However, existing multi-hop reasoning approaches only work well
on short reasoning paths and tend to miss the target entity with
the increasing path length. This is undesirable for many reasoning tasks in real-world scenarios, where short paths connecting
the source and target entities are not available in incomplete
KGs, and thus the reasoning performances drop drastically unless the agent is able to seek out more clues from longer paths.
To address the above challenge, in this paper, we propose a
dual-agent reinforcement learning framework, which trains
two agents (GIANT and DWARF) to walk over a KG jointly and
search for the answer collaboratively. Our approach tackles
the reasoning challenge in long paths by assigning one of the
agents (GIANT) searching on cluster-level paths quickly and
providing stage-wise hints for another agent (DWARF). Finally,
experimental results on several KG reasoning benchmarks
show that our approach can search answers more accurately
and efficiently, and outperforms existing RL-based methods
for long path queries by a large margin.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) have become an essential building
block of various knowledge-driven services, such as relation
extraction (Mintz et al. 2009), question answering (Cui et al.
2019), and recommender systems (Zhang et al. 2016). A KG
is usually defined as a directed graph G = (E, R), where E is
a collection of entity nodes, and R is a set of relation edges.
Due to the highly incomplete nature, in practice, KGs often
fail to include sufficient fact triples to satisfy the long-tail scenarios in various tasks. To this end, we focus our study in the
context of automatic KG reasoning, also known as knowledge
graph completion (KGC), i.e., constructing f (es , rq , ?|G) or
f (?, rq , et |G) to infer missing facts by synthesizing information from multi-hop paths between the source and target
nodes. One example is illustrated in Figure 1, where no direct
link can be found on between the target node et = ”U.S.”
and the source node es = ”Boston”. However, by leveraging
* Hui Xiong is the corresponding author.
Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

†

5932

