The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Static-Dynamic Co-teaching for Class-Incremental 3D Object Detection
Na Zhao, Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{nazhao, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

picture

picture

picture

picture

sofa

Deep learning-based approaches have shown remarkable performance in the 3D object detection task. However, they suffer
from a catastrophic performance drop on the originally trained
classes when incrementally learning new classes without revisiting the old data. This “catastrophic forgetting” phenomenon
impedes the deployment of 3D object detection approaches in
real-world scenarios, where continuous learning systems are
needed. In this paper, we study the unexplored yet important
class-incremental 3D object detection problem and present
the first solution - SDCoT, a novel static-dynamic co-teaching
method. Our SDCoT alleviates the catastrophic forgetting of
old classes via a static teacher, which provides pseudo annotations for old classes in the new samples and regularizes the
current model by extracting previous knowledge with a distillation loss. At the same time, SDCoT consistently learns the
underlying knowledge from new data via a dynamic teacher.
We conduct extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets
and demonstrate the superior performance of our SDCoT over
baseline approaches in several incremental learning scenarios.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Na-Z/SDCoT.

table
chair

chair

chair

chair

chair

New data

Class-incremental Detection

sofa
table
chair

table table
chair

chair

Base classes
Novel classes

Figure 1: An example of class-incremental 3D object detection.
old one. For example, the detection system on a domestic
robot is initially trained to detect several base classes such
as ‘chair’ and ‘picture’ (see the left example in Figure 1).
Subsequently, when the examples of novel classes such as
‘sofa’ and ‘table’ become available, the system needs to incrementally learn to detect these novel classes without losing
the ability to detect the base classes (see the right example
in Figure 1). Furthermore, the ability to do class-incremental
learning of 3D object detection gives machines a learning capability closer to humans since we do not forget old concepts
after learning new ones.
Although class-incremental learning has been studied in
several computer vision tasks (Li and Hoiem 2017; Shmelkov,
Schmid, and Alahari 2017; Michieli and Zanuttigh 2019;
Dong et al. 2021), especially image classification, classincremental learning of 3D object detection remains unexplored. To our best knowledge, we are the first to study this
unexplored yet important problem, and to present an effective
Static-Dynamic Co-Teaching solution named SDCoT. Our
SDCoT is able to incrementally detect new classes without
revisiting any data of the old classes. A challenge in classincrement learning of object detection is the high chance of
old (in the background without labels) and new (with labels)
classes co-occurring in the new training samples. This causes
the model to wrongly suppress the old classes and thus expedites the catastrophic forgetting process. To overcome this
challenge, SDCoT leverages the previous model trained on
old data to generate pseudo annotations of old classes in the
new training samples. Consequently, a mixture of pseudo
labels of the old classes and the ground-truth labels of new
classes, i.e. “mixed labels” is used to train the current model.

Introduction
The success of deep learning are seen in many computer vision tasks that include point cloud-based 3D object detection.
Many deep learning-based approaches (Li, Zhang, and Xia
2016; Chen et al. 2017; Beltrán et al. 2018; Yan, Mao, and
Li 2018; Yang, Luo, and Urtasun 2018; Zeng et al. 2018;
Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Chen et al. 2019; Lang et al. 2019;
Qi et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Yang et al. 2019;
Zhou et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2021) are
proposed and have shown impressive performance in localizing and categorizing objects of interest in the point cloud of a
scene. However, these approaches suffer from “catastrophic
forgetting”, i.e. a significant performance degradation on the
old classes (c.f. Row 3 of Table 1 and 2) when applied in
a class-incremental scenario where new classes are added
incrementally while old data might be unavailable due to storage limitation or privacy issue. The “catastrophic forgetting”
phenomenon largely limits the use of these models in realworld applications, where intelligent machines are required
to continually learn new knowledge without forgetting the
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3436

