The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Zero Stability Well Predicts Performance of Convolutional Neural Networks
Liangming Chen1, 2, 3 , Long Jin1, 3 * , Mingsheng Shang1
1

Chongqing Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Computing, Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Chongqing School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
{lmchen, jinlongsysu}@foxmail.com, msshang@cigit.ac.cn
Abstract

The question of what kind of convolutional neural network
(CNN) structure performs well is fascinating. In this work,
we move toward the answer with one more step by connecting zero stability and model performance. Specifically,
we found that if a discrete solver of an ordinary differential equation is zero stable, the CNN corresponding to that
solver performs well. We first give the interpretation of zero
stability in the context of deep learning and then investigate
the performance of existing first- and second-order CNNs
under different zero-stable circumstances. Based on the preliminary observation, we provide a higher-order discretization to construct CNNs and then propose a zero-stable network (ZeroSNet). To guarantee zero stability of the ZeroSNet, we first deduce a structure that meets consistency conditions and then give a zero stable region of a training-free parameter. By analyzing the roots of a characteristic equation,
we theoretically obtain the optimal coefficients of feature
maps. Empirically, we present our results from three aspects:
We provide extensive empirical evidence of different depth
on different datasets to show that the moduli of the characteristic equation’s roots are the keys for the performance of
CNNs that require historical features; Our experiments show
that ZeroSNet outperforms existing CNNs which is based on
high-order discretization; ZeroSNets show better robustness
against noises on the input. The source code is available at
https://github.com/logichen/ZeroSNet.

澳

(a) A-stability

澳

(b) BIBO stability

澳

(c) Zero stability

Figure 1: Illustrations of A-stability, BIBO stability, and
zero stability. (a) Blue lines denote an A-stable method: Regardless of the step size, the method approaches the exact
solution (the solid green curve). Orange lines represent a
non-A-stable method, which can only approach the exact solution if the step size is small. Note that dotted lines have a
large step size. (b) The light shade represents the bound of
the input; The dark shade represents the bound of the output.
(c) The shades represent possible ranges of the difference
magnitude between features with different initial values. It
means that similar inputs generate similar outputs. In this
work, we focus on zero stability and connect it with robustness and generalization.

Introduction
The structure of a convolutional neural network (CNN) significantly affects its performance (He et al. 2016; Xie et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2021). However, there is no clear clue about
determining the importance of historical features and current activations (e.g., a sequence consisting of ReLU, convolutional layer, and batch normalization layer). A promising direction for structure determination is the ordinarydifferential-equation-inspired design (Lu et al. 2018; Zhu,
Chang, and Fu 2018). We seek the answer from the perspective of zero stability which is a concept originating from numerical analysis.
There are several types of stabilities in different fields. We
provide Fig. 1 to illustrate three of them: Absolute stability

(A-stability), bounded input bounded output (BIBO) stability, and zero stability. In the following content, we discuss
stability from a CNN structure design perspective. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), absolute stability (A-stability) means that the
numerical solution approaches the exact solution, regardless
of the step size, as t → ∞ (Atkinson, Han, and Stewart
2011; Luo et al. 2021). For CNNs, A-stability means that
for a network with a given depth, the feature map magnitude
does not increase from the input to the output (Haber et al.
2019). BIBO stability ensures that the output feature map is
within a bound if the input is bounded (Zhang and Schaeffer
2020), as in Fig. 1(b). Although these stabilities benefit the
learning ability and prevent the model from collapsing (Jin,

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6268

