The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Monotone Abstractions in Ontology-Based Data Management
Gianluca Cima1 , Marco Console2 , Maurizio Lenzerini2 , Antonella Poggi2
1

CNRS & University of Bordeaux
2
Sapienza University of Rome
gianluca.cima@u-bordeaux.fr, {console, lenzerini, poggi}@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

Recent papers (Cima 2017; Lutz, Marti, and Sabellek
2018; Cima, Lenzerini, and Poggi 2019, 2020b; Cima et al.
2021) address a different issue in OBDM: starting from a
query qS expressed over the sources, the goal is to find a
so-called abstraction of qS (Cima 2022), i.e., an ontologybased characterization of qS expressed in terms of the ontology elements, and whose answers coincide with the answer
to the original query, modulo the ontology and the mapping.
We encountered the need of abstraction during a joint project
with a public statistical research institute. The institute’s departments must publish subsets of the data they gather in the
form of semantically described linked open data. To compute the content of the datasets the departments execute suitable queries over the data sources mapped to a shared ontology. Notably, when the dataset is published, it must be documented through a SPARQL query expressed in terms of the
ontology. This task is currently done manually. The notion
of abstraction perfectly captures this scenario and provides
the formal tool for automating the process: given the query
over the sources computing the content of the dataset, the
abstraction of such query with respect to the mapping and
the ontology is exactly the SPARQL query to be associated
to the open dataset. Besides the above use case, abstraction
can be the appropriate tool for checking the quality of mapping in capturing relevant source queries (Lutz, Marti, and
Sabellek 2018), or deriving ontology-mediated queries from
examples (Ortiz 2019; Cima, Croce, and Lenzerini 2021).

In Ontology-Based Data Management (OBDM), an abstraction of a source query q is a query over the ontology capturing the semantics of q in terms of the concepts and the relations available in the ontology. Since a perfect characterization of a source query may not exist, the notions of best sound
and complete approximations of an abstraction have been introduced and studied in the typical OBDM context, i.e., in
the case where the ontology is expressed in DL-Lite, and
source queries are expressed as unions of conjunctive queries
(UCQs). Interestingly, if we restrict our attention to abstractions expressed as UCQs, even best approximations of abstractions are not guaranteed to exist. Thus, a natural question
to ask is whether such limitations affect even larger classes of
queries. In this paper, we answer this fundamental question
for an essential class of queries, namely the class of monotone queries. We define a monotone query language based on
disjunctive Datalog enriched with an epistemic operator, and
show that its expressive power suffices for expressing the best
approximations of monotone abstractions of UCQs.

1

Introduction

In Ontology-Based Data Management (OBDM) (Poggi et al.
2008), an ontology, i.e., a formal, logic-based representation of a domain of interest, is used to provide a high-level
conceptual tool for accessing and managing the data sources
of an information system. Suitable mappings declaratively
specify the relationship between the data at the sources and
the elements in the ontology, and this enables the user to
carry out many relevant tasks on data through the lens of the
ontology (Lenzerini 2018; De Giacomo et al. 2018).
In the last decade, there have been extensive investigations on the problem of answering queries expressed over
the ontology by means of algorithms that, taking into account both the ontology and the mapping, produce suitable
queries that extract the correct data from the sources. The
problem is complicated by the need of reasoning about all
components of the system, so as not to miss any answer logically implied by the axioms expressing both the ontology
and the mapping (see the surveys in (Bienvenu 2016; Xiao
et al. 2018; Ortiz 2018)).

The first investigations on abstraction appear in (Cima
2017; Lutz, Marti, and Sabellek 2018). Both papers point
out that the “perfect” abstraction of a union of conjunctive
queries (UCQ) expressed over the data source not always
exists, and present algorithms for computing such abstraction in the case where it both exists, and can be expressed
as a UCQ over the ontology. In (Cima 2017; Cima, Lenzerini, and Poggi 2019) the notion of (sound and complete)
approximations of the perfect abstraction is introduced, exactly to cope with situations in which perfectness cannot
be achieved. Moreover, both papers make it clear that, for
a given class of queries C, one is probably interested in two
specific forms of approximations, called C-minimally complete and C-maximally sound abstractions. Based on these
notions, (Cima, Lenzerini, and Poggi 2019) presents a thorough analysis of the verification problem (check whether a
given query is a complete or sound abstraction) and the com-

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5556

