The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards High-Fidelity Face Self-Occlusion Recovery via Multi-View
Residual-Based GAN Inversion
Jinsong Chen,1,2 Hu Han,1,2,3,* Shiguang Shan1,2
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing
Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Pengcheng National Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
chenjinsong20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {hanhu, sgshan}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

with face self-occlusion by using the statistically complete
texture represented by a linear combination of the basis texture vectors in 3DMM (Yin et al. 2006; Cao et al. 2013;
Koppen et al. 2018; Booth et al. 2016). While such a texture
is complete, it is not photorealistic compared with the input
face image; particularly it cannot express natural and diverse
face appearance details.
To resolve the unrealistic face texture issue, many latter
approaches propose to sample a texture from the input 2D
face image (UV texture map) to replace the linearly combined texture (PCA-texture) in 3DMM. However, because
of self-occlusion, the UV sampled face texture is incomplete. To address this issue, some studies aim to generate a
complete and photorealistic face texture based on the incomplete one. The most common method is to learn a mapping
between incomplete UV sampled textures to real complete
textures, which usually relies on paired data such as 2D face
image and its corresponding complete face texture (Deng
et al. 2018). The complete face textures may come from 3D
scanning or computed from multi-view 2D face images via
photometric stereo. Apparently, such kinds of paired data are
still limited because of the high cost of data acquisition.
To overcome the above limitations, recent approaches
propose to leverage generative models, such as a GAN, to
model the distribution of the complete and high-fidelity feature textures (Gecer et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2020b). Specifically, a GAN can be trained using a complete high-fidelity
texture dataset so that it can generate arbitrary high-fidelity
textures by changing the latent vector. Then, instead of optimizing the linear texture combination coefficients in early
3DMM based approaches, a complete high-fidelity face texture can be generated to replicate the input 2D face image
by optimizing the latent vector. Another method to get rid of
the constraint of requiring paired data is to leverage the prior
knowledge in pre-trained models on large 2D face datasets
to perform inpainting in 2D face image space. For example,
(Gecer, Deng, and Zafeiriou 2021) proposed to render multiview 2D face images based on incomplete high-fidelity textures, and used StyleGAN (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019)
to perform inpainting for the rendered 2D image so that the
corrupted part in these images can be recovered. Then, these
recovered 2D images can be merged, e.g., via alpha blending, to obtain a complete high-fidelity face texture. While
these face self-occlusion recovery methods can obtain high-

Face self-occlusions are inevitable due to the 3D nature of
the human face and the loss of information in the projection
process from 3D to 2D images. While recovering face selfocclusions based on 3D face reconstruction, e.g., 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) and its variants provides an effective
solution, most of the existing methods show apparent limitations in expressing high-fidelity, natural, and diverse facial
details. To overcome these limitations, we propose in this paper a new generative adversarial network (MvInvert) for natural face self-occlusion recovery without using paired imagetexture data. We design a coarse-to-fine generator for photorealistic texture generation. A coarse texture is computed
by inpainting the invisible areas in the photorealistic but incomplete texture sampled directly from the 2D image using
the unrealistic but complete statistical texture from 3DMM.
Then, we design a multi-view Residual-based GAN Inversion, which re-renders and refines multi-view 2D images,
which are used for extracting multiple high-fidelity textures.
Finally, these high-fidelity textures are fused based on their
visibility maps via Poisson blending. To perform adversarial learning to assure the quality of the recovered texture, we
design a discriminator consisting of two heads, i.e., one for
global and local discrimination between the recovered texture and a small set of real textures in UV space, and the
other for discrimination between the input image and the rerendered 2D face images via pixel-wise, identity, and adversarial losses. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in face selfocclusion recovery under unconstrained scenarios.

Introduction
Face imaging is the process of projecting a 3D human face
to a 2D plane. Therefore, some parts of the face can be
occluded by another part of the face during the projection
process. Self-occlusion seriously affects the performance of
succeeding face analysis, face recognition, and face reenactment tasks.
Face self-occlusion recovery is an ill-posed problem because of insufficient constraints. Existing methods for selfocclusion recovery are generally based on 3DMM (Blanz
and Vetter 1999) and its variants. The early approaches deal
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author

294

