The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FedFR: Joint Optimization Federated Framework for Generic and Personalized
Face Recognition
Chih-Ting Liu1* , Chien-Yi Wang2* , Shao-Yi Chien1 , Shang-Hong Lai2
1

Graduate Institute of Electronics and Engineering, National Taiwan University
2
Microsoft AI R&D Center, Taiwan
jackieliu@media.ee.ntu.edu.tw, chiwa@microsoft.com, sychien@ntu.edu.tw, shlai@microsoft.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art deep learning based face recognition
(FR) models require a large number of face identities for central training. However, due to the growing privacy awareness, it is prohibited to access the face images on user devices to continually improve face recognition models. Federated Learning (FL) is a technique to address the privacy
issue, which can collaboratively optimize the model without sharing the data between clients. In this work, we propose a FL based framework called FedFR to improve the
generic face representation in a privacy-aware manner. Besides, the framework jointly optimizes personalized models
for the corresponding clients via the proposed Decoupled
Feature Customization module. The client-specific personalized model can serve the need of optimized face recognition
experience for registered identities at the local device. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore the personalized face recognition in FL setup. The proposed framework
is validated to be superior to previous approaches on several
generic and personalized face recognition benchmarks with
diverse FL scenarios. The source codes and our proposed
personalized FR benchmark under FL setup are available at
https://github.com/jackie840129/FedFR.

Figure 1: The Federated Learning (FL) setup for face recognition. Given a pre-trained face recognition model, we aim
to simultaneously improve the generic face representation at
the server, and produce an optimal personalized model for
each client without transmitting private identities’ images or
features out of the local devices.

Introduction
Face recognition has been an active and vital topic among
computer vision community for a long time. The state-ofthe-art training frameworks formulate face recognition as a
metric learning problem, and employ the large-scale identity
classification as the proxy task to learn face features, which
could discriminate between different identities robustly. Recently, the quick evolution of softmax-based loss functions
for identity classification greatly promote the performance
of face recognition. However, the training of face recognition model heavily relies on centralizing a huge amount of
personal face images, which are usually not accessible due
to the uprising privacy concern in many countries. Therefore, it is necessary to navigate the development of face
recognition under the premise of privacy preservation.
Federated learning (FL) provides a distributed and
privacy-aware framework to train models where multiple
clients collaboratively learn without sharing their data with

the central server or other clients. A classical FL method
called FedAvg (McMahan et al. 2017) aggregates and averages the gradients from local clients on the server, and transmit the updated model back to the clients for the next round
of local optimization. In the past few years, there has been
significant progress in FL (Kairouz et al. 2019) on image
classification task, which boosts the performance of aggregated global model under diverse FL scenarios. However,
these approaches cannot be directly applied onto face recognition due to several critical reasons: 1) Face recognition is
an open-set classification task, where training and testing
identity classes are different. 2) The identity classes between
local clients are different, which results in different model
architectures in clients. 3) In a more practical setup for face
recognition (Aggarwal, Zhou, and Jain 2021), the FL train-

* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1656

