The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Price of Justified Representation
Edith Elkind,1 Piotr Faliszewski,2 Ayumi Igarashi,3 Pasin Manurangsi,4
Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin,5 Warut Suksompong6
1

University of Oxford, 2 AGH University of Science and Technology, 3 National Institute of Informatics
4
Google Research 5 TU Berlin 6 National University of Singapore

says that in an n-voter election where the goal is to select
a committee of size k, no group of n/k voters who jointly
approve some candidate should remain unrepresented in the
elected committee.

Abstract
In multiwinner approval voting, the goal is to select kmember committees based on voters’ approval ballots. A
well-studied concept of proportionality in this context is the
justified representation (JR) axiom, which demands that no
large cohesive group of voters remains unrepresented. However, the JR axiom may conflict with other desiderata, such as
coverage (maximizing the number of voters who approve at
least one committee member) or social welfare (maximizing
the number of approvals obtained by committee members).
In this work, we investigate the impact of imposing the JR
axiom (as well as the more demanding EJR axiom) on social welfare and coverage. Our approach is threefold: we derive worst-case bounds on the loss of welfare/coverage that
is caused by imposing JR, study the computational complexity of finding ‘good’ committees that provide JR (obtaining a
hardness result, an approximation algorithm, and an exact algorithm for one-dimensional preferences), and examine this
setting empirically on several synthetic datasets.

1

Our Contribution In this paper, we seek to understand the
effect of imposing the JR axiom on the objectives of social
welfare and coverage. We observe that requiring a committee to provide JR has no impact on coverage: there is a committee that offers optimal coverage as well as JR. In contrast,
the impact on welfare is substantial: an example of Lackner and Skowron (2020b) shows that imposing the JR axiom
may result in a committee
√ whose social welfare differs from
optimal by a factor of k/2, and we prove
that this bound is
√
tight; in fact, we can obtain a nearly k/2-approximation to
optimal social welfare, while providing both JR and a 4/3approximation to optimal coverage. For coverage, we also
show that the loss caused by imposing a more demanding
axiom of extended justified representation is bounded by 4/3.
We then investigate the complexity of computing a welfare-maximizing JR committee. While both the problem of
computing a JR committee and the problem of maximizing
the social welfare are in P, combining these two objectives
results in a problem that is NP-hard, even to approximate
up to a factor of k 1/2−ε for ε > 0. On the positive side,
we show that it√ can be efficiently approximated up to a factor of nearly k/2, which means that the inapproximability bound is asymptotically tight. Moreover, we present a
polynomial-time exact algorithm for one-dimensional preferences (namely, for the fairly large 1D-VCR domain, recently proposed by Godziszewski et al. (2021)).
We complement our theoretical findings by an empirical
analysis. We consider three standard models of preference
distributions, and estimate the impact of imposing the JR
axiom on welfare and coverage. In contrast to our theoretical
results, this analysis paints a much more optimistic picture:
one can achieve a good approximation to the Pareto frontier
of social welfare and coverage even under the JR constraint.

Introduction

What do the tasks of electing members of a parliament, making a shortlist of job candidates to invite for an interview, and
selecting dishes for a banquet have in common? They can all
be seen as instances of multiwinner voting: there is a set of
voters with preferences over the candidates, and the goal is
to select a fixed-size subset of the candidates based on these
preferences. Recently, axiomatic and algorithmic questions
related to multiwinner voting have attracted significant attention from the AI community (Faliszewski et al. 2017).
A common form of multiwinner voting involves approval
ballots, wherein each voter specifies the subset of candidates
that she finds acceptable. Depending on the application, one
may want the winning set (also called a committee) to maximize the utilitarian social welfare (i.e., to select the candidates with the largest number of approvals) or coverage
(i.e., to maximize the number of voters who approve at least
one of the selected candidates). Another objective, which is
somewhat more difficult to capture, is to select a committee
that represents the set of voters in a proportional manner. A
fairly basic proportionality requirement is the justified representation (JR) axiom, formulated by Aziz et al. (2017): it

Related Work There is a quickly growing body of work
on approval-based multiwinner voting; we point the reader
to the survey of Lackner and Skowron (2020a). Our work
builds on several predecessor papers, which study trade-offs
among different desiderata in the context of committee selection, but take a somewhat different perspective.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4983

