The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shrub Ensembles for Online Classification
Sebastian Buschjäger1 , Sibylle Hess2 , Katharina J. Morik1
1

2

Artificial Intelligence Group, TU Dortmund, Germany
Data Mining Group, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
{sebastian.buschjaeger, katharina.morik}@tu-dortmund.de, s.c.hess@tue.nl

Abstract

first strategy uses incremental base-learners such as Hoeffding Trees (HT) (Domingos and Hulten 2000) or Hoeffding Anytime Trees (HTT) (Manapragada, Webb, and Salehi
2018) to incrementally grow individual trees on either different subsets of the data, different sets of features (e.g. as in
Online Bagging and its variations (Oza 2005; Abdulsalam,
Skillicorn, and Martin 2008; Gomes et al. 2017b; Gomes,
Read, and Bifet 2019)), or on different targets (e.g. as in
Online Boosting and its variations (Reichler, Harris, and
Savchenko 2004; Oza 2005; Kolter and Maloof 2005; Pelossof et al. 2009; Chen, Lin, and Lu 2012; Beygelzimer et al.
2015)). The drawback of this strategy is that HT and HTT
always keep adding new nodes to the tree without removing
old ones. Thus, the size of the trees grows over time which
is not suitable for applications on small devices. The second strategy is to use a fixed tree structure and to update the
individual split nodes of the tree via (stochastic) gradientdescent (Irsoy, Yildiz, and Alpaydin 2012; Kontschieder
et al. 2015; Seyedhosseini and Tasdizen 2015; Shen et al.
2018). While this approach uses a fixed amount of memory,
it requires the costly computation of gradients by backpropagation through the entire tree, which is not suitable for the
processing capabilities of small devices.
In this paper, we establish a third strategy. We propose to
maintain a bounded but dynamic ensemble of so-called decision shrubs. Just as in botany, decision shrubs are small- to
medium-sized trees which compete against each other. Our
algorithm trains shrubs on small windows and uses stochastic proximal gradient descent to learn the weights of individual shrubs in the ensemble. Shrubs with sub-optimal performance are aggressively pruned from the ensemble while
new shrubs are regularly introduced. This makes our algorithm fast and memory-efficient while it retains a high degree of adaptability to evolving data streams. In contrast
to incremental learners, our trees never exceed a fixed size.
In contrast to gradient-based approaches, we replace costly
gradient-computations with a continuous re-training of trees
on small batches. Our contributions are as follows:

Online learning algorithms have become a ubiquitous tool
in the machine learning toolbox and are frequently used in
small, resource-constraint environments. Among the most
successful online learning methods are Decision Tree (DT)
ensembles. DT ensembles provide excellent performance
while adapting to changes in the data, but they are not resource efficient. Incremental tree learners keep adding new
nodes to the tree but never remove old ones increasing the
memory consumption over time. Gradient-based tree learning, on the other hand, requires the computation of gradients over the entire tree which is costly for even moderately sized trees. In this paper, we propose a novel memoryefficient online classification ensemble called shrub ensembles for resource-constraint systems. Our algorithm trains
small to medium-sized decision trees on small windows and
uses stochastic proximal gradient descent to learn the ensemble weights of these ‘shrubs’. We provide a theoretical
analysis of our algorithm and include an extensive discussion on the behavior of our approach in the online setting.
In a series of 2 959 experiments on 12 different datasets,
we compare our method against 8 state-of-the-art methods.
Our Shrub Ensembles retain an excellent performance even
when only little memory is available. We show that SE offers
a better accuracy-memory trade-off in 7 of 12 cases, while
having a statistically significant better performance than most
other methods. Our implementation is available under https:
//github.com/sbuschjaeger/se-online.

Introduction
Many real-world applications rely on efficient online learning algorithms that are executed on small, resourceconstraint devices (Da Xu, He, and Li 2014). In online learning, the algorithm must process large amounts of data with
limited resources in a fast-paced way to provide predictions
at any point in time. In addition, data streams often belong
to long-running processes which naturally evolve over time
and thereby introduce concept drift. Thus, the algorithm
must also be able to adapt to new situations and changing
data distributions.
Tree ensembles are one of the most popular choices for
online learning due to their ability to cope with drift. There
are two main strategies to train online tree ensembles. The

• Shrub ensembles: We present a learning objective
which enforces a small and effective ensemble. The
Shrub Ensemble (SE) algorithm uses a variant of the
theoretically well-founded proximal gradient descent,
which introduces the training of new shrubs on small
batches of the data and the automatic removal of sub-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6123

