The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Certified Symmetry and Dominance Breaking for Combinatorial Optimisation
Bart Bogaerts,1 Stephan Gocht,2,3 Ciaran McCreesh,4 Jakob Nordström3,2
1
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Lund University, Lund, Sweden
3
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
4
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
bart.bogaerts@vub.be, stephan.gocht@cs.lth.se, Ciaran.McCreesh@glasgow.ac.uk, jn@di.ku.dk
2

Abstract

error-prone even for experienced modellers, and when dealing with larger problems with many constraints and interacting symmetries it can be hard to tell whether an instance
is genuinely unsatisfiable, or was made so by an incorrect
symmetry constraint.
Despite these difficulties, symmetry elimination using
both manual and automatic techniques has been key to
many successes across modern combinatorial optimisation
paradigms such as constraint programming (CP) (Garcia de
la Banda et al. 2014), Boolean satisfiability (SAT) (Biere
et al. 2021), and mixed-integer programming (MIP) (Achterberg and Wunderling 2013). As these optimisation technologies are increasingly being used for high-value and
life-affecting decision-making processes, it becomes vital
that we can trust their outputs—and unfortunately, current solvers do not always produce the correct answer
(Brummayer, Lonsing, and Biere 2010; Cook et al. 2013;
Akgün et al. 2018; Gillard, Schaus, and Deville 2019). The
most promising way to address this problem appears to
be to use certification, or proof logging, where a solver
must produce an efficiently machine-verifiable certificate
that the solution given is correct (Alkassar et al. 2011;
McConnell et al. 2011). This approach has been successfully used in the SAT community, with numerous proof
logging formats such as RUP (Goldberg and Novikov
2003), TraceCheck (Biere 2006), DRAT (Heule, Hunt Jr.,
and Wetzler 2013a,b; Wetzler, Heule, and Hunt Jr. 2014),
GRIT (Cruz-Filipe, Marques-Silva, and Schneider-Kamp
2017), and LRAT (Cruz-Filipe et al. 2017). However, currently used methods work only for decision problems, and
do not support the full range of SAT solving techniques,
let alone CP and MIP solving. As a case in point, there is
no efficient proof logging for symmetry breaking, except

Symmetry and dominance breaking can be crucial for solving hard combinatorial search and optimisation problems, but
the correctness of these techniques sometimes relies on subtle arguments. For this reason, it is desirable to produce efficient, machine-verifiable certificates that solutions have been
computed correctly. Building on the cutting planes proof system, we develop a certification method for optimisation problems in which symmetry and dominance breaking are easily
expressible. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that
we can efficiently verify fully general symmetry breaking in
Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solving, thus providing, for the
first time, a unified method to certify a range of advanced SAT
techniques that also includes XOR and cardinality reasoning.
In addition, we apply our method to maximum clique solving
and constraint programming as a proof of concept that the
approach applies to a wider range of combinatorial problems.

1

Introduction

Symmetries pose a challenge when solving hard combinatorial problems. For example, consider the Crystal Maze puzzle1 shown in Figure 1, which is often used in introductory
constraint modelling courses. A human modeller might notice that the puzzle is the same under a vertical mirror symmetry, and could introduce the constraint A < G to eliminate this. Or, they may notice a horizontal mirror symmetry, which could be broken with A < B. Alternatively, they
might spot that the values are symmetrical, and that we can
interchange 1 and 8, 2 and 7, and so on; this can be eliminated by saying that A ≤ 4. In each case a constraint is
being added that preserves satisfiability overall, but that restricts a solver to finding (ideally) just one witness from each
equivalence class of solutions—the hope is that this will improve solver performance. However, although we may be
reasonably sure that any of these three constraints is correct individually, are combinations of these constraints valid
simultaneously? What if we had said F < C instead of
A < B? And what if we could use numbers more than
once? Getting symmetry elimination constraints right can be

C

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://theconversation.com/what-problems-will-ai-solve-infuture-an-old-british-gameshow-can-help-explain-49080

A

B

D

E

G

H

F

Figure 1: The Crystal Maze puzzle. Place numbers 1 to 8 in
the circles, with every circle getting a different number, so
that adjacent circles do not have consecutive numbers.

3698

