The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Faster Algorithms for Weak Backdoors
Serge Gaspers, Andrew Kaploun
School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney
serge.gaspers@unsw.edu.au, andrewkaploun0@gmail.com

Abstract

SAT solving programs that can solve instances with hundreds of thousands of variables (Ohrimenko, Stuckey, and
Codish 2007). Thus, it can be productive to formally investigate the structure of classes of SAT instances that can be
solved faster than the general case. Throughout this paper,
we will introduce how weak backdoor algorithms facilitate
this investigation, explain their applications, and describe
our improved algorithms.
The SAT problem consists of a Boolean formula φ; an
expression consisting of variables with the binary operators OR (∨) and AND (∧), the negation operator (¬), and
brackets. SAT asks whether there is an assignment of true
(or 1) and false (or 0) values to its variables such that φ
is satisfied. Defining a literal as a Boolean variable with or
without a negation (e.g. x, ¬y); a disjunctive clause, or simply a clause, is a disjunctive (∨) collection of literals (e.g.
(¬x ∨ y ∨ x)). A Boolean formula φ in conjunctive normal
form, or CNF, consists of a conjunction (∧) of clauses (e.g.
C1 ∧ ... ∧ Cn where C1 , ..., Cn are clauses), and is in 3CNF
if each clause has at most 3 variables. 3CNF-SAT, or simply
3-SAT, is the variant of SAT where φ ∈ 3CNF.

A weak backdoor, or simply a backdoor, for a Boolean SAT
formula φ into a class of SAT formulae C is a partial truth assignment τ such that φ[τ ] ∈ C and satisfiability is preserved.
The problem of finding a backdoor from class C1 into class
C2 , or WB(C1 ,C2 ), can be stated as follows: Given a formula
φ ∈ C1 , and a natural number k, determine whether there
exists a backdoor for φ into C2 assigning at most k variables.
The class 0-VAL contains all Boolean formulae with at least
one negative literal in each clause. We design a new algorithm for WB(3CNF, 0-VAL) by reducing it to a local search
variant of 3-SAT. We show that our algorithm runs in time
O∗ (2.562k ), improving on the previous state-of-the-art of
O∗ (2.85k ). Here, the O∗ notation is a variant of the big-O
notation that allows to omit polynomial factors in the input
size.
Next, we look at WB(3CNF, N ULL), where N ULL is the class
consisting of the empty formula. This problem was known
to have a trivial running time upper bound of O∗ (6k ) and
can easily be solved in O∗ (3k ) time. We use a reduction to
C ONFLICT F REE d-H ITTING S ET to prove an upper bound
of O∗ (2.2738k ), and also prove a lower bound of 2o(k) assuming the Exponential Time Hypothesis.
Finally, H ORN is the class of formulae with at most one positive literal per clause. We improve the previous O∗ (4.54k )
running time for WB(3CNF, H ORN) problem to O∗ (4.17k ),
by exploiting the structure of the SAT instance to give a novel
proof of the non-existence of the slowest cases after a slight
restructuring of the branching priorities.

Parameterized Complexity
A parameterized problem is fixed-parameter tractable if it is
solved by an algorithm that runs in O(f (k) · poly(n)) time,
where n is the input size, poly(n) is a polynomial function
of n, k is the parameter, and f (k) is a computable function
of the parameter only. In this way, a problem can be NP-hard
but remain tractable so long as k is small, as we will illustrate when we discuss algorithms for backdoors. As usual in
parameterized algorithmics (Cygan et al. 2015; Downey and
Fellows 2013; Flum and Grohe 2006; Niedermeier 2006),
we say that an algorithm runs in O∗ (f (k)) time for parameter k if it runs in O(f (k) · poly(n)) time.

Introduction
Boolean Satisfiability
Boolean Satisfiability, or SAT, is a foundational problem in computer science, serves as the canonical NPComplete problem (Cook 1971), and solutions are useful
in not only broader theoretical (Aho and Hopcroft 1974)
and applied (Marques-Silva 2008) computer science, but
a number of fields of AI (Järvisalo 2016). Noting that
the fastest running time bound for 3-SAT algorithms is
O(1.307n ) (Hansen et al. 2019) (a bound which would imply solving a formula with just hundreds of variables is intractable), a discrepancy can been observed with modern

Backdoors
Some Boolean satisfiability instances are easy to solve; others seem very difficult to solve. Backdoors formalize this
phenomenon.
Williams, Gomes, and Selman (2003) introduced the idea
of SAT backdoors as a way of formalising the intuitive structure found within a lot of SAT formulae. A (partial) assignment τ is a mapping from variables to truth values. If we
have a formula φ and an assignment τ , we denote φ with

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3741

