The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fractional Adaptive Linear Units
Julio Zamora, Anthony D. Rhodes, Lama Nachman
Intel Labs
julio.c.zamora.esquivel@intel.com, anthony.rhodes@intel.com, lama.nachman@intel.com

Abstract

ods such as Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy
et al. 2020), and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf and
Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2017).
From a conceptual perspective, DNNs are known to act
as universal function approximators. In 1989, the first (Cybenko 1989) of several subsequent Universal Approximation Theorems (UAT) pertaining to ANNs was proven in the
case of the sigmoid activation function: σ(x) = 1+e1−x . In
1991, the UAT for ANNs was extended in a relaxed form to
any bounded and non-constant activation function (Kurt and
Hornik 1991); a further generalization of UAT was later applied to non-polynomial activation functions (Leshno et al.
1993).
With UAT established, the bulk of ANN research in subsequent years focused on the development of engineering
and architectural improvements of ANNs to enhance the efficiency of feature processing and feature learning. These innovations included the introduction of residual connections,
feature normalization, novel regularization methods, and
multi-scale feature aggregation, among others (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012b; He et al. 2016b; Szegedy et al.
2015; Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Chen et al. 2016). In large
part, these historical design enhancements have ignored explicit modifications made to activation functions. This inattention is possibly due to the generalization of large families
of AFs as conduits to universal approximation expressed by
the UAT, which gives the subtle (but misguided) impression
of their relative insignificance. Until 2010, practitioners almost universally employed the conventional sigmoid activation function in ANN design. However, the inherent limitations of the sigmoid activation function, exhibited most
starkly by the vanishing gradient phenomenon (Pascanu,
Mikolov, and Bengio 2013), became clear by the early 2010s
as researchers pushed to increase the capacity of ANNs by
introducing deeper architectures.
Today, the default activation function used for DNNs is
the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) (Nair and Hinton 2010),
defined as: f (x) = max(0, x). Although it was popularized nearly a decade ago with the remarkable performance
of AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012b), it is
still, for this reason, often implicitly synonymized as a fixture of “Deep Learning”. The ReLU activation is commonly
preferred by practitioners due to its computational simplicity, favorable non-saturation properties, and the perception

This work introduces Fractional Adaptive Linear Units
(FALUs), a flexible generalization of adaptive activation
functions. Leveraging principles from fractional calculus,
FALUs define a diverse family of activation functions (AFs)
that encompass many traditional and state-of-the-art activation functions. This family includes the Sigmoid, Gaussian,
ReLU, GELU, and Swish functions, as well as a large variety
of smooth interpolations between these functions. Our technique requires only a small number of additional trainable
parameters, and needs no further specialized optimization
or initialization procedures. For this reason, FALUs present
a seamless and rich automated solution to the problem of
activation function optimization. Through experiments on a
variety of conventional tasks and network architectures, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of FALUs when compared to
traditional and state-of-the-art AFs. To facilitate practical use
of this work, we plan to make our code publicly available.

Introduction
The genesis of modern Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
can be traced to the McCulloch-Pitts neural model (Mcculloch and Pitts 1943), which provides an elegant mathematical description of the high-level functionality of a single biological neuron. In this framework, a neuron receives one or
more inputs, and these inputs are then aggregated and passed
through a non-linear activation function (typically a stepfunction). The activation function serves to approximate the
“firing” mechanism of a neuron.
Remarkably, since the introduction of the McCullochPitts model, very little of this basc structure has substantially changed when we compare this early vision with modern Deep Learning practices. Many of the same core operations utilized in the M-P model are also found in many other
popular ANN-related models, including the early Perceptron
(Rosenblatt 1958), as well as the majority of modern Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs), including feed-forward networks
(Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Lecun
et al. 1998; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012a; He
et al. 2016a), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), and even more neoteric methCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8988

