The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unified Named Entity Recognition as Word-Word Relation Classification
Jingye Li,1,∗ Hao Fei,1, * Jiang Liu,1 Shengqiong Wu,1
Meishan Zhang,2 Chong Teng,1 Donghong Ji,1 Fei Li1,†
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry
of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
Institute of Computing and Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
{theodorelee, hao.fei, liujiang, whuwsq, tengchong, dhji, lifei csnlp}@whu.edu.cn, mason.zms@gmail.com
Abstract

(a) I am having aching in legs and shoulders
e1
e2

So far, named entity recognition (NER) has been involved
with three major types, including flat, overlapped (aka.
nested), and discontinuous NER, which have mostly been
studied individually. Recently, a growing interest has been
built for unified NER, tackling the above three jobs concurrently with one single model. Current best-performing methods mainly include span-based and sequence-to-sequence
models, where unfortunately the former merely focus on
boundary identification and the latter may suffer from exposure bias. In this work, we present a novel alternative by modeling the unified NER as word-word relation classification, namely W2 NER. The architecture resolves the kernel bottleneck of unified NER by effectively modeling the neighboring relations between entity words with Next-Neighboring-Word (NNW) and
Tail-Head-Word-* (THW-*) relations. Based on the
W2 NER scheme we develop a neural framework, in which
the unified NER is modeled as a 2D grid of word pairs. We
then propose multi-granularity 2D convolutions for better refining the grid representations. Finally, a co-predictor is used
to sufficiently reason the word-word relations. We perform
extensive experiments on 14 widely-used benchmark datasets
for flat, overlapped, and discontinuous NER (8 English and
6 Chinese datasets), where our model beats all the current
top-performing baselines, pushing the state-of-the-art performances of unified NER.

NNW
NNW

NNW

(b) I am having aching in legs and shoulders
THW-S
THW-S

Figure 1: (a) An example to show three types of NER.
e1 is a flat entity overlapped with a discontinuous entity e2 at the span “aching in”. (b) We formalize three
NER subtasks as word-word relation classification, where
the Next-Neighboring-Word (NNW) relation indicates that a word pair are successively joint as a segment of
an entity (e.g., aching→in), and the Tail-Head-Word-*
(THW-*) relation implies the edges where the tail words
connect to the head words (e.g., legs→aching) as an entity
with “*” type (e.g., Symptom).
overlapped and discontinuous NER become more complicated, i.e., overlapped entities contain the same tokens,1 and
discontinuous entities entail non-adjacent spans, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Previous methods for multi-type NER can be roughly
grouped into four major categories: 1) sequence labeling, 2)
hypergraph-based methods, 3) sequence-to-sequence methods and 4) span-based methods. A majority of initial work
formalizes NER as a sequence labeling problem (Lample
et al. 2016; Zheng et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2018; Straková
et al. 2019), assigning a tag to each token. However, it is
difficult to design one tagging scheme for all NER subtasks.
Then hypergraph-based models are proposed (Lu and Roth
2015; Wang and Lu 2018; Katiyar and Cardie 2018) to represent all entity spans, which however suffer from both the
spurious structure and structural ambiguity issue during inference. Recently, Yan et al. (2021) propose a sequence-tosequence (Seq2Seq) model to directly generate various entities, which unfortunately potentially suffers from the decoding efficiency problem and certain common shortages of
Seq2Seq architecture, e.g., exposure bias. Span-based meth-

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) has long been a fundamental task in natural language processing (NLP) community,
due to its wide variety of knowledge-based applications,
e.g., relation extraction (Wei et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021b), entity linking (Le and Titov 2018; Hou et al. 2020), etc. Studies
of NER have gradually evolved initially from the flat NER
(Lample et al. 2016; Strubell et al. 2017), late to the overlapped NER (Yu et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2021), and recently
to the discontinuous NER (Dai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021a).
Specifically, flat NER simply detects the mention spans and
their semantic categories from text, while the problems in
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Without losing generality, “nested” can be seen as a special
case of “overlapped” (Zeng et al. 2018; Dai 2018; Fei et al. 2020).

10965

