The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Incorporating Item Frequency for Differentially Private Set Union
Ricardo Silva Carvalho, Ke Wang, Lovedeep Singh Gondara
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
rsilvaca@sfu.ca, wangk@cs.sfu.ca, lgondara@sfu.ca

Abstract

that differ in the addition or removal of one user’s data, and
all sets S of possible outputs, we have:

We study the problem of releasing the set union of users’ items
subject to differential privacy. Previous approaches consider
only the set of items for each user as the input. We propose incorporating the item frequency, which is typically available in
set union problems, to boost the utility of private mechanisms.
However, using the global item frequency over all users would
largely increase privacy loss. We propose to use the local item
frequency of each user to approximate the global item frequency without incurring additional privacy loss. Local item
frequency allows us to design greedy set union mechanisms
that are differentially private, which is impossible for previous
greedy proposals. Moreover, while all previous works have to
use uniform sampling to limit the number of items each user
would contribute to, our construction eliminates the sampling
step completely and allows our mechanisms to consider all of
the users’ items. Finally, we propose to transfer the knowledge
of the global item frequency from a public dataset into our
mechanism, which further boosts utility even when the public
and private datasets are from different domains. We evaluate
the proposed methods on multiple real-life datasets.

1

Pr[M(D) ∈ S] ≤ eε Pr[M(D′ ) ∈ S] + δ
Since neighboring datasets differ by the data of one user, the
inequality above ensures that the outputs of a mechanism M
satisfying DP will have only a small impact if we remove
or add any single user from the dataset used to generate the
output. Thus, such outputs will not be tightly related to any
individual user, effectively protecting users’ sensitive data.

1.1

Differentially Private Set Union

The problem of Differentially Private Set Union (DPSU) was
formalized by (Gopi et al. 2020).
Problem 1 (Differentially Private Set Union (DPSU)). Let U
be some universe of items, possibly of unbounded size. Given
a database D of users, each user i has a set of items Wi ⊆ U ,
we want an (ε, δ)-DP mechanism M that outputs a subset
S ⊆ ∪i Wi such that the size of S is as large as possible.
The goal is to output the largest possible subset of the union
while meeting DP. Previous work related to DPSU (Korolova
et al. 2009; Wilson et al. 2020) designed mechanisms with
two phases, as shown in Figure 1. Phase 1 builds a histogram
on ∪i Wi by iterating over the users and getting their contributions in terms of items. To provide DP, the contribution
of every single user is bounded. That means the maximum
number of items a user may contribute is fixed, denoted by
∆0 , and the updates to items’ weights in the histogram given
by each user sum to a total weight budget of 1. In Phase 2,
only items with a noisy weight above the threshold ρ will be
outputted. Basically, the threshold is used to limit the probability of outputting the items only contributed by the user
present in just one of the neighboring data D or D′ .

Introduction

The set union is a basic operation that provides a global view
of the data from all of the users involved in a study. It is one
of the most fundamental building blocks in many data-related
problems, such as vocabulary extraction, data integration and
SQL queries (Kannan et al. 2016; Lenzerini 2002; Chen et al.
2019). However, when the data contains sensitive information
of users, this operation may breach users’ privacy. For example, releasing a vocabulary disclosing just a single word is
enough to impact a user’s privacy, as it may represent a password, disease diagnosis or political preference. Recent works
(Carlini et al. 2019, 2020) have used extraction attacks to
successfully reveal sensitive text. Therefore, algorithms that
provide privacy guarantees are highly desirable. Differential
Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006) is the most often used standard for privacy, implemented by Google (Fanti, Pihur, and
Erlingsson 2016), Microsoft (Ding, Kulkarni, and Yekhanin
2017), the US Census Bureau (Abowd 2018; Kuo et al. 2018),
etc. A randomized mechanism M is (ε, δ)-differentially private, or (ε, δ)-DP, if for all neighboring datasets D and D′

1.2

Contributions

This work addresses several limitations in the previous DPSU
mechanisms, detailed below.
Introducing item frequency: All previous works treat Wi
as a set of distinct items, ignoring items’ frequencies for the
user i when available. For example, for vocabulary extraction
the data for each user can be a text document where terms are
allowed to occur multiple times, but previous works represent
each user by a set of distinct terms in the user document. Our

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9504

