The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deepfake Network Architecture Attribution
Tianyun Yang1,2 * , Ziyao Huang1,2 * , Juan Cao1,2† , Lei Li1,2 , Xirong Li3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, Renmin University of China
{yangtianyun19z,huangziyao19f,caojuan,lilei17b}@ict.ac.cn, xirong@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2020; Joslin and Hao 2020) perform attribution for
multiple GAN models and obtain high classification accuracies. While encouraging, the problem of GAN attribution
is far from studied and solved sufficiently.
From the perspective of understanding GAN fingerprints,
previous works (Marra et al. 2019; Yu, Davis, and Fritz
2019; Frank et al. 2020; Joslin and Hao 2020) suggest that:
1) Models with different architectures have distinct fingerprints. 2) With architecture fixed, changing only the model’s
random initialization seed or training data also results in a
distinct fingerprint. From 2), it can be deduced that model
weights may influence GAN fingerprints. While from 1), it
cannot be verified whether the GAN fingerprint is related to
the architecture since weights also change as the architecture changes. This motivates us to investigate whether GAN
architectures leave fingerprints. In other words, do different models with the same architecture share the same fingerprint? Answering this question may help us understand
deeper into the generation of GAN fingerprints.
From the perspective of application, previous works on
GAN attribution only perform model-level attribution, i.e.,
training and testing images come from the same model,
which means for fake images, we can only handle those generated by seen models. However, this approach is limited
in real-world scenarios. For malicious content supervision,
the malicious producers would probably download a certain
deepfake project to their own computers from code hosting platforms at first, and then use their personal collected
training data to finetune or train from scratch instead of directly using the public available models. In such a situation,
model-level attribution is no longer applicable since it is unfeasible to get the privately trained model. For intellectual
property protection, if an attacker steals a copyrighted GAN,
and modifies weights by finetuning, model-level attribution
will fail too. These motivate us to solve fake image attribution under a more generic setting, i.e., attribute fake images
to the source architecture instead of the specific model.
In this paper, we propose a novel task of Deepfake Network Architecture Attribution. Compared with modellevel attribution, architecture-level attribution requires attributing fake images to their generators’ architectures even
if the models are fine-tuned or retrained with a different
seed, loss or dataset. Although architecture-level attribution
is more coarse-grained than model-level attribution, it is still

With the rapid progress of generation technology, it has become necessary to attribute the origin of fake images. Existing works on fake image attribution perform multi-class classification on several Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
models and obtain high accuracies. While encouraging, these
works are restricted to model-level attribution, only capable
of handling images generated by seen models with a specific
seed, loss and dataset, which is limited in real-world scenarios when fake images may be generated by privately trained
models. This motivates us to ask whether it is possible to attribute fake images to the source models’ architectures even
if they are finetuned or retrained under different configurations. In this work, we present the first study on Deepfake
Network Architecture Attribution to attribute fake images on
architecture-level. Based on an observation that GAN architecture is likely to leave globally consistent fingerprints while
traces left by model weights vary in different regions, we
provide a simple yet effective solution named DNA-Det for
this problem. Extensive experiments on multiple cross-test
setups and a large-scale dataset demonstrate the effectiveness
of DNA-Det.

Introduction
The deepfake technology has raised big challenges to visual
forensics. Dedicated research efforts are paid (Durall, Keuper, and Keuper 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Liu, Qi, and Torr
2020; Zhang, Karaman, and Chang 2019; Jeon et al. 2020;
Nataraj et al. 2019; Chai et al. 2020; Frank et al. 2020; Zhao
et al. 2021; Haliassos et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Chandrasegaran, Tran, and Cheung 2021; Li et al. 2020) to detect
generated images in recent years. However, only real/fake
classification is not the end: On the one hand, for malicious
and illegal content, law enforcers need to identify its owner.
On the other hand, GAN models need experienced designers
with laborious trial-and-error testings, some of which have
high commercial value and should be protected. These motivate works on fake image attribution, i.e., attributing the
origin of fake images. For fake image attribution, existing
works (Marra et al. 2019; Yu, Davis, and Fritz 2019; Frank
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4662

