The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Invariant Information Bottleneck for Domain Generalization
Bo Li1 , Yifei Shen2 , Yezhen Wang1 ,
Wenzhen Zhu3 , Colorado Reed4 , Dongsheng Li1 ,
Kurt Keutzer4 and Han Zhao5
1

2

Microsoft Research Asia, China
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
3
Washington University in St. Louis, USA
4
University of California, Berkeley, USA
5
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

Abstract

Domain generalization (DG), which aims to learn a model
from several different domains so that it generalizes to unseen related domains, has recently received much attention. From the perspective of representation learning, there
are several paradigms towards this goal, including invariant
representation learning (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf
2013; Zhao et al. 2018; Tachet des Combes et al. 2020), invariant causality prediction (Arjovsky et al. 2019; Krueger
et al. 2020b), meta-learning (Balaji, Sankaranarayanan, and
Chellappa 2018; Du et al. 2020), and feature disentanglement (Du et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2019). Of particular interest is the invariant learning methods. Some early works,
e.g., DANN (Ganin et al. 2017), CDANN (Long et al. 2018),
aim at finding representations that are invariant across domains. Nevertheless, learning invariant representations fails
for domain adaptation or generalization when the marginal
label distributions change between source and target domains (Zhao et al. 2019a). Recently, Invariant Causal Prediction (ICP), and its follow-up Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM), have attracted much interest. ICP assumes that
the data are generated according to a structural causal model
(SCM) (Pearl 2010). The causal mechanism for the data generating process is the same across domains, while the interventions can vary among different domains. Under such
data generative assumptions, IRM (Arjovsky et al. 2019) attempts to learn an optimal classifier that is invariant across
domains. ICP then argues that under the SCM assumption,
such a classifier can generalize across domains.

Invariant risk minimization (IRM) has recently emerged as
a promising alternative for domain generalization. Nevertheless, the loss function is difficult to optimize for nonlinear classifiers and the original optimization objective could
fail when pseudo-invariant features and geometric skews exist. Inspired by IRM, in this paper we propose a novel formulation for domain generalization, dubbed invariant information bottleneck (IIB). IIB aims at minimizing invariant
risks for nonlinear classifiers and simultaneously mitigating
the impact of pseudo-invariant features and geometric skews.
Specifically, we first present a novel formulation for invariant
causal prediction via mutual information. Then we adopt the
variational formulation of the mutual information to develop
a tractable loss function for nonlinear classifiers. To overcome
the failure modes of IRM, we propose to minimize the mutual information between the inputs and the corresponding
representations. IIB significantly outperforms IRM on synthetic datasets, where the pseudo-invariant features and geometric skews occur, showing the effectiveness of proposed
formulation in overcoming failure modes of IRM. Furthermore, experiments on DomainBed show that IIB outperforms
13 baselines by 0.9% on average across 7 real datasets.

Introduction
In most statistical machine learning algorithms, a fundamental assumption is that the training data and test data
are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, the data we have in many real-world applications are
not i.i.d. Distributional shifts are ubiquitous. Under such
circumstances, classic statistical learning paradigms with
strong generalization guarantees, e.g., Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik 1999), often fail to generalize due
to the violation of the i.i.d. assumption. It has been widely
observed that the performance of a model often deteriorates
dramatically when it is faced with samples from a different domain, even under a mild distributional shift (Arjovsky
et al. 2019). On the other hand, collecting training samples
from all possible future scenarios is essentially infeasible.
Hence, understanding and improving the generalization of
models on out-of-distribution data is crucial.

Despite the intuitive motivations, IRM falls short in several aspects. First, the proposed loss function in (Arjovsky
et al. 2019) is difficult to optimize when the classifier is
nonlinear. Furthermore, it has been shown that IRM fails
when the pseudo-invariant features (Rosenfeld, Ravikumar,
and Risteski 2020) or geometric skews exist (Nagarajan, Andreassen, and Neyshabur 2021). Under such circumstances,
the classifier will utilize both the causal and spurious features, leading to a violation of invariant causal prediction. To
address the first issue, we propose an information-theoretical
formulation of invariant causal prediction and adopt a variational approximation to ease the optimization procedure.
To tackle the second issue, we emphasize that the use of
pseudo-invariant features or geometric skews will inevitably
increase the mutual information between the inputs and the

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7399

