The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fourier Representations for Black-Box
Optimization over Categorical Variables
Hamid Dadkhahi1 * , Jesus Rios2 , Karthikeyan Shanmugam2 , Payel Das2
1

Amazon
IBM Research AI
dadkhami@amazon.com, jriosal@us.ibm.com, karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com, daspa@us.ibm.com
2

Abstract
Optimization of real-world black-box functions defined over
purely categorical variables is an active area of research. In particular, optimization and design of biological sequences with
specific functional or structural properties have a profound impact in medicine, materials science, and biotechnology. Standalone search algorithms, such as simulated annealing (SA)
and Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS), are typically used for
such optimization problems. In order to improve the performance and sample efficiency of such algorithms, we propose
to use existing methods in conjunction with a surrogate model
for the black-box evaluations over purely categorical variables.
To this end, we present two different representations, a grouptheoretic Fourier expansion and an abridged one-hot encoded
Boolean Fourier expansion. To learn such representations,
we consider two different settings to update our surrogate
model. First, we utilize an adversarial online regression setting
where Fourier characters of each representation are considered
as experts and their respective coefficients are updated via
an exponential weight update rule each time the black box
is evaluated. Second, we consider a Bayesian setting where
queries are selected via Thompson sampling and the posterior
is updated via a sparse Bayesian regression model (over our
proposed representation) with a regularized horseshoe prior.
Numerical experiments over synthetic benchmarks as well
as real-world RNA sequence optimization and design problems demonstrate the representational power of the proposed
methods, which achieve competitive or superior performance
compared to state-of-the-art counterparts, while improving the
computation cost and/or sample efficiency, substantially.

1

Introduction

A plethora of practical optimization problems involve blackbox functions, with no simple analytical closed forms, that
can be evaluated at any arbitrary point in the domain. Optimization of such black-box functions poses a unique challenge due to restrictions on the number of possible function
evaluations, as evaluating functions of real-world complex
processes is often expensive and time consuming. Efficient
algorithms for global optimization of expensive black-box
functions take past queries into account in order to select
the next query to the black-box function more intelligently.
* Work done while at IBM Research.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10156

Black-box optimization of real-world functions defined over
purely categorical type input variables has not been studied
in the literature as extensively as its integer, continuous, or
mixed variables counterparts.
Categorical type variables are particularly challenging
when compared to integer or continuous variables, as they
do not have a natural ordering. However, many real-world
functions are defined over categorical variables. One such
problem, which is of wide interest, is the design of optimal
chemical or biological (protein, RNA, and DNA) molecule
sequences, which are constructed using a vocabulary of fixed
size, e.g. 4 for DNA/RNA. Designing optimal molecular sequences with novel structures or improved functionalities is
of paramount importance in material science, drug and vaccine design, synthetic biology and many other applications,
see (Dixon et al. 2010; Ng et al. 2019; Hoshika et al. 2019;
Yamagami et al. 2019). Design of optimal sequences is a difficult black-box optimization problem over a combinatorially
large search space (Stephens et al. 2015), in which function
evaluations often rely on either wet-lab experiments, physicsinspired simulators, or knowledge-based computational algorithms, which are slow and expensive in practice. Another
problem of interest is the constrained design problem, e.g.
find a sequence given a specific structure (or property), which
is inverse of the well-known folding problem discussed in
(Dill and MacCallum 2012). This problem is complex due to
the strict structural constraints imposed on the sequence. In
fact, one of the ways to represent such a complex structural
constraint is to constrain the next choice sequentially based
on the sequence elements that have been chosen a priori.
Therefore, we divide the black box optimization problem
into two settings, depending on the constraint set: (i) Generic
Black Box Optimization (BBO) problem referring to the unconstrained case and (ii) Design Problem that refers to the
case with complex sequential constraints.
Let xt be the t-th sequence evaluated by the black box
function f . The key question in both settings is the following: Given prior queries x1 , x2 . . . xt and their evaluations
f (x1 ) . . . f (xt ), how to choose the next query xt+1 ? This
selection must be devised so that over a finite budget of
black-box evaluations, one is closest to the minimizer in an
expected sense over the acquisition randomness.
In the literature, for design problems with sequential constraints, MCTS (Monte Carlo Tree Search) based search al-

