The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Spline-PINN: Approaching PDEs without Data
Using Fast, Physics-Informed Hermite-Spline CNNs
Nils Wandel,1 Michael Weinmann,2 Michael Neidlin,3 Reinhard Klein 1
1
University of Bonn
Delft University of Technology
3
RWTH Aachen University
wandeln@cs.uni-bonn.de, m.weinmann@tudelft.nl, neidlin@ame.rwth-aachen.de, rk@cs.uni-bonn.de
2

Abstract

or computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to help engineers
with simulated wind tunnel experiments.
Recently, advances of machine learning (ML) based approaches have led to promising results coping with the
high computational costs associated with classical numerical methods. Furthermore, some ML based approaches are
by design differentiable. This means that they offer gradients that can be used for stability analysis, optimal control
or reinforcement learning. However, ML based approaches
often do not generalize to domains not seen during training
[Kim and Lee 2020, Mohan et al. 2020, Thuerey et al. 2019,
Um et al. 2020, Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019]
or rely on large amounts of training data which capture the
variations to be expected in foreseen scenarios [Pfaff et al.
2021, Kim et al. 2019, Ladický et al. 2015].Recent physicsconstrained approaches based on finite differences [Tompson et al. 2017, Zhu et al. 2019, Wandel, Weinmann, and
Klein 2021a,b] exhibit the potential to mitigate these problems but might lead to inaccuracies and discretization artifacts, especially at high Reynolds-Numbers.
Here, we propose to use a Hermite spline CNN to obtain continuous solutions that can be trained with a physicsinformed loss only. This approach combines the advantages
of i) leveraging physics-informed neural networks (PINNs)
to overcome the need for large amounts of training data [Jin
et al. 2021, Raissi, Yazdani, and Karniadakis 2018, Raissi,
Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019] and ii) leveraging the
faster inference and better generalization capabilities offered
by convolutional neural networks [Tompson et al. 2017,
Wandel, Weinmann, and Klein 2021a,b]. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach for the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations as well as the damped wave equation. The incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, which
are particularly hard to solve due to the non-linear advection term and thus the main focus of this paper, are investigated for Reynolds numbers ranging from 2-10000. To
assess the accuracy of our method, we compute drag and
lift coefficients on a CFD benchmark domain [Schäfer and
Turek 1996] and compare the results with official benchmark values. For both equations, we perform generalization
experiments, evaluate the stability over long time horizons
and present an interactive real-time demonstration. To ensure full reproducibility, our code is publicly available on
github: https://github.com/aschethor/Spline PINN.

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are notoriously difficult
to solve. In general, closed-form solutions are not available
and numerical approximation schemes are computationally
expensive. In this paper, we propose to approach the solution of PDEs based on a novel technique that combines the
advantages of two recently emerging machine learning based
approaches. First, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs)
learn continuous solutions of PDEs and can be trained with
little to no ground truth data. However, PINNs do not generalize well to unseen domains. Second, convolutional neural
networks provide fast inference and generalize but either require large amounts of training data or a physics-constrained
loss based on finite differences that can lead to inaccuracies
and discretization artifacts.
We leverage the advantages of both of these approaches by
using Hermite spline kernels in order to continuously interpolate a grid-based state representation that can be handled
by a CNN. This allows for training without any precomputed
training data using a physics-informed loss function only and
provides fast, continuous solutions that generalize to unseen
domains. We demonstrate the potential of our method at the
examples of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation and
the damped wave equation. Our models are able to learn several intriguing phenomena such as Karman vortex streets,
the Magnus effect, Doppler effect, interference patterns and
wave reflections. Our quantitative assessment and an interactive real-time demo show that we are narrowing the gap
in accuracy of unsupervised ML based methods to industrial
solvers for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) while being
orders of magnitude faster.

Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are an important mathematical concept to describe for example the motion of fluids, the propagation of waves, the evolution of stock markets, gravity and more. However, solving partial differential
equations is a hard problem since closed-form solutions are
rarely available. Thus, developing fast and accurate numerical schemes in order to find approximate solutions is of great
interest for applications such as e.g. physics engines in computer games, computer generated imagery (CGI) for movies,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8529

