The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multiple-Source Domain Adaptation via Coordinated Domain Encoders and
Paired Classifiers
Payam Karisani
Emory University
payam.karisani@emory.edu

Abstract

either explicitly by minimizing the divergence between the
two distributions (Long et al. 2015) or via a binary classifier
to increase the domain confusion and to reduce the divergence (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015). In either case, the aim is
to obtain domain-invariant features between the source and
the target (Yosinski et al. 2014).
In this article, we study multiple-source Domain Adaptation (Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009). In this setting, there are multiple labeled source domains available and
the goal is to minimize the classification error in the target
domain. While the availability of multiple sources provides
us with more opportunities, this also comes with challenges.
Naively applying single-source domain adaptation models in
a multiple-source setting may cause negative transfer (Pan
and Yang 2010), i.e., deterioration in performance. In this
work, we propose an objective function to minimize negative
transfer via the coordination between the representations of
source domains. Additionally, based on the intuition that every source classifier may specialize in predicting some regions of the target domain, we present a heuristic criterion
to guide the weak source classifiers by the reliable ones.
We evaluate our model in two datasets consisting of usergenerated data in Twitter. We select this domain because it is
considerably less explored compared to other domains, e.g.,
sentiment analysis. The documents in this domain are short
and their language is highly informal (Karisani, Agichtein,
and Ho 2020). Additionally, due to the nature of the tasks in
this domain the class distributions are typically imbalanced
(Karisani and Agichtein 2018). Taken together, these are significant challenges for existing methods. The results in this
setting testify that our model is the most robust approach
across various cases and consistently outperforms multiple
state of the art baselines.

We present a novel multiple-source unsupervised model for
text classification under domain shift. Our model exploits the
update rates in document representations to dynamically integrate domain encoders. It also employs a probabilistic heuristic to infer the error rate in the target domain in order to pair
source classifiers. Our heuristic exploits data transformation
cost and the classifier accuracy in the target feature space. We
have used real world scenarios of Domain Adaptation to evaluate the efficacy of our algorithm. We also used pretrained
multi-layer transformers as the document encoder in the experiments to demonstrate whether the improvement achieved
by domain adaptation models can be delivered by out-of-thebox language model pretraining. The experiments testify that
our model is the top performing approach in this setting.

1

Introduction

Modern classifiers typically rely on large amount of training data. Collecting large training sets is expensive and in
some cases very challenging, e.g., in legal domain (Holzenberger, Blair-Stanek, and Van Durme 2020) or in social media domain (Karisani, Choi, and Xiong 2021; Karisani and
Karisani 2020). There exist several techniques to address
the lack of training data, one of which is Domain Adaptation (Ben-David and Schuller 2003), where a classifier is
trained in one domain (the source domain) and evaluated
in another domain (the target domain). One of the fundamental assumptions of text classification is that training and
test data follow an identical distribution. A classifier trained
in one domain, typically is a poor predictor for another domain (Ben-David et al. 2010). Therefore, Domain Adaptation primarily tackles the domain shift challenge (Torralba
and Efros 2011). One of the major areas of Domain Adaptation, which is also the subject of our study, is the unsupervised setting where there is no labeled target data available.
Theoretical studies (Ben-David et al. 2010) have shown
that the outcome of Domain Adaptation is primarily influenced by the performance of the classifier in the source domain and the discrepancy between the source and the target
domains. The former can be improved irrespective of domain shift, therefore, existing domain adaptation models primarily focus on the latter. These models approach the task

2

Related Work

Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh (2009) theoretically
show that, in multiple-source domain adaptation setting,
simply combining the source classifiers yields a high prediction error. They show that there always exists a weighted
average of the source classifiers that has a low error prediction in the target domain–their weights are derived
from the source distributions. Therefore, existing multiplesource models typically rely on either inventively aggregating source data (Guo, Shah, and Barzilay 2018) or craft-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7087

