The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Heterogeneous Facility Location with Limited Resources
Argyrios Deligkas,1 Aris Filos-Ratsikas,2 Alexandros A. Voudouris3
1

Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway University of London
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool
3
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex
argyrios.deligkas@rhul.ac.uk, aris.filos-ratsikas@liverpool.ac.uk, alexandros.voudouris@essex.ac.uk

mechanism design problem becomes far more challenging.1
While the literature on heterogeneous facility location is
quite rich by this point, there is a fundamental setting that
has surprisingly eluded previous investigations. In particular, all previous works have considered the case of multiple (predominantly two) facilities which all have to be located, based on the positions and the preferences of the
agents. However, in many real-world applications, resources
are limited, and therefore a decision has to be made about
which subset of the facilities should be build and where. For
instance, the governing body might have sufficient funds to
build only one of two options, either a library or a basketball
court. The decision must be made based on the preferences
of the agents over the two facilities, but also on their positions, in a way that incentivizes the agents to reveal all their
private information truthfully; this is clearly a challenging
mechanism design problem.

Abstract
We initiate the study of the heterogeneous facility location
problem with limited resources. We mainly focus on the fundamental case where a set of agents are positioned in the line
segment [0, 1] and have approval preferences over two available facilities. A mechanism takes as input the positions and
the preferences of the agents, and chooses to locate a single
facility based on this information. We study mechanisms that
aim to maximize the social welfare (the total utility the agents
derive from facilities they approve), under the constraint of
incentivizing the agents to truthfully report their positions and
preferences. We consider three different settings depending
on the level of agent-related information that is public or private. For each setting, we design deterministic and randomized strategyproof mechanisms that achieve a good approximation of the optimal social welfare, and complement these
with nearly-tight impossibility results.

1

1.1

Introduction

Our Setting

We initiate the study of the heterogeneous facility location
problem with limited resources. We focus on the most fundamental case where there are two facilities, and only one of
them must be located somewhere in the line segment [0, 1].
In particular, there is a set of agents, each of whom is associated with a position in [0, 1] and an approval preference
over the facilities. An agent may approve one of the two facilities or both, and obtains positive utility2 only if a facility
that she approves is built; otherwise, she has zero utility irrespectively of her position.
Our goal is to design strategyproof mechanisms that
choose and locate a single facility, so as to maximize the
social welfare (the total utility of the agents) and incentivize
the agents to truthfully report their private information. We
study the following three settings depending on the level of

The truthful facility location problem is one of the most
prominent paradigms in environments with strategic participants, and it was in fact the prototypical problem used
by (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013) to put forward their
very successful research agenda of approximate mechanism design without money about a decade ago. Since then,
the problem has been extensively studied in the literature
of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence,
with a plethora of interesting variants emerging over the
years. Among those, one particularly meaningful variant,
which captures several important scenarios, is that of heterogeneous facility location, introduced by (Feigenbaum and
Sethuraman 2015) and studied notably by Serafino and Ventre (2015, 2016), Anastasiadis and Deligkas (2018), Fong
et al. (2018), Chen et al. (2020) and Li et al. (2020). In this
setting, there are multiple facilities, and each of them plays a
different role – for example, a library and a basketball court.
Consequently, the preferences of the agents for the possible
outcomes do not only depend on the location of the facility (as in the original model of Procaccia and Tennenholtz
(2013)), but also on the type of the facility. As a result, the

1

In particular, the preference domain is no longer singlepeaked, and therefore maximizing the happiness of the agents cannot be achieved by simple median mechanisms.
2
We remark that in several facility location settings (e.g., see
(Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013; Lu, Wang, and Zhou 2009; Lu
et al. 2010)), the agents are associated with costs instead of utilities. In the literature of heterogeneous facility problems however,
the setting is commonly defined in terms of utilities, as there is no
meaningful way of assigning a cost to undesirable outcomes, such
as a facility which the agent does not approve.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4966

