The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph Convolutional Networks with Dual Message Passing for
Subgraph Isomorphism Counting and Matching
Xin Liu, Yangqiu Song
Department of CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{xliucr, yqsong}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

Ying et al. (2020) combined node embeddings and voting
to match subgraphs. They found that neural networks could
speed up 10 to 1,000 times compared with traditional searching algorithms. Xu et al. (2019) and Morris et al. (2019)
showed that graph neural networks (GNNs) based on message passing are at most as powerful as the WL test (Weisfeiler and Leman 1968), and Chen et al. (2020) further analyzed the upper-bound of message passing and k-WL for
subgraph isomorphism counting. These studies show that it
is theoretically possible for neural methods to count larger
patterns in complex graphs. In heterogeneous graphs, edges
play an important role in checking and searching isomorphisms because graph isomorphisms require taking account
of graph adjacency and edge types. However, existing message passing mechanisms have not paid enough attention to
edge representations (Gilmer et al. 2017; Schlichtkrull et al.
2018; Vashishth et al. 2020; Jin et al. 2021).
In this paper, we discuss a particular edge-to-vertex
transform and find the one-to-one correspondence between
subgraph isomorphisms of original graphs and subgraph
isomorphisms of their corresponding edge-to-vertex dual
graphs. This property suggests that searching isomorphisms
on the original graph is equivalent to searching on its dual
graph. Based on this observation and the theoretical guarantee, we propose new dual message passing networks
(DMPNNs) to learn node and edge representations simultaneously in the aligned space. Empirical results show the
effectiveness of DMPNNs on all homogenerous and heterogeneous graphs, synthetic data or real-life data.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

Graph neural networks (GNNs) and message passing neural
networks (MPNNs) have been proven to be expressive for
subgraph structures in many applications. Some applications
in heterogeneous graphs require explicit edge modeling, such
as subgraph isomorphism counting and matching. However,
existing message passing mechanisms are not designed well
in theory. In this paper, we start from a particular edge-tovertex transform and exploit the isomorphism property in the
edge-to-vertex dual graphs. We prove that searching isomorphisms on the original graph is equivalent to searching on
its dual graph. Based on this observation, we propose dual
message passing neural networks (DMPNNs) to enhance the
substructure representation learning in an asynchronous way
for subgraph isomorphism counting and matching as well
as unsupervised node classification. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the robust performance of DMPNNs by combining both node and edge representation learning in synthetic
and real heterogeneous graphs.

Introduction
Graphs have been widely used in various applications across
domains from chemoinformatics to social networks. The
isomorphism is one of the important properties in graphs,
and analysis on subgraph isomorphisms is useful in real
applications. For example, we can determine the properties of compounds by finding functional group information in chemical molecules (Gilmer et al. 2017); some substructures in social networks are regarded as irreplaceable
features in recommender systems (Ying et al. 2018). The
challenge of finding subgraph isomorphisms requires the
exponential computational cost. Particularly, finding and
counting require global inference to oversee the whole
graph. Existing counting and matching algorithms are designed for some query patterns up to a certain size (e.g.,
5), and some of them cannot directly apply to heterogeneous graphs where vertices and edges are labeled with
types (Bhattarai, Liu, and Huang 2019; Sun and Luo 2020).
There has been more attention to using deep learning to
count or match subgraph isomorphisms. Liu et al. (2020) designed a general end-to-end framework to predict the number of subgraph isomorphisms on heterogeneous graphs, and

1. We prove that there is a one-to-one correspondence between isomorphisms of connected directed heterogeneous multi-graphs with reversed edges and isomorphisms between their edge-to-vertex dual graphs.
2. We propose dual message passing mechanism and design
the DMPNN model to explicitly model edges and align
node and edge representations in the same space.
3. We empirically demonstrate that DMPNNs can count
subgraph isomorphisms more accurately and match isomorphic nodes more correctly. DMPNNs also surpass
competitive baselines on unsupervised node classification, indicating the necessity of explicit edge modeling
for general graph representation learning.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7594

