The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Feedback Gradient Descent:
Efﬁcient and Stable Optimization with Orthogonality for DNNs
Fanchen Bu, Dong Eui Chang
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
{boqvezen97, dechang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Without great loss of orthogonality, an alternative is to ﬁnd
a transformation or mapping, keeping the hard constraints
on orthogonality and allowing normal Euclidean optimization on the transformed or mapped parameters (Huang et al.
2018; Li, Fuxin, and Todorovic 2019). Although these algorithms are much faster than Riemannian optimization algorithms, they are still considerably time-consuming when
applied to DNNs. To further improve the efﬁciency, another
intuitive way is to apply soft constraints (Rodrı́guez et al.
2017; Xie, Xiong, and Pu 2017; Bansal, Chen, and Wang
2018; Jia et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020)
by adding a penalty term into the loss function. Nevertheless, such a way fails to maintain orthogonality during the
training process. Therefore, it is imperative to develop a new
algorithm with both high efﬁciency and high numerical stability.
In this paper, we propose a novel method, named Feedback Gradient Descent (FGD), to our knowledge, the ﬁrst
work showing high efﬁciency and stability simultaneously.
FGD induces orthogonality based on the simple Euler discretization of a continuous-time dynamical system (CTDS).
In particular, we start from building a CTDS on the tangent
bundle of the Stiefel manifold to represent the gradient descent (GD) process with momentum and orthogonality by
following the idea of the Euclidean counterparts, i.e., the
corresponding CTDSs of GD (Baldi 1995), especially GD
with momentum (Qian 1999).
To construct the corresponding optimization algorithm, it
is indispensable yet nontrivial to discretize the CTDS on the
tangent bundle. The direct application of usual discretization techniques such as Euler’s method for ordinary differential equations is inadequate because the trajectories of the
discrete-time system can go off the manifold. Meanwhile,
usual structure-preserving discretization methods such as
variational or symplectic integrators (Haier, Lubich, and
Wanner 2006) are complex and computationally expensive.
Inspired by Feedback Integrators (FI) (Chang, Jiménez, and
Perlmutter 2016), which is a numerical integration method
for CTDSs on manifolds, we convert the discretization problem on the tangent bundle to one on a Euclidean space.
Speciﬁcally, following the framework of FI, we extend the
CTDS representing GD on the tangent bundle to an ambient
Euclidean space and modify the extended CTDS by adding
a feedback term pulling the variables back to the tangent

The optimization with orthogonality has been shown useful
in training deep neural networks (DNNs). To impose orthogonality on DNNs, both computational efﬁciency and stability
are important. However, existing methods utilizing Riemannian optimization or hard constraints can only ensure stability while those using soft constraints can only improve efﬁciency. In this paper, we propose a novel method, named
Feedback Gradient Descent (FGD), to our knowledge, the
ﬁrst work showing high efﬁciency and stability simultaneously. FGD induces orthogonality based on the simple yet
indispensable Euler discretization of a continuous-time dynamical system on the tangent bundle of the Stiefel manifold.
In particular, inspired by a numerical integration method on
manifolds called Feedback Integrators, we propose to instantiate it on the tangent bundle of the Stiefel manifold for the
ﬁrst time. In the extensive image classiﬁcation experiments,
FGD comprehensively outperforms the existing state-of-theart methods in terms of accuracy, efﬁciency, and stability.

Introduction
During the prosperous and ongoing development of deep
neural networks (DNNs), it has been shown that imposing
orthogonality on the parameters can help improve the network performance, which has attracted substantial attention
with theoretical analyses (Saxe, McClelland, and Ganguli
2014; Desjardins et al. 2015; Harandi and Fernando 2016).
Many researchers have been trying to practically impose
orthogonality during the training of DNNs. As orthogonality can be regarded as a property of the Stiefel manifold,
Riemannian optimization is a typical and direct technique to
maintain orthogonality, which has been widely studied in the
optimization ﬁeld (Smith 1994; Edelman, Arias, and Smith
1998; Rapcsák 2002; Absil, Mahony, and Sepulchre 2009;
Absil and Malick 2012; Wen and Yin 2013; Bonnabel 2013;
Jiang and Dai 2015). However, most Riemannian optimization algorithms are computationally expensive due to the
complex retraction or projection. They are especially computationally prohibitive when applied to the state-of-the-art
DNNs that have numerous parameters (Ozay and Okatani
2018), which has been demonstrated in the comparisons
done by a previous work (Li, Fuxin, and Todorovic 2019).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6106

