The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient One-Pass Multi-View Subspace Clustering with Consensus Anchors
Suyuan Liu,1 * Siwei Wang,1 * Pei Zhang,1 Kai Xu,1 Xinwang Liu,1† Changwang Zhang,2 Feng Gao3
1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, 410073
2
CCF Theoretical Computer Science Technical Committee, Shenzhen, China, 518064
3
School of Arts, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
suyuanliu@nudt.edu.cn, wangsiwei13@nudt.edu.cn, zhangpei@nudt.edu.cn, kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com,
xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn, changwangzhang@foxmail.com, gaof@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

MVC(multi-view clustering) methods have been proposed
recently to explore consistency and complementarity across
views (Tang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021a;
Zhang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2020a). The current MVC
methods are mostly based on graph models, which first learn
a common similarity matrix from the features of different
views and then execute a spectral clustering algorithm to obtain the final clustering results (Liu et al. 2012; Ding and Fu
2014; Zhan et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2021). Existing multi-view subspace clustering algorithms suffer from
high time consumption, making it difficult to process largescale data in reality. The high time complexity mainly comes
from the construction of the similarity matrix, the calculation of the spectral embedding in spectral clustering, and the
discretization of the spectral embedding.
In order to improve efficiency, it has recently been proposed to apply bipartite graph learning, using the relationship between anchor points and data points to represent the
relationship between all data points (Chen and Cai 2011;
Adler, Elad, and Hel-Or 2015; Li et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2021c). Then the graph size of each view is reduced from
n × n to n × m and m is the number of anchor points. However, most anchor point selection applies heuristic sampling
strategies, such as k-means or random sampling, which prevents the mutual negotiation between anchor point selection
and graph construction to achieve optimal clustering. Besides, existing graph-based methods usually consist of two
stages, which construct graphs from raw data first, and perform post-processing to obtain the final result then (Zhou
et al. 2020b; Gao et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019). The final cluster structure is not clearly shown in the graph constructed
in the previous stage, and the clustering performance dependents heavily on the constructed graphs (Nie et al. 2016b,
2017). Moreover, multi-view clustering algorithms usually
encounter a large number of hyper-parameters. How to determine these hyper-parameters which severely reduce the
effectiveness of algorithms remains to be a challenge.
In this paper, we propose a scalable MVSC method named
Efficient One-pass Multi-view Subspace Clustering with
Consensus Anchors (EOMSC-CA) to directly output the
clustering labels without post-processing procedure. Firstly,
we learn the anchor points and fused graph together, and the
two procedures can be negotiated mutually to improve clustering performance. At the same time, we adaptively learn

Multi-view subspace clustering (MVSC) optimally integrates
multiple graph structure information to improve clustering
performance. Recently, many anchor-based variants are proposed to reduce the computational complexity of MVSC.
Though achieving considerable acceleration, we observe that
most of them adopt fixed anchor points separating from
the subsequential anchor graph construction, which may adversely affect the clustering performance. In addition, postprocessing is required to generate discrete clustering labels
with additional time consumption. To address these issues,
we propose a scalable and parameter-free MVSC method
to directly output the clustering labels with optimal anchor graph, termed as Efficient One-pass Multi-view Subspace Clustering with Consensus Anchors (EOMSC-CA).
Specially, we combine anchor learning and graph construction into a uniform framework to boost clustering performance. Meanwhile, by imposing a graph connectivity constraint, our algorithm directly outputs the clustering labels
without any post-processing procedures as previous methods
do. Our proposed EOMSC-CA is proven to be linear complexity respecting to the data size. The superiority of our
EOMSC-CA over the effectiveness and efficiency is demonstrated by extensive experiments. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/Tracesource/EOMSC-CA.

Introduction
In the era of big data, high-dimensional datasets have much
smaller inherent dimension than the respective ambient
space. In fact, most of the data can be represented by samples drawn from the sets of subspaces with low-dimension.
Based on the above assumptions, subspace clustering attends
to cluster the data lied in the linear subspaces and determine
the low-dimensional subspace corresponding to each cluster
(Vidal 2011; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013). However, data usually are collected from different sources or diverse domains
in many real-world problems (Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021b; Wang et al. 2021a). For instance,
the same news can be covered in multiple forms as text, image and video (Kang et al. 2019). Therefore, in order to take
full advantage of information from multiple sources, many
* First author with equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7576

