The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Exploring Motion and Appearance Information for Temporal Sentence Grounding
Daizong Liu1,2 , Xiaoye Qu3 , Pan Zhou1* , Yang Liu4
1

The Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Electronic Information and Communication, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Huawei Cloud 4 Harbin Institute of Technology
{dzliu, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, quxiaoye@huawei.com, liu.yang@hit.edu.cn
Query: Person opens the door. Person closes the door. Person opens the closet.
Abstract
Video:

This paper addresses temporal sentence grounding. Previous
works typically solve this task by learning frame-level video
features and align them with the textual information. A major limitation of these works is that they fail to distinguish
ambiguous video frames with subtle appearance differences
due to frame-level feature extraction. Recently, a few methods adopt Faster R-CNN to extract detailed object features in
each frame to differentiate the fine-grained appearance similarities. However, the object-level features extracted by Faster
R-CNN suffer from missing motion analysis since the object detection model lacks temporal modeling. To solve this
issue, we propose a novel Motion-Appearance Reasoning
Network (MARN), which incorporates both motion-aware
and appearance-aware object features to better reason object
relations for modeling the activity among successive frames.
Specifically, we first introduce two individual video encoders
to embed the video into corresponding motion-oriented and
appearance-aspect object representations. Then, we develop
separate motion and appearance branches to learn motionguided and appearance-guided object relations, respectively.
At last, both motion and appearance information from two
branches are associated to generate more representative features for final grounding. Extensive experiments on two challenging datasets (Charades-STA and TACoS) show that our
proposed MARN significantly outperforms previous state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin.

GT:

(a) A hard example for temporal sentence grounding
Faster
R-CNN
Faster
R-CNN

Object Reasoning
1. Similar Appearance
2. Similar Location

Open? the door
Close?
(Confused)

(b) Existing detection-based framework
Motion

Motion
Reasoning

Faster
R-CNN

Appearance
Reasoning

Close the door

(c) Our motion-appearance reasoning method

Figure 1: (a) A hard example where the video contains several semantically similar segments. (b) Existing detectionbased framework only extracts appearance-aware object information, and fails to distinguish similar motions “open”
and “close”. (c) Our method develops additional branch to
learn motion-aware object contexts, and associates the information of two branches to reason the query.

2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020a,b; Zhang et al.
2020b; Liu et al. 2021a; Liu, Qu, and Zhou 2021) first
pre-define abundant video segments as proposals, and then
match them with the sentence query for ranking. The best
segment proposal with the highest matching degree is finally
selected as the target segment. Instead of proposal-based
paradigm, some proposal-free works (Rodriguez et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2020; Yuan, Mei, and Zhu 2019; Mun, Cho, and
Han 2020; Zhang et al. 2020a) propose to directly regress
the start and end timestamps of the target segment for each
frame. Although above two kinds of works bring significant
improvements in recent years, all of them extract frame-level
video features to model the semantic of the target activity,
which captures the redundant background information and
fails to perceive the fine-grained differences among video
frames with high similarity. As shown in Figure 1 (a), for
the semantically similar queries “Person opens the door” and
“Person opens the closet”, modeling the temporal relations
by frame-wise features can capture the same action “open”,
but it is not enough to distinguish the local details of different objects (“door” and “closet”) in these frames.

Introduction
Temporal sentence grounding is an important topic of
cross-modal understanding in computer vision. Given an
untrimmed video, it aims to locate a segment that contains
the interested activity corresponding to the sentence description. There are several related tasks proposed involving both
video and language, such as video summarization (Song
et al. 2015; Chu, Song, and Jaimes 2015), video question
answering (Gao et al. 2019; Le et al. 2020), and temporal sentence grounding (Gao et al. 2017; Anne Hendricks
et al. 2017). Among them, temporal sentence grounding is
the most challenging task due to its detailed multi-modal interaction and complicated context reasoning.
To localize the target segment, most previous works
(Anne Hendricks et al. 2017; Gao et al. 2017; Chen et al.
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1674

