The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GearNet: Stepwise Dual Learning for Weakly Supervised Domain Adaptation
Renchunzi Xie1 , Hongxin Wei1 * , Lei Feng2 and Bo An1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
XIER0002@e.ntu.edu.sg, hongxin001@e.ntu.edu.sg, lfeng@cqu.edu.cn, boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

TCL (Shu et al. 2019) selects clean and transferable samples
from the source domain guided by a transferable curriculum and Butterfly (Liu et al. 2019) picks small-loss samples
from both the source domain and target domain. Similarly,
DCIC (Yu et al. 2020) emphasizes clean and transferable
source samples by an estimated transition matrix. Although
these methods achieve acceptable performance, they only
exploit the supervision information from the source domain
to prevent the model from overfitting to label noise, and then
transfer the learned information from the source domain to
the target domain. In other words, these methods only exploit unidirectional relationships from the source domain to
the target domain. However, if we further consider exploiting the pseudo supervision information from the unlabeled
target domain, the relationships between the two domains
are exploited in a bilateral way. Consequently, richer supervision information could be discovered for combating the
label noise and the gap between the two domains would be
narrowed. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
explore the benefit of utilizing pseudo supervision knowledge
from the target domain in improving the robustness against
noisy labels from the source domain.
This paper proposes the first universal paradigm to exploit
bilateral relationships between the source domain and the
target domain. Specifically, we train two models on the two
domains respectively in an alternate manner, and the whole
training process consists of four main steps: 1) training model
A on source domain data with noisy labels, 2) using model A
to generate pseudo labels for target domain data, 3) training
model B on pseudo-labeled target domain data with regularization on the consistency of source-domain class posteriors
of model B and model A, 4) training model A on labeled
source domain data with regularization on the consistency of
target-domain class posteriors of model A and model B. We
iterate from step 2 to step 4 multiple times until the training
process stops. In this way, the pseudo supervision information in the target domain can be discovered and leveraged to
improve the model robustness against label noise from source
domain. It is worth noting that our proposed paradigm is a
general WSDA framework to enhance the model robustness.
Therefore, it can be easily incorporated into existing WSDA
algorithms for further improving the performance of those
methods.
To verify the effectiveness of our proposed GearNet, we

This paper studies a weakly supervised domain adaptation
(WSDA) problem, where we only have access to the source
domain with noisy labels, from which we need to transfer useful information to the unlabeled target domain. Although there
have been a few studies on this problem, most of them only
exploit unidirectional relationships from the source domain
to the target domain. In this paper, we propose a universal
paradigm called GearNet to exploit bilateral relationships
between the two domains. Specifically, we take the two domains as different inputs to train two models alternately, and
a symmetrical Kullback-Leibler loss is used for selectively
matching the predictions of the two models in the same domain. This interactive learning schema enables implicit label
noise canceling and exploit correlations between the source
and target domains. Therefore, our GearNet has the great potential to boost the performance of a wide range of existing
WSDA methods. Comprehensive experimental results show
that the performance of existing methods can be significantly
improved by equipping with our GearNet.

Introduction
In the problem of domain adaptation, we aim to train classifiers for data from the target domain by leveraging auxiliary data sampled from related but different source domains
(Combes et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2013; Pan and Yang 2009;
Dong et al. 2021a, 2020). Most of the existing domain adaptation studies assume that the source domains are clean datasets
with accurate annotations. However, it is usually expensive
and time-consuming to collect such large-scale and correctly
labeled datasets in some real-world scenarios (Frénay and
Verleysen 2013; Ghosh, Kumar, and Sastry 2017). To alleviate this problem, an increasing number of researchers
started to investigate weakly supervised domain adaptation
(WSDA), where only source domain data with noisy labels
and unlabeled target domain data are available.
To improve the model robustness against label noise from
the source domain, some WSDA algorithms (Shu et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019; Yu et al. 2020) were developed to specially
reduce the negative impact of label noise while minimizing
the distribution discrepancy of two domains. For example,
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8717

