The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Evo-ViT: Slow-Fast Token Evolution for Dynamic Vision Transformer
Yifan Xu1,3,4 * , Zhijie Zhang2,3∗ , Mengdan Zhang3 , Kekai Sheng3 , Ke Li3 , Weiming Dong1,4† ,
Liqing Zhang2 , Changsheng Xu1,4 , Xing Sun3†
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Tencent Youtu Lab
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xuyifan2019, weiming.dong, changsheng.xu}@ia.ac.cn, zzj506506@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
{davinazhang, saulsheng, tristanli}@tencent.com, winfred.sun@gmail.com
Abstract
Pretraining

Vision transformers (ViTs) have attracted considerable research attention recently, but the huge computational cost is
still a severe issue. A mainstream paradigm for computation
reduction aims to reduce the number of tokens given that
the computation complexity of ViT is quadratic with respect
to the input sequence length. Existing designs include structured spatial compression that uses a progressive shrinking
pyramid to reduce the computations of large feature maps,
and unstructured token pruning that dynamically drops redundant tokens. However, limitations of existing token pruning
lie in the following aspects: 1) the incomplete spatial structure caused by pruning is incompatible with structured spatial
compression that is commonly used in modern deep-narrow
transformers; 2) it usually requires a time-consuming pretraining procedure. To address the limitations and expand the
applicable scenario of token pruning, we present Evo-ViT, a
self-motivated slow-fast token evolution approach for vision
transformers. Specifically, we conduct unstructured instancewise token selection by taking advantage of the simple and
effective global class attention that is native to vision transformers. Then, we propose to update the selected informative
tokens and uninformative tokens with different computation
paths, namely, slow-fast updating. Since slow-fast updating
mechanism maintains the spatial structure and information
flow, Evo-ViT can accelerate vanilla transformers of both flat
and deep-narrow structures from the very beginning of the
training process. Experimental results demonstrated that our
method significantly reduces the computational cost of vision
transformers while maintaining comparable performance on
image classification. For example, our method accelerates
DeiT-S by over 60% throughput while only sacrificing 0.4%
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K, outperforming current token
pruning methods on both accuracy and efficiency.

Token
Selection

Unstructured
Pruning

Fine-tuning

Compact
Transformer

Local
Spatial Prior

Structured
Compression

Training

Compact
Transformer

Token
Selection

Structure
Preservation

Slow-Fast
Updating

Compact
Transformer

Figure 1: An illustration of technique pipelines for computation reduction via tokens. The dash lines denote iterative
training. The first branch: the pipeline of unstructured token
pruning (Rao et al. 2021; Tang et al. 2021) based on pretrained models. The second branch: the pipeline of structured compression (Graham et al. 2021). The third branch:
our proposed pipeline that performs unstructured updating
while suitable for structured compressed models.

because images contain large regions of low-level texture
and uninformative background.
Existing methods follow two processes to address the
inefficiency problem of modeling long-range dependencies
among tokens in ViT as shown in the above two branches of
Fig. 1. The first process, as shown in the second branch, is to
perform structured compression based on local spatial prior,
such as local linear projection (Wang et al. 2021a), convolutional projection (Heo et al. 2021), and shift windows (Liu
et al. 2021). Most modern transformers with deep-narrow
structures are typically within this process. However, the
structured compressed models treat the informative object
tokens and uninformative background tokens with the same
priority. Thus, token pruning, the second process, proposes
to identify and drop the uninformative tokens in an unstructured way. (Tang et al. 2021) improves the efficiency of a
pre-trained transformer network by developing a top-down
layer-by-layer token slimming approach that can identify
and remove redundant tokens based on the reconstruction
error of the pre-trained network. The trained pruning mask
is fixed for all instances. (Rao et al. 2021) proposes to accelerate a pre-trained transformer network by removing redundant tokens hierarchically, and explores an data-dependent
down-sampling strategy via self-distillation. Despite of the
significant acceleration, these unstructured token pruning

Introduction
Vision transformers (ViTs) have shown strong power on various computer vision tasks (Xu et al. 2022). The reason of
introducing the transformer into computer vision lies in its
unique properties that convolution neural networks (CNNs)
lack, especially the property of modeling long-range dependencies. However, dense modeling of long-range dependencies among image tokens brings computation inefficiency,
* Equal contribution; †Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2964

