The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Constraint Sampling Reinforcement Learning: Incorporating Expertise For
Faster Learning
Tong Mu1 , Georgios Theocharous2 , David Arbour2 , Emma Brunskill1
1

Stanford University
2
Adobe Research
tongm@cs.stanford.edu, theochar@adobe.com, arbour@adobe.com, ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

time is important (Nilashi et al. 2016; Bradley and Smyth
2001; Komiak and Benbasat 2006; Chen et al. 2019). But
confidently concluding this finding will generalize to a new
system, and translating this high level knowledge into a concrete constraint for the policy class is subtle (does ’diversity’
mean 3 or 4 different item categories? Within the last 5 or
the last 10 recommendations?). Choosing the wrong formulation can significantly impact the resulting reward.
An alternate approach is to allow a human domain expert to provide many different formulations, and use model
or algorithm selection to automatically learn to choose the
most effective (e.g. (Lee et al. 2021; Laroche and Feraud
2018). However, much of the work on selection focuses on
theoretical results and cannot be used with popular deep RL
algorithms that may be of more practical use (Lee et al.
2021). Perhaps most closely related to our work is the work
of Laroche and Feraud (2018), which uses an upper confidence bound bandit approach to learn to select among a set
of reinforcement learners. This work was constructed for optimizing across learning hyperparameters (such as learning
rate or model size) and, like many upper confidence bound
approaches, relies on tuning the optimism parameter used,
which is often hard to do in advance of deployment.
In this work we instead focus on leveraging human insight over the domain to speed RL through weak labels on
the policy. We propose an algorithm, Constraint Sampling
Reinforcement Learning (CSRL)1 which performs adaptive
selection and elimination over a set of different policy constraints. Our selection algorithm optionally uses these constraints to learn quickly. To distinguish this from the safety
constraints used in safe RL, we will also refer to them as
policy restrictions. A policy constraint or restriction limits
the available actions in a state and can speed learning by potentially reducing the exploration of suboptimal actions. Our
method performs algorithm selection over a set of RL learners, each using a different policy restriction. For example, in
a recommendation system, one restriction might specify that
3 items should be from unique categories in the past 5 items
shown, and another could require at least 2 unique items in
the past 10, but only for users who have used the system for
more than 6 months. A third RL learner could use the unrestricted policy class, which does not limit the available ac-

Online reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are often difficult to deploy in complex human-facing applications as they
may learn slowly and have poor early performance. To address this, we introduce a practical algorithm for incorporating human insight to speed learning. Our algorithm, Constraint Sampling Reinforcement Learning (CSRL), incorporates prior domain knowledge as constraints/restrictions on
the RL policy. It takes in multiple potential policy constraints
to maintain robustness to misspecification of individual constraints while leveraging helpful ones to learn quickly. Given
a base RL learning algorithm (ex. UCRL, DQN, Rainbow)
we propose an upper confidence with elimination scheme that
leverages the relationship between the constraints, and their
observed performance, to adaptively switch among them.
We instantiate our algorithm with DQN-type algorithms and
UCRL as base algorithms, and evaluate our algorithm in four
environments, including three simulators based on real data:
recommendations, educational activity sequencing, and HIV
treatment sequencing. In all cases, CSRL learns a good policy
faster than baselines.

Introduction
Online reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have
the large potential for improving real world systems
with sequential decisions such as recommendation systems (Theocharous et al. 2020) or intelligent tutoring systems (Bassen et al. 2020). Such domains often have large
or infinite state spaces, and existing RL methods that can
scale to these settings frequently require a prohibitively large
amount of interaction data to learn a good policy. Incorporating human expert knowledge can accelerate learning, such
as through expert demonstrations (Wu et al. 2019; Arora and
Doshi 2021; Hussein et al. 2017; Taylor, Suay, and Chernova
2011) or having them provide properties the optimal policy
is guaranteed to satisfy, such as a specific function class constraint (Ijspeert, Nakanishi, and Schaal 2002; Tamosiunaite
et al. 2011; Buchli et al. 2011; Kober, Bagnell, and Peters
2013). However, such approaches also run the risk of reducing the system performance when the provided information
is misleading or suboptimal. For example, in recommendation systems, prior Human Computer Interaction (HCI) literature has found that diversity of recommendations across
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7841

Code: https://github.com/StanfordAI4HI/CSRL

