The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Encoding of Cost Optimal Delete-Free Planning as SAT
Masood Feyzbakhsh Rankooh and Jussi Rintanen
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland
jussi.rintanen@aalto.fi, masood.feyzbakhshrankooh@aalto.fi

Abstract

ders in relational database query plan generation (Robinson,
McIlraith, and Toman 2014).
Another reason for importance of efficient delete-free
planning emerges from the fact that optimal plans for general planning problems can be produced by iterative solving
and reformulating delete-free planning tasks (Haslum 2012).
This can be done by repeatedly finding optimal plans for
delete-free relaxations of the planning problem, while reducing the relaxation by reformulating the problem in each
iteration, until the optimal plan for the delete-free problem
is in fact an optimal plan for the original problem.
The current state-of-the-art methods for finding exact
value of h+ are based on Integer and Linear Programming (IP/LP) (Haslum, Slaney, and Thiébaux 2012; Imai
and Fukunaga 2015; Castro et al. 2020). Because propositional satisfiability has a limited expressive power compared
to that of LP and IP, using it for computing h+ might seem
counter-intuitive. In our view, however, there are compelling
reasons to the contrary.
Representing and reasoning about causality, which is
a sizable part of knowledge representation and inference
needed to compute h+ , is inherently propositional. Therefore, propositional satisfiability is a well-suited platform to
perform such tasks. Nevertheless, the main tentative weakness of satisfiability is representing and propagating information about action costs.
In this work, we show that by using succinct representation of causality, and also careful encoding of action cost
propagation, one can efficiently compute h+ using propositional satisfiability. Our empirical results indicate that our
method is quite competitive with the state of the art, demonstrating a better coverage than LP/IP based methods on conventional STRIPS planning problems.

We introduce a novel method for encoding cost optimal
delete-free STRIPS Planning as SAT. Our method is based on
representing relaxed plans as partial functions from the set of
propositions to the set of actions. This function can map any
proposition to a unique action that adds the proposition during execution of the relaxed plan. We show that a relaxed plan
can be produced by maintaining acyclicity in the graph of all
causal relations among propositions, represented by the mentioned partial function. We also show that by efficient encoding of action cost propagation and enforcing a series of upper
bounds on the total costs of the output plan, an optimal plan
can effectively be produced for a given delete-free STRIPS
problem. Our empirical results indicate that this method is
quite competitive with the state of the art, demonstrating a
better coverage compared to that of competing methods on
standard STRIPS planning benchmark problems.

Introduction
Delete-free planning problems are those for which every action can add propositions but not delete them. Every planning problem can be relaxed into a delete-free problem in
linear time. The optimal cost of the solution for delete-free
relaxation of a planning problem, denoted by h+ is a lower
bound of the optimal cost of the original problem. Computing h+ , however, is NP-equivalent (Bylander 1994), and also
hard to approximate (Betz and Helmert 2009).
Solving delete-free planning problems is important for
several reasons. Many admissible heuristics functions have
been introduced to compute lower bounds for h+ . Examples are hmax heuristic (Bonet and Geffner 2001), LM-cut
heuristic (Helmert and Domshlak 2009), set-additive heuristic (Keyder and Geffner 2008), and cost-sharing approximations of hmax (Mirkis and Domshlak 2007). This accentuates the need for computing the exact value of h+ , as it is a
measure for informativeness of such heuristic functions.
Moreover, efficient solving of delete-free planning problems is inherently important, as there exist delete-free planning tasks that are of interest for AI community. Examples
of such problems are the minimal seed-set problem (Gefen
and Brafman 2011), and the problem of determining join or-

Preliminaries and Background
We formalize a STRIPS planning problem as a 5-tuple
Π = (P, I, A, G, cost) where P is a finite set of Boolean
state variables, also called propositions. I, the initial state,
and G, the set of goal conditions, are subsets of P . A is
a finite set of actions. Each member a of A is a triple
(pre(a), add(a), del(a)), where pre(a), add(a) and del(a)
are sets of propositions denoting the set of preconditions,
positive effects, and negative effects of a, which are the
propositions that a requires, adds, and deletes, respectively.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9910

