The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Human Driving Behaviors with Sequential Causal Imitation Learning
Kangrui Ruan, Xuan Di
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
kr2910@columbia.edu, sharon.di@columbia.edu

However, IL methods rely on the assumption that all expert features are fully observed and recorded. When there
exist unobserved variables inside the expert’s demonstrations, critical problems arise. Causal Inference (CI) addresses those issues by investigating the causal relationships
among observed and unobserved variables (Spirtes et al.
2000; Pearl 2009; Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017).
There has been some research focused on the combination
of IL and Causality. Causal Imitation Learning (CIL) was recently proposed by (Zhang, Kumor, and Bareinboim 2020),
which focuses on learning a policy within the limit of nonsequential one-stage settings. The authors of (Etesami and
Geiger 2020) study the causal transfer problem by assuming
that the relationships among variables are linear. The paper
(de Haan, Jayaraman, and Levine 2019) ignores unobserved
confounders and assumes the reward and the expert can be
easily accessible.
So far we found one paper (Kumor, Zhang, and Bareinboim 2021) related to SeqCIL, and the major differences
between their research and ours are listed here. Their diagrams are within finite-stage settings, but we work in
the γ-discounted infinite horizon setting. Their experiments
are mainly based on synthetic datasets with simplified reward functions. However, our experiments include a realistic dataset whose actual reward function cannot even be accessed. Their method mainly focuses on behavioral cloning,
while we also show the internal connection between AIL and
SeqCIL.
Little research has been conducted for sequential imitation learning when unobserved variables exist. To demonstrate the issue of ignoring unobserved variables resulting in
an unacceptable policy, we begin with an introductory example.

Abstract
Learning human driving behaviors is an efficient approach
for self-driving vehicles. Traditional Imitation Learning
(IL) methods assume that the expert demonstrations follow
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). However, in reality, this
assumption does not always hold true. Spurious correlation
may exist through the paths of historical variables because
of the existence of unobserved confounders. Accounting for
the latent causal relationships from unobserved variables to
outcomes, this paper proposes Sequential Causal Imitation
Learning (SeqCIL) for imitating driver behaviors. We develop a sequential causal template that generalizes the default MDP settings to one with Unobserved Confounders
(MDPUC-HD). Then we develop a sufficient graphical criterion to determine when ignoring causality leads to poor performances in MDPUC-HD. Through the framework of Adversarial Imitation Learning, we develop a procedure to imitate the expert policy by blocking π-backdoor paths at each
time step. Our methods are evaluated on a synthetic dataset
and a real-world highway driving dataset, both demonstrating
that the proposed procedure significantly outperforms noncausal imitation learning methods.

Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) presents a promising paradigm for
autonomous driving (Pomerleau 1988; Bojarski et al. 2016,
2017; Bansal, Krizhevsky, and Ogale 2018; Codevilla et al.
2019). There are two major types in IL: behavioral cloning
(BC) and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL). BC methods
directly learn an approximate conditional distribution from
any given state to the expert’s action. Instead, IRL learns the
implicit reward function, which is optimal to the expert behaviors; then using this learned reward function, RL methods are employed to obtain a policy. Inspired by Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) and IRL (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Gulrajani et al. 2017), the framework of Adversarial
Imitation Learning (AIL) is proposed (Ho and Ermon 2016;
Li, Song, and Ermon 2017; Fu, Luo, and Levine 2017). In
AIL, the policy is trained by producing expert-like stateaction pairs to fool the discriminator. While training, the
discriminator can provide a reward signal to help the policy
proceed to expert-like zones.

Example 1. Suppose a scenario when an imitator needs to
learn how to correctly accelerate At . St denotes the velocity
and locations of the ego vehicle and the surrounding vehicles. In reality, there exist some unobserved variables inside
the expert demonstrations. Human drivers utilize the vehi(L)
cle light information Ut , i.e., the tail light from the front
vehicle 1 and the turn signal from the left vehicle 2. How(L)
ever, Ut is not properly recorded, which is common in
some real-world datasets, such as NGSIM (Alexiadis et al.
2004) or highD (Krajewski et al. 2018). When the demon-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4583

