The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Knowledge Distillation for Object Detection via Rank Mimicking and
Prediction-Guided Feature Imitation
Gang Li1,2 * , Xiang Li1 * , Yujie Wang2 , Shanshan Zhang1† , Yichao Wu2 , Ding Liang2
1

PCA Lab‡ , Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Sensetime Research
{gang.li, xiang.li.implus, shanshan.zhang}@njust.edu.cn, {wangyujie, wuyichao, liangding}@sensetime.com

Student

Abstract

Head

Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a widely-used technology
to inherit information from cumbersome teacher models to
compact student models, consequently realizing model compression and acceleration. Compared with image classification, object detection is a more complex task, and designing specific KD methods for object detection is non-trivial.
In this work, we elaborately study the behaviour difference
between the teacher and student detection models, and obtain two intriguing observations: First, the teacher and student
rank their detected candidate boxes quite differently, which
results in their precision discrepancy. Second, there is a considerable gap between the feature response differences and
prediction differences between teacher and student, indicating that equally imitating all the feature maps of the teacher is
the sub-optimal choice for improving the student’s accuracy.
Based on the two observations, we propose Rank Mimicking
(RM) and Prediction-guided Feature Imitation (PFI) for distilling one-stage detectors, respectively. RM takes the rank of
candidate boxes from teachers as a new form of knowledge
to distill, which consistently outperforms the traditional soft
label distillation. PFI attempts to correlate feature differences
with prediction differences, making feature imitation directly
help to improve the student’s accuracy. On MS COCO and
PASCAL VOC benchmarks, extensive experiments are conducted on various detectors with different backbones to validate the effectiveness of our method. Specifically, RetinaNet
with ResNet50 achieves 40.4% mAP on MS COCO, which is
3.5% higher than its baseline, and also outperforms previous
KD methods.

···

reg map

···

cls map

NMS

Feature
Difference
Head

Prediction
Difference
···

cls map

···

reg map

input

Result
Difference

NMS

Teacher

Figure 1: To figure out where the performance gap between
teachers and students comes from, in this paper, we elaborately compare their behaviour, including the feature difference, prediction difference and detection result difference.

driving, intelligent surveillance and robotics. With the development of deep learning, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) based detectors dominate the field and replace the
traditional hand-craft detectors. When equipped with highcapacity CNN backbones, the advanced detectors can obtain satisfactory performance, however, these cumbersome
models hardly satisfy real-time requirements and are useless in practical deployments. To address this dilemma, some
researchers attempt to design efficient detectors, such as
YOLO (Redmon and Farhadi 2017) and EfficientDet (Tan,
Pang, and Le 2020). Apart from this, another solution is
to transfer knowledge from cumbersome teacher models to
lightweight student models, and help students to achieve
comparable performance with teachers, which is known as
Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015). We focus on KD in this paper.
KD is firstly proposed to compress classification networks, but in the past few years, researchers adapt it to object
detection. Mimicking (Li, Jin, and Yan 2017) only adopts
proposal features from teachers as distillation targets; Chen
et al. (Chen et al. 2017) borrow the idea of soft labels from
(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), and directly apply it to
the classification branch of detection; (Wang et al. 2019;
Sun et al. 2020) design fine-grained masks for feature imitation; DeFeat (Guo et al. 2021) investigates the balance

Introduction
As a fundamental computer vision task, object detection attracts much attention and achieves significant progress in recent years (Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). It also has extensive applications in the real world, such as autonomous
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

1306

