The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Inferring Prototypes for Multi-Label Few-Shot Image Classification
with Word Vector Guided Attention
Kun Yan1 , Chenbin Zhang1 , Jun Hou2 , Ping Wang1 * , Zied Bouraoui3 ,
Shoaib Jameel4 , Steven Schockaert5
1
Peking University
SenseTime Group Limited
3
CRIL - University of Artois & CNRS
4
University of Essex
5
Cardiff University
{kyan2018, zcbin, pwang}@pku.edu.cn, houjun@sensetime.com, zied.bouraoui@cril.fr,
shoaib.jameel@gmail.com, schockaerts1@cardiff.ac.uk
2

Abstract

multi-label setting. For instance, so-called metric-based approaches learn a prototype for each image category, and then
assign images to the category whose prototype is closest to
the image in some sense. These prototypes are typically obtained by averaging a representation of the training images.
In the seminal ProtoNet model (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017), for instance, prototypes are simply defined as the average of the global feature maps of the available training examples. This strategy crucially relies on the assumption that
most of the image is somehow relevant to its category. In the
multi-label setting, however, such an assumption is highly
questionable, given that different labels tend to refer to different parts of the image. For instance, given an image depicting a car and a bike, using a representation of the entire
image to obtain a prototype for bike would be misleading.

Multi-label few-shot image classification (ML-FSIC) is the
task of assigning descriptive labels to previously unseen images, based on a small number of training examples. A key
feature of the multi-label setting is that images often have
multiple labels, which typically refer to different regions of
the image. When estimating prototypes, in a metric-based setting, it is thus important to determine which regions are relevant for which labels, but the limited amount of training data
makes this highly challenging. As a solution, in this paper, we
propose to use word embeddings as a form of prior knowledge about the meaning of the labels. In particular, visual
prototypes are obtained by aggregating the local feature maps
of the support images, using an attention mechanism that relies on the label embeddings. As an important advantage, our
model can infer prototypes for unseen labels without the need
for fine-tuning any model parameters, which demonstrates its
strong generalization abilities. Experiments on COCO and
PASCAL VOC furthermore show that our model substantially improves the current state-of-the-art.

Our aim in this paper is to introduce a metric-based model
for multi-label few-shot image classification (ML-FSIC).
Given the aforementioned concerns, we need a strategy that
is based on local image features, allowing us to focus on
those parts of the training images that are most likely to be
relevant. However, as we may only have a single training
example for some labels, we cannot implement such a strategy without some kind of prior knowledge about the meaning of the labels. We will rely on word vectors (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014) for this purpose. Some previous works for the single-label setting have already relied on
word vectors for inferring prototypes directly (Xing et al.
2019; Yan et al. 2021a), but as the resulting prototypes are
inevitably noisy, such strategies are most useful in combination with prototypes that are derived from visual features.
Therefore, taking a different approach, in this paper we only
use word vectors to identify which regions of the training
images are most likely to be relevant for a given label. As
an example to explain the intuition of how word vectors can
be useful for this purpose, assume that we have a number
of labels that refer to animals. These labels will have similar word vectors, which tells the model that the predictive
visual features for these different labels are likely to be similar. Now suppose we have an image which is labelled with
cat. Based on training data for other labels, the model will
select areas that are likely to contain an animal (although

Introduction
Multi-label image classification (ML-IC) has received considerable attention in recent years (Wang et al. 2016; Chen
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2017; Yazici et al. 2020). The aim
of this task is to assign descriptive labels to images, where
each image is typically associated with multiple labels. Standard approaches for this task often focus on modelling label
dependencies, e.g. taking advantage of the fact that the presence of one label makes the presence of another label more
(or less) likely. In the few-shot setting, however, we only
have a small number of images available for training, possibly only a single image for some labels. Clearly, relying on
label co-occurrence statistics is not feasible in such a setting.
The problem of few-shot image classification (FSIC), i.e.
image classification with limited training data in the singlelabel setting, has also received considerable attention. However, standard approaches for this task are not suitable for the
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2991

