The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Braid: Weaving Symbolic and Neural Knowledge into Coherent Logical
Explanations
Aditya Kalyanpur, Tom Breloff, David A Ferrucci
Elemental Cognition Inc.
{adityak, tomb, davef} @ec.ai

Abstract

learned rule predicates have distributed representations and
are not directly interpretable). Also, the embeddings for entities/predicates once learned during training are fixed at test
time. Other neuro-symbolic approaches are built on similar
ideas to encode logical semantics in E2E differentiable networks such as Logic Tensor Networks (Serafini and d’Avila
Garcez 2016) and IBM’s Logic NNs (Riegel et al. 2020).
We take a complementary approach: our novel logical reasoner, called Braid, is at its core a symbolic reasoning engine, and thus capable of producing explicit logical explanations, but at the same time, it uses statistical methods to
inject explicit term alignment or missing rule knowledge,
considering the Knowledge Base (KB) context at run-time.
It does this by supporting custom-unifiers, which are functions that propose and score mappings between the terms of
two logical propositions, given the KB as context. In our
work, we use neural matching functions as unifiers. Braid
also supports dynamic rule-generators - DRGs - which
given a target proposition (goal) and a KB as input, output a scored list of hypothesized rules that are used to prove
the target (these rules are fully interpretable, unlike in NLProlog). We describe a DRG implementation using a neural
rule generation model that was trained on a dataset of crowdsourced causal rules (Mostafazadeh et al. 2020).
We discuss the reasoning algorithms used in Braid, their
implementation in a distributed task-based framework for
proof graph building, and an evaluation of Braid on ROC
stories (Nasrin Mostafazadeh 2016).

Traditional symbolic reasoning engines, while attractive for
their precision and explicability, have a few major drawbacks:
the use of brittle inference procedures that rely on exact
matching (unification) of logical terms, an inability to deal
with uncertainty, and the need for a precompiled rule-base
of knowledge (the “knowledge acquisition” problem). To address these issues, we devise a novel logical reasoner called
Braid, that supports probabilistic rules, and uses the notion of
custom unification functions and dynamic rule generation to
overcome the brittle matching and knowledge-gap problem
prevalent in traditional reasoners. In this paper, we describe
the reasoning algorithms used in Braid, and their implementation in a distributed task-based framework that builds proof/explanation graphs for an input query. We use a simple QA
example from a children’s story to motivate Braid’s design
and explain how the various components work together to
produce a coherent logical explanation. Finally, we evaluate
Braid on the ROC Story Cloze test and achieve close to stateof-the-art results while providing frame-based explanations.

Introduction and Related Work
Symbolic reasoning systems work well for certain
knowledge-rich domains that typically involve a (predefined) set of axioms or rules, use structured queries and
datasets, and have a need for precise logical inference with
explanations. However, they have several well-known limitations. The inference procedures are highly brittle in that
they require precise matching/unification of logical terms to
construct a complete explanation. Moreover, such systems
suffer from the knowledge acquisition problem (i.e. how
does one acquire the rules). Often, the rules are hand-coded,
an approach which doesn’t scale in general.
To address these issues, there has been a growing interest
in exploring neuro-symbolic approaches, such as NL-Prolog
(Leon et al. 2019) in which the authors use a Prolog-like system to do back-chaining from a query to find proofs, where
the entities/predicates have distributed representations (allowing for weak unification), and the inference rules are
learned during training by specializing generic templates
like P1(?X1, ?X3) :- P2(?X1, ?X2), P3(?X2, ?X3). However, NL-Prolog is an end-to-end (E2E) differentiable system whose explanations are not fully transparent (e.g. the

Motivating Example
We describe an example to illustrate the challenges
that a logical reasoning engine faces when answering
story understanding questions. The text below is from a
children’s story (Grade: K) on the ReadWorks website
(http://readworks.org).
Consider the following short story:
“Fernando and Zoey go to a plant sale. They buy mint
plants. They like the minty smell of leaves. Zoey puts her
plant near a sunny window. The plant looks green and
healthy!”
The question we would like to answer is:
“Why does Zoey place the plant near the window?”
Questions of this nature are part of the Template of Understanding, defined in (Dunietz et al. 2020), that is used

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10867

