The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

OVIS: Open-Vocabulary Visual Instance Search via
Visual-Semantic Aligned Representation Learning
Sheng Liu1 , Kevin Lin2 , Lijuan Wang2 , Junsong Yuan1 , Zicheng Liu2
1

University at Buffalo
2
Microsoft
{sliu66, jsyuan}@buffalo.edu, {keli, lijuanw, zliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract

e.g., “ovis”, “marble column”, OVIS aims to return
visual instances, i.e., image patches (instead of images)1 ,
which are relevant to the query, solely relying on the visual contents of images. We use the term “open” as we do
not limit the visual instances that can be searched, it can be
instances of any objects, movements and attributes. In contrast, works on image retrieval mainly focus on retrieving
whole images of a closed set of classes (Liu et al. 2016; Cao
et al. 2018; Yu, Wu, and Yuan 2017; Yu et al. 2018, 2020;
Johnson et al. 2015; Faghri et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2020).
Furthermore, we do not restrict the words that can be used
in the textual queries. Words from any part of speech can be
used, e.g., nouns, verbs and adjectives.
The vast number of the visual instances to be searched and
the textual search queries makes OVIS a challenge. While
state-of-the-art computer vision models have achieved great
success in many areas, they often have a closed vocabulary
limited by the annotated categories. The vocabulary of an
object detector is limited, for example, by the number of
object classes with bounding box annotations. They cannot
detect classes of objects with no bounding box annotations.
However, it is infeasible for us to create a sufficiently large
dataset that, covers all the possibilities of the visual instances
as well as the textual search queries, due to their large numbers.
To address this challenge, we propose to use a large number of image captions that can be collected by a web crawler
to train our model. However, captions describe images rather
than visual instances. Therefore, captions can only serve as
weak supervision, as we have to associate words or phrases
of the captions with visual instances in images without explicit supervision. This is achieved with the help of masked
token prediction, which is a task that attempts to predict the
masked token in the caption based on visual instances in the
image and the other tokens. In order to correctly predict the
masked token, our model must attend to visual instances relevant to the masked token. In this way, an implicit association is achieved. As a result, our model is able to encode
visual instances and textual search queries into representations that are aligned in a common semantic space. In other
words, visual instances and textual search queries with sim-

We introduce the task of open-vocabulary visual instance
search (OVIS). Given an arbitrary textual search query, Openvocabulary Visual Instance Search (OVIS) aims to return a
ranked list of visual instances, i.e., image patches, that satisfies the search intent from an image database. The term “open
vocabulary” means that there are neither restrictions to the visual instance to be searched nor restrictions to the word that
can be used to compose the textual search query. We propose to address such a search challenge via visual-semantic
aligned representation learning (ViSA). ViSA leverages massive amount of image-caption pairs as weak image-level (not
instance-level) supervision to learn a rich cross-modal semantic space where the representations of visual instances (not
images) and those of textual queries are aligned, thus allowing us to measure the similarities between any visual instance
and an arbitrary textual query. To evaluate the performance of
ViSA, we build two datasets named OVIS40 and OVIS1400
and also introduce a pipeline for error analysis. Through
extensive experiments on the two datasets, we demonstrate
ViSA’s ability to search for visual instances in images not
available during training given a wide range of textual queries
including those composed of uncommon words. Experimental results show that ViSA achieves an mAP@50 of 27.8%
on OVIS40 and achieves a recall@30 of 21.3% on OVIS1400
dataset under the most challenging settings.

Introduction
The sheer number of image searches perfectly reflects its
importance. Tens of millions of image searches are carried
out in a single day by image search engines, e.g., Google
(Google 2021), in a single day. Taking a textual search query,
e.g., a word “ovis” as input, an image search engine returns
a list of images relevant to the query. In this sense, an image search engine can be viewed as mapping textual search
queries to visual search results. Despite promising text-toimage search results, image search engines like Google often rely on textual descriptions of images, e.g., alt-texts and
titles, and not on visual contents of images. In addition, existing image search engine typically returns a whole image
rather than locating the textual query in the image.
In this work, we introduce the task of open-vocabulary visual instance search (OVIS). Given a textual search query,

1
We use the two terms, “visual instance” and “image patch”,
interchangeably in this manuscript.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1773

