The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adaptive Poincaré Point to Set Distance for Few-Shot Classification
Rongkai Ma1 , Pengfei Fang2,3 * , Tom Drummond4 , Mehrtash Harandi1,3
1

Monash University
The Australian National University
3
DATA61-CSIRO, Australia
4
The University of Melbourne
{rongkai.ma, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu, pengfei.fang@anu.edu.au, tom.drummond@unimelb.edu.au
2

Abstract
Learning and generalizing from limited examples, i.e., fewshot learning, is of core importance to many real-world vision
applications. A principal way of achieving few-shot learning is to realize an embedding where samples from different
classes are distinctive. Recent studies suggest that embedding
via hyperbolic geometry enjoys low distortion for hierarchical and structured data, making it suitable for few-shot learning. In this paper, we propose to learn a context-aware hyperbolic metric to characterize the distance between a point
and a set associated with a learned set to set distance. To this
end, we formulate the metric as a weighted sum on the tangent bundle of the hyperbolic space and develop a mechanism
to obtain the weights adaptively, based on the constellation
of the points. This not only makes the metric local but also
dependent on the task in hand, meaning that the metric will
adapt depending on the samples that it compares. We empirically show that such metric yields robustness in the presence
of outliers and achieves a tangible improvement over baseline models. This includes the state-of-the-art results on five
popular few-shot classification benchmarks, namely miniImageNet, tiered-ImageNet, Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011
(CUB), CIFAR-FS, and FC100.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a): For a query sample in “red” class, outliers
(i.e., yellow and white circles) drag the prototype (i.e., the
black circle) far away from the real cluster center in the
embedding space such that the nearest neighbor classifier
mis-classifies the query point into “green” class. (b): Our
method computes an adaptive point to set distance on the
manifold, which is more robust to outliers than prototypes.
Best viewed in color.

In many cases, FSL methods deem to learn an embedding
space to distinguish samples from different classes. Therein,
the embedding space is a multidimensional Euclidean space
and is realized via a deep neural network.
Employing hyperbolic geometry to encode data has been
shown rewarding, as the volume of space expands exponentially (Ganea, Bécigneul, and Hofmann 2018; Khrulkov
et al. 2020). Recent works have shown that a hierarchical
structure exists within visual datasets and that the use of
hyperbolic embeddings can yield significant improvements
over Euclidean embeddings (Khrulkov et al. 2020; Fang,
Harandi, and Petersson 2021).
Most existing FSL solutions learn a metric through comparing the distance between a query sample and the class
prototypes, often modeled as the mean embeddings of each
class. However, this does not take the adverse effects of
outliers and noises into consideration (Sun et al. 2019).
This severely limits the representation power of embeddingbased methods since the outliers may drag the prototype
away from the true center of the cluster (see Fig.1(a)). For a
more robust approach, we require an adaptive metric, which
can faithfully capture the distribution per class, while being
robust to outliers and other nuances in data (Fig. 1(b)).
With this in mind, we propose learning a context-

Introduction
In the modern context of machine learning, deep neural networks (DNNs) have enjoyed enormous success by leveraging the rich availability of labeled data for supervised training. Despite this, deep supervised learning is primarily limited in terms of scaling towards unseen samples due to the
high cost of acquiring large amounts of labeled data. This
is in clear contrast to how humans learn, where in many
cases, only a handful of training examples are sufficient for
generalizing towards unseen samples. Few-Shot Learning
(FSL) addresses this critical problem through the development of algorithms that can learn using limited data (Finn,
Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman
2018; Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Sung et al. 2018;
Vinyals et al. 2016; Ye et al. 2020; Hong et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2020).
Performing FSL well is essential towards creating robust
frameworks that can learn with the efficiency of humans.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1926

