The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stage Conscious Attention Network (SCAN):
A Demonstration-Conditioned Policy for Few-Shot Imitation
Jia-Fong Yeh1∗ , Chi-Ming Chung1∗ , Hung-Ting Su1 , Yi-Ting Chen2 , Winston H. Hsu1, 3
1

National Taiwan University
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
3
Mobile Drive Technology
jiafongyeh@ieee.org, r09944021@ntu.edu.tw
2

Abstract
In few-shot imitation learning (FSIL), using behavioral
cloning (BC) to solve unseen tasks with few expert demonstrations becomes a popular research direction. The following capabilities are essential in robotics applications: (1) Behaving in compound tasks that contain multiple stages. (2)
Retrieving knowledge from few length-variant and misalignment demonstrations. (3) Learning from an expert different from the agent. No previous work can achieve these
abilities at the same time. In this work, we conduct FSIL
problem under the union of above settings and introduce
a novel stage conscious attention network (SCAN) to retrieve knowledge from few demonstrations simultaneously.
SCAN uses an attention module to identify each stage in
length-variant demonstrations. Moreover, it is designed under
demonstration-conditioned policy that learns the relationship
between experts and agents. Experiment results show that
SCAN can perform in complicated compound tasks without
fine-tuning and provide the explainable visualization. Project
page is at https://sites.google.com/view/scan-aaai2022.

Figure 1: Schema of few-shot imitation learning (FSIL). In
our FSIL problem, models need to solve the task in novel
environment that is unseen during training. Few demonstrations are given to let models imitate. There are three
challenges in our FSIL setting, (1) We conduct FSIL on
compound tasks which contain multiple stages. (2) Demonstrations are length-variant. Each stage may locate at different timestamps. (3) Models need to learn the behavior
from a different type of expert. None of previous works
can solve these challenges concurrently. Moreover, learning from length-variant sequences is non-trivial, making our
FSIL a challenging yet practical problem.

Introduction
Humans can learn to perform unseen compound tasks from
different experts with few nonidentical demonstrations. The
number of researches on few-shot imitation learning (FSIL)
increases rapidly to verify whether the machine also has this
ability. The above challenging settings of FSIL problem are
illustrated in Figure 1, and most of existing works only solve
them partially. To overcome the complexity of environment
and concomitant complicated training process, behavioral
cloning (BC) is leveraged to mimics the experts. Previous
works (Finn et al. 2017; Duan et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018,
2019; Dasari and Gupta 2020; Bonardi, James, and Davison
2020) only support one demonstration at once, which limits
the capability of models. We argue that retrieving knowledge
from few demonstrations simultaneously can break through
the limitations and lead to better performance when conducting FSIL under these challenging settings.
Meta-learning based methods (Finn et al. 2017; Yu et al.
2018, 2019) learn a meta-policy π(a | s) that takes state s
from current playout p and outputs an action a via BC. Before testing, the meta-trained policy uses expert demonstra-

tions to adapt meta-parameters. Then, they update the policy several times based on the number of demonstrations.
The main drawbacks of these methods are twofold: (1) finetuning is required, and (2) they need a learnable loss (Yu
et al. 2019) to map expert to agent explicitly.
To tackle these drawbacks, demonstration-conditioned
(DC) based methods (Duan et al. 2017; James, Bloesch,
and Davison 2018; Bonardi, James, and Davison 2020; Shao
et al. 2020; Dasari and Gupta 2020; Dance, Perez, and Cachet 2021) apply a policy π(a | s, D) which predict actions conditioned on both states and demonstrations D. Finetuning is optional for DC methods, because they are expected to behave by observing demonstrations. They implicitly learn the mapping since they have the information in D
concurrently when generating a, even if experts are different
from the agent. The primary objective of DC policies is to
encode few demonstrations into a representative embedding.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8866

