The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

C2 L: Causally Contrastive Learning
for Robust Text Classification
Seungtaek Choi1 * , Myeongho Jeong1 * , Hojae Han2 , Seung-won Hwang2
1
Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{hist0613, wag9611}@yonsei.ac.kr, {stovecat, seungwonh}@snu.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Despite the super-human accuracy of recent deep models in
NLP tasks, their robustness is reportedly limited due to their
reliance on spurious patterns. We thus aim to leverage contrastive learning and counterfactual augmentation for robustness. For augmentation, existing work either requires humans
to add counterfactuals to the dataset or machines to automatically matches near-counterfactuals already in the dataset. Unlike existing augmentation is affected by spurious correlations,
ours, by synthesizing “a set” of counterfactuals, and making
a collective decision on the distribution of predictions on this
set, can robustly supervise the causality of each term. Our empirical results show that our approach, by collective decisions,
is less sensitive to task model bias of attribution-based synthesis, and thus achieves significant improvements, in diverse
dimensions: 1) counterfactual robustness, 2) cross-domain
generalization, and 3) generalization from scarce data.

Introduction
Deep learning models have been successful in natural language tasks, aiming to learn how to correlate input features
to desired outputs. However, these models are reported to
often rely on “spurious” features, hindering the robustness–
An illustrative example from (Wang and Culotta 2020a) is,
classifying the sentiment of “This Spielberg film was wonderful”, to positive. Though the term Spielberg itself does
not have a causal effect to predicting the review as positive,
if the given dataset contains many positive reviews for his
movies, it can correlate to positive. In contrast, another term
wonderful has a causal effect. While both features have high
predictive power in this particular dataset, using Spielberg
for prediction does not generalize well to another set where
his movie is not as favored.
In this paper, we aim to reduce spurious correlations, to
rely more on robust features, with more “causal” effects to
predicting class labels and generalizing better to new data.
For finding causal features in language tasks, existing efforts
look for human annotations, namely counterfactual data augmentations (Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton 2019), collecting the
minimally-dissimilar yet differently labeled examples. By
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10526

highlighting the different parts between original and counterfactual texts, the model could identify the causal correlations
of the given task. In our example, the term wonderful is considered causal, as editing the term with bad generates its
counterfactual pair of negative sentiment.
However, collecting such counterfactual pairs from human annotators is expensive and thus hard to scale up. Alternatively, there have been efforts to collect such counterfactual pairs automatically, to avoid high human-annotation
costs: First, matching-based approaches (Wang and Culotta
2020b) find the most similar samples of opposite labels within
the dataset. These will be effective when the given dataset
contains counterfactual pairs, which may not be always practical. Second, attribution-based approaches (Moon et al.
2020; Liang et al. 2020; Han et al. 2021) no longer rely on
the dataset coverage, but use attributions from the task model
instead, such as attention or gradients, to decide “candidate”
causal term as high-attributed features. This approach can
be viewed as distilling causality from the task model itself,
to reduce the dependence on the dataset coverage, though it
may propagate the bias within the task model, e.g., Spielberg
is highly-attributed.
Our work is of combining the strength of the two approaches, by reducing the bias, from both dataset and task
model. Specifically, we propose a novel pipeline for the unbiased causality identification, which consists of the following
two steps: 1) candidate proposal and 2) candidate validation.
The first step identifies “candidate” causal terms, by using
attention or gradient as in (Moon et al. 2020; Liang et al.
2020). Then, the second step validates the causality of candidate terms, by estimating a causal “treatment” effect of
the word, for classifying the given text into its class label,
i.e., “outcome”, known as Individualized Treatment Effect
(ITE) in causality literature (Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Shalit,
Johansson, and Sontag 2017).
Our distinction is “robustifying” the second step, for which
we contrast ITE validation of existing and our approaches as
in Figure 1. Existing efforts (Wang and Culotta 2020b; Klein
and Nabi 2020) first generate a single counterfactual example,
then observe if the predicted label differs from the original
label, which may be incorrect if the task is biased or noisy for
the generated sentence as shown in Figure 1a. In contrast, we
make a collective decision over multiple generations, as in
Figure 1b, and consider decision “distributions” for making

