The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hierarchical Context Tagging for Utterance Rewriting
Lisa Jin1 * , Linfeng Song2‡ , Lifeng Jin2 , Dong Yu2 , Daniel Gildea1
1

University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
2
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA, USA
ljin14@cs.rochester.edu, {lfsong, lifengjin, dyu}@tencent.com, gildea@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract

Turn

Utterance

Utterance rewriting aims to recover coreferences and omitted information from the latest turn of a multi-turn dialogue.
Recently, methods that tag rather than linearly generate sequences have proven stronger in both in- and out-of-domain
rewriting settings. This is due to a tagger’s smaller search
space as it can only copy tokens from the dialogue context.
However, these methods may suffer from low coverage when
phrases that must be added to a source utterance cannot be
covered by a single context span. This can occur in languages
like English that introduce tokens such as prepositions into
the rewrite for grammaticality. We propose a hierarchical context tagger (HCT) that mitigates this issue by predicting slotted rules (e.g., “besides ”) whose slots are later filled with
context spans. HCT (i) tags the source string with token-level
edit actions and slotted rules and (ii) fills in the resulting rule
slots with spans from the dialogue context. This rule tagging
allows HCT to add out-of-context tokens and multiple spans
at once; we further cluster the rules to truncate the long tail
of the rule distribution. Experiments on several benchmarks
show that HCT can outperform state-of-the-art rewriting systems by ∼2 BLEU points.

1
2
3

Why did Federer withdraw from the tournament?
He injured his back in yesterday’s match.
Did he have any other injuries?

3∗

Did Federer have any other injuries besides his back?

Table 1: Sample dialogue for utterance rewriting. Turns 1–
2 are the context, 3 is the source, and 3∗ is the target. The
target is a context-independent rewrite of the source.

Much past work (Pan et al. 2019; Elgohary, Peskov, and
Boyd-Graber 2019) on this task frames it as a standard
sequence-to-sequence (seq-to-seq) problem, applying RNNs
or Transformers. This approach requires re-predicting tokens shared between source and target utterances. To ease
the redundancy, models may include a copy mechanism (Gu
et al. 2016; See, Liu, and Manning 2017) that supports copying source tokens besides drawing from a separate vocabulary. Yet generating all target tokens from scratch remains a
burden. Perhaps as a result, these early efforts do not generalize well between data domains. For instance, Hao et al.
(2021) report a drop of 28 BLEU after transfer between two
Chinese rewriting datasets (Su et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2019).
To exploit overlaps between source and target utterances,
later work converts rewrite generation into source editing
through sequence tagging. This tagging vastly simplifies the
learning problem: predict a few fixed-length tag sequences,
each with a small vocabulary. Hao et al. (2021) propose a
system that predicts edit actions to (i) keep or delete a source
token and (ii) optionally add a context span before the token. They rewrite Chinese datasets, where most targets can
be covered by adding at most one context span per source
token. Unfortunately, their single-span tagger is too brittle
to insert out-of-context tokens or a series of non-contiguous
spans, leading to low target phrase coverage.
Instead of separating edit action tagging from span insertion, Liu et al. (2020) predict a word-level edit matrix between context-source pairs. In contrast to Hao et al., this
approach can add arbitrary non-contiguous context phrases
before each source token. Though it may cover more target
phrases, an edit matrix involves O(m) times more tags than
a sequence for m context tokens. Its flexibility also makes

Introduction
Modeling dialogue between humans and machines has long
been an important research direction with high commercial
value. Such tasks include dialogue response planning (Li
et al. 2016), question answering (Reddy, Chen, and Manning
2019) and semantic parsing in conversational settings (Yu
et al. 2019). Recent advances in deep learning and language
model pre-training have greatly improved performance on
many sentence-level tasks. However, machines are often
challenged by coreference, anaphora, and ellipsis that are
common in longer form conversations. Utterance rewriting
(Kumar and Joshi 2017; Su et al. 2019; Elgohary, Peskov,
and Boyd-Graber 2019) has been proposed to resolve these
references locally by editing dialogues turn-by-turn to include past context. This way, models need only focus on the
last rewritten dialogue turn. Self-contained utterances also
let models leverage sentence-level semantic parsers (Zhang
et al. 2019) for dialogue understanding.
* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
‡

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10849

