The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Local Surface Descriptor for Geometry and Feature Preserved Mesh Denoising
Wenbo Zhao1,2 , Xianming Liu1,2 * , Junjun Jiang1,2 , Debin Zhao1,2 , Ge Li3 , Xiangyang Ji4
1

Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract

2014) to the most recent data-driven methods (Wang, Liu,
and Tong 2016; Li et al. 2020a). In particular, data-driven
strategies for mesh denoising have gained great interest recently, boosted by the success of deep learning in 2D image
denoising (Zhang et al. 2017).
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have massively
impacted denoising tasks in 2D images, and are ubiquitous in many state-of-the-art approaches. CNNs have been
proven to own the ability of modeling complex features
at different scales, which is also very useful for mesh denoising since meshes contain multi-scale features, such as
large-scale curvature changes, fillet radii, small scale details
and corners. However, the application of CNNs-based denoising strategy to mesh denoising is not straightforward.
CNNs require regular 2D grid as input, while meshes exhibit irregular 3D topology. Moreover, compared to point
clouds, 3D meshes contain vertex connectivity in addition
to vertex coordinates. These issues prevent the deployment
of CNNs in mesh denoising. Accordingly, different from 2D
image denoising in which CNNs-based strategy has become
the basic methodology (Zhang et al. 2017), to the best of
our knowledge, there are only a few deep learning based
schemes for mesh denoising (Wang, Liu, and Tong 2016;
Li et al. 2020a,b; Armando, Franco, and Boyer 2020; Zhao
et al. 2021; Shen et al. 2021).
To denoise a mesh, a common practice among the most efficient methods is to first denoise the face normals and then
update the vertex positions accordingly, so as to benefit from
the scale invariance of the face normals (Fleishman, Drori,
and Cohen-Or 2003; Sun et al. 2007; Armando, Franco, and
Boyer 2020). Existing CNNs-based methods mostly adopt
this strategy, which train networks to regress face normals.
For instance, in (Li et al. 2020a), an end-to-end mesh normal
denoising network called as DNF-Net is proposed, which
takes patches of facet normals as inputs and directly outputs
the corresponding denoised facet normals. However, in this
method, the noisy normals are simply organized as matrices,
which discard the surface geometry information, leading to
lost in discriminative representation. To achieve satisfactory
denoising performance, the proposed DNF-Net is carefully
designed, which includes a tailored multi-scale feature embedding unit, a residual learning strategy to remove noise,
and a deeply-supervised joint loss function.
Another feasible manner is to extend convolutional layers

3D meshes are widely employed to represent geometry structure of 3D shapes. Due to limitation of scanning sensor precision and other issues, meshes are inevitably affected by noise,
which hampers the subsequent applications. Convolultional
neural networks (CNNs) achieve great success in image processing tasks, including 2D image denoising, and have been
proven to own the capacity of modeling complex features at
different scales, which is also particularly useful for mesh
denoising. However, due to the nature of irregular structure,
CNNs-based denosing strategies cannot be trivially applied
for meshes. To circumvent this limitation, in the paper, we
propose the local surface descriptor (LSD), which is able to
transform the local deformable surface around a face into
2D grid representation and thus facilitates the deployment
of CNNs to generate denoised face normals. To verify the
superiority of LSD, we directly feed LSD into the classical
Resnet without any complicated network design. The extensive experimental results show that, compared to the state-ofthe-arts, our method achieves encouraging performance with
respect to both objective and subjective evaluations.

Introduction
3D sensing and scanning techniques have been extensively
employed to capture deformable surfaces of real physical
objects, which are typically represented as meshes. These
digital representations facilitate a variety of applications, including movie industry, digital games, virtual reality and so
on. However, due to limitation of scanning sensor precision
and computational issues, the derived 3D meshes inevitably
contain noise, which hinders the subsequent applications.
Mesh denoising is thus one of the most fundamental research
topics in 3D geometry processing.
Mesh denoising is a challenging ill-posed problem. The
desired denoising result owes to the ability of smoothing a
noisy surface, as well as preserving the “original” object features, without introducing unnatural geometric distortions.
Due to the brisk demand coming from different applications, there exist a rich literature on mesh denoising, ranging
from filtering-based (Zheng et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2015),
optimization-based (He and Schaefer 2013; Wang et al.
* Corresponding author: csxm@hit.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3446

