The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On Optimizing Interventions in Shared Autonomy
Weihao Tan1 * † , David Koleczek13† , Siddhant Pradhan1† , Nicholas Perello1 , Vivek Chettiar2 , Vishal
Rohra2 , Aaslesha Rajaram2 , Soundararajan Srinivasan2 , H M Sajjad Hossain2‡ , Yash Chandak 1‡
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Microsoft
3
MassMutual Data Science
{weihaotan, dkoleczek, sspradhan, nperello, ychandak}@umass.edu, hivishalrohra@gmail.com
{Vivek.Chettiar, Aaslesha.Rajaram, Soundararajan.Srinivasan, Hossain.H}@microsoft.com

Abstract

cally maintain their satisfaction of collaboration, or level of
autonomy.
Shared autonomy provides a framework to allow human
and autonomous agents to interact congruently to improve
performance at the task, while still allowing the human to
maintain control (Abbink et al. 2018). Several prior works
on shared autonomy rely on specific knowledge of the environment’s dynamics, or the ability to model them accurately
(Gopinath, Jain, and Argall 2017; Javdani et al. 2018; Backman, Kulić, and Chung 2021), or having data a priori in order
to determine the goals of the collaborating human (Reddy
et al. 2020; Reddy, Dragan, and Levine 2018b; Carroll et al.
2019; Javdani, Bagnell, and Srinivasa 2016). However, for
many tasks the computational dynamics model may be unavailable, or determining user goals accurately, in advance of
system design, may not be feasible. Therefore, similar to the
works by (Reddy, Dragan, and Levine 2018a), (Schaff and
Walter 2020), and (Du et al. 2020) we focus on a model-free
approach and do not aim to model user’s goals explicitly.
An important aspect not addressed by the aforementioned
prior works is how to allow humans to use the full depth of
their expertise towards achieving their goals. Because the
agents serves as assistants, a natural assumption is that the
agent should only assist the human minimally or intervene
only when necessary, while maintaining good performance.
This consideration is especially important in domains such
as assistive robotics (Javdani et al. 2018; Gopinath, Jain, and
Argall 2017; de Winter and Dodou 2011) in reality and assistive agent in video games where users may want to feel as
independent as possible while performing the task at hand
(Verdonck, McCormack, and Chard 2011; Palmer, Thursfield,
and Judge 2005), AI assisted employee training (Seo et al.
2021) where the AI agent is expected to gradually reduce assistance to ensure the user is learning the objective. Our work
focuses on addressing this gap by incentivizing the agent to
minimize interventions, while making sure that the humanagent collaboration achieves near-optimal performance. For
many tasks, this objective is quite natural. Interventions are
intuitively a reasonable proxy to capture user experience
because by definition we are optimizing for human control
(since more human actions need to be realized), while also
achieving greater reward than they could have achieved with-

Shared autonomy refers to approaches for enabling an autonomous agent to collaborate with a human with the aim of
improving human performance. However, besides improving
performance, it may often also be beneficial that the agent
concurrently accounts for preserving the user’s experience
or satisfaction of collaboration. In order to address this additional goal, we examine approaches for improving the user
experience by constraining the number of interventions by the
autonomous agent. We propose two model-free reinforcement
learning methods that can account for both hard and soft constraints on the number of interventions. We show that not only
does our method outperform the existing baseline, but also
eliminates the need to manually tune a black-box hyperparameter for controlling the level of assistance. We also provide an
in-depth analysis of intervention scenarios in order to further
illuminate system understanding.

Introduction
Human-AI collaboration forms an integral part of advancing
science in domains where neither advances in independent
AI nor human experts are able to fully realize the solution
to a problem. It has shown promising and practical advances
in deploying synergistic systems to assist humans. With the
assist of these powerful artificial systems, human can perform
more safely and smoothly or even above their own ability
in many complex and challenging tasks, such as aircraft operations (Matni and Oishi 2008), semi-autonomous driving
(de Winter and Dodou 2011), flying drone control (Backman,
Kulić, and Chung 2021), teleoperation (Kofman et al. 2005;
Aarno, Ekvall, and Kragic 2005) and enabling people with
disabilities to enjoy playing video games 1 . A key question
that we further explore is how to balance the control between
a human and the assistive system in order to not only help
the human in achieving a task successfully, but just as criti* Corresponding author
†

These authors contributed equally.
Equal Advising
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Xbox Adaptive Controller: https://www.xbox.com/en-US/
community/for-everyone/accessibility
‡

5341

