The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MIA-Former: Efficient and Robust Vision Transformers via
Multi-Grained Input Adaptation
Zhongzhi Yu1 , Yonggan Fu1 , Sicheng Li2 , Chaojian Li1 , Yingyan Lin1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University 2 Alibaba DAMO Academy

1

Abstract

Introduction

Vision transformers (ViTs) have been proven to be a powerful architecture on various computer vision tasks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021a;
Caron et al. 2021; Strudel et al. 2021), especially when being scaled up with larger model sizes and more training
data (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Steiner et al. 2021; Ridnik
et al. 2021). However, powerful ViTs often come with prohibitive computational overhead. Specifically, (1) the tokens
consisting of merely background information and (2) redundant heads within the multi-head self-attention (MSA) module of ViTs which learn similar features can lead to unnecessary yet non-negligible inference costs. Taking the widely
used DeiT-Small model (Touvron et al. 2021) as an example, running inference on a single image with a resolution of
224 × 224 requires over 4.6 Giga floating-point operations
(GFLOPs), making it challenging to deploy ViTs onto many
real-world resource-constrained devices for supporting intelligent internet of things (IoT) applications. Thus, there is
an urgent need to reduce the computational cost of ViTs.
On the other hand, in real-world applications, the complexity of images can vary significantly. As such, processing all the images with the same model complexity of ViTs
could be overcooked. For example, for most of the time during video surveillance, the video may be just staring at an
empty background, and the corresponding images can be
processed with a naively simple model, saving a large portion of computational cost while still achieving satisfying accuracy. Thus, a straightforward solution for trimming down
ViTs’ complexity is to perform input-adaptive dynamic inference. Although dynamic inference has been extensively
explored for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) through
various dynamic dimensions (e.g., model depth, channel
number, and model bit-width) (Hu et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2018; Shen et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020), only a few pioneering works have considered this aspect for ViTs (Rao
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b), which yet merely focus on
reducing the computational budget by adaptively adjusting
the number of input tokens. However, as suggested in (Zhou
et al. 2021), the similarity between heads and feature maps
can increase significantly in deeper ViT layers, implying that
the token dimension is not the only source of redundancy,
and the unexplored depth and head dimensions could lead to
more efficient ViTs.

Vision transformers (ViTs) have recently demonstrated great
success in various computer vision tasks, motivating a
tremendously increased interest in their deployment into
many real-world IoT applications. However, powerful ViTs
are often too computationally expensive to be fitted onto realworld resource-constrained devices, due to (1) their quadratically increased complexity with the number of input tokens and (2) their overparameterized self-attention heads and
model depth. In parallel, different images are of varying complexity and their different regions can contain various levels
of visual information, e.g., a sky background is not as informative as a foreground object in object classification tasks,
indicating that treating all regions/tokens equally in terms
of model complexity is unnecessary while such opportunities for trimming down ViTs’ complexity have not been fully
explored. To this end, we propose a Multi-grained InputAdaptive Vision TransFormer framework dubbed MIAFormer that can input-adaptively adjust the structure of ViTs
at three coarse-to-fine-grained granularities (i.e., model depth
and the number of model heads/tokens). In particular, our
MIA-Former adopts a low-cost network trained with a hybrid
supervised and reinforcement training method to skip unnecessary layers, heads, and tokens in an input adaptive manner, reducing the overall computational cost. Furthermore,
an interesting side effect of our MIA-Former is that its resulting ViTs are naturally equipped with improved robustness against adversarial attacks over their static counterparts,
because MIA-Former’s multi-grained dynamic control improves the model diversity similar to the effect of ensemble
and thus increases the difficulty of adversarial attacks against
all its sub-models. Extensive experiments and ablation studies validate that the proposed MIA-Former framework can
(1) effectively allocate computation budgets adaptive to the
difficulty of input images, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA)
accuracy-efficiency trade-offs, e.g., 20% computation savings
with the same or even a higher accuracy compared with SOTA
dynamic transformer models, and (2) boost ViTs’ robustness
accuracy under various adversarial attacks over their vanilla
counterparts by 2.4% and 3.0%, respectively. Our code is
available at https://github.com/RICE-EIC/MIA-Former.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8962

