The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

JFB: Jacobian-Free Backpropagation for Implicit Networks
Samy Wu Fung,* 1 Howard Heaton,* 2 Qiuwei Li,3 Daniel McKenzie,4 Stanley Osher,4 Wotao Yin3
1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Colorado School of Mines
2
Typal Research, Typal LLC
3
Alibaba Group (US), Damo Academy
4
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
swufung@mines.edu, research@typal.llc, li.qiuwei@alibaba-inc.com, mckenzie@math.ucla.edu
Abstract

input data

A promising trend in deep learning replaces traditional feedforward networks with implicit networks. Unlike traditional
networks, implicit networks solve a fixed point equation to
compute inferences. Solving for the fixed point varies in
complexity, depending on provided data and an error tolerance. Importantly, implicit networks may be trained with
fixed memory costs in stark contrast to feedforward networks,
whose memory requirements scale linearly with depth. However, there is no free lunch — backpropagation through implicit networks often requires solving a costly Jacobian-based
equation arising from the implicit function theorem. We propose Jacobian-Free Backpropagation (JFB), a fixed-memory
approach that circumvents the need to solve Jacobian-based
equations. JFB makes implicit networks faster to train and
significantly easier to implement, without sacrificing test accuracy. Our experiments show implicit networks trained with
JFB are competitive with feedforward networks and prior implicit networks given the same number of parameters.

QΘ

d

u

QΘ

SΘ

y

SΘ
RΘ

u?d

uk
loop until
convergence

latent variable
feedforward network
implicit network

Figure 1: Feedforward networks act by computing SΘ ◦ QΘ .
Implicit networks add a fixed point condition using RΘ .
When RΘ is contractive (more generally: averaged) repeatedly applying RΘ to update a latent variable uk converges
to a fixed point u? = RΘ (u? ; QΘ (d)).
which is illustrated by the red arrows in Figure 1. One can
allow for computation in the latent space U by introducing a
self-map RΘ (·; QΘ (d)) and the iteration

Introduction
A new direction has emerged from explicit to implicit neural networks (Winston and Kolter 2020; Bai, Kolter, and
Koltun 2019; Bai, Koltun, and Kolter 2020; Chen et al. 2018;
Ghaoui et al. 2019; Dupont, Doucet, and Teh 2019; Jeon,
Lee, and Choi 2021; Zhang et al. 2020; Lawrence et al. 2020;
Revay and Manchester 2020; Look et al. 2020; Gould, Hartley, and Campbell 2019). In the standard feedforward setting, a network prescribes a series of computations that map
input data d to an inference y. Networks can also explicitly leverage the assumption that high dimensional signals
typically admit low dimensional representations in some latent space (Van der Maaten and Hinton 2008; Osher, Shi,
and Zhu 2017; Peyré 2009; Elad, Figueiredo, and Ma 2010;
Udell and Townsend 2019). This may be done by designing
the network to first map data to a latent space via a mapping
QΘ and then apply a second mapping SΘ to map the latent
variable to the inference. Thus, a traditional feedforward EΘ
may take the compositional form
EΘ (d) = SΘ (QΘ (d)),

latent variable output inference

uk+1 = RΘ (uk ; QΘ (d)).

(2)

Iterating k times may be viewed as a weight-tied, inputinjected network, where each feedforward step applies RΘ
(Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2019). As k → ∞, i.e. the latent space portion becomes deeper, the limit of (2) yields a
fixed point equation. Implicit networks capture this “infinite
depth” behaviour by using RΘ (· ; QΘ (d)) to define a fixed
point condition rather than an explicit computation:
NΘ (d) , SΘ (u?d ) where u?d = RΘ (u?d , QΘ (d)),

(3)

as shown by blue in Figure 1. Special cases of the network
in (3) recover architectures introduced in prior works:
B Taking SΘ to be the identity recovers the well-known
Deep Equilibrium Model (DEQ) (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun
2019; Bai, Koltun, and Kolter 2020).
B Choosing SΘ as the identity, QΘ to be an affine map and
RΘ (u, QΘ (d)) = σ(W u+QΘ (d)) yields Monotone Operator Networks (Winston and Kolter 2020) as long as W
and σ satisfy additional conditions. Allowing SΘ to be
linear yields the model proposed in (Ghaoui et al. 2019).

(1)

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6648

