The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

KID-Review: Knowledge-Guided Scientific Review Generation with Oracle
ELMo
Pre-training
Weizhe Yuan, Pengfei Liu

use
d-fo

e
par

com

BERT

used-for

r

NER

for
d
teLanguage Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, -for
Pittsburgh,QAPA, val
USA
ua
e
use

{weizhey, pliu3}@cs.cmu.edu

F1

(a) Temporary knowledge — concept graph.

Abstract
The surge in the number of scientific submissions has brought
challenges to the work of peer review. In this paper, as a
first step, we explore the possibility of designing an automated system, which is not meant to replace humans, but
rather provide a first-pass draft for a machine-assisted human review process. Specifically, we present an end-to-end
knowledge-guided review generation framework for scientific
papers grounded in cognitive psychology research that a better
understanding of text requires different types of knowledge. In
practice, we found that this seemingly intuitive idea suffered
from training difficulties. In order to solve this problem, we
put forward an oracle pre-training strategy, which can not
only make the K ID -R EVIEW better educated but also make
the generated review cover more aspects. Experimentally, we
perform a comprehensive evaluation (human and automatic)
from different perspectives. Empirical results have shown the
effectiveness of different types of knowledge as well as oracle
pre-training. We make all code, relevant datasets available:
https://github.com/yyy-Apple/KIDReview as well as the K ID R EVIEW system: http://nlpeer.reviews.

(b) General
world
knowledge
— citation
graph.
(a) World
knowledge
– citation
graph
ELMo

use
d-fo

are

p

com

BERT
use

d-f
or

r

used-for
QA

NER

for
te-

a
alu
ev

F1

(b)Temporary
Temporaryknowledge
knowledge—
– concept
(a)
concept graph
graph.

Figure 1: Two types of knowledge: citation graph and concept
graph. Squares represent concepts, circles represent papers.

Introduction
The rapid growth of research publication not only requires
scientists to devote more time to the literature review (Luu
et al. 2020; Jha, Abu-Jbara, and Radev 2013; Mohammad
et al. 2009; Xing, Fan, and Wan 2020), but brings difficulties
to peer review (Yuan, Liu, and Neubig 2021). To address this
problem, a small handful of works make a preliminary exploration towards automatic scientific review generation. Wang
et al. (2020) perform template-based comment generation
for each fine-grained aspect. Yuan, Liu, and Neubig (2021)
first answer what the desiderata of a good automatic reviewing system are, and then design an end-to-end auto-review
system using current state-of-the-art summarization models.
Despite making a good first step, it is still far from a wellqualified automated reviewing system that can match a human reviewer (Yuan, Liu, and Neubig 2021). Inspired by
research in the context of cognitive psychology (Kintsch
and Walter Kintsch 1998; Kamide, Altmann, and Haywood
2003; Mumper 2013; Chen et al. 2018), that human comprehend text from (i) general world knowledge (long-term
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11639

memory) (ii) temporary knowledge (working memory). We
claim that a better understanding of scientific papers also
General
knowledge
— citation
requires (b)
these
two world
types of
knowledge
and graph.
operationalize
this idea by proposing a knowledge-guided framework for
scientific review generation (K ID -R EVIEW).
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, knowledge is incorporated
by using diverse graphs, where concept graph carries the
information of entities (e.g., method) associated with their
relations (e.g., a method is used for a task) for a given
paper. By contrast, citation graph expresses the whole citation topology within a specific domain. Architecturally, we
propose an end-to-end framework where a citation graph is
first encoded using a large-scale node representation learning algorithm (Tang et al. 2015) and incorporated with the
paper content itself. Then we use Graph Neural Networks
(Veličković et al. 2017) to represent entities and their interactions within a paper to guide the review generation process.
Practically, to make K ID -R EVIEW better educated from
training data, we propose an oracle pre-training strategy. The
basic idea is that instead of directly training K ID -R EVIEW
with the whole content of a paper as input, we pre-train it
by feeding oracle texts (Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2017),
which are sentences from the paper that achieve large lexical

