The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SCALoss: Side and Corner Aligned Loss for Bounding Box Regression
Tu Zheng1,2 , Shuai Zhao1 , Yang Liu1 , Zili Liu1,2 , Deng Cai1,2 *
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, China
2
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
{zhengtuzju,zhaoshuaimcc,zililiuzju}@gmail.com, {lyng 95, dcai}@zju.edu.cn

Bounding box regression is an important component in object detection. Recent work achieves promising performance
by optimizing the Intersection over Union (IoU). However,
IoU-based loss has the gradient vanish problem in the case of
low overlapping bounding boxes, and the model could easily ignore these simple cases. In this paper, we propose Side
Overlap (SO) loss by maximizing the side overlap of two
bounding boxes, which puts more penalty for low overlapping bounding box cases. Besides, to speed up the convergence, the Corner Distance (CD) is added into the objective
function. Combining the Side Overlap and Corner Distance,
we get a new regression objective function, Side and Corner
Align Loss (SCALoss). The SCALoss is well-correlated with
IoU loss, which also benefits the evaluation metric but produces more penalty for low-overlapping cases. It can serve
as a comprehensive similarity measure, leading to better localization performance and faster convergence speed. Experiments on COCO, PASCAL VOC, and LVIS benchmarks
show that SCALoss can bring consistent improvement and
outperform `n loss and IoU based loss with popular object detectors such as YOLOV3, SSD, Faster-RCNN. Code is available at: https://github.com/Turoad/SCALoss.

3.0

1.0

2.5

0.8

2.0

SCA
SO
GIoU
DIoU
IoU

1.5
1.0

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

IoU

IoU w.r.t. GT

Gradient magnitude

Abstract

0.6
0.4
0.2

IoU+CornerAlign
IoU+CenterAlign
0

200 400 600 800 100012001400

Iteration

Figure 1: (left) The relationship between gradient magnitude
and IoU. Gradient magnitude is the mean of || ∂L
∂x ||2 in different IoU intervals, where IoU interval = {[0., 0.1], [0.1, 0.2],
..., [0.9, 1.0]}, x = (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 ) is the bounding box corner point. The gradient of LIoU significantly drops in low
overlapping cases, but LSO , LSCA still have a large gradient. All results are calculated with 1000k random boxes.
(right) A comparison between center alignment and corner
alignment. The loss weight of corner alignment is 0.5x as
center alignment. Detail settings can be found in the Approach section.

2016) is proposed to directly optimize the evaluation metric.
However, IoU is infeasible to optimize in the case of nonoverlapping bounding boxes. Then Generalized IoU (GIoU)
loss (Rezatofighi et al. 2019) addresses this weakness by introducing a generalized version as the new loss. After that,
Distance IoU (DIoU) loss (Zheng et al. 2019) adds the normalized center distance between the predicted box and the
target box, which helps converge faster than GIoU loss. Although the IoU-based loss can achieve more accurate result
than `n loss, they still have several limitations as shown in
Fig. 1. Below, we describe these issues in turn:
1) Gradient vanish problem: IoU-based methods (IoU,
GIoU, DIoU) improve baseline for high overlapping metric like AP75, but have relatively inferior performance in
AP50. We further investigate this phenomenon and notice
that IoU loss will lead to gradient vanish problem for nonoverlapping cases and produce small gradient for low overlapping cases. In Fig. 1 (left), we visualize the relationship
between gradient magnitude and IoU for different loss functions. It shows that lower IoU cases will have relatively
smaller gradient value. During the training process, the small

Introduction
Object detection has been improved rapidly with the development of advanced deep convolutional neural networks.
A series of state-of-the-art CNN-based detectors emerge
in recent years, such as Faster R-CNN (Ren et al. 2015),
SSD (Liu et al. 2016), YOLOV3 (Redmon and Farhadi
2018), Reppoints (Yang et al. 2019), and etc. Generally, object detection consists of object classification and
object localization. Current state-of-the-art object detectors (e.g. Faster-RCNN, Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017),
RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2017)) have shown the importance of
bounding box regression in object detection pipeline. In this
paper, we focus on the problem of object localization.
Intersection over Union (IoU) is the most popular evaluation metric for bounding box regression. In the existing
methods, `n loss is the widely used loss, but it is not tailored to the evaluation metric (IoU). Thus, IoU loss (Yu et al.
* Deng Cai is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3535

