The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Coordinating Momenta for Cross-Silo Federated Learning
An Xu, Heng Huang*
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
an.xu@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

unstable conditions and slower network links due to the
geo-distribution. Typically, (Bonawitz et al. 2019) showed
that one communication round in FL could take about 2
to 3 minutes in practice. To address the communication inefficiency, the de facto standard method FedAvg was proposed in (McMahan et al. 2017). In FedAvg, the server sends
clients the server model. Each client conducts many local
training steps with its local data and sends back the updated
model to the server. The server then averages the models received from clients and finishes one round of training. The
increased local training steps can reduce the communication
rounds and cost. Here we also refer to the idea of FedAvg
as periodic averaging, which is closely related to local SGD
(Stich 2018; Yu, Jin, and Yang 2019). Another parallel line
of works is to compress the communication to reduce the
volume of the message (Rothchild et al. 2020; Karimireddy
et al. 2019; Gao, Xu, and Huang 2021; Xu, Huo, and Huang
2021, 2020a,b). In this paper, we do not focus on communication compression.
Although periodic averaging methods such as FedAvg
greatly improve the training efficiency in FL, a new problem named client drift arises. The data distributions of different clients are non-i.i.d. because we cannot gather and
randomly shuffle the client data as data-center distributed
training does. Therefore, the stochastic gradient computed
at different clients can be highly skewed. Given that we do
many local training steps in each training round, skewed gradients will cause local model updating directions to gradually diverge and overfit local data at different clients. This
client drift issue can deteriorate the performance of FedAvg
drastically (Hsieh et al. 2020; Hsu, Qi, and Brown 2019),
especially with a low similarity of the data distribution on
different clients and a large number of local training steps.
As a method to reduce variance and smooth the model
updating direction (Cutkosky and Orabona 2019) to accelerate optimization, momentum SGD has shown its power
in training many deep learning models in various tasks
(Sutskever et al. 2013). Local momentum SGD (Yu, Jin,
and Yang 2019) (i.e., FedAvgLM) maintains momentum for
the stochastic gradient in each training step but requires averaging local momentum buffer at the end of each training round. Therefore, FedAvgLM requires ×2 communication cost compared with FedAvg. One strategy to achieve
the same communication cost as FedAvg is resetting the

Communication efficiency is crucial for federated learning
(FL). Conducting local training steps in clients to reduce the
communication frequency between clients and the server is a
common method to address this issue. However, this strategy
leads to the client drift problem due to non-i.i.d. data distributions in different clients which severely deteriorates the performance. In this work, we propose a new method to improve
the training performance in cross-silo FL via maintaining
double momentum buffers. In our algorithm, one momentum
buffer is used to track the server model updating direction,
and the other one is adopted to track the local model updating
direction. More important, we introduce a novel momentum
fusion technique to coordinate the server and local momentum buffers. We also derive the first theoretical convergence
analysis involving both the server and local standard momentum SGD. Extensive deep FL experimental results verify that
our new approach has a better training performance than the
FedAvg and existing standard momentum SGD variants.

Introduction
With deep learning models becoming prevalent but datahungry, data privacy emerges as an important issue. Federated learning (FL) (Konečnỳ et al. 2016) was thus introduced to leverage the massive data from different clients
for training models without directly sharing nor aggregating data. More recently, an increasing number of FL techniques focus on addressing the cross-silo FL (Kairouz et al.
2019; Gu et al. 2021) problem, which has more and more
real-world applications, such as the collaborative learning
on health data across multiple medical centers (Liu et al.
2021; Guo et al. 2021) or financial data across different corporations and stakeholders. During the training, the server
only communicates the model weights and updates with the
participating clients.
However, the deep learning models require many training iterations to converge. Unlike workers in data-center
distributed training with large network bandwidth and relatively low communication delay, the clients participating in
the collaborative FL system are often faced with much more
* This work was supported by NSF IIS 1845666, 1852606,
1838627, 1837956, 1956002, IIA 2040588.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8735

