The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Defending against Model Stealing via Verifying Embedded External Features
Yiming Li1, * , Linghui Zhu1,2,∗ , Xiaojun Jia3 , Yong Jiang1,2 , Shu-Tao Xia1,2,† , Xiaochun Cao3
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
li-ym18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Obtaining a well-trained model involves expensive data collection and training procedures, therefore the model is a valuable intellectual property. Recent studies revealed that adversaries can ‘steal’ deployed models even when they have no
training samples and can not get access to the model parameters or structures. Currently, there were some defense methods to alleviate this threat, mostly by increasing the cost of
model stealing. In this paper, we explore the defense from
another angle by verifying whether a suspicious model contains the knowledge of defender-specified external features.
Specifically, we embed the external features by tempering
a few training samples with style transfer. We then train a
meta-classifier to determine whether a model is stolen from
the victim. This approach is inspired by the understanding
that the stolen models should contain the knowledge of features learned by the victim model. We examine our method on
both CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method is effective in detecting different types of model stealing simultaneously, even if the stolen
model is obtained via a multi-stage stealing process. The
codes for reproducing main results are available at Github
(https://github.com/zlh-thu/StealingVerification).

Private Images

Images After Style Transfer

Suspicious Model

Suspicious Model

Meta-classifier

Meta-classifier

Stolen / Benign

Stolen / Benign

Figure 1: The verification stage of dataset inference and our
method. Specifically, dataset inference adopts inherent features contained in benign private images while our method
utilizes external features embedded in stylized images.

is called model stealing. Since the model stealing can obtain a function-similar copy of the victim model stealthily, it
poses a huge threat to model owners.
To alleviate the threat of model stealing, there were also
some defense methods, mostly by introducing randomness
or perturbation in the victim models to increase the costs
of model stealing (Tramèr et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2019;
Kariyappa and Qureshi 2020). For instance, defenders may
perturb the prediction by rounding or adding noise to the
posterior probabilities. However, these defenses may significantly reduce the performance of legitimate users and could
even be bypassed by following adaptive attacks (Jia et al.
2021; Maini, Yaghini, and Papernot 2021).
In this paper, we explore the defense of model stealing
from another perspective by verifying whether a suspicious
model has defender-specified behaviors. If the model has
such behaviors, we treat it as stolen from the victim. This
approach is inspired by the understanding that the stolen
models should contain the knowledge of features learned by
the victim model and therefore they have similar behaviors.
To the best of our knowledge, there is only one work, i.e.,
dataset inference (Maini, Yaghini, and Papernot 2021), focusing on this perspective, where they adopted inherent features of the training set to verify model ownership. However,
we reveal that this approach is easy to make misjudgments,
especially when the training set of suspicious models have a
similar distribution to that of the victim model. The misjudg-

Introduction
Deep learning, especially deep neural networks (DNNs),
has demonstrated its great power in many applications (Guo
et al. 2020; Stokes et al. 2020; Minaee et al. 2021). In general, training a well-performed model requires a large number of training samples and a massive amount of computational resources. Both data collection and training process
are expensive and time-consuming, which makes the trained
model a valuable intellectual property to its owner.
Recently, researchers found that adversaries can ‘steal’
the (deployed) victim model even when they have no training samples and can not get access to the model parameters
or structures (Tramèr et al. 2016; Orekondy, Schiele, and
Fritz 2019; Chandrasekaran et al. 2020). For example, the
adversaries may use the victim model to label an unlabeled
dataset, based on which to train the stolen model. This threat
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding Author: Shu-Tao Xia
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1464

