The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Algorithmic Introduction to Savings Circles
Rediet Abebe1 , Adam Eck2 , Christian Ikeokwu1 , Samuel Taggart2
1

University of California, Berkeley
2
Oberlin College

Abstract

Cameroon’s national savings. Likewise, over one in six
households in Ethiopia’s highlands participate in ekub, the
region’s variant of roscas Bouman (1995a). Due to their ability to provide quick, targeted support within communities,
roscas and other mutual aid organizations often play an instrumental role when communities experience shocks and
disasters (Chevée 2021; Mesch et al. 2020; Travlou 2020).
Roscas are well-studied in the economics literature, with
economic theory on the subject pioneered by Besley, Coate,
and Loury (1993); Kovsted and Lyk-Jensen (1999); Kuo
(1993) (see supplement for further related works). This line
of work seeks to explain how roscas act as insurance, savings, and lending among members. While such studies have
deepened our understanding of roscas, they are typically
constrained in two main ways. First, the standard economic
approach solves exactly for equilibria, which can be especially difficult due to the dynamic nature of roscas. Second, much of the existing theory focuses on coarse-grained
comparisons between the welfare of roscas and other mechanisms for allocating credit. In part due to these coarse
comparisons, this work often concludes that roscas allocate
credit suboptimally, leaving open the question of why roscas
are prevalent in practice.
In this work, we initiate an algorithmic study of roscas.
Viewing roscas through the lens of approximation and using
techniques from the price of anarchy literature, we study the
welfare properties of rosca outcomes without directly solving for them. We specifically quantify the allocative efficacy
of roscas: how well do roscas coordinate saving and lending
among participants with heterogeneous investment opportunities? We show roscas enable a group’s lending and borrowing in a way that approximately maximizes the groups’ total
utility. We do so under a wide range of assumptions on both
participants’ values for investment and the mechanisms used
for allocating the pots. This robustness may provide one explanation for their prevalence.
Our work builds on the saving and lending formulation
of Besley, Coate, and Loury (1994). We assume each participant seeks to purchase an investment, such as a durable
good, but can only do so upon winning the rosca’s pot.
We analyze the welfare properties of typical pot allocation
mechanisms, such as “swap roscas,” where the participants
are given an initial (e.g. random) allocation and then swap
positions in an after-market through bilateral trade agree-

Rotating savings and credit associations (roscas) are informal
financial organizations common in settings where communities have reduced access to formal financial institutions. In a
rosca, a fixed group of participants regularly contribute sums
of money to a pot. This pot is then allocated periodically using lottery, aftermarket, or auction mechanisms. Roscas are
empirically well-studied in economics. They are, however,
challenging to study theoretically due to their dynamic nature. Typical economic analyses of roscas stop at coarse ordinal welfare comparisons to other credit allocation mechanisms, leaving much of roscas’ ubiquity unexplained. In this
work, we take an algorithmic perspective on the study of
roscas. Building on techniques from the price of anarchy literature, we present worst-case welfare approximation guarantees. We further experimentally compare the welfare of outcomes as key features of the environment vary. These cardinal
welfare analyses further rationalize the prevalence of roscas.
We conclude by discussing several other promising avenues.

1

Introduction

Rotating saving and credit associations (roscas) are financial
institutions common in low- and middle-income nations, as
well as immigrant and refugee populations around the world.
In a rosca, a group of individuals meet regularly for a defined
period of time. At each meeting, members contribute a sum
of money into a pot, which is then allocated via some mechanism, such as a lottery or an auction. Recipients often use
this money to purchase durable goods (e.g., farming equipment, appliances, and vehicles), to buffer shocks (e.g. an unexpected medical expense), or to pay off loans. Roscas often
exist outside of legal frameworks and do not typically have a
central authority to resolve disputes or enforce compliance.
Instead, they provide a decentralized mechanism for peerto-peer lending, where members who receive the pot earlier
borrow from those who receive it later. They also create a
structure for mutual support and community empowerment.
Roscas are used in over 85 countries and are especially prevalent in contexts where communities have reduced access to formal financial institutions (Aredo 2004;
Bouman 1995a; Klonner 2002; La Ferrara 2002; Raccanello
and Anand 2009). Roscas account for about one-half of
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4744

