The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Computing Diverse Shortest Paths Efficiently:
A Theoretical and Experimental Study
Tesshu Hanaka1 , Yasuaki Kobayashi2 , Kazuhiro Kurita3 , See Woo Lee4 , Yota Otachi5
1

Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
3
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
4
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
5
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
hanaka@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp, koba@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, kurita@nii.ac.jp, slee06@iip.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, otachi@nagoya-u.jp
2

to achieve the solution multiplicity is the k-best enumeration (Hamacher and Queyranne 1985; Eppstein 2016)
(also known as top-k enumeration). The k-best enumeration version of an algorithm finds k feasible solutions S =
{S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk } such that no feasible solution outside S is
strictly better than that inside S. This approach allows us to
choose the best-suited solution amongst k sufficiently good
feasible solutions, in a given real-life situation. There are
many k-best enumeration algorithms for various optimization problems. See (Hamacher and Queyranne 1985; Eppstein 2016) for surveys.

Abstract
Finding diverse solutions in combinatorial problems recently
has received considerable attention (Baste et al. 2020; Fomin
et al. 2020; Hanaka et al. 2021). In this paper we study the
following type of problems: given an integer k, the problem
asks for k solutions such that the sum of pairwise (weighted)
Hamming distances between these solutions is maximized.
Such solutions are called diverse solutions. We present a
polynomial-time algorithm for finding diverse shortest stpaths in weighted directed graphs. Moreover, we study the diverse version of other classical combinatorial problems such
as diverse weighted matroid bases, diverse weighted arborescences, and diverse bipartite matchings. We show that these
problems can be solved in polynomial time as well. To evaluate the practical performance of our algorithm for finding
diverse shortest st-paths, we conduct a computational experiment with synthetic and real-world instances. The experiment
shows that our algorithm successfully computes diverse solutions within reasonable computational time.

One potential drawback of the k-best enumeration approach is the lack of diversity of solutions. Most of
k-best enumeration algorithms, such as Lawler’s framework (Lawler 1972), recursively generate solutions from a
single optimal solution X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xt } by finding a
solution including {x1 , . . . , xi−1 } and excluding xi for each
1 ≤ i ≤ t. This implies that solutions tend to be similar to
each other in nature (Akgün, Erkut, and Batta 2000), which
may potentially defeat the purpose of finding multiple solutions.

Introduction
When solving a real-world problem, we usually interpret it
as an instance of a mathematical optimization problem. We
then seek a single best solution that optimizes a given objective function while satisfying the set of constraints. Unfortunately, the single solution obtained this way may be inadequate for practical usage, since real-life intricacies (side
constraints) are oversimplified or even ignored in the optimization problem for the sake of computational feasibility.
To illustrate, consider the task of finding a fastest route
between location s and t, which may seem like an obvious
instance of the shortest st-path problem in graphs. However,
numerous important real-life considerations – such as traffic
congestion, constructions, or availabilities of petrol stations
in the route, to name a few – cannot be factored into the
graph data structure on which Dijkstra’s or Bellman-Ford’s
algorithms are run. Furthermore, real-life constraints are often “...aesthetic, political, or environmental” in nature (Baste
et al. 2020); such qualitative characteristics are difficult or
downright impossible to express mathematically.
In light of this issue, the multiplicity of the solutions
has gained attention. One of the best known approaches

Motivated by this, (explicitly) optimizing diversity of solutions has received considerable attention in the literature.
There are many results for finding diverse solutions for Constrained Satisfaction Problems or Mixed Integer Programming (Danna and Woodruff 2009; Hebrard et al. 2005; Nadel
2011; Petit and Trapp 2015, 2019) and diversifying query results (Drosou and Pitoura 2010; Liu et al. 2018; Qin, Yu, and
Chang 2012; Vieira et al. 2011). According to Baste et al.
(2019), Michael Fellows proposed the Diverse X Paradigm,
where X is a placeholder for an optimization problem, and
to investigate these problems from the theoretical perspective, particularly fixed-parameter tractability. Based on this
proposal, they initiated a theoretical study of the Diverse
X Paradigm and gave several results through the lens of
fixed-parameter tractability. In particular, they showed that
several diverse versions of combinatorial problems, such
as V ERTEX C OVER, F EEDBACK V ERTEX S ET, and dH ITTING S ET, are fixed-parameter tractable parameterized
by the solution size plus the number of solutions (Baste et al.
2019). Their follow-up research also discussed the fixedparameter tractability of diverse versions of several combinatorial problems on bounded-treewidth graphs (Baste et al.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3758

