The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Backprop-Free Reinforcement Learning with Active Neural Generative Coding
Alexander G. Ororbia1 , Ankur Mali2
1
2

Rochester Institute of Technology
The Pennsylvania State University
ago@cs.rit.edu, aam35@psu.edu

Abstract

teracting with their world, adjusting the internal states of this
model to account for the evidence that they acquire from
their environment. This scheme unifies perception, action,
and learning in adaptive systems by framing them as processes that result from approximate Bayesian inference, elegantly tackling the exploration-exploitation trade-off inherent to organism survival. The emergence of this framework
is timely – in reinforcement learning (RL) research, despite
the recent successes afforded by artificial neural networks
(ANNs) (Mnih et al. 2013; Silver et al. 2018), most models
require exorbitant quantities of data to train well, struggling
to learn tasks as efficiently as humans and animals (Arulkumaran et al. 2017). As a result, a key challenge is how to
design RL methods that successfully resolve environmental
uncertainty and complexity given limited resources and data.
Model-based RL, explored in statistical learning research
through world (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018) or dynamics
models (Sutton 1990), offers a promising means of tackling this challenge and active inference provides a promising
path towards instantiating it in a powerful yet neurocognitively meaningful way (Tschantz et al. 2020b).

In humans, perceptual awareness facilitates the fast recognition and extraction of information from sensory input. This
awareness largely depends on how the human agent interacts
with the environment. In this work, we propose active neural
generative coding, a computational framework for learning
action-driven generative models without backpropagation of
errors (backprop) in dynamic environments. Specifically, we
develop an intelligent agent that operates even with sparse rewards, drawing inspiration from the cognitive theory of planning as inference. We demonstrate on several simple control
problems that our framework performs competitively with
deep Q-learning. The robust performance of our agent offers
promising evidence that a backprop-free approach for neural
inference and learning can drive goal-directed behavior.

Introduction
Manipulating one’s environment in the effort to understand
it is an essential ingredient of learning in humans (Spielberger and Starr 1994; Berlyne 1966). In cognitive neuroscience, behavioral and neurobiological evidence indicates a
distinction between goal-directed and habitual action selection in reward-based decision-making. With respect to habitual action selection, or actions taken based on situationresponse associations, ample evidence exists to support the
temporal-difference (TD) account from reinforcement learning. In this account, the neurotransmitter dopamine creates
an error signal based on reward prediction to drive (state) updates in the corpus striatum, a particular neuronal region in
the basal ganglia that affects an agent’s choice of action. In
contrast, goal-directed action requires prospective planning
where actions are taken based on predictions of their future
potential outcomes (Niv 2009; Solway and Botvinick 2012).
Planning-as-inference (PAI) (Botvinick and Toussaint 2012)
attempts to account for goal-directed behavior by casting it
as a problem of probabilistic inference where an agent manipulates an internal model that estimates the probability of
potential action-outcome-reward sequences.
One important, emerging theoretical framework for PAI is
that of active inference (Friston, Mattout, and Kilner 2011;
Tschantz, Seth, and Buckley 2020), which posits that biological agents learn a probabilistic generative model by in-

Although PAI and active inference offer an excellent story
for biological system behavior and a promising model-based
RL setup, most computational implementations are formulated with explainability in mind (favoring meaningfully labeled albeit low-dimensional, discrete state/action spaces)
yet in the form of complex probabilistic graphical models
that do not scale easily (Friston et al. 2015, 2017a,b, 2018).
In response, effort has been made to scale active inference by
using deep ANNs (Ueltzhöffer 2018; Tschantz et al. 2020a)
trained by the popular backpropagation of errors (backprop)
(Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986). While ANNs represent a powerful step in the right direction, one common
criticism of using them within the normative framework
of RL is that they have little biological relevance despite
their conceptual value (Lake et al. 2017; Zador 2019). Importantly, from a practical point-of-view, they also suffer
from practical issues related to their backprop-centric design (Ororbia and Mali 2019). This raises the question: can a
biologically-motivated alternative to backprop-based ANNs
also facilitate reinforcement learning through active inference in a scalable way? In this paper, motivated by the fact
that animals and humans solve the RL problem, we develop
one alternative that positively answers this question. As a re-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

29

