The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Task Knowledge Distillation in Multi-Task Recommendation
Chenxiao Yang1 , Junwei Pan2 , Xiaofeng Gao1 , Tingyu Jiang2 , Dapeng Liu2 , Guihai Chen1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tencent Inc.
chr26195@sjtu.edu.com, jonaspan@tencent.com, gao-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, travisjiang@tencent.com, rocliu@tencent.com,
gchen@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

binary ground-truth label (1 or 0), attempting to rank positive items above negative ones. However, using such binary
labels as training signals, the task may fail to accurately capture user’s preference for items with the same label, despite
that learning the auxiliary knowledge about these items’ relations may benefit the overall ranking performance.
To address this limitation, we observe that the predictions
of other tasks may contain useful information about how to
rank same-labeled items. For example, given two tasks predicting ‘Buy’ and ‘Like’, and two items labeled as ‘Buy:0,
Like:1’ and ‘Buy:0, Like:0’, the task ‘Buy’ may not accurately distinguish their relative ranking since both of their
labels are 0. In contrast, another task ‘Like’ will identity the
former item as positive with larger probability (e.g. 0.7), the
latter with smaller probability (e.g. 0.1). Based on the fact
that a user is more likely to purchase the item she likes 1 ,
we could somehow take advantage of these predictions from
other tasks as a means to transfer ranking knowledge.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015) is a teacher-student learning framework where the student is trained using the predictions of the teacher. As revealed by theoretical analysis in previous studies (Tang et al.
2020b; Phuong and Lampert 2019), the predictions of the
teacher, also known as soft labels, are usually seen as more
informative training signals than binary hard labels, since
they could reflect ‘whether the sample is true positive (negative)’. On the perspective of backward gradient, KD can
adaptively re-scale student model’s training dynamics based
on the values of soft labels. Specially, in the above example,
we could incorporate predictions 0.7 and 0.1 in the training signals for task ‘Buy’. Consequently, the gradients w.r.t
the sample labeled ‘Buy:0 & Like:0’ in the example will
be larger, indicating it is a more confident negative sample.
Through this process, the task ‘Buy’ could hopefully give
accurate rankings of same-labeled items. Motivated by these
above observations, we proceed to design a new knowledge
transfer paradigm on the optimization level of MTL models
by leveraging KD. It is non-trivial due to three critical and
fundamental challenges:

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) has been widely used in recommender systems, wherein predicting each type of user feedback on items (e.g, click, purchase) are treated as individual
tasks and jointly trained with a unified model. Our key observation is that the prediction results of each task may contain task-specific knowledge about user’s fine-grained preference towards items. While such knowledge could be transferred to benefit other tasks, it is being overlooked under
the current MTL paradigm. This paper, instead, proposes a
Cross-Task Knowledge Distillation framework that attempts
to leverage prediction results of one task as supervised signals to teach another task. However, integrating MTL and KD
in a proper manner is non-trivial due to several challenges
including task conflicts, inconsistent magnitude and requirement of synchronous optimization. As countermeasures, we
1) introduce auxiliary tasks with quadruplet loss functions to
capture cross-task fine-grained ranking information and avoid
task conflicts, 2) design a calibrated distillation approach to
align and distill knowledge from auxiliary tasks, and 3) propose a novel error correction mechanism to enable and facilitate synchronous training of teacher and student models.
Comprehensive experiments are conducted to verify the effectiveness of our framework in real-world datasets.

Introduction
Online recommender systems often involve predicting various types of user feedback such as clicking and purchasing.
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997) has emerged in
this context as a powerful tool to explore the connection of
tasks for improving user interest modeling (Ma et al. 2018b;
Lu, Dong, and Smyth 2018; Wang et al. 2018).
Common MTL models consist of low-level shared network and several high-level individual networks, as shown
in Fig. 1(a), in the hope that the shared network could transfer the knowledge about “how to encode the input features”
by sharing or enforcing similarity on parameters of different
tasks (Ruder 2017). Most prior works (Ma et al. 2018a; Tang
et al. 2020a; Ma et al. 2019) put efforts on designing different shared network architectures with ad-hoc parametersharing mechanisms such as branching and gating. In these
models, each task is trained under the supervision of its own

• How to address the task conflict problem during distillation? Not all knowledge from other tasks is use1
The same applies to other types of user feedback, e.g., click,
collect, forward.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4318

