The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Large DAGs by Combining Continuous Optimization and Feedback Arc
Set Heuristics
Pierre Gillot, Pekka Parviainen
University of Bergen
HIB - Thormøhlens gate 55
Postboks 7803 5020 Bergen
Pierre.Gillot@uib.no, Pekka.Parviainen@uib.no
Abstract

up to few hundred nodes (Cussens 2011) and scalable algorithms for SEMs rely on approaches such as local modifications (Aragam, Gu, and Zhou 2019). A recent breakthrough,
NOTEARS (Zheng et al. 2018) circumvents the combinatorial problem by formulating a continuous acyclicity constraint. This enables usage of gradient-based optimization
methods. The bottleneck with respect to scalability lies in
the cubic complexity for the calculation of the acyclicity
function which involves the computation of a matrix exponential. GOLEM (Ng, Ghassami, and Zhang 2020) is similar
to NOTEARS but replaces the generalized LASSO objective
found in NOTEARS by a log-likelihood-based fitness function. It shares however the same computational bottleneck as
NOTEARS due to the acyclicity constraint. Some methods
circumvent this bottleneck by finding a sparse graph without
the acyclicity constraint and impose acyclicity afterwards
(Varando 2020; Yu and Gao 2020).
Our goal is to develop a fast heuristic for learning DAGs in
the linear SEM setting. In other words, we trade accuracy for
speed. We speed-up learning by decoupling the optimization
of the objective function from the acyclicity constraint in a
similar fashion as (Park and Klabjan 2017)1 . At a general
level, we learn by iteratively repeating the following steps:

Bayesian networks represent relations between variables using
a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Learning the DAG is an NPhard problem and exact learning algorithms are feasible only
for small sets of variables. We propose two scalable heuristics
for learning DAGs in the linear structural equation case. Our
methods learn the DAG by alternating between unconstrained
gradient descent-based step to optimize an objective function
and solving a maximum acyclic subgraph problem to enforce
acyclicity. Thanks to this decoupling, our methods scale up
beyond thousands of variables.

Introduction
Bayesian networks are probabilistic graphical models that
represent joint distributions among random variables. They
consist of a structure which is a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
representing conditional independencies and parameters that
specify local conditional distributions.
Bayesian networks can handle both discrete and continuous variables. In this work, we concentrate on continuous
variables. Specifically, we study linear structural equation
models (SEMs) where the local conditional distribution in a
node is a Gaussian whose mean is a linear combination of
the values of its parents.
Traditionally, there are two main approaches for learning
DAGs. In constraint-based approach (see, e.g., (Pearl 2000;
Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000)), one performs conditional independence tests and tries to construct a DAG that
expresses the same conditional independencies as the test
results. We take the score-based approach (see, e.g., (Cooper
and Herskovits 1992; Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering
1995)) where one tries to find a DAG that maximizes a score.
Typically, one uses decomposable scores, that is, the score of
a DAG is a sum of local scores for each node-parent set pair.
This leads to a combinatorial optimization problem where
one picks a parent set for each node while satisfying the
constraint that the resulting graph is acyclic.
The combinatorial learning problem is NP-hard (Chickering 1996) and developing scalable methods is challenging.
Indeed, state-of-the-art exact learning methods scale only

1. Given an acyclic graph, find a graph (possibly cyclic)
which is better in terms of the objective function value.
2. Given a cyclic graph, find an acyclic graph.
The first step can be solved efficiently using state-of-the-art
gradient-based solvers. We present two variants for this step.
ProxiMAS uses proximal gradient descent whereas OptiMAS
uses standard automatic differentiation and gradient-based
updates.
In the second step, the cyclic solution from the first step is
converted into an acyclic one. The quality of the final solution
depends crucially on the quality of this conversion. We solve
an instance of maximum acyclic subgraph (MAS) problem
which has been previously used to learn DAGs (Gillot and
Parviainen 2020). Intuitively, we prefer keeping arcs whose
weights are far from zero. Solving the MAS problem exactly
is NP-hard but there exists efficient heuristics for solving its
complement, the feedback arc set (FAS) problem (Simpson,
Srinivasan, and Thomo 2016).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6713

Differences are discussed in Section ”Proposed method”.

