The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Online-Updated High-Order Collaborative Networks for Single Image Deraining
Cong Wang1 , Jinshan Pan2 , Xiao-Ming Wu1 *
1

2

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
supercong94@gmail.com, sdluran@gmail.com, xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Single image deraining is an important and challenging task
for some downstream artificial intelligence applications such
as video surveillance and self-driving systems. Most of the
existing deep-learning-based methods constrain the network
to generate derained images but few of them explore features from intermediate layers, different levels, and different modules which are beneficial for rain streaks removal.
In this paper, we propose a high-order collaborative network with multi-scale compact constraints and a bidirectional scale-content similarity mining module to exploit features from deep networks externally and internally for rain
streaks removal. Externally, we design a deraining framework
with three sub-networks trained in a collaborative manner,
where the bottom network transmits intermediate features to
the middle network which also receives shallower rainy features from the top network and sends back features to the
bottom network. Internally, we enforce multi-scale compact
constraints on the intermediate layers of deep networks to
learn useful features via a Laplacian pyramid. Further, we
develop a bidirectional scale-content similarity mining module to explore features at different scales in a down-to-up
and up-to-down manner. To improve the model performance
on real-world images, we propose an online-update learning approach, which uses real-world rainy images to finetune the network and update the deraining results in a selfsupervised manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our proposed method performs favorably against eleven stateof-the-art methods on five public synthetic datasets and one
real-world dataset.

(a) I

(c) MPRNe

2Rea

(d) O

(e) SSIM

Figure 1: Results on the real-world image (b-d) and the synthetic Rain200H dataset (e). Our proposed method generates a better deraining result on the real-world image and
achieves the best performance-parameter trade-off on the
synthetic dataset.

Many deraining approaches have been developed based on
this simple rainy image model, including prior-based methods and deep-learning-based methods. Prior-based methods
usually explore empirical statistical properties of rain streaks
and rain-free images, such as image decomposition (Kang,
Lin, and Fu 2012), sparse coding (Luo, Xu, and Ji 2015;
Zhang and Patel 2017), low-rank representation (Chen and
Hsu 2013), and Gaussian mixture model (Li et al. 2016).
However, since the priors are based on empirical statistical observations, they do not hold when real-world complex
rainy conditions deviate from the simplified assumptions.
Recent years have witnessed the successful application of
deep learning methods to image deraining (Fu et al. 2017;
Yang et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018b; Zhang and Patel 2018;
Pan et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019a; Jiang et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020b; Zamir et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Pan
et al. 2021). Most of these methods develop joint learning networks (Zhang and Patel 2018; Hu et al. 2019; Jiang
et al. 2020) or explore multi-scale architectures (Wang et al.
2020b; Zhu et al. 2020; Zamir et al. 2021) for image deraining. The methods based on joint learning networks include density-guided multi-stream networks (Zhang and Patel 2018) and progressive networks motivated by patch similarity and guided by multi-scale architectures (Jiang et al.
2020). While these methods are able to remove rain streaks
with the guiding networks, they do not perform well when

Introduction
Outdoor images taken in rainy conditions have limited visibility, which degrades the performance of various applications such as video surveillance and self-driving systems.
Hence, it is essential to recover the degraded images to improve scene visibility and the performance of downstream
applications. This paper considers single image deraining.
A rainy image O can be modeled as a linear combination
of a rain-free image B and a rain streaks image R:
O = B + R.

(b) S

(1)

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2406

