The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast and Efficient MMD-Based Fair PCA via Optimization over Stiefel Manifold
Junghyun Lee1 , Gwangsu Kim*2 , Mahbod Olfat3,4 , Mark Hasegawa-Johnson5 , Chang D. Yoo*2
1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, Republic of Korea
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
3
UC Berkeley IEOR, Berkeley, CA, USA
4
Citadel, Chicago, IL, USA
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
{jh lee00, s88012, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr, molfat@berkeley.edu, jhasegaw@illinois.edu
2

Abstract

data can be considered as a dimension-reduced fair representation of the input data (Zemel et al. 2013). We answer the
questions of 1) how fairness should be defined for PCA and
2) how to (algorithmically) incorporate fairness into PCA
in a fast and efficient manner. This work takes a different
approach from prior studies on PCA fairness (Samadi et al.
2018; Olfat and Aswani 2019), which is discussed in Section
and 15.
Our main contributions are as follows:

This paper defines fair principal component analysis (PCA) as
minimizing the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) between
dimensionality-reduced conditional distributions of different
protected classes. The incorporation of MMD naturally leads
to an exact and tractable mathematical formulation of fairness
with good statistical properties. We formulate the problem of
fair PCA subject to MMD constraints as a non-convex optimization over the Stiefel manifold and solve it using the
Riemannian Exact Penalty Method with Smoothing (REPMS).
Importantly, we provide local optimality guarantees and explicitly show the theoretical effect of each hyperparameter in
practical settings, extending previous results. Experimental
comparisons based on synthetic and UCI datasets show that
our approach outperforms prior work in explained variance,
fairness, and runtime.

• We motivate a new mathematical definition of fairness
for PCA using the maximum-mean discrepancy (MMD),
which can be evaluated in a computationally efficient
manner from the samples while guaranteeing asymptotic
consistency. Such properties were not available in the
previous definition of fair PCA (Olfat and Aswani 2019).
This is discussed in detail in Section 3 and 4.

Introduction

• We formulate the task of performing MMD-based fair
PCA as a constrained optimization over the Stiefel manifold and propose using REPMS (Liu and Boumal 2019).
For the first time, we prove two general theoretical guarantees of REPMS regarding the local minimality and feasibility. This is discussed in detail in Section 5 and 6.

It has become increasingly evident that many widelydeployed machine learning algorithms are biased, yielding
outcomes that can be discriminatory across key groupings
such as race, gender and ethnicity (Mehrabi et al. 2019). As
the applications of these algorithms proliferate in protected
areas like healthcare (Karan et al. 2012), hiring (Chien and
Chen 2008) and criminal justice (Kirchner et al. 2016), this
creates the potential for further exacerbating social biases.
To address this, there has recently been a surge of interest in
ensuring fairness in resulting machine learning algorithms.
Working in high-dimensional spaces can be undesirable as
the curse of dimensionality manifests in the form of data sparsity and computational intractability. Various dimensionality
reduction algorithms are deployed to resolve these issues,
and Principal Component Analysis (PCA), is one of the most
popular methods (Jolliffe and Cadima 2016). One particular
advantage of PCA is that there’s no need to train a complex
neural network.
In this work, fair PCA is defined as doing PCA while
minimizing the difference in the conditional distributions of
projections of different protected groups. Here, the projected

• Using synthetic and UCI datasets, we verify the efficacy
of our approach in terms of explained variance, fairness,
and runtime. Furthermore, we verify that using fair PCA
does indeed result in a fair representation, as in (Zemel
et al. 2013). This is discussed in detail in Section 7.

Preliminaries
Notations
For b ≥ 1, let Pb be the set of all Borel probability measures
defined on Rb . For some measurable function Π : Rp → Rd
and a measure P ∈ Pp , the push-forward measure of P
via Π is the probability measure Π# P ∈ Pd , defined as
(Π# P )(S) = P (Π−1 (S)) for any Borel set S. Let 0 and 1
denote matrices (or vectors) of zeros and ones of appropriate
size, respectively. In this work, we focus on binary cases, i.e.,
we assume that the protected attribute A and outcome Y are
binary (A, Y ∈ {0, 1}). We abbreviate demographic parity,
equalized opportunity, and equalized odds as DP, EOP, and
EOD, respectively.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding authors
See (Lee et al. 2021) for a more complete version of this
manuscript, including the supplementary material.

7363

