The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Resolving Inconsistencies in Simple Temporal Problems:
A Parameterized Approach
Konrad K. Dabrowski1 , Peter Jonsson2 , Sebastian Ordyniak3 , George Osipov2
1

Newcastle University, UK
Linköping University, Sweden
3
University of Leeds, UK
konrad.dabrowski@newcastle.ac.uk, {peter.jonsson,george.osipov}@liu.se, sordyniak@gmail.com
2

Abstract

measurements, human mistakes etc. (for further motivation
see (Condotta, Nouaouri, and Sioutis 2016; Chomicki and
Marcinkowski 2005; Bertossi and Chomicki 2004) and the
references therein). Thus, it is a natural computational problem to identify a maximum consistent subset of the data: this
is the maximum constraint satisfaction problem (M AX CSP).
In the AI literature, M AX CSP has recently been considered
in the context of spatial and temporal reasoning (Condotta,
Nouaouri, and Sioutis 2016; Condotta et al. 2016). The complementary problem of finding minimum correction sets has
also been an object of recent studies (Marques-Silva et al.
2013; Liffiton and Sakallah 2008). We show that M AX CSP
for the STP is surprisingly hard: the problem is NP-hard
for all sets of allowed constraints except for a class of trivially solvable constraints. However, the quest for efficient
algorithms is not hopeless: under the reasonable assumption
that the amount of erroneous data is small, we can employ
tools from parameterized complexity to design efficient algorithms for “almost” consistent STPs.
In parameterized complexity (Downey and Fellows 1999;
Flum and Grohe 2006) the running time of algorithms is
measured in terms of a parameter k ∈ N as well as the input size n. Many important problems are NP-hard on general instances and are thus computationally intractable (under the assumption that P 6= NP). However, realistic problem
instances are not chosen arbitrarily. When the parameter is
small compared to the instance size, an algorithm confining
the combinatorial explosion to this parameter can still be efficient in practice. The most favourable parameterized complexity class is FPT, which consists of all fixed-parameter
tractable problems, i.e. problems decidable in f (k) · nO(1)
time, where f is a computable function. A less favourable
option is the complexity class XP, which contains all problems decidable in nf (k) time, i.e. the problems solvable in
polynomial time when k is fixed. Clearly, FPT ⊆ XP holds,
and this inclusion is strict (see e.g. (Flum and Grohe 2006,
Corr. 2.26)). It is significantly better if a problem is in FPT
than in XP, since the order of the polynomial factor in the
former case does not depend on the parameter.
With this in mind, we consider the dual problem of
M AX CSP where we remove the minimum number of constraints in order to achieve consistency. We let the parameter k be the number of constraints that need to be
removed and the corresponding parameterized problem is

The simple temporal problem (STP) is one of the most influential reasoning formalisms for representing temporal information in AI. We study the problem of resolving inconsistency of data encoded in the STP. We prove that the problem of identifying a maximally large consistent subset of
data is NP-hard. In practical instances, it is reasonable to assume that the amount of erroneous data is small. We therefore parameterize by the number of constraints that need to
be removed to achieve consistency. Using tools from parameterized complexity we design fixed-parameter tractable algorithms for two large fragments of the STP. Our main algorithmic results employ reductions to the Directed Subset
Feedback Arc Set problem and iterative compression combined with an efficient algorithm for the Edge Multicut problem. We complement our algorithmic results with hardness
results that rule out fixed-parameter tractable algorithms for
all remaining non-trivial fragments of the STP (under standard complexity-theoretic assumptions). Together, our results
give a full classification of the classical and parameterized
complexity of the problem.

Introduction
The simple temporal problem (STP) proposed by Dechter
et al. (1991) is one of the most influential temporal reasoning formalisms in AI. The STP is used intensively in planning and scheduling (Barták, Morris, and Venable 2014), but
is also used, for instance, in medical applications (Anselma
et al. 2006) and for coordination of agent teams (Barbulescu
et al. 2010). Moreover, the STP is an important component in more expressive formalisms such as disjunctive variants of STPs (Barber 2000), formalisms for handling uncertainty (Vidal and Ghallab 1996), and frameworks for
analysing multi-agent systems (Boerkoel and Durfee 2013).
The STP is a special case of the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) with constraints a ≤ x1 − x2 ≤ b,
where a, b ∈ Q ∪ {−∞, ∞} and x1 , x2 are variables with
domain Q.1 The CSP for the STP is solvable in polynomial time (Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991). Unfortunately, large real-world datasets are prone to errors stemming from contradictory sources of information, noise in the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
This is the most basic definition of the STP and variations appear in the literature. We will discuss this in more detail in Sec. .

3724

