The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Iterative Contrast-Classify For Semi-supervised Temporal Action Segmentation
Dipika Singhania , Rahul Rahaman , Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
dipika16@comp.nus.edu.sg, rahul.rahaman@u.nus.edu, ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

80%

Abstract

MoF

Temporal action segmentation classifies the action of each
frame in (long) video sequences. Due to the high cost of framewise labeling, we propose the first semi-supervised method
for temporal action segmentation. Our method hinges on unsupervised representation learning, which, for temporal action
segmentation, poses unique challenges. Actions in untrimmed
videos vary in length and have unknown labels and start/end
times. Ordering of actions across videos may also vary. We
propose a novel way to learn frame-wise representations from
temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) by clustering input features with added time-proximity condition and multiresolution similarity. By merging representation learning with
conventional supervised learning, we develop an “IterativeContrast-Classify (ICC)” semi-supervised learning scheme.
With more labelled data, ICC progressively improves in performance; ICC semi-supervised learning, with 40% labelled
videos, performs similar to fully-supervised counterparts. Our
ICC improves MoF by {+1.8, +5.6, +2.5}% on Breakfast,
50Salads and GTEA respectively for 100% labelled videos.

60%
40%
20%

Our Semi-Supervised
Supervised
0%

20%

40%
60%
80%
Labeled video (%)

100%

Figure 1: Frame accuracy on Breakfast dataset: Our semisupervised approach has impressive performance with just
5% labelled videos; at 40%, we almost match the Mean over
Frames (MoF) of a 100% fully-supervised setup.

viewpoints of a sequence (Sermanet et al. 2018) or multiple modalities, such as video and text (Miech et al. 2020)
or video and audio (Alwassel et al. 2019) . These settings
target multi-view or multi-modal representations and are not
applicable for videos in action segmentation datasets. Also,
standard contrastive technique to bring image (or video) and
its augmentations near is unlikely to be effective. Action segmentation is a frame-wise (and not video-wise) classification
task so a model should capture similarities across temporally disjoint but semantically similar frames, while factoring
temporal continuity within every action segment. This poses
significant challenges without action labels.
As such, contrastive learning has not yet been explored for
action segmentation and our work is the first. We design a
novel strategy to form the positive and negative sets without
labels by leveraging the discriminativeness of the pre-trained
I3D (Carreira and Zisserman 2017) input features (see Fig. 2
right). As a base model, we use a SOTA temporal convolutional network (TCN) (Singhania, Rahaman, and Yao 2021);
a key advantage is the progressive temporal upsampling in the
decoder which allows us to integrate contrastive learning to
multiple temporal resolutions and enforce temporal continuity by design. Our proposed multi-resolution representation
for contrastive learning is is highly effective.
Equipped with our (unsupervised) learned model, we can
perform semi-supervised learning with only a small fraction

Introduction
Temporal action segmentation takes long untrimmed video
containing multiple actions in a sequence and estimates the
action labels for each video frame. There is a huge annotation
cost to label each frame of all videos for action segmentation,
especially as the videos are minutes long. Several works aim
to reduce annotation requirements with weak supervision
like transcripts (Chang et al. 2019), or few frame labels (Li,
Farha, and Gall 2021). In this work, we advocate using semisupervised learning, i.e. having labels only for a fraction of
the videos in the training set. Specifically, we design the unsupervised representation learning step to learn the underlying
distribution of all unlabelled videos, which helps achieve
higher temporal action segmentation scores with very few
labeled videos in the subsequent supervised training step.
For unsupervised representation learning, we are inspired
by the success of contrastive learning in images (Chen et al.
2020b), short-trimmed videos (Qian et al. 2020; Lorre et al.
2020) and other areas of machine learning (Chen et al. 2021;
Rahaman, Ghosh, and Thiery 2021). Works which apply contrastive learning to longer sequences bring together multiple
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2262

