The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DeepGPD: A Deep Learning Approach for Modeling Geospatio-Temporal
Extreme Events
Tyler Wilson,1 Pang-Ning Tan,1 Lifeng Luo2
1

Dept of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
2
Department of Geography, Michigan State University
{wils1270,ptan,lluo}@msu.edu

Abstract

infer the statistical distribution of the extreme values. Another approach is to cast the prediction of extreme events
as a supervised learning problem (Nayak and Ghosh 2013;
Laptev et al. 2017), which is the approach used in this paper.
Specifically, we are interested in predicting the conditional
distribution of excesses over a threshold (e.g., monthly precipitation or temperature that exceeds their 95th percentile)
at various spatial locations. However, predicting the conditional distribution of such excesses is a challenging problem due to their rare frequency of occurrence. In addition,
the predictive model must consider the complex spatial relationships between events at multiple locations. Identifying
such complex and potentially nonlinear interactions among
the predictors is a challenge that must be addressed.
In recent years, there have been growing interest in developing deep learning algorithms to address various spatiotemporal modeling problems (Wilson, Tan, and Luo 2018;
Shi et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2019). For spatial data, one emerging technique that can effectively handle spatial relationships in the data is convolutional neural network (CNN).
CNN initially found its application in computer vision tasks,
but has since been successfully applied to a wider range
of problems, including climate downscaling (Vandal et al.
2017), precipitation nowcasting (Shi et al. 2015) and hail
prediction (Gagne et al. 2019). However, despite their growing body of literature, there has been scant research on
spatio-temporal deep learning for modeling extreme events.
Non-parametric deep learning methods are generally ineffective at inferring the distribution of extreme events unless
there are sufficiently long, historical observation data available. When trained for regression problems, deep learning
models are generally trained to predict the conditional mean
of a distribution using the mean squared error loss, and thus,
fail to capture the tail of the distribution. Extreme events
are governed by two parametric distributions (Coles 2001):
the distribution of block maxima is governed by the generalized extreme value distribution (GEV) and the distribution
of excesses over a threshold are governed by the generalized
Pareto distribution (GPD).
In this paper, we propose a novel framework that combines extreme value theory (EVT) with deep learning.
Specifically, our framework leverages the strengths of deep
learning in modeling complex relationships in geospatiotemporal data as well as the ability of GPD to capture

Geospatio-temporal data are pervasive across numerous application domains. These rich datasets can be harnessed to
predict extreme events such as disease outbreaks, flooding,
crime spikes, etc. However, since the extreme events are rare,
predicting them is a hard problem. Statistical methods based
on extreme value theory provide a systematic way for modeling the distribution of extreme values. In particular, the
generalized Pareto distribution (GPD) is useful for modeling
the distribution of excess values above a certain threshold.
However, applying such methods to large-scale geospatiotemporal data is a challenge due to the difficulty in capturing the complex spatial relationships between extreme events
at multiple locations. This paper presents a deep learning
framework for long-term prediction of the distribution of extreme values at different locations. We highlight its computational challenges and present a novel framework that combines convolutional neural networks with deep set and GPD.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a realworld dataset for modeling extreme climate events.

Introduction
Extreme geospatio-temporal events such as flooding, heat
waves, and droughts are destructive natural forces with the
potential to cause devastating losses in property and human
lives. According to NOAA’s National Center for Environmental Information, as of July 2021, there were 8 billion
dollar weather/climate disaster events in 2021 alone, incurring close to $30 billion in total losses. Given the severity
of their impact, accurate modeling of extreme events are
therefore critical to provide timely information to the public threatened by such hazards and to minimize the risk for
human casualties and property destruction.
Numerous methods have been developed in the past for
modeling extremes. This includes outlier detection methods
(Cheng et al. 2009, 2008b,a; Boriah et al. 2008), where the
goal is not to predict future extreme events but to detect
them retrospectively from observation data after they have
occurred. Statistical approaches based on extreme value theory (Katz, Parlange, and Naveau 2002; Kharin and Zwiers
2005; López and Francés 2013) are also commonly used to
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4245

