The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shaping Noise for Robust Attributions in Neural Stochastic Differential Equations
Sumit Kumar Jha1 , Rickard Ewetz2 , Alvaro Velasquez3 , Arvind Ramanathan4 , Susmit Jha5
1

Computer Science Department, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX 78249
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
3
Information Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Rome, NY 13441
4
Data Science and Learning, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, 60439
5
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA, 94709
sumit.jha@utsa.edu, rickard.ewetz@ucf.edu, alvaro.velasquez.1@us.af.mil, ramanathana@anl.gov, susmit.jha@sri.com
2

Abstract

the actual input. While these approaches provide very
compelling results, the computed attributions are still far
from accurate. In this paper, we do not seek to develop yet
another new approach to compute attributions but rather
investigate whether we can train deep learning models
that produce better attributions using existing attribution
methods. We analyze the recently proposed Neural Stochastic
Differential Equations (Neural SDEs) framework and present
a new iterative training process that bootstraps the noise
injected in each iteration using attributions computed over
the previous iteration model. Such a Neural SDE model
with adaptive attribution-driven noise produces qualitatively
and quantitatively better attributions than the corresponding
residual neural networks. Further, the attribution produced by
adaptive attribution-driven shaping of noise in Neural SDEs
are more robust than those produced by traditional Neural
SDEs with Brownian motion as noise (Jha et al. 2021).

Neural SDEs with Brownian motion as noise lead to
smoother attributions than traditional ResNets. Various
attribution methods such as saliency maps, integrated
gradients, DeepSHAP and DeepLIFT have been shown to
be more robust for neural SDEs than for ResNets using
the recently proposed sensitivity metric. In this paper, we
show that neural SDEs with adaptive attribution-driven
noise lead to even more robust attributions and smaller
sensitivity metrics than traditional neural SDEs with Brownian
motion as noise. In particular, attribution-driven shaping of
noise leads to 6.7%, 6.9% and 19.4% smaller sensitivity
metric for integrated gradients computed on three discrete
approximations of neural SDEs with standard Brownian
motion noise: stochastic ResNet-50, WideResNet-101 and
ResNeXt-101 models respectively. The neural SDE model
with adaptive attribution-driven noise leads to 25.7% and
4.8% improvement in the SIC metric over traditional ResNets
and Neural SDEs with Brownian motion as noise. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose the use of
attributions for shaping the noise injected in neural SDEs, and
demonstrate that this process leads to more robust attributions
than traditional neural SDEs with standard Brownian motion
as noise.

Introduction

Figure 1: Integrated Gradients produces less noisy
attributions for our adaptive attribution-driven Neural SDE
model compared to the standard ResNet-50 model.

Computing the attribution of input features for a prediction
made by a deep neural network (DNN) on an input has
been extensively studied over the last few years (Simonyan,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Li and Yu 2015; Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Kim et al. 2018; Jha et al. 2017;
Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Selvaraju et al. 2017;
Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Lundberg and
Lee 2017; Kapishnikov et al. 2019; Smilkov et al. 2017;
Sturmfels, Lundberg, and Lee 2020). These attribution
methods enable explaining decisions made by DNNs and
consequently improve their interpretability. Attributions
are also helpful in debugging DNNs for poor accuracy,
generalizability, and fairness. These different attribution
methods often rely on measuring the change in output with
change in input features such as gradients with respect
to the input or integrating gradients from a baseline to

We formulate a new iterative approach in the technical
approach section to train Neural SDEs that employs
attributions from previous iterations to shape the injected
noise in each iteration. This makes the model more robust
over relevant features and also makes the attributions less
noisy and more robust. We relate the theoretical results on the
robustness of SDEs to the elimination of the saturation effects
in attributions (Miglani et al. 2020; Smilkov et al. 2017) and
alleviation of their sensitivity to irrelevant perturbations (Yeh
et al. 2019; Ghorbani, Abid, and Zou 2019). We also
empirically demonstrate the improved quality of attributions
computed over Neural SDEs. We evaluate our approach on
the ImageNet dataset in Table 1 and show that the attributions
computed over such Neural SDEs with attribution-driven
noise are consistently more robust to input perturbations

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9567

