The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Finding Backdoors to Integer Programs: A Monte Carlo Tree Search Framework
Elias B. Khalil1, 2 , Pashootan Vaezipoor3, 4 , Bistra Dilkina5
1

2

Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
Scale AI Research Chair in Data-Driven Algorithms for Modern Supply Chains
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
4
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
khalil@mie.utoronto.ca, pashootan@cs.toronto.edu, dilkina@usc.edu
Abstract

stances of NP-Hard MIPs can be solved relatively efficiently
in practice.
The existence of backdoor sets provides one possible answer to this puzzle of empirical tractability in exact MIP
solving. This was first reported by Dilkina et al. (2009) who
showed that backdoors of sizes 10–20 did exist for some
instances (of MIPLIB2003 (Achterberg, Koch, and Martin
2006)) with many hundreds to thousands of integer variables. The intuition is simple: if one need only branch on a
handful of integer variables to solve a MIP instance to global
optimality (or declare it as infeasible), then it is not difficult to imagine that a full-fledged MIP solver would be able
to solve that instance without much branching. This motivates the design of algorithms for finding backdoors, with
the following potential use cases: (i) Discovering heretofore
unknown structural properties for a family of MIP instances,
e.g., a new variant of an independent set or facility location
problem, by data-mining backdoors from a large number of
instances; (ii) Constructing datasets of pre-computed backdoors that can then be used to train machine learning models for quickly identifying these crucial sets on similar but
unseen instances and branching on them for a quick solving
time; (iii) Directly using the backdoor for branching, assuming that the backdoor in question can be computed quickly
in advance; such a use case, if realized, could speed up solving times substantially for instances that are challenging for
current branching strategies in state-of-the-art MIP solvers.
How, then, does one find backdoors? We will denote the
desired backdoor size by K ∈ N+ . Despite negative computational complexity results (e.g., Szeider (2005) shows that
finding backdoors for SAT requires time exponential in K,
even for fixed K), some heuristics have been developed.
Dilkina et al. (2009) used two forms of random sampling:
independent uniform sampling of K integer variables, and
independent biased sampling of K integer variables to favor
ones that are more fractional (i.e., with fractional parts closer
to 0.5) in the solution of the Linear Programming (LP) relaxation of the MIP. Candidate sets are sampled (in parallel)
and used for branching in a MIP solver; if global optimality is attained, then a backdoor has been found. The biased
sampling strategy proved much more effective than uniform.
While useful as a proof-of-concept, random sampling is a
pure exploration strategy which cannot use knowledge from
previous draws to focus future ones towards more promising

In Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MIP), a (strong)
backdoor is a “small” subset of an instance’s integer variables with the following property: in a branch-and-bound procedure, the instance can be solved to global optimality by
branching only on the variables in the backdoor. Constructing datasets of pre-computed backdoors for widely used MIP
benchmark sets or particular problem families can enable new
questions around novel structural properties of a MIP, or explain why a problem that is hard in theory can be solved
efficiently in practice. Existing algorithms for finding backdoors rely on sampling candidate variable subsets in various
ways, an approach which has demonstrated the existence of
backdoors for some instances from MIPLIB2003 and MIPLIB2010. However, these algorithms fall short of consistently succeeding at the task due to an imbalance between
exploration and exploitation. We propose BaMCTS, a Monte
Carlo Tree Search framework for finding backdoors to MIPs.
Extensive algorithmic engineering, hybridization with traditional MIP concepts, and close integration with the CPLEX
solver have enabled our method to outperform baselines on
MIPLIB2017 instances, finding backdoors more frequently
and more efficiently.

1

Introduction

Hard discrete optimization problems arise in a very wide
range of application domains. While the theoretical computer science approach focuses on the design of algorithms
with approximation guarantees, many real problems are not
amenable to such analyses. In the artificial intelligence and
operations research communities, on the other hand, much
of the focus is on deriving algorithms that can efficiently
produce high-quality solutions (even if without approximation bounds) and/or optimality guarantees (even when the
worst-case running time is exponential). In this work, we focus on the latter class of approaches, in particular the branchand-bound procedure for the exact solution of Mixed Integer
Programming (MIP) problems. MIP solvers are celebrated
for their ability to solve problems with hundreds of thousands to millions of variables and constraints, a feat which
the theory would suggest to be impossible in a reasonable
amount of time. Yet, little is known about why realistic inCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3786

