The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DiffSinger: Singing Voice Synthesis via Shallow Diffusion Mechanism
Jinglin Liu* , Chengxi Li* , Yi Ren* , Feiyang Chen, Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
{jinglinliu,chengxili,rayeren,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn, chenfeiyangai@gmail.com

Abstract

2019; Lee et al. 2019; Blaauw and Bonada 2020; Ren et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2020)1 .
Previous singing acoustic models mainly utilize simple
loss (e.g., L1 or L2) to reconstruct the acoustic features.
However, this optimization is based on the incorrect unimodal distribution assumptions, leading to blurry and oversmoothing outputs. Although existing methods endeavor
to solve this problem by generative adversarial network
(GAN) (Lee et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020), training an effective GAN may occasionally fail due to the unstable discriminator. These issues hinder the naturalness of synthesized singing.
Recently, a highly flexible and tractable generative model,
diffusion probabilistic model (a.k.a. diffusion model) (SohlDickstein et al. 2015; Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song,
Meng, and Ermon 2021) emerges. Diffusion model consists
of two processes: diffusion process and reverse process (also
called denoising process). The diffusion process is a Markov
chain with fixed parameters (when using the certain parameterization in (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)), which converts
the complicated data into isotropic Gaussian distribution by
adding the Gaussian noise gradually; while the reverse process is a Markov chain implemented by a neural network,
which learns to restore the origin data from Gaussian white
noise iteratively. Diffusion model can be stably trained by
implicitly optimizing variational lower bound (ELBO) on
the data likelihood. It has been demonstrated that diffusion model can produce promising results in image generation (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Song, Meng, and Ermon
2021) and neural vocoder (Chen et al. 2021; Kong et al.
2021) fields.
In this work, we propose DiffSinger, an acoustic model
for SVS based on diffusion model, which converts the
noise into mel-spectrogram conditioned on the music score.
DiffSinger can be efficiently trained by optimizing ELBO,
without adversarial feedback, and generates realistic melspectrograms strongly matching the ground truth distribution.
To further improve the voice quality and speed up inference, we introduce a shallow diffusion mechanism to make
better use of the prior knowledge learned by the simple loss.
Specifically, we find that there is an intersection of the diffu-

Singing voice synthesis (SVS) systems are built to synthesize high-quality and expressive singing voice, in which the
acoustic model generates the acoustic features (e.g., melspectrogram) given a music score. Previous singing acoustic models adopt a simple loss (e.g., L1 and L2) or generative adversarial network (GAN) to reconstruct the acoustic
features, while they suffer from over-smoothing and unstable training issues respectively, which hinder the naturalness
of synthesized singing. In this work, we propose DiffSinger,
an acoustic model for SVS based on the diffusion probabilistic model. DiffSinger is a parameterized Markov chain
that iteratively converts the noise into mel-spectrogram conditioned on the music score. By implicitly optimizing variational bound, DiffSinger can be stably trained and generate realistic outputs. To further improve the voice quality and
speed up inference, we introduce a shallow diffusion mechanism to make better use of the prior knowledge learned by
the simple loss. Specifically, DiffSinger starts generation at
a shallow step smaller than the total number of diffusion
steps, according to the intersection of the diffusion trajectories of the ground-truth mel-spectrogram and the one predicted by a simple mel-spectrogram decoder. Besides, we
propose boundary prediction methods to locate the intersection and determine the shallow step adaptively. The evaluations conducted on a Chinese singing dataset demonstrate
that DiffSinger outperforms state-of-the-art SVS work. Extensional experiments also prove the generalization of our
methods on text-to-speech task (DiffSpeech). Audio samples: https://diffsinger.github.io. Codes: https://github.com/
MoonInTheRiver/DiffSinger.

1

Introduction

Singing voice synthesis (SVS) which aims to synthesize natural and expressive singing voice from musical score (Wu
and Luan 2020), increasingly draws attention from the
research community and entertainment industries (Zhang
et al. 2020). The pipeline of SVS usually consists of an
acoustic model to generate the acoustic features (e.g., melspectrogram) conditioned on a music score, and a vocoder to
convert the acoustic features to waveform (Nakamura et al.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11020

A music score consists of lyrics, pitch and duration.

