The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On Improving Resource Allocations by Sharing
Robert Bredereck1 , Andrzej Kaczmarczyk2,3 , Junjie Luo4 , Rolf Niedermeier2 , Florian Sachse2
1

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
3
AGH University, Kraków, Poland
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
robert.bredereck@hu-berlin.de, andrzej.kaczmarczyk@agh.edu.pl, junjie.luo@ntu.edu.sg, rolf.niedermeier@tu-berlin.de,
sachse.florian@gmail.com
2

Abstract

scenario, which takes into account the relationships between
agents expressed by social networks, means that two adjacent agents in the social network may share the very same
resource, thus increasing the utility of the resource allocation for at least one of them (assuming positive utility for
each resource). We assume this to be organized and decided
by a central authority like, for example, the boss of a company. To get started with this new setting, we focus on a
very basic scenario. That is, in our model only two neighbors may share and, reflecting the (very human) principle
of protection of acquired possession, no agent shall loose its
already allocated resources. This conservative principle naturally makes sharing easier to implement, keeping “restructuring costs” lower, and it may even help to “keep peace”
among agents. Moreover, it sometimes comes very naturally as depicted in the subsequent knowledge sharing example. Besides improving egalitarian or utilitarian welfare,
we focus on the perhaps most basic fairness criterion, envyfreeness. Since it is not always possible that complete envyfreeness is achieved (consider one indivisible resource and
two agents desiring it), we aim at, given an initial resource
allocation, improving it by decreasing the number of envious agents through resource sharing. Moreover, we allow for
modeling relationship aspects of sharing based on the social
network formed by the agents.
Before becoming more specific about our model, let us
first introduce the following example related to knowledge
sharing. Assume that agents are employees of a company,
each having a bundle of qualifications. An agent may “envy”
another agent because the other agent has some special qualification. The central authority wants to improve the situation by building teams of two agents where, due to a daily
extensive cooperation, one teaches the other the missing
qualification (for instance, a realization of this is the concept of pair programming that also has other benefits besides
knowledge sharing (Williams et al. 2000)).

Given an initial resource allocation, where some agents may
envy others or where a different distribution of resources
might lead to higher social welfare, our goal is to improve
the allocation without reassigning resources. We consider a
sharing concept allowing resources being shared with social
network neighbors of the resource owners. To this end, we
introduce a formal model that allows a central authority to
compute an optimal sharing between neighbors based on an
initial allocation. Advocating this point of view, we focus on
the most basic scenario where a resource may be shared by
two neighbors in a social network and each agent can participate in a bounded number of sharings. We present algorithms
for optimizing utilitarian and egalitarian social welfare of allocations and for reducing the number of envious agents. In
particular, we examine the computational complexity with respect to several natural parameters. Furthermore, we study
cases with restricted social network structures and, among
others, devise polynomial-time algorithms in path- and treelike (hierarchical) social networks.

1

Introduction

The fair allocation of resources undoubtedly is a key challenge for modern societies and economies. Applications can
be found in such diverse fields as cloud computing, food
banks, or managing carbon loads in the context of global
warming. Naturally, this topic received high attention in the
scientific literature. This also holds true for the special case
of indivisible resources (Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and Maudet
2016), which we concentrate on here. Moreover, we take
into account the role of social networks built by agents,
a growing line of research (Abebe, Kleinberg, and Parkes
2017; Bei, Qiao, and Zhang 2017; Bouveret et al. 2017;
Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Niedermeier 2022; Chevaleyre, Endriss, and Maudet 2017; Beynier et al. 2019; Lange
and Rothe 2019; Huang and Xiao 2019). We bring one further new aspect into this scenario, reflecting the increasing relevance of “sharing economies” (Belk, Eckhardt, and
Bardhi 2019; Schor and Cansoy 2019), where agents share
resources in a peer-to-peer fashion. Resources to share may
be almost everything, for instance, knowledge, machines,
time, or natural resources. More specifically, sharing in our

Model of sharing allocation. Roughly speaking, our
model is as follows (see Section 2 for formal definitions).
The input is a set of agents and a set of indivisible resources
initially assigned to the agents. Typically, every agent may
be assigned several resources. Each agent has an individual utility value for each resource. The general goals are to
decrease the overall degree of envy, to increase the sum of

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4875

