The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Continual Learning through Retrieval and Imagination
Zhen Wang1 , Liu Liu1 , Yiqun Duan2 , Dacheng Tao3,1
1

The University of Sydney, Australia, 2 University of Technology Sydney, Australia, 3 JD Explore Academy, China
zwan4121@uni.sydney.edu.au, liu.liu1@sydney.edu.au, yiqun.duan@student.uts.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract

Previous continual learning progresses majorly follow two
directions: (1) trying to estimate the importance of each
network parameter for previous tasks and penalizing the
changes of important parameters during the learning of new
tasks (Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Schwarz et al. 2018; Serra et al.
2018; Zenke et al. 2017). However, it is difficult to find a
reasonable metric to regularize all the parameters effectively,
especially in long sequences of tasks and large networks. (2)
trying to consolidate the knowledge in the original network
by replaying a subset of past examples stored in a memory
buffer (Buzzega et al. 2020; Hou et al. 2018; Rannen et al.
2017; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Buzzega et al. 2021). Whereas,
the main additional challenge is the class imbalance between
previous versus new tasks. The latest literature (Delange
et al. 2021) proposed a series of guidelines for continual
learning methods to be applicable in practice: i) good performance and less forgetting on previous tasks; ii) no oracle of
task identifiers at inference time; and iii) bounded memory
footprint throughout the entire training phase. Unfortunately,
most of the exiting methods fail to satisfy all these guidelines
mentioned above (Chaudhry et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020;
Lopez-Paz et al. 2017; Wei et al. 2021; Riemer et al. 2019;
Kong et al. 2021; Schwarz et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020).
Contemporary biology suggests that humans can keep past
knowledge with limited memory capacity, benefiting from the
retrieval and imagination of a few past experiences (Schuster
et al. 2011; Grilli et al. 2013). The Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) theory (Gelbard-Sagiv et al. 2008; Kumaran et al. 2016) holds that the hippocampus in human
brain stores episodic-like memory that can be reactivated
during sleep or in unconscious and conscious recall, thus consolidating knowledge in the neocortex via the retrieval and
imagination of past experiences in terms of multiple internal
replays (Schacter et al. 2012; Cheng et al. 2016). Inspired
by the mechanism of the human brain to deepen past impressions, we propose to apply such imagination into machine
vision systems for retrieving the limited memory, in order to
consolidate knowledge and alleviate catastrophic forgetting.
In this work, we propose a novel framework, Deep Retrieval and Imagination (DRI), to solve the challenges in
continual learning. DRI can imitate the ability of the brain
to generate additional imaginary data based on the limited
memory of past data and retrieve previous tasks in a balanced manner while learning the current data. Specifically,

Continual learning is an intellectual ability of artificial agents
to learn new streaming labels from sequential data. The main
impediment to continual learning is catastrophic forgetting, a
severe performance degradation on previously learned tasks.
Although simply replaying all previous data or continuously
adding the model parameters could alleviate the issue, it is
impractical in real-world applications due to the limited available resources. Inspired by the mechanism of the human brain
to deepen its past impression, we propose a novel framework,
Deep Retrieval and Imagination (DRI), which consists of two
components: 1) an embedding network that constructs a unified embedding space without adding model parameters on
the arrival of new tasks; and 2) a generative model to produce additional (imaginary) data based on the limited memory.
By retrieving the past experiences and corresponding imaginary data, DRI distills knowledge and rebalances the embedding space to further mitigate forgetting. Theoretical analysis
demonstrates that DRI can reduce the loss approximation error
and improve the robustness through retrieval and imagination,
bringing better generalizability to the network. Extensive experiments show that DRI performs significantly better than
the existing state-of-the-art continual learning methods and
effectively alleviates catastrophic forgetting.

1

Introduction

Humans continuously learn new skills and accumulate knowledge over their lifetime (Alvarez et al. 1994; Smolen et al.
2019). By contrast, artificial neural networks suffer from
catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey et al. 1989) which refers
to the drastic drop in performance on the previous tasks
while learning new tasks. The underlying reason is that training a network with new information severely interferes with
the previously learned knowledge (McClelland et al. 1995).
As trivial workarounds, devoting a whole new network to
each task or storing all previous task data for re-training the
model could alleviate the performance degradation on previous learning, but it is impractical for real-world applications
in terms of required resources. Continual learning (also called
lifelong or incremental learning) methods aim at training a
neural network from sequential data with streaming labels, relieving catastrophic forgetting with limited resources (Rebuffi
et al. 2017; Riemer et al. 2019; van de Ven et al. 2018).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8594

