The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SpreadGNN: Decentralized Multi-Task Federated Learning for
Graph Neural Networks on Molecular Data
Chaoyang He* , Emir Ceyani* , Keshav Balasubramanian*
Murali Annavaram, Salman Avestimehr
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
{chaoyang.he,ceyani,keshavba,annavara,avestime}@usc.edu

Abstract

labeled along multiple orthogonal dimensions. Since each
graph has multiple labels the learning itself can be characterized as multi-task learning. For instance, whether a molecule
has potentially harmful interactions with a diabetics drug, or
whether that molecule can turn toxic under certain conditions
are distinct labels. Molecular property analysis and labeling require wet-lab experiments, which are time-consuming
and resource-costly. As a consequence, many entities may
only have partially labeled molecules even if they know the
graph structure. Finally, molecules are coveted inventions
and hence entities often possess a proprietary graph representation that cannot be shared with other institutions for
competitive and regulatory reasons. However, training collectively over a private set of molecular graphs can have
immense societal benefits such as accelerated drug discovery.
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning paradigm
that addresses this data isolation problem via collaborative
training. In this paradigm, training is an act of collaboration
between multiple clients (such as research institutions) without requiring centralized local data while providing a certain
degree of user-level privacy (McMahan et al. 2017; Kairouz
et al. 2019). However, there are still challenges and shortcomings to training GNNs in a federated setting. This setting
(Figure 1) is the typical case in molecular graphs since each
owner may have different molecules and even when they have
the same molecular graph each owner may have an incomplete set of labels for each molecule. The left half of Figure
1 shows a simpler case where all clients can communicate
through a central server. However, in practice, the presence
of a central server is not feasible when multiple competing
entities may want to collaboratively learn. The challenges are
further compounded by the lack of a central server as shown
in the right half of the Figure 1. Thus, it remains an open
problem to design a realistic federated learning framework
for molecular GNNs, in which clients only have partial labels
and one in which there is no reliance on a central server. This
is the problem we seek to address in this work.
We propose a multi-task federated learning framework
called SpreadGNN that operates in the presence of multiple, but partial labels for each client and the absence of a
central server as shown in Figure 1. First, we present a multitask learning (MTL) formulation to learn from partial labels.
Second, in our MTL formulation, we utilize decentralized
periodic averaging stochastic gradient descent to solve the

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are the first choice methods for graph machine learning problems thanks to their ability to learn state-of-the-art level representations from graphstructured data. However, centralizing a massive amount of
real-world graph data for GNN training is prohibitive due to
user-side privacy concerns, regulation restrictions, and commercial competition. Federated Learning is the de-facto standard for collaborative training of machine learning models
over many distributed edge devices without the need for centralization. Nevertheless, training graph neural networks in a
federated setting is vaguely defined and brings statistical and
systems challenges. This work proposes SpreadGNN, a novel
multi-task federated training framework capable of operating
in the presence of partial labels and the absence of a central
server for GNNs over molecular graphs. We provide convergence guarantees and empirically demonstrate the efficacy of
our framework on a variety of non-I.I.D. distributed graphlevel molecular property prediction datasets with partial labels.
Our results show that SpreadGNN outperforms GNN models trained over a central server-dependent federated learning
system, even in constrained topologies.

Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017) are expressive models that can distill structural knowledge into highly representative embeddings.
While graphs are the representation of choice in domains
such as social networks (Bian et al. 2020), knowledge graphs
for recommendation systems (Chen et al. 2020), in this work
we focus on molecular graphs that are the core of drug discovery, molecular property prediction (Gilmer et al. 2017;
Kearnes et al. 2016) and virtual screening (Zheng, Fan, and
Mu 2019). Molecular graphs differ from their more wellknown counterparts such as social network graphs. First,
each molecule is a graph representation of the basic atoms
and bonds that constitute the molecule and hence the size of
the graph is small. Second, even though each graph may be
small numerous molecules are being developed continuously
for varied use cases. Hence, what they lack in size they make
up for it in structural heterogeneity. Third, molecules can be
* Equal contribution (alphabetical order).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6865

