The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning V1 Simple Cells with Vector Representation of Local Content and
Matrix Representation of Local Motion
Ruiqi Gao1∗ , Jianwen Xie2 , Siyuan Huang3 , Yufan Ren4 , Song-Chun Zhu1,3 , Ying Nian Wu1
1

UCLA, 2 Baidu Research, 3 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI),
4
cole Polytechnique Fdrale de Lausanne (EPFL)
ruiqig@google.com, jianwen@ucla.edu, huangsiyuan@ucla.edu, yufan.ren@epfl.ch, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a representational model for image pairs
such as consecutive video frames that are related by local
pixel displacements, in the hope that the model may shed
light on motion perception in primary visual cortex (V1). The
model couples the following two components: (1) the vector
representations of local contents of images and (2) the matrix representations of local pixel displacements caused by the
relative motions between the agent and the objects in the 3D
scene. When the image frame undergoes changes due to local
pixel displacements, the vectors are multiplied by the matrices that represent the local displacements. Thus the vector
representation is equivariant as it varies according to the local displacements. Our experiments show that our model can
learn Gabor-like filter pairs of quadrature phases. The profiles
of the learned filters match those of simple cells in Macaque
V1. Moreover, we demonstrate that the model can learn to infer local motions in either a supervised or unsupervised manner. With such a simple model, we achieve competitive results
on optical flow estimation.

1

Figure 1: Scheme of representation. The image is illustrated
by the big rectangle. A pixel is illustrated by a dot. The local image content is illustrated by a small square around it.
The displacement of the pixel is illustrated by a short arrow, which is within the small square. The vector representation of the local image content is represented by a long
vector, which is equivariant because it rotates as the image
undergoes deformation due to the pixel displacements. The
rotation is realized by a matrix representation of the local
motion. See Section 3 for the detailed notation.

Introduction

Our understanding of the primary visual cortex or V1 (Hubel
and Wiesel 1959) is still very limited (Olshausen and Field
2005). In particular, mathematical and representational models for V1 are still in short supply. Two prominent examples of such models are sparse coding (Olshausen and Field
1997) and independent component analysis (ICA) (Bell and
Sejnowski 1997). Although such models may not provide
detailed explanations at the level of neuronal dynamics, they
help us understand the computational problems being solved
by V1.
In this paper, we propose a model of this sort. It is a representational model of natural image pairs that are related
by local pixel displacements. The image pairs can be consecutive frames of a video sequence, where the local pixel
displacements are caused by the relative motions between
the agent and the objects in the 3D environment. Perceiving
such local motions can be crucial for inferring ego-motion,
object motions, and 3D depth information.

As is the case with existing models, we expect our model
to explain only partial aspects of V1, including: (1) The
receptive fields of V1 simple cells resemble Gabor filters
(Daugman 1985). (2) Adjacent simple cells have quadrature
phase relationship (Pollen and Ronner 1981; Emerson and
Huang 1997). (3) The V1 cells are capable of perceiving local motions. While existing models can all explain (1), our
model can also account for (2) and (3) naturally. Compared
to models such as sparse coding and ICA, our model has a
component that serves a direct purpose of perceiving local
motions.
Our model consists of the following two components.
(1) Vector representation of local image content. The local
content around each pixel is represented by a high dimensional vector. Each unit in the vector is obtained by a linear
filter. These local filters or wavelets are assumed to form a
normalized wavelet tight frame, i.e., the image can be reconstructed from the vectors using the linear filters as the basis
functions.
(2) Matrix representation of local displacement. The

∗
The author is now a Research Scientist at Google Research,
Brain team.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6674

