The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Denoised Maximum Classifier Discrepancy for
Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Tong Chu, Yahao Liu, Jinhong Deng, Wen Li, Lixin Duan*
School of Computer Science and Engineering & Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{uestcchutong, lyhaolive, jhdeng1997, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract

2018; Saito et al. 2018; Dong et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021;
Deng et al. 2021; Dong et al. 2021), these approaches is
needed to access the source domain data during the training process. This limits application of the UDA approach
in many real-world scenarios. For example, in visual recognition tasks involving medical images, surveillance videos,
or fingerprint images, accessing these data often introduces
privacy issues.
To avoid accessing the source domain data in the domain adaptation process, a more challenging UDA setting
has been is proposed, named Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (SFUDA) (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020). Under this setting, we are only given a source model pre-trained
on the source domain and unlabeled samples in the target domain; the goal is to improve the performance of the model
on the target domain without access to the original labeled
source domain data.
One straightforward way to address SFUDA is to apply a
self-training strategy, and many methods using this way have
been proposed (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020; Chen et al. 2021;
Tian et al. 2021). The core concept involves using the trained
model to select a set of confidently predicted samples from
the target domain, which are likely to be correctly labeled,
and then use these selected pseudo-labeled samples to refine
the model. This process is then iterated such that the model
can be gradually improved.
However, there are also risks associated with the selftraining strategy. First, there exists a sample selection bias
when selecting pseudo-labeled samples from the target domain, which inevitably limits the model’s generalization
ability on the entire target domain. Second, the pseudolabeled samples often contain significant label noise, which
also harms the model performance. While several heuristics
designed have been proposed (Liang, Hu, and Feng 2020;
Chen et al. 2021) to improve the label quality, existing works
on this topic have not entirely resolved these two issues.
In this work, we provide a rigorous theoretical analysis of
how the sample selection bias and the label noise of pseudolabeled samples affect the target model’s generalization ability when the self-training strategy is applied for the SFUDA
problem. Building upon the generalization bound for the traditional UDA problem, we provide a generalization bound
for the SFUDA problem. We prove that the generalization
ability of the target model can be bounded by the target train-

Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (SFUDA)
aims to adapt a pre-trained source model to an unlabeled
target domain without access to the original labeled source
domain samples. Many existing SFUDA approaches apply
the self-training strategy, which involves iteratively selecting
confidently predicted target samples as pseudo-labeled samples used to train the model to fit the target domain. However,
the self-training strategy may also suffer from sample selection bias and be impacted by the label noise of the pseudolabeled samples. In this work, we provide a rigorous theoretical analysis on how these two issues affect the model
generalization ability when applying the self-training strategy for the SFUDA problem. Based on this theoretical analysis, we then propose a new Denoised Maximum Classifier
Discrepancy (D-MCD) method for SFUDA to effectively address these two issues. In particular, we first minimize the
distribution mismatch between the selected pseudo-labeled
samples and the remaining target domain samples to alleviate
the sample selection bias. Moreover, we design a strong-weak
self-training paradigm to denoise the selected pseudo-labeled
samples, where the strong network is used to select pseudolabeled samples while the weak network helps the strong network to filter out hard samples to avoid incorrect labels. In
this way, we are able to ensure both the quality of the pseudolabels and the generalization ability of the trained model on
the target domain. We achieve state-of-the-art results on three
domain adaptation benchmark datasets, which clearly validates the effectiveness of our proposed approach. Full code is
available at https://github.com/kkkkkkon/D-MCD.

Introduction
Benefiting from the large amount of labeled training data
available, deep neural networks have achieved promising
results in many computer vision tasks. However, it is often highly costly to build a large-scale labeled dataset for
deep neural network training. To this end, the Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) was devised, the goal of which
to leverage a labeled source domain to help the training of
models on a new unlabeled target domain, thus saving the
cost of annotating training samples for the new domain.
While many methods have been proposed to solve the
UDA problem (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Long et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

472

