The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast and Robust Online Inference
with Stochastic Gradient Descent via Random Scaling
Sokbae Lee* ,1 Yuan Liao* ,2 Myung Hwan Seo* ,3† Youngki Shin* 4
1

Department of Economics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
Department of Economics, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA
3
Department of Economics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Korea
4
Department of Economics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada
sl3841@columbia.edu, yuan.liao@rutgers.edu, myunghseo@snu.ac.kr, shiny11@mcmaster.ca
2

where the asymptotic variance Υ has a sandwich form
Υ := H−1 SH −1 , H := ∇2 Q (β ∗ ) is the Hessian matrix and
0
S := E ∇q (β ∗ , Y ) ∇q (β ∗ , Y ) is the score variance. The
Polyak-Ruppert estimator β̄n can be computed recursively
βt
by the updating rule β̄t = β̄t−1 t−1
t + t , which implies that
it is well suited to the online setting.
Although the celebrated asymptotic normality result
(Polyak and Juditsky 1992) was established about three
decades ago, it is only past several years that online inference with β̄n has gained increasing interest in the literature.
It is challenging to estimate the asymptotic variance Υ in
an online fashion. This is because the naive implementation
of estimating it requires storing all data, thereby losing the
advantage of online learning. In the seminal work of Chen
et al. (2020), the authors addressed this issue by estimating H
and S using the online iterated estimator βt , and recursively
updating them whenever a new observation is available. They
called this method a plug-in estimator and showed that it consistently estimates the asymptotic variance and is ready for
inference. However, the plug-in estimator requires that the
Hessian matrix be computed to estimate H. In other words,
it is necessary to have strictly more inputs than the SGD solution paths βt to carry out inference. In applications, it can be
demanding to compute the Hessian matrix. As an alternative,
Chen et al. (2020) proposed a batch-means estimator that
avoids separately estimating H −1 or S. This method directly
estimates the variance of the averaged online estimator β̄n
by dividing {β1 , ..., βn } into batches with increasing batch
size. The batch-means estimator is based on the idea that
correlations among batches that are far apart decay exponentially fast; therefore, one can use nonparametric empirical
covariance to estimate Υ. Along this line, Zhu, Chen, and
Wu (2021) extended the batch-means approach to allow for
real-time recursive updates, which is desirable in the online
setting.
The batch-means method produces batches of streaming
samples, so that data are weakly correlated when batches far
apart. The distance between batches is essential to control
dependence among batches so it should be chosen very carefully. In applications, we need to specify a sequence which
determines the batch size as well as the speed at which dependence among batches diminish. While this is a new sequence

Abstract
We develop a new method of online inference for a vector of
parameters estimated by the Polyak-Ruppert averaging procedure of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms. We
leverage insights from time series regression in econometrics and construct asymptotically pivotal statistics via random
scaling. Our approach is fully operational with online data
and is rigorously underpinned by a functional central limit
theorem. Our proposed inference method has a couple of key
advantages over the existing methods. First, the test statistic is
computed in an online fashion with only SGD iterates and the
critical values can be obtained without any resampling methods, thereby allowing for efficient implementation suitable for
massive online data. Second, there is no need to estimate the
asymptotic variance and our inference method is shown to be
robust to changes in the tuning parameters for SGD algorithms
in simulation experiments with synthetic data.

Introduction
We consider an inference problem for a vector of parameters
defined by
β ∗ := arg min Q (β) ,
β∈Rd

where Q (β) := E [q (β, Y )] is a real-valued population objective function, Y is a random vector, and β 7→ q (β, Y )
n
is convex. For a given sample {Yt }t=1 , let βt denote the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) solution path, that is, for
each t ≥ 1,
βt = βt−1 − γt ∇q (βt−1 , Yt ) ,

(1)

where β0 is the initial starting value, γt is a step size, and
∇q (βt−1 , Yt ) denotes the gradient of q (β, Yt ) with respect
to β at β = βt−1 . We study the classical PolyakP(1990)n
Ruppert (1988) averaging estimator β̄n := n−1 t=1 βt .
Polyak and Juditsky (1992) established regularity conditions
under which the averaging estimator β̄n is asymptotically
normal:
 d
√
n β̄n − β ∗ → N (0, Υ),
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7381

