The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

HoD-Net: High-Order Differentiable Deep Neural Networks and Applications
Siyuan Shen1 , Tianjia Shao1 * , Kun Zhou1 , Chenfanfu Jiang2 , Feng Luo3 , Yin Yang3
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
3
School of Computing, Clemson University
{shensiyuan|tjshao|kunzhou}@zju.edu.cn, cffjiang@math.ucla.edu, {luofeng|yin5}@clemson.edu
2

Abstract

unstable code (Margossian 2018; Betancourt 2018). Highorder AD is often not well supported or could be much
slower (like JAX (Schoenholz and Cubuk 2019)), which
stands as a major technical obstacle in many applications.
We propose a new set of differentiation toolkit named
HoD-Net to close the gap of high-order differentiability
of DL. Our method is based on complex-step finite difference method or CSFD (Squire and Trapp 1998). Unlike the
classic finite difference method (Morton and Mayers 2005),
CSFD lifts differentiation computations to the complex domain. This strategy avoids the notorious numerical issue of
subtraction cancellation (Muller et al. 2018). As a result
CSFD computes differentiations highly accurately albeit being a numerical method. Based on CSFD, we approach highorder differentiable deep networks by generalizing regular
complex arithmetic to multicomplex domains, designing an
efficient adjoint perturbation scheme, and showing its applications in several learning problems.
To make the paper self-contained, we start with a brief review of classic finite difference method, its numerical issue,
and CSFD alternatives. Related literatures will be discussed
when introducing the relevant topics.

We introduce a deep architecture named HoD-Net to enable high-order differentiability for deep learning. HoD-Net
is based on and generalizes the complex-step finite difference (CSFD) method. While similar to classic finite difference, CSFD approaches the derivative of a function from a
higher-dimension complex domain, leading to highly accurate and robust differentiation computation without numerical stability issues. This method can be coupled with backpropagation and adjoint perturbation methods for an efficient
calculation of high-order derivatives. We show how this numerical scheme can be leveraged in challenging deep learning
problems, such as high-order network training, deep learningbased physics simulation, and neural differential equations.

Introduction
The prosperity of deep learning (DL) is unlikely without the
development of underlying differentiation methods. Indeed,
the concept of neural networks has a long history dated back
to WW2, which was originally designed as a computational
modality for logical calculus (McCulloch and Pitts 1943).
However, the actual deployment of the deep neural network or DNN for machine learning is neither common nor
feasible until differentiation techniques, i.e., the automatic
differentiation (AD) method (Baydin et al. 2018; Rall and
Corliss 1996; Bücker et al. 2006), become fledged. A multilayer net is then treated as a compositional function, and we
can practically calculate its gradient via the backpropagation
(BP) (Hecht-Nielsen 1992; Rumelhart et al. 1995), which is
a dedicated implementation of reverse AD.
AD computes the analytic derivative of a function, using “exact formulas along with floating-point values” (Neidinger 2010). When higher-order differentiation is needed,
the computation complexity along the chain rule escalates at
a super-polynomial rate (w.r.t. the order of differentiation)
bringing practical difficulties in AD implementations (Margossian 2018). As a result, many existing AD packages (e.g.,
Adept (Hogan 2014)) only deals with the first-order derivative. While one may perform first-order differentiation multiple times to obtain a high-order derivative, it has been argued that recursive AD leads to inefficient and numerically

Background
Evaluating the differentiation of a function is often through
inferring the exact form of its derivative. While it is
possible to automatically obtain the analytic derivative
formulation with symbolic differentiation packages like
Mathematica (Wolfram et al. 1996) and Maple (Maple
1994), AD is more widely used in practice. AD decomposes
a general computation procedure into multiple basic steps,
and each step corresponds to a node on its computation
graph. AD analytically computes the derivative of each step
either using source code transformation (Utke et al. 2008;
van Merrienboer, Moldovan, and Wiltschko 2018) or operator overloading (Phipps and Pawlowski 2012). The latter
option is natively supported by most modern programming
languages like C++ and Python (e.g., see (Hogan 2014)).
Following the differentiation chain rule, it is possible to accumulate the final result in two directions, namely the forward mode and backward/reverse mode (Linnainmaa 1976;
Griewank 2012). Being widely used in DL, BP is essentially
AD of the reverse mode.
Numerical differentiation is another differentiation tech-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8249

