The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Teaching Humans When To Defer to a Classifier via Exemplars
Hussein Mozannar, Arvind Satyanarayan, David Sontag
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mozannar@mit.edu

Abstract

letting the human write down rules indicating what they
learned from each example. Our approach is inspired by research in the education literature that highlight the importance of feedback and lesson retention for learning (Atkinson et al. 2000; Hattie and Timperley 2007). To select the
teaching examples, we need to have a mathematical framework of how the human mental model evolves after we give
them feedback. We model the human thought process as first
deciding whether to rely on the AI’s prediction or not using
an internal rejector. This rejector is what we refer to as the
human’s mental model of the AI. We propose to model the
human’s rejector as consisting of a prior rejector and a nearest neighbor rule that only applies in local regions surrounding each teaching example. This novel parameterization is
inspired by work in cognitive science that suggests that humans make decisions by weighing similar past experiences
(Bornstein et al. 2017). Assuming this rejector model, we
give a near-optimal greedy strategy for selecting a set of representative teaching examples that allows us to control the
examples and the region surrounding them.
We first evaluate the efficacy of our algorithmic approach
on a set of synthetic experiments and its robustness to the
misspecification of the human’s model. For our main evaluation, we conduct experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk
on the task of passage-based question answering from HotpotQA (Yang et al. 2018). Crowdworkers first performed a
teaching phase and were then tested on a randomly chosen
subset of examples. Our results demonstrate the importance
of teaching: around half of the participants who undertook
the teaching phase were able to correctly determine the AI’s
region of error and had a resulting improved performance.
The full version of this paper is available on arxiv (Mozannar, Satyanarayan, and Sontag 2021).

Expert decision makers are starting to rely on data-driven
automated agents to assist them with various tasks. For this
collaboration to perform properly, the human decision maker
must have a mental model of when and when not to rely on
the agent. In this work, we aim to ensure that human decision
makers learn a valid mental model of the agent’s strengths
and weaknesses. To accomplish this goal, we propose an
exemplar-based teaching strategy where humans solve a set
of selected examples and with our help generalize from them
to the domain. We present a novel parameterization of the
human’s mental model of the AI that applies a nearest neighbor rule in local regions surrounding the teaching examples.
Using this model, we derive a near-optimal strategy for selecting a representative teaching set.We validate the benefits
of our teaching strategy on a multi-hop question answering
task with an interpretable AI model using crowd workers. We
find that when workers draw the right lessons from the teaching stage, their task performance improves. We furthermore
validate our method on a set of synthetic experiments.

Introduction
Automated agents powered by machine learning are augmenting the capabilities of human decision makers in settings such as healthcare (Gaube et al. 2021), content moderation (Link, Hellingrath, and Ling 2016) and more routine decisions such as asking AI-enabled virtual assistants
for recommendations (Shaikh and Cruz 2019). This mode
of interaction whereby the automated agent serves only to
provide a recommendation to the human decision maker, a
setting typically named AI assisted decision making, is the
focus of our study here. A key question is how does the human expert know when to rely on the AI for advice. In this
work, we make the case for the need to initially onboard the
human decision maker on when and when not to rely on the
automated agent. This allows the human to have an accurate
mental model of the AI agent, and this mental model helps
in setting expectations about the performance of the AI on
different examples.
Our onboarding phase consists of letting the human predict on a series of specially selected teaching examples while
providing feedback and enabling lesson retention through

Related Work
One of the goals of explainable machine learning is to enable humans to better evaluate the correctness of the AI’s
prediction by providing supporting evidence (Lai and Tan
2019; Suresh et al. 2021; Wortman Vaughan and Wallach
2021). However, these explanations do not inform the decision maker how to weigh their own predictions against those
of the AI or how to combine the AI’s evidence to make their
final decision (Kaur et al. 2020). The AI explanations cannot
factor in the effect of the human’s side information, and thus

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5323

