The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Adversarial Attack for Asynchronous Event-Based Data
Wooju Lee and Hyun Myung*
Urban Robotics Lab, School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
dnwn24@kaist.ac.kr, hmyung@kaist.ac.kr

Original event

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples that are carefully designed to cause the deep learning model to make mistakes. Adversarial examples of 2D images and 3D point clouds have been extensively studied, but
studies on event-based data are limited. Event-based data can
be an alternative to a 2D image under high-speed movements,
such as autonomous driving. However, the given adversarial
events make the current deep learning model vulnerable to
safety issues. In this work, we generate adversarial examples
and then train the robust models for event-based data, for the
first time. Our algorithm shifts the time of the original events
and generates additional adversarial events. Additional adversarial events are generated in two stages. First, null events
are added to the event-based data to generate additional adversarial events. The perturbation size can be controlled with
the number of null events. Second, the location and time of
additional adversarial events are set to mislead DNNs in a
gradient-based attack. Our algorithm achieves an attack success rate of 97.95% on the N-Caltech101 dataset. Furthermore, the adversarial training model improves robustness on
the adversarial event data compared to the original model.

Moterbike

Perturbation

Adversarial event

Llama

Figure 1: Grid representations of adversarial events. The
event times are separated by three channels and converted
to 2D RGB images. Shifting events (top). Generating additional adversarial events (middle). A combined method (bottom).

Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great
success in various domains, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Adversarial examples can mislead DNNs
by adding imperceivable perturbations to the original data.
They raise security concerns for DNNs in safety-critical scenarios, such as face recognition and autonomous driving,
etc. For secure and robust deep learning, adversarial attacks
have been extensively studied for data such as 2D images
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018;
Carlini and Wagner 2017), 3D point clouds (Xiang, Qi, and
Li 2018; Tsai et al. 2020), and natural languages (Jia and
Liang 2017; Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2018). However, studies
on event-based data are limited.
An event camera is an asynchronous visual sensor with
high dynamic range and temporal resolution. Instead of capturing the brightness of images at a fixed rate, an event camera measures brightness changes (called events) for each

pixel independently. An event camera can be an alternative to a traditional camera in situations that require highspeed and high-dynamic range, such as autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) (Maqueda et al.
2018; Dimitrova et al. 2020). Although event-based deep
learning models have been studied in various fields such as
object recognition (Sironi et al. 2018; Gehrig et al. 2019;
Lagorce et al. 2016), gesture recognition (Chen et al. 2020),
and optical flow (Zhu et al. 2018, 2019), adversarial attacks
on the event-based deep learning model raise security problems. In a recent study, Marchisio et al. (2021) generated
2D adversarial images in event-based data. They projected
event-based data to 2D images and generated 2D adversarial
images. However, event-based data cannot be retrieved from
2D adversarial images. As the input data of an event camera
cannot be attacked, it does not pose a real threat to the eventbased deep learning. In this paper, we study how to generate

* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1237

