The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Lingual Adversarial Domain Adaptation for Novice Programming
Ye Mao1 , Farzaneh Khoshnevisan2 , Thomas Price1 , Tiffany Barnes1 , Min Chi1
1

North Carolina State University
2
Intuit Inc.
{ymao4, twprice, tmbarnes, mchi}@ncsu.edu, farzaneh khoshnevisan@intuit.com

Abstract

stage. The latter task is particularly important for determining whether to provide additional learning interventions.
Programs are complex and contain both structural/syntactic and semantic information (Allamanis, Brockschmidt, and
Khademi 2018). Traditionally, expert-designed features are
used for SMP (Marwan et al. 2020), but they heavily rely
on expert knowledge of each task and are therefore laborintensive and task-specific. Recently, deep learning-based
models such as Code2vec (Alon et al. 2019) and ASTNN
(Zhang et al. 2019) have demonstrated extraordinary results on public datasets by analyzing Abstract Syntax Trees
(ASTs) of programs. These models, however, generally need
a lot of data to perform well. For example, when it comes
to program classification, ASTNN achieved 0.95 of AUC in
CodeWorkout (D2 ) dataset with 795 submissions compared
with 0.81 in iSnap (D1 ) dataset gathered from 171 students
over four semesters. In real classroom settings, collecting
programming sequences during small, in-person classes can
be prohibitively expensive as most teachers don’t teach using the same assignments in different semesters and it is rare
to have a large dataset to cover all the possible solution space
(Piech et al. 2015b). Domain Adaptation (DA), on the other
hand, has emerged as a promising research direction for reducing human effort in data collection by learning sufficient
information from relevant domains (Shen et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2019). DA has been shown to enhance
performance in a range of fields by sharing feature representations across different domains, wherein training data are
obtained from multiple domains (Nam and Han 2016).
In this work, we propose a Cross-lingual Adversarial
Domain Adaptation framework named CrossLing leveraging data from other programming systems to improve SMP
in small classroom settings. Our proposed framework is
based on a novel AST-based Neural Network (ASTNN)
(see (Zhang et al. 2019) for more details), which has been
shown to be very successful in student code analysis (Shi
et al. 2021). CrossLing uses an adversarial learning process to separate global latent representations across all domains from domain-specific representations. In this context, domains refer to programming systems using different programming languages. We leverage student programming data from iSnap (domain D1 ) and CodeWorkout (domain D2 ). The effectiveness of CrossLing is evaluated on
two tasks: student program classification and student suc-

Student modeling sits at the epicenter of adaptive learning
technology. In contrast to the voluminous work on student
modeling for well-defined domains such as algebra, there
has been little research on student modeling in programming
(SMP) due to data scarcity caused by the unbounded solution
spaces of open-ended programming exercises. In this work,
we focus on two essential SMP tasks: program classification and early prediction of student success and propose a
Cross-Lingual Adversarial Domain Adaptation (CrossLing)
framework that can leverage a large programming dataset to
learn features that can improve SMP’s build using a much
smaller dataset in a different programming language. Our
framework maintains one globally invariant latent representation across both datasets via an adversarial learning process,
as well as allocating domain-specific models for each dataset
to extract local latent representations that cannot and should
not be united. By separating globally-shared representations
from domain-specific representations, our framework outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods for both SMP tasks.

Introduction
Student modeling is a task of measuring students’ performance in a learning environment and predicting their future performance based on their previous interaction data.
While student modeling has been extensively studied in
well-defined domains like algebra and physics (Lin, Shen,
and Chi 2016; Pardos and Heffernan 2010), student modeling for programming (SMP) remains an extremely challenging machine learning problem through the combination of
Knowledge Tracing and Code Representation. Much of prior
work has explored code representation (Mou et al. 2014; Allamanis, Peng, and Sutton 2016; Bui, Yu, and Jiang 2021),
which is primarily concerned with identifying the functions
the corresponding code belongs to. In SMP, however, it’s vital to have the ability to measure students’ performances in
a learning environment and predict their future performance
based on historical data (Geden et al. 2020). This former task
is referred to as program classification: the task of determining whether a student’s code is correct or not, while the latter is the task of predicting a student’s success at an early
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7682

