The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Tractable Explanations for d-DNNF Classifiers
Xuanxiang Huang1 , Yacine Izza1 , Alexey Ignatiev2 ,
Martin Cooper3 , Nicholas Asher4 , Joao Marques-Silva4
1
University of Toulouse, France
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
IRIT, CNRS, Univ. Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France
4
IRIT, CNRS, Toulouse, France
xuanxiang.huang@univ-toulouse.fr, yacine.izza@univ-toulouse.fr, alexey.ignatiev@monash.edu,
martin.cooper@irit.fr, nicholas.asher@irit.fr, joao.marques-silva@irit.fr
2

Abstract

ated with an ML classifier into some propositional language (among those covered by the knowledge compilation
map (Darwiche and Marquis 2002)). As a result, more recent
work studied such propositional languages from the perspective of explainability, with the purpose of understanding the complexity of computing explanations (Audemard,
Koriche, and Marquis 2020; Barceló et al. 2020; Audemard
et al. 2021), but also with the goal of identifying examples of queries of interest (Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020; Audemard et al. 2021). Furthermore, although
recent work (Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020; Barceló et al. 2020) analyzed the complexity of explainability queries for classifiers represented with different propositional languages, it is also the case that it is unknown which
propositional languages allow the expressible functions to
be explained efficiently, and which do not. On the one hand,
(Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020) proposes conditions not met by most propositional languages. On the other
hand (Barceló et al. 2020) studies restricted cases of propositional languages, but focusing on smallest PI-explanations.
Also, since one key motivation for the use of propositional
languages is the efficiency of reasoning, namely with respect
to specific queries and transformations (Darwiche and Marquis 2002), a natural question is whether similar results can
be obtained in the setting of explainability.
This paper studies the computational complexity of computing PI-explanations (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018)
and contrastive explanations (Miller 2019b) for classifiers
represented with well-known propositional languages. Concretely, the paper shows that for any propositional language
that implements in polynomial time the queries of consistency (CO) and validity (VA), and the transformation of conditioning (CD), then one PI-explanation or one contrastive
explanation can be computed in polynomial time. This requirement is strictly less stringent than another one proposed
in earlier work (Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020),
thus proving that explanations can be computed in polynomial time for a larger range of propositional languages. Concretely, the paper shows that for classifiers represented with
several propositional languages, that include d-DNNF, one
PI-explanation or one contrastive explanation can be computed in polynomial time. The result immediately generalizes to propositional languages less succinct than d-DNNF,
e.g. OBDD, SDD, to name a few. Moreover, for the concrete

Compilation into propositional languages finds a growing
number of practical uses, including in constraint programming, diagnosis and machine learning (ML), among others.
One concrete example is the use of propositional languages
as classifiers, and one natural question is how to explain the
predictions made. This paper shows that for classifiers represented with some of the best-known propositional languages,
different kinds of explanations can be computed in polynomial time. These languages include deterministic decomposable negation normal form (d-DNNF), and so any propositional language that is strictly less succinct than d-DNNF.
Furthermore, the paper describes optimizations, specific to
Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDDs), which are shown to
yield more efficient algorithms in practice.

1

Introduction

The growing use of machine learning (ML) models in practical applications raises a number of concerns related with
fairness, robustness, but also explainability (Lipton 2018;
Weld and Bansal 2019; Monroe 2021). Recent years have
witnessed a number of works on computing explanations for
the predictions made by ML models1 . Approaches to computing explanations can be broadly categorized as heuristic (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee
2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018), which offer no
formal guarantees of rigor, and non-heuristic (Shih, Choi,
and Darwiche 2018; Ignatiev, Narodytska, and MarquesSilva 2019a; Darwiche and Hirth 2020; Audemard, Koriche, and Marquis 2020), which in contrast offer strong
guarantees of rigor. Non-heuristic explanation approaches
can be further categorized into compilation-based (Shih,
Choi, and Darwiche 2018, 2019; Darwiche and Hirth 2020)
and oracle-based (Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva
2019a; Malfa et al. 2021).
Compilation-based approaches (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018, 2019) compile the decision function associCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
There is a fast growing body of work on the explainability
of ML models. Example references include (Guidotti et al. 2019;
Samek et al. 2019; Samek and Müller 2019; Miller 2019b,a; Anjomshoae et al. 2019; Mittelstadt, Russell, and Wachter 2019; Xu
et al. 2019; Mueller et al. 2019).

5719

