The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

LaSSL: Label-Guided Self-Training for Semi-supervised Learning
∗

Zhen Zhao1 , Luping Zhou1 * , Lei Wang2 , Yinghuan Shi3 , Yang Gao3
2

1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of Sydney, Australia
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{zhen.zhao, luping.zhou}@sydney.edu.au, leiw@uow.edu.au, {syh, gaoy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

The principal idea of SSL is to dig guidance information for the unlabeled data and cooperate with few labeled
data to train models. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) SSL
approaches, either the classic self-training-based (Lee et al.
2013; Arazo et al. 2020; Yalniz et al. 2019) or the more recent consistency-based approaches (Tarvainen and Valpola
2017; Miyato et al. 2018; Berthelot et al. 2019, 2020; Sohn
et al. 2020), largely rely on the pseudo-labelling of the
unlabeled data (Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020). The former approaches first train the model based on the labeled
data and then use the model’s predictions on unlabeled data
as pseudo-labels. Differently, the latter approaches usually
generate two crops from a single image via data perturbations and take the prediction of one crop as the pseudolabel for the other. Such approaches commonly adopt a highthreshold mask to alleviate the confirmation bias(Arazo et al.
2020), but excluding samples with low-confidence pseudolabels results in severe inefficiencies in exploiting unlabeled
data and consumes a longer training time. More importantly,
the label information in such approaches only contributes as
a supervised loss, but its direct effects on pseudo-label generations are not explicitly considered.

The key to semi-supervised learning (SSL) is to explore
adequate information to leverage the unlabeled data.
Current dominant approaches aim to generate pseudolabels on weakly augmented instances and train models on their corresponding strongly augmented variants
with high-confidence results. However, such methods
are limited in excluding samples with low-confidence
pseudo-labels and under-utilization of the label information. In this paper, we emphasize the cruciality
of the label information and propose a Label-guided
Self-training approach to Semi-supervised Learning
(LaSSL), which improves pseudo-label generations
from two mutually boosted strategies. First, with the
ground-truth labels and iteratively-polished pseudolabels, we explore instance relations among all samples and then minimize a class-aware contrastive loss to
learn discriminative feature representations that make
same-class samples gathered and different-class samples scattered. Second, on top of improved feature representations, we propagate the label information to the
unlabeled samples across the potential data manifold
at the feature-embedding level, which can further improve the labelling of samples with reference to their
neighbours. These two strategies are seamlessly integrated and mutually promoted across the whole training process. We evaluate LaSSL on several classification benchmarks under partially labeled settings and
demonstrate its superiority over the state-of-the-art approaches.

Inspired by the observed limitations of the existing SSL
approaches as above, in this paper, we propose LaSSL,
a Label-guided Self-training approach to Semi-supervised
Learning. The term “label-guided” emphasizes the full exploitation of label information based on sample relations,
which is achieved by two intrinsically connected strategies aiming at improving the generation of pseudo-labels.
Firstly, given the potential semantic content carried by
ground-truth labels and pseudo-labels, LaSSL obtains the
instance relations at the prediction level and explores a better feature embedding through a proposed class-aware contrastive loss, so that the same-class samples are gathered and
the different-class samples are scattered. Consequently, all
the unlabeled samples are involved. At the same time, better
feature representations also indirectly benefit the quality of
pseudo-labels. Our approach differs from the assumption of
instance discrimination in contrastive learning(Jaiswal et al.
2021), where each image instance is treated as a distinct
class of its own. Secondly, on top of the sample relations
improved by the revised contrastive learning, we propagate
the labels from the labeled samples to the unlabeled ones
across the underlying data manifold via the label propaga-

Introduction
In the past several years, many remarkable breakthroughs
have been achieved in various computer vision tasks thanks
to fast developments of deep learning (Goodfellow et al.
2016). However, such a big success is closely dependent
on constructing large-scale labeled datasets which are increasingly costly and even infeasible in some professional
areas (e.g., medical and astronomical fields). To mitigate
the demand for labeled data, Semi-supervised learning
(SSL) (Oliver et al. 2018) has been proposed as a powerful
approach to leverage unlabeled data.
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9208

