The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Machine Learning for Online Algorithm Selection under Censored Feedback
Alexander Tornede, 1 Viktor Bengs, 2 Eyke Hüllermeier 2
1

Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University
2
Institute for Informatics, LMU Munich
alexander.tornede@upb.de, viktor.bengs@lmu.de, eyke@lmu.de

Abstract
In online algorithm selection (OAS), instances of an algorithmic problem class are presented to an agent one after another,
and the agent has to quickly select a presumably best algorithm from a fixed set of candidate algorithms. For decision
problems such as satisfiability (SAT), quality typically refers
to the algorithm’s runtime. As the latter is known to exhibit
a heavy-tail distribution, an algorithm is normally stopped
when exceeding a predefined upper time limit. As a consequence, machine learning methods used to optimize an algorithm selection strategy in a data-driven manner need to
deal with right-censored samples, a problem that has received
little attention in the literature so far. In this work, we revisit multi-armed bandit algorithms for OAS and discuss their
capability of dealing with the problem. Moreover, we adapt
them towards runtime-oriented losses, allowing for partially
censored data while keeping a space- and time-complexity
independent of the time horizon. In an extensive experimental
evaluation on an adapted version of the ASlib benchmark, we
demonstrate that theoretically well-founded methods based on
Thompson sampling perform specifically strong and improve
in comparison to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Algorithm selection (AS) considers the automatic selection
of an algorithm most suitable for solving an instance of an
algorithmic problem class, such as the boolean satisfiability
problem (SAT) or the traveling salesperson problem (TSP).
Suitability is often quantified in terms of a loss function
(or performance measure), such as solution quality or the
algorithm’s runtime — we shall focus on the latter in the
remainder of this work. AS is motivated by the phenomenon
of performance complementarity, roughly stating that the best
algorithm within a pool of candidate algorithms will typically
vary from instance to instance (Wolpert and Macready 1997;
Kerschke et al. 2019).
Considering AS in an online setting, i.e., online algorithm
selection (OAS), the problem can be posed as an iterative decision making problem, where instances arrive and decisions
have to be made in an online manner. This setting suggests
modeling the task as a contextual multi-armed bandit problem (Chu et al. 2011). In contrast to standard AS, one usually
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10370

does not assume an upfront training dataset, consisting of
loss function measurements for some of the algorithms on
some training instances. Instead, in the online setting, the
algorithm is provided feedback in the form of an evaluation
of the loss function for the selected algorithm on the current
instance, after the selection has been made.
In practice, algorithm runtime distributions often exhibit a
heavy-tail property (Gomes, Selman, and Crato 1997), meaning that some algorithms can take extremely long to terminate on some instances. To avoid an online AS system from
stalling, it is common to run algorithms with a timeout after
which the algorithm is forcefully terminated if it did not solve
the instance before. Correspondingly, one may end up with
unsolved instances and right-censored runtimes (Kleinbaum
and Klein 2010): although the true runtime is not known
precisely, it is known to exceed the timeout. Needless to say,
learning algorithms should try to exploit such censored data,
which nevertheless provide a kind of “weak supervision”. Although different forms of the OAS problem have been studied
quite intensively in the literature (cf. Section 3), censoring
has hardly been considered so far.
To alleviate this situation, we revisit well-known linear
contextual bandit algorithms for the OAS problem under
censored data and and discuss their weaknesses. Thereupon,
we present theoretically grounded adaptations of these algorithms, incorporating improvements toward learning from
censored data and employing selection criteria tailored toward runtime-based loss functions from the field of AS. In an
extensive experimental study, we show that our approaches
improve in terms of performance upon comparable existing
approaches while featuring a time- and space-complexity independent of the time horizon. All code including detailed
documentation and the technical appendix can be found on
Github (cf. Section 7).

2

The Online Algorithm Selection Problem

The online algorithm selection problem is an iterative decision making problem, which comprises a problem instance
space I featuring instances of an algorithmic problem class,
and a set of candidate algorithms A, which can solve such
instances. The instances arrive iteratively over time, so that,
at each time step t, an algorithm spht , it q “ at P A has to be
chosen by the algorithm selector
s:HˆI ÑA
(1)

