The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Joint 3D Object Detection and Tracking Using Spatio-Temporal Representation of
Camera Image and LiDAR Point Clouds
Junho Koh1 * , Jaekyum Kim1 * , Jin Hyeok Yoo1 , Yecheol Kim1 , Dongsuk Kum2 , Jun Won Choi1
1

Hanyang University
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{jhkoh, jkkim, jhyoo, yckim}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, dskum@kaist.ac.kr, junwchoi@hanyang.ac.kr
2

Abstract

sensors, would it not be beneficial to jointly design and optimize both detectors and trackers to improve the performance
of both?
Several works relevant to JoDT have been reported in the
literature (Zhang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020; Wang, Kitani, and Weng 2020; Hu et al. 2019; Kim and Kim 2016;
Kieritz, Hubner, and Arens 2018; Voigtlaender et al. 2019;
Shenoi et al. 2020). The previous JoDT methods can be categorized into two approaches. The first approach integrates
the re-identification network for object association into the
detector and jointly optimizes them end-to-end. This approach was mostly developed for 2D MOT, including TrackRCNN (Voigtlaender et al. 2019), JDE (Wang et al. 2020),
FairMOT (Zhang et al. 2021), RetinaTrack (Lu et al. 2020),
and GSDT (Wang, Kitani, and Weng 2020). The second approach exploits the intermediate features extracted by the
detector for MOT. The appearance cues and motion context identified by the detector were used to perform tracking.
The 2D MOT methods in this category include MPNTrack
(Brasó and Leal-Taixé 2020), RNN tracker (Kieritz, Hubner,
and Arens 2018), CDT (Kim and Kim 2016), PredNet (Munjal et al. 2020), and Chained-Tracker (Peng et al. 2020). The
JoDT methods for 3D MOT include the mono3DT (Hu et al.
2019) and JRMOT(Shenoi et al. 2020).
In this paper, we propose a new JoDT method, referred to
as 3D DetecTrack, which performs 3D MOT based on the
sequence of the camera images in conjunction with LiDAR
point clouds. In our framework, the detector and tracker cooperate to utilize spatio-temporal information to perform 3D
object detection and tracking.
First, the detector generates spatio-temporal features by
combining the spatial features produced by the camera and
LiDAR sensor fusion over time. This operation creates features for detecting objects with higher accuracy. The detection step in 3D DetecTrack also exploits the tracklet maintained by the tracker to improve detection accuracy. The region proposal network (RPN) calibrates an objectness score
based on the intersection of union (IoU) between the anchor
box and its nearest tracklet box. Then, refinement network
aggregates the instance-level features from adjacent frames
and adjusts the classification scores in a manner similar to
RPN. This design is inspired by the intuition that the tracklets provide useful cues, which can increase the confidence
score for detecting objects.

In this paper, we propose a new joint object detection and
tracking (JoDT) framework for 3D object detection and tracking based on camera and LiDAR sensors. The proposed
method, referred to as 3D DetecTrack, enables the detector
and tracker to cooperate to generate a spatio-temporal representation of the camera and LiDAR data, with which 3D
object detection and tracking are then performed. The detector constructs the spatio-temporal features via the weighted
temporal aggregation of the spatial features obtained by the
camera and LiDAR fusion. Then, the detector reconfigures
the initial detection results using information from the tracklets maintained up to the previous time step. Based on the
spatio-temporal features generated by the detector, the tracker
associates the detected objects with previously tracked objects using a graph neural network (GNN). We devise a fullyconnected GNN facilitated by a combination of rule-based
edge pruning and attention-based edge gating, which exploits
both spatial and temporal object contexts to improve tracking performance. The experiments conducted on both KITTI
and nuScenes benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed 3D
DetecTrack achieves significant improvements in both detection and tracking performances over baseline methods and
achieves state-of-the-art performance among existing methods through collaboration between the detector and tracker.

Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) based on sensor measurements (e.g., camera and LiDAR) is essential for machine perception tasks in robotics and autonomous driving
applications. The traditional approach is the tracking-bydetection strategy, which detects objects based on a single
snapshot of sensor measurements and temporally links the
detection results over multiple snapshots. In this approach,
detection and tracking are considered independent tasks and
thus have been studied separately by different research communities.
Although the tracking-by-detection approach has been
shown to be effective in numerous studies, the following
question arises: if our end goal is to identify moving objects
based on the sequence of measurements received from the
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1210

