The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SVGA-Net: Sparse Voxel-Graph Attention Network for 3D Object Detection from
Point Clouds
Qingdong He, Zhengning Wang∗ , Hao Zeng, Yi Zeng, Yijun Liu
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
heqingdong@alu.uestc.edu.cn,zhengning.wang@uestc.edu.cn, {haozeng,zengyii,yijunliu}@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

2018; Yan, Mao, and Li 2018). Then convolutional neural networks and mature 2D objection detection frameworks (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016) are applied to extract features. However, because projection alone cannot capture the object’s geometric information well, many methods(Chen et al. 2017; Wang and Jia 2019; Qi et al. 2018; Sindagi, Zhou, and Tuzel 2019) have to combine RGB images in
the designed network. While the methods using only voxelization do not make good use of the properties of the point
clouds and bring a huge computational burden(Liu et al.
2019) as resolution increases. Apart from converting point
clouds into other formats, some works (Shi, Wang, and Li
2019; Yang et al. 2019) take Pointnets (Qi et al. 2017a,b) as
backbone to process point clouds directly. Although Pointnets build a hierarchical network and use a symmetric function to maintain permutation invariance, they fail to construct the neighbour relationships between the grouped point
sets.
Considering the properties of point clouds, we should notice the superiority of graphs in dealing with the irregular
data. In fact, in the domain of point clouds for segmentation and classification tasks, the method of processing with
graphs has been deeply studied by many works (Qi et al.
2017; Bi et al. 2019; Landrieu and Simonovsky 2018; Shen
et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019). However, few researches have
used graphs to make 3D object detection from point clouds. To our knowledge, Point-GNN(Shi and Rajkumar 2020)
may be the first to prove the potential of using the graph
neural network as a new approach for 3D object detection.
Point-GNN introduces auto-registration mechanism to reduce translation variance and designs box merging and scoring operation to combine detection results from multiple vertices accurately. However, similar to ShapeContextNet (Xie
et al. 2018) and Pointnet++ (Qi et al. 2017b), the relationship between point sets is not well established in the feature
extraction process and a large number of matrix operations
will bring heavy calculation burden and memory cost.
In this paper, we propose the sparse voxel-graph attention
network (SVGA-Net) for 3D object detection. SVGA-Net
is an end-to-end trainable network which takes raw point
clouds as input and outputs the category and bounding boxes information of the object. Specifically, SVGA-Net mainly
consists of voxel-graph network module and sparse-to-dense
regression module. Instead of normalized rectangle voxels,

Accurate 3D object detection from point clouds has become a
crucial component in autonomous driving. However, the volumetric representations and the projection methods in previous works fail to establish the relationships between the local point sets. In this paper, we propose Sparse Voxel-Graph
Attention Network (SVGA-Net), a novel end-to-end trainable network which mainly contains voxel-graph module and
sparse-to-dense regression module to achieve comparable 3D
detection tasks from raw LIDAR data. Specifically, SVGANet constructs the local complete graph within each divided
3D spherical voxel and global KNN graph through all voxels.
The local and global graphs serve as the attention mechanism to enhance the extracted features. In addition, the novel
sparse-to-dense regression module enhances the 3D box estimation accuracy through feature maps aggregation at different levels. Experiments on KITTI detection benchmark and
Waymo Open dataset demonstrate the efficiency of extending the graph representation to 3D object detection and the
proposed SVGA-Net can achieve decent detection accuracy.

Introduction
With the widespread popularity of LIDAR sensors in autonomous driving (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012) and
augmented reality (Park, Lepetit, and Woo 2008), 3D object detection from point clouds has become a mainstream
research direction. Compared to RGB images from video
cameras, point clouds could provide accurate depth and geometric information (Yu et al. 2020) which can be used not
only to locate the object, but also to describe the shape of
the object (Zhang et al. 2020). However, the properties of
unordered, sparsity and relevance of point clouds make it a
challenging task to utilize point clouds for 3D object detection directly.
In recent years, several pioneering approaches have been
proposed to tackle these challenges for 3D object detection
on point clouds. The main ideas for processing point clouds data are to project point clouds to different views(Simon
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2017; Ku et al. 2018; Liang et al.
2018; Yang, Luo, and Urtasun 2018) or divide the point
clouds into equally spaced voxels(Li 2017; Zhou and Tuzel
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

870

