The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FisheyeHDK: Hyperbolic Deformable Kernel Learning for Ultra-Wide
Field-of-View Image Recognition
Ola Ahmad1 , Freddy Lecue1, 2
1

Thales, Thales Digital Solutions, Canada
2
INRIA, France
ola.ahmad@thalesdigital.io, freddy.lecue@inria.fr

Abstract

plane), fisheye images suffer from non-linear distortion in
which straight lines are mapped to curvilinear (distorted
lines) to provide large FoV on a finite spatial support. According to (Kannala and Brandt 2006), fisheye distortion
does not obey one specific projection model. A general polynomial mapping of fourth order was proven to be an accurate approximation of fisheye camera model (Yogamani
et al. 2019; Yin et al. 2018). This model was used to synthesize fisheye effects on perspective images. It was also used
for calibration and distortion correction prior to fisheye image recognition tasks. However, estimating the parameters
of the polynomial model of order four is an inverse problem
which is ill-posed, in practice, under the lack of information
and careful assumptions. In this paper, we address the challenge of ultra-wide FoV image recognition without the need
for distortion correction. A challenge that is quite recent in
computer vision research areas.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
state-of-the-art results on perception tasks when trained
on perspective images. However, their performance significantly drops when applied on or transferred to fisheye images. Convolution networks rely on the translation invariant property and use fixed kernel shapes over all image
plane. The translation invariance property makes their training harder on fisheye images because of the spatially varying
distortion. Therefore, some CNN model adaptation methods
based on kernel adaptation and learning were proposed to
solve recognition tasks from large FoV images. Our work
is inspired by the deformable kernel learning concept (Dai
et al. 2017; Jeon and Kim 2017) which aims to learn local offset fields prior to convolution units in standard CNNs.
Here, we propose a novel method that learns deformable kernels in hyperbolic spaces for wide FoV images; we generalize the original concept to provide a flexible solution for
non-linear offsets.

Conventional convolution neural networks (CNNs) trained on
narrow Field-of-View (FoV) images are the state-of-the art
approaches for object recognition tasks. Some methods proposed the adaptation of CNNs to ultra-wide FoV images by
learning deformable kernels. However, they are limited by the
Euclidean geometry and their accuracy degrades under strong
distortions caused by fisheye projections. In this work, we
demonstrate that learning the shape of convolution kernels in
non-Euclidean spaces is better than existing deformable kernel methods. In particular, we propose a new approach that
learns deformable kernel parameters (positions) in hyperbolic
space. FisheyeHDK is a hybrid CNN architecture combining
hyperbolic and Euclidean convolution layers for positions and
features learning. First, we provide intuition of hyperbolic
space for wide FoV images. Using synthetic distortion profiles, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. We
select two datasets - Cityscapes and BDD100K 2020 - of perspective images which we transform to fisheye equivalents at
different scaling factors (analogue to focal lengths). Finally,
we provide an experiment on data collected by a real fisheye
camera. Validations and experiments show that our approach
improves existing deformable kernel methods for CNN adaptation on fisheye images.

Introduction
Fisheye cameras are designed with ultra-wide field of view
(FoV) lenses to offer wide images. They are commonly
used in many computer vision applications. In particular, autonomous vehicles heavily rely on perception tasks such as
semantic segmentation and object detection from the environment surrounding the vehicle for path and motion planning, driving policy, and decision making (Deng et al. 2020;
Yogamani et al. 2019). To optimize the load on autonomous
vehicles, only four fisheye cameras each with FoV up to
180◦ can be used to provide the total 360◦ scene coverage
(Yogamani et al. 2019). Automated drones (Hrabar et al.
2005), augmented reality (Schmalstieg and Höllerer 2017)
and surveillance (Kim et al. 2015) are other interesting applications of large FoV cameras. However, unlike pinhole
projection models of narrow FoV cameras (where straight
lines in 3D world are projected to straight lines in image

Motivation We are motivated by learning CNNs aware to
the geometric distortions tied to wide FOV cameras such as
fisheye. We assume an existing analogy between hyperbolic
space, more particularly the Poincaré Ball Model, and fisheye projections. The poincaré ball is a stereographic projection of the hyperbolic space on a disk in image plane
(Fig. 2). The poincaré ball is a conformal mapping that preserves angles between distorted lines. We can thus obtain

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5968

