The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards a Rigorous Evaluation of Time-Series Anomaly Detection
Siwon Kim1

Kukjin Choi1,2

Hyun-Soo Choi3,4

Byunghan Lee5 *

Sungroh Yoon1,6,7 *

1

Data Science and AI Laboratory, Seoul National University, Korea
2
DIT Center, Samsung Electronics, Korea 3 Ziovision, Korea
4
Department of CSE and Education Research Team for Medical Big-data Convergence, Kangwon National University, Korea
5
Department of Electronic and IT Media Engineering, Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Korea
6
Department of ECE and Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University, Korea
7
AIIS, ASRI, and INMC, Seoul National University, Korea
{tuslkkk, kj21.choi}@snu.ac.kr choi.hyunsoo@kangwon.ac.kr bhlee@seoultech.ac.kr sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Informative
anomaly score

(a)

Abstract

1

Threshold

Point adjust (

Adjusted
Random
anomaly score prediction

In recent years, proposed studies on time-series anomaly detection (TAD) report high F1 scores on benchmark TAD
datasets, giving the impression of clear improvements in
TAD. However, most studies apply a peculiar evaluation protocol called point adjustment (PA) before scoring. In this
paper, we theoretically and experimentally reveal that the
PA protocol has a great possibility of overestimating the detection performance; even a random anomaly score can easily
turn into a state-of-the-art TAD method. Therefore, the comparison of TAD methods after applying the PA protocol can
lead to misguided rankings. Furthermore, we question the potential of existing TAD methods by showing that an untrained
model obtains comparable detection performance to the existing methods even when PA is forbidden. Based on our findings, we propose a new baseline and an evaluation protocol.
We expect that our study will help a rigorous evaluation of
TAD and lead to further improvement in future researches.

GT anomaly

)

Point adjust (

)
Threshold

Time

(b)
Methods

F1 score

GDN
OmniAnomaly
LSTM-VAE
DAGMM
USAD

Introduction

Random score

As Industry 4.0 accelerates system automation, consequences of system failures can have a significant social impact (Baheti and Gill 2011; Lee 2008; Lee, Bagheri, and Kao
2015). To prevent this failure, the detection of the anomalous
state of a system is more important than ever, and it is being
studied under the name of anomaly detection (AD). Meanwhile, deep learning has shown its effectiveness in modeling multivariate time-series data collected from numerous sensors and actuators of large systems (Chalapathy and
Chawla 2019). Therefore, various time-series AD (TAD)
methods have widely adopted deep learning, and each of
them demonstrated its own superiority by reporting higher
F1 scores than the preceding methods (Choi et al. 2021).
For some datasets, the reported F1 scores exceed 0.9, giving
an encouraging impression of today’s TAD capabilities.
However, most of the current TAD methods measure the
F1 score after applying a peculiar evaluation protocol named
point adjustment (PA), proposed by Xu et al. (Audibert et al.

w/

w/o

Baseline

Figure 1: (a) PA makes different anomaly scores indistinguishable. The black lines, gray area, and dashed line indicate the anomaly scores, GT anomaly segment, and TAD
threshold, respectively. After applying PA, the predictions
for informative and random anomaly scores degenerate to
the same adjusted prediction (red). (b) Existing methods fail
to exceed F1PA of a randomly generated anomaly score (left)
and show no improvement against the newly proposed baseline (right) even when PA is forbidden for the WADI dataset.

2020; Shen, Li, and Kwok 2020; Su et al. 2019). PA works
as follows: if at least one moment in a contiguous anomaly
segment is detected as an anomaly, the entire segment is then
considered to be correctly predicted as anomaly. Typically,
F1 score is calculated with the adjusted predictions (hereinafter denoted by F1PA ). The F1 score computed without
PAis denoted as F1. The PA protocol was proposed on the

* Correspondence with Byunghan Lee and Sungroh Yoon
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7194

