The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Temporally and Semantically Consistent Unpaired Video-to-video
Translation Through Pseudo-Supervision From Synthetic Optical Flow
Kaihong Wang1 * , Kumar Akash2 , Teruhisa Misu2
1

Boston University
Honda Research Institute USA, Inc.
kaiwkh@bu.edu, kakash@honda-ri.com, tmisu@honda-ri.com
2

Abstract

A major challenge in extending synthesis from imagelevel to video-level is temporal inconsistency; it originates
from the subtle difference in temporally adjacent frames,
which is further magnified in the unstable translation process. As a result, translating every frame independently leads
to flickering effects even if every single frame is correctly
translated to the target domain from an image translation
perspective. On the other hand, semantic inconsistency is
another common problem highly correlated with temporal
inconsistency, which refers to the changes in the semantic
labels during the unstable translation process.
To address these problems, Recycle-GAN (Bansal et al.
2018) introduces spatiotemporal consistency constraint that
utilizes temporal information in videos to regularize the temporal consistency in the translation, and is widely adopted
by subsequent works. Practically, the temporal information
is obtained from the estimated motions between temporally
adjacent frames to synchronize motions before and after the
translation, thereby enforcing cyclic spatiotemporal consistency. Meanwhile, semantic consistency is also improved
when temporally contextual factors are incorporated as additional spatial smoothing. As a result, generators are guided
to perform temporally and semantically consistent video
translation at the same time.
Intuitively, the effect of regularization of the spatiotemporal consistency greatly relies on the accuracy of motion
estimation. However, most existing works fail to accurately
estimate motion and therefore weaken the benefits of the
regularization. For instance, the pixel-level temporal predictor P in Recycle-GAN (Bansal et al. 2018), as illustrated in
Figure 1(a), and the optical flow estimators in (Chen et al.
2019; Park et al. 2019), as illustrated in Figure 1(b), are very
likely to make inaccurate estimations of the motions due to
capacity limitation of the models or domain gap problems.
This impairs the consistency of motions across domains, and
the enforcement of the spatiotemporal consistency based on
the inaccurately estimated motions will inadvertently be included as the target of optimization of the generators for
the translation model. Therefore, generators will be misled
when they are forced to fix the mistakes made by motion estimation in the paradigm and synthesize consistent images
given inconsistent motions. As a result, the temporal and semantic stability of translated videos is undermined.
In this paper, we propose a novel paradigm that learns

Unpaired video-to-video translation aims to translate videos
between a source and a target domain without the need of
paired training data, making it more feasible for real applications. Unfortunately, the translated videos generally suffer
from temporal and semantic inconsistency. To address this,
many existing works adopt spatiotemporal consistency constraints incorporating temporal information based on motion
estimation. However, the inaccuracies in the estimation of
motion deteriorate the quality of the guidance towards spatiotemporal consistency, which leads to unstable translation.
In this work, we propose a novel paradigm that regularizes
the spatiotemporal consistency by synthesizing motions in
input videos with the generated optical flow instead of estimating them. Therefore, the synthetic motion can be applied in the regularization paradigm to keep motions consistent across domains without the risk of errors in motion estimation. Thereafter, we utilize our unsupervised recycle and
unsupervised spatial loss, guided by the pseudo-supervision
provided by the synthetic optical flow, to accurately enforce
spatiotemporal consistency in both domains. Experiments
show that our method is versatile in various scenarios and
achieves state-of-the-art performance in generating temporally and semantically consistent videos. Code is available at:
https://github.com/wangkaihong/Unsup Recycle GAN/.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
has shown its versatility in various computer vision applications, especially in cross-domain image-to-image translation (Isola et al. 2017) tasks. However, such tasks normally require a huge amount of pixel-level annotation
in datasets and generating such dataset with aligned image pairs is not only expensive but sometimes also unnecessary when expected output is not uniquely paired
with input. Consequently, unpaired image-to-image translation (Zhu et al. 2017a) addresses this task in the absence
of paired images. On this basis, unpaired video-to-video
translation (Bashkirova, Usman, and Saenko 2018; Bansal
et al. 2018) is further introduced to translate a source domain video to its target domain counterpart.
* Work done as an intern at Honda Research Institute USA, Inc.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2477

