The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Variant of Concurrent Constraint Programming on GPU
Pierre Talbot, Frédéric Pinel, Pascal Bouvry
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT)
University of Luxembourg
Esch-sur-Alzette L-4243, Luxembourg
pierre.talbot@uni.lu, frederic.pinel@uni.lu, pascal.bouvry@uni.lu

Abstract

reached and no more values can be removed. The search
step then splits the problem into two complementary subproblems. Propagation and search alternates recursively until either a solution is found or no solution could be found.
Search can be parallelized without much hurdles by executing each subproblem on a different thread. This approach
has been explored in-depth on CPUs and in distributed settings (Perron 1999; Schulte 2000; Malapert, Régin, and
Rezgui 2016). However, it is not very efficient to run a subproblem per thread on a GPU; in part due to the limited
cache memory available per thread. On the other hand, propagation is almost never parallelized in modern constraint
solvers because propagators are executed in a highly sequential manner (Schulte and Stuckey 2008). Moreover, as propagators share variables, it seems that synchronization will
unavoidably hinder efficiency and complicate the solver architecture (Gent et al. 2018).
In this paper, we contribute to a simple, intrinsically parallel, lock-free and formally correct programming language based on concurrent constraint programming
(CCP) (Saraswat 1993), that we call parallel CCP (PCCP).
CCP has been very successful to describe concurrent computations at the theoretical level, but has had limited impact
on practical implementations. PCCP aims to bridge this gap
between concurrency theory and parallel programming.
The key characteristics of PCCP is to allow threads to
progress and communicate on a shared memory without synchronization, and still to always reach a unique deterministic
result. The main ingredient is the notion of fixed point over
lattices (Davey and Priestley 2002), a practical and mathematical structure, which guarantees the correct combination
of parallel processes. To show the correctness of our language, we successively refine the semantics of PCCP from
denotational, operational and then to a low-level semantics
based on load and store operations. In particular, we show
that whether the fixed point of a PCCP program is computed
sequentially or in parallel, the result of the execution remains
the same.
Through the lens of PCCP, we then re-examine parallel
constraint solving on GPUs. We propose T URBO, the first
propagate and search constraint solver fully implemented on
GPUs. To accommodate the architecture of GPUs, we have
made several algorithmic simplifications which are normally
considered crucial for efficiency in sequential solvers. For

The number of cores on graphical computing units (GPUs)
is reaching thousands nowadays, whereas the clock speed
of processors stagnates. Unfortunately, constraint programming solvers do not take advantage yet of GPU parallelism.
One reason is that constraint solvers were primarily designed
within the mental frame of sequential computation. To solve
this issue, we take a step back and contribute to a simple,
intrinsically parallel, lock-free and formally correct programming language based on concurrent constraint programming.
We then re-examine parallel constraint solving on GPUs
within this formalism, and develop T URBO, a simple constraint solver entirely programmed on GPUs. T URBO validates the correctness of our approach and compares positively
to a parallel CPU-based solver.

Introduction
The number of cores of graphical computing units (GPUs)
steadily increases over the years, reaching thousands nowadays, whereas central processing unit (CPU) clock speed
and core numbers stagnate (Thompson and Spanuth 2021).
However, it is notoriously difficult and error prone to write
parallel programs on shared memory systems (Lee 2006).
Threads introduce nondeterminism that must be pruned using synchronization mechanisms such as locks and barriers.
However, too much synchronization quickly reduce the efficiency of a parallel program, sometimes making it slower
than its sequential counterpart.
This phenomenon is observed in the field of constraint
programming, where constraint solvers do not benefit yet
from the parallelism offered by GPUs. One of the reasons
is that most of the key optimisations of constraint solvers,
including propagation loop, search strategies, global constraints and various forms of constraints learning, were primarily designed in the mental frame of sequential computation.
To grasp the challenge, we consider a standard solving algorithm named propagate and search (see, e.g., Tack
(2009)). Each constraint is implemented by a function,
called a propagator, which removes inconsistent values
from the domain of its variables. The propagation is the
process of executing the propagators until a fixed point is
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3830

