The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Differentially Private Normalizing Flows for Synthetic Tabular Data Generation
Jaewoo Lee1 , Minjung Kim2 , Yonghyun Jeong2 , Youngmin Ro2
1

University of Georgia
2
Samsung SDS
jwlee@cs.uga.edu, {mj100.kim, yhyun.jeong, youngmin.ro}@samsung.com

Abstract

end up learning a degenerate distribution in which arbitrarily
high likelihoods are assigned to few particular values (Uria,
Murray, and Larochelle 2013). To avoid this, DP-HFlow first
converts discrete values into continuous ones using variational dequantization (Ho et al. 2019) and applies the same
density estimator to both continuous and discrete variables
to capture the interactions between them.
Second, compared to other generative models, NF models have a higher parameter complexity. To improve the expressiveness, flow-based models are normally constructed
by composing multiple sub-flows. In practice, this is implemented by repeating the same blocks of transformations.
For example, GLOW (Kingma and Dhariwal 2018) model
contains 32 blocks of actnorm, 1×1 convolution, and affine
coupling transformations. This increased complexity poses a
significant challenge to the differentially private training of
NF models. To reduce the parameter complexity, we propose
a conditional spline flow whose transformation is conditionally defined by an additional input. The conditional spline
flow is shared among multiple layers of sub-flows and hence
helps mitigate the parameter complexity.
Third, the neural networks in DP-HFlow used to generate the parameters of each sub-flow are heterogeneous
in terms of both architecture and parameter complexity.
As a result, the scales of their gradients vary significantly
not only among different networks but also among layers.
We observed that a naı̈ve application of gradient clipping
technique (Abadi et al. 2016) results in a poor signal-tonoise ratio for some layers, making the training difficult.
In DP-HFlow, we introduce two advanced strategies for
fine-grained gradient clipping (namely, per-unit clipping and
stochastic sparsification) and show that they can accelerate
private training by improving the signal-to-noise ratio.
Lastly, the gradient clipping technique requires modifying
per-example gradients. For easy Jacobian determinant computation, NF models use neural network layers with custom
factorized parameters. While per-example gradients for such
layers can be computed using auto-differentiation library
with gradient accumulation trick, it forces the model to process one example at a time instead of as a batch, which unacceptably slows down the training of differentially private
models (Bagdasaryan, Poursaeed, and Shmatikov 2019). To
improve the scalability of private training, we analyze the
back-propagation equations for these custom layers and de-

Normalizing flows have shown to be a promising approach to
deep generative modeling due to their ability to exactly evaluate density — other alternatives either implicitly model the
density or use approximate surrogate density. In this work,
we present a differentially private normalizing flow model for
heterogeneous tabular data. Normalizing flows are in general
not amenable to differentially private training because they
require complex neural networks with larger depth (compared
to other generative models) and use specialized architectures
for which per-example gradient computation is difficult (or
unknown). To reduce the parameter complexity, the proposed
model introduces a conditional spline flow which simulates
transformations at different stages depending on additional
input and is shared among sub-flows. For privacy, we introduce two fine-grained gradient clipping strategies that provide a better signal-to-noise ratio and derive fast gradient clipping methods for layers with custom parameterization. Our
empirical evaluations show that the proposed model preserves
statistical properties of original dataset better than other baselines.

Introduction
Differentially private generative modeling of data has received much attention due to the ability to generate samples from the learned distributions while protecting privacy.
However, majority of existing approaches focused on two
popular deep generative models: generative adversarial networks (GANs) and variational autoencoders (VAEs), and
other types of generative models remain unexplored. In this
paper, we develop a differentially private normalizing flow
model, called DP-HFlow, to synthesize realistic tabular data.
Normalizing flows (NFs) (Tabak and Turner 2013;
Rezende and Mohamed 2015) allow exact evaluation of likelihood via change of variables and hence can be directly
trained with maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). Despite these advantages, modeling tabular data using a flowbased model under differential privacy poses several challenges. First, many real-world tabular datasets contain both
continuous and discrete variables. Unfortunately, NFs are
not immediately applicable to datasets with mixed types.
When training a continuous density model, such as normalizing flows, on discrete data using MLE, the model may
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7345

