The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Action Gap Increasing with Clipped Advantage Learning
Zhe Zhang,1, 2 Yaozhong Gan, 1, 2 Xiaoyang Tan 1, 2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
{zhangzhe, yzgancn, x.tan}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

However, a potential problem less studied by previous research is that the advantage term may become a burden if the
optimal action induced by the approximated value function
does not align with the true optimal action. This mismatch is
common when there exists under-exploration about the current MDP and would lead to a negative advantage term for
the true optimal action at the next iteration. Consequently,
the AL operator could hinder the value improvement about
the true optimal and may lead to suboptimal policies. To
investigate this issue, we provide an in-depth analysis on
the relationship between advantage term and performance
loss bound for the AL operator. The theoretical result shows
that the advantage term could lead to more cumulative errors
in performance loss bound while increasing the action gap,
hence slowing down the value/policy update. We further illustrate this problem by a classic chain-walk example.

Advantage Learning (AL) seeks to increase the action gap between the optimal action and its competitors, so as to improve
the robustness to estimation errors. However, the method becomes problematic when the optimal action induced by the
approximated value function does not agree with the true optimal action. In this paper, we present a novel method, named
clipped Advantage Learning (clipped AL), to address this issue. The method is inspired by our observation that increasing
the action gap blindly for all given samples while not taking
their necessities into account could accumulate more errors
in the performance loss bound, leading to a slow value convergence, and to avoid that, we should adjust the advantage
value adaptively. We show that our simple clipped AL operator not only enjoys fast convergence guarantee but also retains
proper action gaps, hence achieving a good balance between
the large action gap and the fast convergence. The feasibility
and effectiveness of the proposed method are verified empirically on several RL benchmarks with promising performance.

To address the above issue, we present an improved AL
algorithm named clipped Advantage Learning (clipped AL).
Our key idea can be summarized as ”advantage term should
not be added without necessity” according to the principle
of Occam’s razor. Intuitively, assume that the optimal action induced by the approximated value function were wrong
(which is highly likely at the early stage of the training),
the action gap term works just like a regularization imposed
on two randomly suboptimal actions and hence it makes no
sense to continuously enlarge their gap if it has already been
very large. Based on this observation, during AL training we
first determine whether the current action gap is too small
and only increase this gap if it is below some predefined
threshold. This can be easily implemented with a clipping
function, and hence we call the resulting method Clipped
AL. We show that, with this simple mechanism, we could
significantly improve the stability of the AL training by reducing the potential adverse effects when the induced optimal action is wrong. Besides, clipped AL adopts an adaptive clipping mechanism to adjust the advantage term more
reasonably for a robust action gap increasing. From the perspective of implicit regularization, clipped AL can also be
viewed as a relaxation on the KL constraints. We prove that
a theoretical balance between fast convergence and large action gap can be achieved by clipped AL. Empirical performance on popular RL benchmarks also verifies the feasibility and effectiveness of our clipped AL.

Introduction
Many recent studies have shown that (deep) reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms can achieve great progress when
making use of regularization, though they may be derived
from different motivations, such as robust policy optimization (Schulman et al. 2015, 2017) or efficient exploration
(Haarnoja et al. 2017, 2018a). According to the reformulation in (Vieillard, Pietquin, and Geist 2020; Vieillard et al.
2020), Advantage Learning (AL) (Bellemare et al. 2016) can
also be viewed as a variant of the Bellman optimality operator imposed by an implicit Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization between two consecutive policies. And this KL
penalty can help to reduce the policy search space for stable
and efficient optimization.
Specifically, the AL operator adds a scaling advantage
value term to Bellman optimality operator. Besides transformed into an implicit KL-regularized update, this operator
can directly increase the gap between the optimal and suboptimal actions, called action gap. (Bellemare et al. 2016)
shows that increasing this gap is beneficial, and especially a
large gap can mitigate the undesirable effects of estimation
errors from the approximation function.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9145

