The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Boost Supervised Pretraining for Visual Transfer Learning: Implications of
Self-Supervised Contrastive Representation Learning
†

Jinghan Sun1,2,* , Dong Wei2,* , Kai Ma2 , Liansheng Wang1, , Yefeng Zheng2
1

Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Tencent Healthcare (Shenzhen) Co., LTD, Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China
jhsun@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lswang@xmu.edu.cn, {donwei,kylekma,yefengzheng}@tencent.com
2

Abstract

1-shot

50

Unsupervised pretraining based on contrastive learning has
made significant progress recently and showed comparable
or even superior transfer learning performance to traditional
supervised pretraining on various tasks. In this work, we
first empirically investigate when and why unsupervised pretraining surpasses supervised counterparts for image classification tasks with a series of control experiments. Besides the commonly used accuracy, we further analyze the
results qualitatively with the class activation maps and assess the learned representations quantitatively with the representation entropy and uniformity. Our core finding is that
it is the amount of information effectively perceived by the
learning model that is crucial to transfer learning, instead
of absolute size of the dataset. Based on this finding, we
propose Classification Activation Map guided contrastive
(CAMtrast) learning which better utilizes the label supervision to strengthen supervised pretraining, by making the networks perceive more information from the training images.
CAMtrast is evaluated with three fundamental visual learning tasks: image recognition, object detection, and semantic
segmentation, on various public datasets. Experimental results show that our CAMtrast effectively improves the performance of supervised pretraining, and that its performance
is superior to both unsupervised counterparts and a recent related work which similarly attempted improving supervised
pretraining.

5-shot

65
60

45

55

40

50
35

30
25

Supervised

45

Unsupervised

40

CAMtrast
64

48

35
32

16

8

Supervised
Unsupervised
CAMtrast
64

48

32

16

8

Figure 1: Effects of number of pretraining classes (x-axis) of
the supervised, unsupervised (SimSiam; Chen and He 2021),
and our proposed CAMtrast pretraining on miniImageNet
on downstream 5-way few-shot classification accuracy (%;
y-axis), with the total number of images (4,800) unchanged.
achieved SOTA performance on many tasks. Recently, a series of self-supervised representation learning frameworks
(He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a; Caron et al. 2020; Grill
et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021) emerged that adopted contrastive learning (Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006). Without using any label, these frameworks enforced certain invariance across different augmented views of an image. Surprisingly, unsupervised contrastive pretraining beat supervised counterparts on various downstream tasks while being comparable on many others. This naturally raises some
intriguing questions, including: Why does the unsupervised
pretraining transfer better than supervised counterparts?1
Are manual labels still useful to pretraining?
In their pioneering work, Zhao et al. (2021) empirically
found that the intra-category invariance enforced by supervised models weakened transferability by causing information loss and increasing task misalignment, and proposed
that supervised pretraining could be strengthened by an
exemplar-based approach (the “Exemplar”). Concretely, Exemplar used the labels to filter true negatives in contrastive
learning to recover much low- and mid-level information,
without explicitly enforcing intra-category invariance. However, the authors did not explicitly answer when supervised
pretraining would fall short especially when there was only
minimal task misalignment (e.g., transfer within the same

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) are the current state of the art (SOTA) of many fundamental tasks in
computer vision. However, to achieve satisfactory performance, DCNNs often need large amounts of data for effective training, which can be difficult to collect in practice.
Transfer learning is an effective solution to the data deficiency problem (Tan et al. 2018), where the model is first
pretrained on pretext tasks with sufficient data and then finetuned on the target downstream task with limited data. Pretraining on the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al. 2009) with
one million images and corresponding categorical labels has
been the de facto standard for visual transfer learning and
* J. Sun and D. Wei—Contributed equally; J. Sun contributed to

this work during an internship at Tencent.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

Without causing confusion, the terms “supervised” and “unsupervised” pretraining in this work means traditional supervised
classification and self-supervised contrastive learning, respectively.

2307

