The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Causal Structure Learning from Multiple Interventional Datasets with
Unknown Targets
Yunxia Wang1 , Fuyuan Cao1,∗ , Kui Yu2 , Jiye Liang1
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, P.R. China
School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230009, P.R. China
wangyx cloud@163.com, cfy@sxu.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn, ljy@sxu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

2016; M, B, and Turner R 2018). That is, one can distinguish
the corresponding causes and effects by the idea of intervention, which is also the unique advantage of causality (Huang
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2017).
Usually, one only knows that a dataset is interventional,
but does not know which variables are intervened in this
dataset (Bareinboim and Pearl 2016; Yu et al. 2020). For
example, in molecular biology, the effects of various added
chemicals to the cell are not set to one specific value and
are not also precisely known. Also gene knockout technologies are known to have off-target effects, i.e., the CRISPRCas gene-editing technology performs cleavage at unknown
genome sites other than their intended target (Antonia, Wendell, and Lei 2016; Wu et al. 2015). Facing different intervention experiments, if the intervention targets are forcibly
known or not accounting for these additional targets while
learning a causal structure, it may lead to incorrect conclusions in the learned causal DAG. In addition, compared with
the known intervention targets setting, the unknown one requires a separate treatment since it is certainly less informative. Therefore, learning a causal inference algorithm effectively that can make full of interventional data under the
unknown intervention targets is the purpose of the present
paper. Here, we focus on reducing the number of inconsistencies produced by constraint-based methods.
There are algorithms are proposed for causal structure
learning from multiple experimental datasets with unknown
intervention targets. He and Geng (He and Geng 2016)
adopted constraint-based algorithms (Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 2000) to learn each causal DAG from each interventional dataset, and then merged the graphs directly to get
the final structure. However, due to the influence of sample
selection bias and data noise, the idea ignores the contradictory information of multiple structures learned, resulting in
large indeterminacies in the estimated graph. In addition, it
learns each causal DAG from each dataset, which also leads
to a higher time complexity. Squires et al. (Squires, Wang,
and Uhler 2020) proposed the UT-IGSP algorithm to estimate causal DAG models from a mix of observational and
interventional data, when the intervention targets are partially or completely unknown. Brouillard et al. (Brouillard et al.
2020) proposed a general continuous-constrained method
for causal discovery which can leverage various types of interventional data as well as expressive neural architectures.

We consider the problem of reducing the false discovery rate
in multiple high-dimensional interventional datasets under
unknown targets. Traditional algorithms merged directly multiple causal graphs learned, which ignores the contradictions
of different datasets, leading to lots of inconsistent directions of edges. For reducing the contradictory information, we
propose a new algorithm, which first learns an interventional
Markov equivalence class (I-MEC) before merging multiple
graphs. It utilizes the full power of the constraints available
in interventional data and combines ideas from local learning, intervention, and search-and-score techniques in a principled and effective way in different intervention experiments.
Specifically, local learning on multiple datasets is used to
build a causal skeleton. Perfect intervention destroys some
possible triangles, leading to the identification of more possible V-structures. And then a theoretically correct I-MEC is
learned. Search and scoring techniques based on the learned
I-MEC further identify the remaining unoriented edges. Both
theoretical analysis and experiments on benchmark Bayesian
networks with the number of variables from 20 to 724 validate that the effectiveness of our algorithm in reducing the
false discovery rate in high-dimensional interventional data.

Introduction
Causal relationship discovery plays an irreplaceable role in
various fields, including biology, epidemiology, medicine
and economics (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018; Schölkopf et al.
2021). Therefore, learning a causal model described the relations among variables is important, which is in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Yu et al. 2019; Xun
et al. 2020). Many algorithms are proposed from observational and/or experimental data. Since different causal DAG
models can generate the same observational distribution, a
DAG is in general only identifiable up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) (Chickering 2002) from observational
data (Hauser and Bühlmann 2012; Shohei et al. 2006; Tsamardinos, Brown, and Aliferis 2006). The availability of
interventional (experimental) data opens up new opportunities to reduce the size of the equivalence class down, possibly to recover the true causal graph (Ghassami et al. 2017;
Peters, Bhlmann, and Meinshausen 2016; Meinshausen et al.
∗

Corresponding author: Fuyuan Cao. Email: cfy@sxu.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8584

