The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Enhancing Counterfactual Classification Performance via Self-Training
Ruijiang Gao* 1 , Max Biggs2 , Wei Sun3 , Ligong Han4
1

University of Texas at Austin
2
University of Virginia
3
IBM Research
4
Rutgers University
ruijiang@utexas.edu, biggsm@darden.virginia.edu, sunw@us.ibm.com, lh599@rutgers.edu
Abstract

alternatives (i.e., in the pricing example, we do not observe
what would occur if a different promotion was offered). In
contrast to the gold standard of a randomized controlled
trial, observational data are influenced by the historical policy deployed in the system which may over or underrepresent certain actions, yielding a biased data distribution. A
naive but widely used approach is to learn a machine learning algorithm directly from observational data and use it for
prediction. This is often referred to as the direct method
(DM) (Dudı́k et al. 2014). Failure to account for the bias
introduced by the historical policy often results in an algorithm which has high accuracy on the data it was trained
on, but performs considerably worse under different policies (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017). For example, in
the pricing setting, if historically most customers who received high promotion offers have a certain profile, then a
model based on direct method may fail to produce reliable
predictions on these customers when low offers are given.
In this paper, we focus on Counterfactual Classification
(CC), where the outcome of each action is categorical. For
instance, one may want to estimate whether a customer will
purchase an item in a pricing application or a user clicks
on an ad in online marketing. This setting is in contrast to
the body of literature on treatment effect estimation which
assumes a continuous outcome (Yoon, Jordon, and van der
Schaar 2018; Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017; Shi, Blei,
and Veitch 2019; Alaa and van der Schaar 2017).

Unlike traditional supervised learning, in many settings only
partial feedback is available. We may only observe outcomes
for the chosen actions, but not the counterfactual outcomes
associated with other alternatives. Such settings encompass a
wide variety of applications including pricing, online marketing and precision medicine. A key challenge is that observational data are influenced by historical policies deployed in
the system, yielding a biased data distribution. We approach
this task as a domain adaptation problem and propose a selftraining algorithm which imputes outcomes with categorical
values for finite unseen actions in the observational data to
simulate a randomized trial through pseudolabeling, which
we refer to as Counterfactual Self-Training (CST). CST iteratively imputes pseudolabels and retrains the model. In addition, we show input consistency loss can further improve
CST performance which is shown in recent theoretical analysis of pseudolabeling. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed algorithms on both synthetic and real datasets.

Introduction
Counterfactual inference (Pearl et al. 2000) attempts to address a question central to many applications - What would
be the outcome had an alternative action was chosen? This
includes selecting relevant ads to engage with users in online
marketing (Li et al. 2010), determining prices that maximize
profit in revenue management (Bertsimas and Kallus 2016),
or designing the most effective personalized treatment for a
patient in precision medicine (Xu, Xu, and Saria 2016). With
observational data, we have access to past actions, their outcomes, and possibly some context, but in many cases not
the complete knowledge of the historical policy which gave
rise to the action (Shalit, Johansson, and Sontag 2017). Consider a pricing setting in the form of targeted promotions.
We might record information about a customer (context),
the promotion offered (action) and whether an item was purchased (outcome), but we do not know why a particular promotion was selected.
Unlike traditional supervised learning with full feedback,
we only observe partial feedback for the chosen action in observational data, but not the outcomes associated with other

To overcome the limitations of the direct method, Shalit,
Johansson, and Sontag (2017); Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag (2016); Lopez et al. (2020) cast counterfactual learning
as a domain adaptation problem, where the source domain
is observational data and the target domain is a randomized
trial whose assignment of actions follows a uniform distribution for a given context. The key idea is to map contextual
features to an embedding space and jointly learn a representation that encourages similarity between these two domains, leading to better counterfactual inference. The embedding is generally learned by a neural network and the estimation of the domain gap is usually slow to compute. Such
representation learning approaches also pose challenges for
interpretable models since the learned representation often
loses the semantic meaning of origin features. In this paper,
while we also view counterfactual classification as a domain
adaptation problem between observational data and an ideal

* This work was done while the author was an intern at IBM
Research
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6665

