The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning the Optimal Recommendation from Explorative Users
Fan Yao1 , Chuanhao Li1 , Denis Nekipelov2 , Hongning Wang1 , Haifeng Xu1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, USA
2
Department of Economics, University of Virginia, USA
{fy4bc,cl5ev,dn4w,hw5x,hx4ad}@virginia.edu

Abstract

back. However, for at least two reasons, such modeling assumptions of static and omniscient users appear less realistic in many modern RS applications. First, given the huge
size of candidate choices, a typical user is usually not fully
aware of her “true preference” but needs to estimate it via the
interactions with the RS. For instance, an ordinary user on
video-sharing apps like TikTok or review-sharing apps like
Yelp does not have pre-determined rewards on all possible
choices or knows the optimal choice in advance. Instead, she
has to consume the recommendations in order to discover
the desirable content gradually. Second, in many applications, users simply respond to recommendations with accept/reject decisions rather than reveal their consumed items’
utility. This situation is reflected in most practical recommendation systems nowadays. Platforms like TikTok and
Yelp can easily collect binary feedback like click/non-click
while struggling to evaluate the users’ actual extent of satisfaction (Schnabel et al. 2018). These two limitations challenge the reliability of existing recommendation solutions
in utility estimation from user feedback and thus shake the
foundation of modern recommender systems.

We propose a new problem setting to study the sequential interactions between a recommender system and a user. Instead
of assuming the user is omniscient, static, and explicit, as the
classical practice does, we sketch a more realistic user behavior model, under which the user: 1) rejects recommendations
if they are clearly worse than others; 2) updates her utility
estimation based on rewards from her accepted recommendations; 3) withholds realized rewards from the system. We
formulate the interactions between the system and such an
explorative user in a K-armed bandit framework and study
the problem of learning the optimal recommendation on the
system side. We show that efficient system learning is still
possible but is more difficult. In particular, the system can
identify the best arm with probability at least 1 − δ within
O(1/δ) interactions, and we prove this is tight. Our finding
contrasts the result for the problem of best arm identification
with fixed confidence, in which the best arm can be identified
with probability 1 − δ within O(log(1/δ)) interactions. This
gap illustrates the inevitable cost the system has to pay when
it learns from an explorative user’s revealed preferences on
its recommendations rather than from the realized rewards.

To address the challenges mentioned above, we introduce a more realistic user behavior model, which hinges
on two assumptions of today’s RS users. Firstly, we believe the users are also learning the items’ utilities via exploration. Their feedback becomes more relevant to the item’s
utility only after gaining more experience, e.g., consuming
the recommended item. This perspective has been observed
and supported in numerous cognitive science (Cohen, McClure, and Yu 2007; Daw et al. 2006), behavior science
(Gershman 2018; Wilson et al. 2014), and marketing science studies (Villas-Boas 2004). For instance, Zhang and
Angela (2013) showed through a multi-armed bandit experiment that humans maintain confidence levels regarding different choices and eliminate sub-optimal choices to achieve
long-term goals when they are aware of the uncertain environment. These works motivate us to study the recommendation problem under a more realistic user model, where the
user keeps refining her assessment about an item after consuming it, and she is willing to explore the uncertainty when
deciding on the recommendations. Formally, we model her
exploration as being driven by her estimated confidence intervals of each item’s reward: she will only reject an item
when its estimated reward is clearly worse than others.

Introduction
Recommender systems (RS) are typically built on the interactions among three parties: the system, the users, and the
items (Tennenholtz and Kurland 2019). By collecting useritem interactions, the system aims to predict a user’s preference over items. This type of problem setting has been extensively studied for decades and has seen many successes in
various real-world applications, such as content recommendation, online advertising, and e-commerce platforms (Das
et al. 2007; Linden, Smith, and York 2003; Koren, Bell, and
Volinsky 2009; Schafer, Konstan, and Riedl 1999; Gopinath
and Strickman 2011).
Most previous works have modeled the RS users as an unknown but omniscient “classifier” (Das et al. 2007; Li et al.
2010; Linden, Smith, and York 2003) that allows the system
to query their preference over the candidate items directly.
For instance, any RS algorithm based on supervised learning has to assume that users have the full information beforehand, as its training labels are derived from users’ feedCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9457

