The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TIGGER: Scalable Generative Modelling for Temporal Interaction Graphs
Shubham Gupta, Sahil Manchanda, Srikanta Bedathur, Sayan Ranu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
{shubham.gupta,sahil.manchanda,srikanta,sayanranu}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract

2016), community interaction graphs like Reddit (Liu, Benson, and Charikar 2019), and user behaviour networks (Yang
et al. 2013). The interactions (edges) between nodes in a
temporal graph are timestamped and the structure of these
graphs change with time. The key challenge in generative
modelling is therefore to learn the rules that govern their
evolution over the time horizon (Michail 2015).
TAG G EN (Zhou et al. 2020) models temporal graphs by
converting them into equivalent static graphs by combining
node-ids with each of their interaction edge timestamps, and
connecting only those nodes in the resulting static graph that
satisfy a specified temporal neighbourhood constraint. They
perform random walks on this transformed graph, which
are then modified using heuristic local operations to generate many synthetic random walks. Finally, the synthetic
random walks that are classified by a discriminator as real
random walks are collected and combined to construct the
generated temporal graph. More recently, DYMOND (Zeno,
La Fond, and Neville 2021) presented a non-neural, 3-node
motif based approach for the same problem. They assume
that each type of motif follows a time-independent exponentially distributed arrival rate and learn the parameters to fit
the observed arrival rate.
These approaches suffer from the following limitations:
• Weak Temporal Modelling: DYMOND makes two key assumptions: first, the arrival rate of motifs is exponential; and
second, the structural configuration of a motif remains the
same throughout the time horizon being modeled on. Both
these assumptions do not hold in practice – motifs themselves may evolve with time and could arrive with timedependent rates. This leads to poor fidelity of structural and
temporal properties of the generated graph. TAG G EN, on the
other hand, does not model the graph evolution rate explicitly. It assumes that the timestamps in the input graph are
discrete random variables prohibiting TAG G EN from generating new(unseen in source graph) timestamps. More critically, the generated graph duplicates a large portion of edges
from the source graph – our experiments found upto 80%
edge overlap between the generated and the source graph.
While the design choices of TAG G EN generate graphs that
exhibit high fidelity of graph structural and temporal interaction properties, unfortunately it achieves them by generating graphs that are largely indistinguishable from the source
graph due to their poor modelling of interaction times.

There has been a recent surge in learning generative models for graphs. While impressive progress has been made
on static graphs, work on generative modeling of temporal
graphs is at a nascent stage with significant scope for improvement. First, existing generative models do not scale with
either the time horizon or the number of nodes. Second, existing techniques are transductive in nature and thus do not facilitate knowledge transfer. Finally, due to their reliance on oneto-one node mapping from source to the generated graph, existing models leak node identity information and do not allow
up-scaling/down-scaling the source graph size. In this paper,
we bridge these gaps with a novel generative model called
T IGGER. T IGGER derives its power through a combination
of temporal point processes with auto-regressive modeling
enabling both transductive and inductive variants. Through
extensive experiments on real datasets, we establish T IGGER
generates graphs of superior fidelity, while also being up to 3
orders of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art.

Introduction and Related Work
Modelling and generating graphs find applications in various domains such as drug discovery (Hrinchuk, Popova, and
Ginsburg 2020; Li, Zhang, and Liu 2018), anomaly detection (Ranu and Singh 2009), data augmentation (Bojchevski
et al. 2018), and data privacy (Casas-Roma, HerreraJoancomartı́, and Torra 2017). Initial works on graph generative modelling relied on making prior assumptions about the
graph structure. Examples include Erdős-Rényi (Karoński
and Ruciński 1997) graphs, small-world models (Watts DJ
1998), and scale-free graphs (Albert and Barabási 2002).
Recently, learning-based algorithms have been developed
that circumvent this limitation (You et al. 2018; Goyal, Jain,
and Ranu 2020; Hrinchuk, Popova, and Ginsburg 2020;
De Cao and Kipf 2018; Liao et al. 2019). Specifically, these
algorithms directly learn the underlying hidden distribution
of graph structures from training data.
Unfortunately, most of the learning-based generative
models are limited to static graphs. In today’s world, there
is an abundance of graphs that are temporal in nature. Examples include financial transactions (Kumar et al. 2016;
Dal Pozzolo et al. 2018), online shopping (He and McAuley
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6819

