The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph-Wise Common Latent Factor Extraction for Unsupervised Graph
Representation Learning
Thilini Cooray, Ngai-Man Cheung
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
thilini_cooray@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract

they are useful for applications such as drug discovery, material design and recommendation systems. Availability of
task-specific labels plays a significant role in graph representation learning. However, annotations are very expensive
(Yang et al. 2019; Wieder et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020) due
to many specialized fields in which graphs are utilized (e.g.,
biological sciences, quantum mechanics). Therefore, unsupervised graph representation learning has become crucial.
Unsupervised graph level representation learning has a
very rich literature consisting of several main directions.
Skip-gram influenced graph embedding methods (node2vec
(Grover and Leskovec 2016), sub2vec (Adhikari et al. 2018),
graph2vec (Narayanan et al. 2017)) only rely on neighbourhood information and lose the advantage of using node features, making them less effective. Kernel methods (Random Walk (RW) (Gärtner, Flach, and Wrobel 2003), Shortest Path (SP) (Borgwardt and Kriegel 2005), Graphlet Kernel (GK) (Shervashidze et al. 2009), DDGK (Al-Rfou, Perozzi, and Zelle 2019), GCKN (Chen, Jacob, and Mairal
2020)) and graph proximity methods (UGraphEmb (Bai
et al. 2019)) use pair-wise inter-graph similarity calculations
making them more effective, but less efficient. Quality of
learnt embeddings by this method heavily relies on the quality and variety of other graphs with which it compares. Contrastive learning (InfoGraph (Sun et al. 2020), CMV (Multiview) (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020), GCC (Extra data)
(Qiu et al. 2020) and GraphCL(Augmentations) (You et al.
2020)) is the newest addition which is based on the Infomax principle (Linsker 1988) which aims at obtaining an
output which has maximum mutual information with the input. The main drawback of these methods (Grill et al. 2020)
is that their heavy reliance on the selection procedure of negative samples for model performance. A careful selection of
task-wise negative samples is required to obtain good performance. While both inter-graph similarity and contrastive
methods achieve state-of-the-art for graph embedding learning, both of them suffer very high if the quality of other
graphs they compare with is low.
Autoencoder (Baldi and Hornik 1989; Hinton and Zemel
1993) based embedding methods solve this weakness by
only utilizing its current input for representation learning. However, existing graph autoencoder models (Kipf and
Welling 2016; Pan et al. 2018; Park et al. 2019) are only
aimed at node-level modelling. In particular, these meth-

Unsupervised graph-level representation learning plays a crucial role in a variety of tasks such as molecular property prediction and community analysis, especially when data annotation is expensive. Currently, most of the best-performing
graph embedding methods are based on Infomax principle.
The performance of these methods highly depends on the selection of negative samples and hurt the performance, if the
samples were not carefully selected. Inter-graph similaritybased methods also suffer if the selected set of graphs for
similarity matching is low in quality. To address this, we focus only on utilizing the current input graph for embedding
learning. We are motivated by an observation from real-world
graph generation processes where the graphs are formed
based on one or more global factors which are common to all
elements of the graph (e.g., topic of a discussion thread, solubility level of a molecule). We hypothesize extracting these
common factors could be highly beneficial. Hence, this work
proposes a new principle for unsupervised graph representation learning: Graph-wise Common latent Factor EXtraction
(GCFX). We further propose a deep model for GCFX, deepGCFX, based on the idea of reversing the above-mentioned
graph generation process which could explicitly extract common latent factors from an input graph and achieve improved
results on downstream tasks to the current state-of-the-art.
Through extensive experiments and analysis, we demonstrate
that, while extracting common latent factors is beneficial for
graph-level tasks to alleviate distractions caused by local variations of individual nodes or local neighbourhoods, it also
benefits node-level tasks by enabling long-range node dependencies, especially for disassortative graphs.

Introduction
Graph structured data has been very useful in representing
a variety of data types including social networks (Newman
and Girvan 2004), protein-protein interactions (Krogan et al.
2006), scene graphs (Krishna et al. 2017), customer purchasing patterns (Yada et al. 2004) and many more (Pang
and Cheung 2017; Cooray, Cheung, and Lu 2020; Liu and
Cheung 2021). In this work, we focus on graph-level representation learning. It is crucial for tasks like molecular
property identification (Duvenaud et al. 2015) and community classification (Yanardag and Vishwanathan 2015), and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6420

