The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Oscillatory Fourier Neural Network: A Compact and Efficient Architecture for
Sequential Processing
Bing Han, Cheng Wang, and Kaushik Roy
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
610 Purdue Mall, West Lafayette, IN 47907
han183,wang4700,kaushik@purdue.edu

Abstract

throughout large number of time steps. BPTT is not only
prone to exponentially decaying or growing of the propagated values but also consuming significant computation resources over the recurrent steps. Although mitigating architectures, such as long-short term memory (LSTM) and gated
recurrent units (GRU) have been proposed, these modified
RNN models typically contain more training parameters,
consumes longer time to train, and may still suffer the loss of
gradients in presence of very long input sequences. On the
other hand, it has been observed that extracting and understanding meaningful patterns at different time scales can be
important for sequential processing tasks such as text sentiment analysis or body activity recognition. For instances,
patterns in movie reviews could emerge at the word level,
sentence/clause level, and paragraph level that altogether determine the outcome of the final sentiment of a review. In
order to learn the features at various scales from sequential
data, incorporating spectral analysis such as Fourier Transform in RNNs have received growing attention (Lee-Thorp
et al. 2021), (Tamkin, Jurafsky, and Goodman 2020). Typically, the input of temporal series can be fed into certain
type of spectral processing such as Fourier transform, where
frequency-domain outcome can be obtained and further analyzed by the subsequent neural network blocks.

Tremendous progress has been made in sequential processing with the recent advances in recurrent neural networks.
However, recurrent architectures face the challenge of exploding/vanishing gradients during training, and require significant computational resources to execute back-propagation
through time. Moreover, large models are typically needed for
executing complex sequential tasks. To address these challenges, we propose a novel neuron model that has cosine activation with a time varying component for sequential processing. The proposed neuron provides an efficient building
block for projecting sequential inputs into spectral domain,
which helps to retain long-term dependencies with minimal extra model parameters and computation. A new type
of recurrent network architecture, named Oscillatory Fourier
Neural Network, based on the proposed neuron is presented
and applied to various types of sequential tasks. We demonstrate that recurrent neural network with the proposed neuron
model is mathematically equivalent to a simplified form of
discrete Fourier transform applied onto periodical activation.
In particular, the computationally intensive back-propagation
through time in training is eliminated, leading to faster training while achieving the state of the art inference accuracy
in a diverse group of sequential tasks. For instance, applying
the proposed model to sentiment analysis on IMDB review
dataset reaches 89.4% test accuracy within 5 epochs, accompanied by over 35x reduction in the model size compared to
LSTM. The proposed novel RNN architecture is well poised
for intelligent sequential processing in resource constrained
hardware.

In this work, we propose a new type of neuron with time
varying cosine activation (termed TV-Cosine neuron), and
construct an RNN architecture, named oscillatory Fourier
neural network (O-FNN), for efficient learning for sequential tasks. Intuitively, the proposed neuron model projects
sequential input data into a phase of oscillating neuron, in
contrast to conventional neurons such as ReLU or tanh that
modulate the magnitude of activation depending on the input. Moreover, each neuron in the proposed architecture is a
cosine activation applied onto a superposition of input signal
and time dependent rotating term of certain frequency. The
hidden state vector of the O-FNN accumulates the outcome
of cosine activation across all time steps before being fed
into the final layer of the network. Following this approach,
no backpropagation through time is needed during the backward pass of training, and both forward and backward pass
can process the sequential data in a fully parallel manner.
We will show that after accumulating the cosine activation
through time, the hidden states will equivalently represent a
modified discrete Fourier transform of sine and cosine neu-

Introduction
Recently, artificial neural networks, especially various types
of recurrent neural networks (RNN) have demonstrated significant success in sequential processing tasks such as natural language processing (NLP)(Yin et al. 2017). However,
complex sequential processing tasks desires increasingly
large RNN models, and the training of RNNs encounters
the notorious challenge of exploding or vanishing gradients
when information across long time need to be preserved
and processed. In particular, back-propagation through time
(BPTT) applied on weight matrices associated with hidden states such as Whh need to unroll gradient calculations
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6838

