The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Detailed Facial Geometry Recovery from Multi-View Images
by Learning an Implicit Function
Yunze Xiao1∗ , Hao Zhu1∗ , Haotian Yang1 , Zhengyu Diao1 , Xiangju Lu2 , Xun Cao1†
1

Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
iQIYI Inc, Beijing, China
{yunze.xiao, diaozhengyu}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {zhuhaoese, caoxun}@nju.edu.cn,
yanght321@gmail.com, luxiangju@qiyi.com
Abstract
Recovering detailed facial geometry from a set of calibrated
multi-view images is valuable for its wide range of applications. Traditional multi-view stereo (MVS) methods adopt an
optimization-based scheme to regularize the matching cost.
Recently, learning-based methods integrate all these into an
end-to-end neural network and show superiority of efficiency.
In this paper, we propose a novel architecture to recover extremely detailed 3D faces within dozens of seconds. Unlike
previous learning-based methods that regularize the cost volume via 3D CNN, we propose to learn an implicit function
for regressing the matching cost. By fitting a 3D morphable
model from multi-view images, the features of multiple images are extracted and aggregated in the mesh-attached UV
space, which makes the implicit function more effective in
recovering detailed facial shape. Our method outperforms
SOTA learning-based MVS in accuracy by a large margin
on the FaceScape dataset. The code and data are released in
https://github.com/zhuhao-nju/mvfr.

Figure 1: Our method reconstructs detailed facial geometry
from multi-view images. The result shape is rendered in grey
(left) and with normal-color (right). The input image is partially mosaicked for anonymization.

In this paper, we propose a novel framework to efficiently
recover detailed facial geometry from calibrated multi-view
images. The key observation is that the previous state-ofthe-art learning-based methods(Yao et al. 2018, 2019; Chen
et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2020; Yi et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020)
build and refine the cost volume in the camera frustum
space, which is memory-consuming and limits the resolution. Though several works(Gu et al. 2020; Riegler, Ulusoy,
and Geiger 2017; Wang et al. 2017) tried to improve the efficiency of the volume-based neural network, they didn’t utilize the facial prior and fail to recover the detailed geometry.
To overcome this problem, we propose to use an implicit
function to regularize the matching cost to recover geometric details. To make the framework achievable, multi-view
3DMM estimation is utilized to transfer the cost space into
UVD space (UV + displacement), which efficiently solves
the rough shape, and supports the implicit function learning in detailed shape recovery. Compared to the previous
learning-based MVS framework, our method doesn’t require
an additional fusion phase, which saves processing time and
achieves higher accuracy.
The contribution can be summarized in three aspects:

Introduction
Recovering high-quality facial 3D models is of great value
in many fields including the movie industry, facial analysis, and augmented reality. Multi-view stereo (MVS) focuses
on reconstructing accurate shape from several calibrated images, which is the main way to obtain high-quality 3D face
models. Traditional MVS pipeline mainly consists of matching cost computation, fusion, and refinement(Beeler et al.
2010; Furukawa and Ponce 2010; Galliani, Lasinger, and
Schindler 2015), which can yield extremely fine facial geometry at the cost of tremendous calculations and running
time. In recent years, learning-based MVS methods(Chen
et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2018; Im et al. 2019;
Ji et al. 2017; Kar, Häne, and Malik 2017; Luo et al. 2019;
Yao et al. 2018, 2019) show superiority in accuracy and
speed, which use a single-pass neural network instead of traditional iterative optimization. Though learning-based MVS
outperforms traditional methods in certain scenes, there is
still no learning-based MVS method that recovers fine-level
facial geometry for industrial 3D modeling.

• A novel facial-specific multi-view reconstruction
pipeline is proposed consisting of base model fitting,
learned implicit function, and mesoscopic prediction.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work.
†
Xun Cao is the corresponding author.

• We propose to tackle the problem of cost regression and
multi-view fusion simultaneously by learning an implicit
2839

