The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Low-Pass Graph Convolutional Network for Recommendation
Wenhui Yu* 1 , Zixin Zhang* 2 , Zheng Qin2
1

Alibaba Group,
Tsinghua University
jianlin.ywh@alibaba-inc.com, zzx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, qingzh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

and need to be calculated, thus the efficiency is increased
greatly. LCF and the graph convolution are used to design an
end-to-end GCN, called LCF Network (LCFN), where kernels are trainable. Another benefit of the LCF is to remove
the noise. Due to the random exposure and quantization, observed interactions reflect user preference yet contain noise.
Yu and Qin (2020) pointed out that the user preference is
low-frequency and the noise is high-frequency, thus can be
separated by LCF. As we can see, LCF contributes to both
efficiency and effectiveness aspects.
However, there is still great room for improvement.
Firstly, LCFN used 2D graph convolution, with user-user
and item-item hypergraphs defining the graph spaces of
the two dimensions. These hypergraphs are constructed by
the 2-hop connections of the user-item bipartite graph, thus
there is no 1-hop connections, resulting in information loss.
For example, when performing convolution on a user, items
cannot contribute to the result. What’s more, since the feature maps are large and dense matrices, they are factorized
in LCFN for storage, making 2D convolution of an interaction matrix degenerates into twice 1D convolution of embeddings. As we can see, LCFN pays the cost of information
loss, but does not achieve real 2D graph convolution. Considering this issue, we utilize the observed bipartite graph
to define the graph space directly. To be specific, we treat
the bipartite graph as a homogeneous graph and design 1D
graph convolution. In this case, both users and items contribute to the convolution on a certain user.
Secondly, LCFN focuses attention on introducing a new
graph convolution while simply follows the general network
structure and model settings of GCNs. Many unnecessary
structures and suboptimal model settings are used, increasing the difficulty of model training and degrading the performance. To solve these issuses, we design experiments to
explore the optimal structure and settings for the proposed
model.
Finally, we inject the 1D spectral graph convolution
into the tuned network, and propose our Low-pass Graph
Convolutional Network (LGCN). To sum up, the contributions are as follows:

Spectral graph convolution is extremely time-consuming for
large graphs, thus existing Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) reconstruct the kernel by a polynomial, which is (almost) fixed. To extract features from the graph data by learning kernels, Low-pass Collaborative Filter Network (LCFN)
was proposed as a new paradigm with trainable kernels.
However, there are two demerits of LCFN: (1) The hypergraphs in LCFN are constructed by mining 2-hop connections of the user-item bipartite graph, thus 1-hop connections are not used, resulting in serious information loss. (2)
LCFN follows the general network structure of GCNs, which
is suboptimal. To address these issues, we utilize the bipartite graph to define the graph space directly and explore the
best network structure based on experiments. Comprehensive
experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model. Codes are available on
https://github.com/Wenhui-Yu/LCFN.

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) gain strong power
of extracting features by learning kernels (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). To explore convolution in
the graph learning tasks such as recommendation, it is extended from the Euclidean domain to the graph domain
(Shuman et al. 2013), and is then injected to a deep structure
to propose Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf
and Welling 2017; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016; He et al. 2020; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017).
However, since graph convolution is time-consuming for
large graphs, Kipf and Welling (2017) simplified it by fixing the kernel into a 1-order polynomial, thus GCNs lose the
ability of extracting features and only propagate embeddings
through the graph.
To close this gap, Yu and Qin (2020) proposed an unscathed way to simplify the (spectral) graph convolution by a
Low-pass Collaborative Filter (LCF). Graph convolution is
defined in the frequency domain (Shuman et al. 2013) and
all-frequency components of the signal participate in calculation. Filtered by LCF, only a very small proportion of
the components (low-frequency components) are reserved

• We propose 1D graph convolution to leverage the direct
connections of the observed graph. Then, we design a
1D LCF, and integrate it with 1D graph convolution as
the low-pass graph convolution.

* These authors contributed equally.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8954

