The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CADRE: A Cascade Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for
Vision-Based Autonomous Urban Driving
Yinuo Zhao* 1 , Kun Wu* 2 , Zhiyuan Xu3 , Zhengping Che3 ,
Qi Lu3 , Jian Tang†3 , Chi Harold Liu1
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Syracuse University
3
Midea Group
ynzhao@bit.edu.cn, kwu102@syr.edu, {xuzy70,chezp,luqi8,tangjian22}@midea.com, liuchi02@gmail.com
Abstract

Recently, significant progress has been made for Imitation
Learning (IL) (Pomerleau 1991; Ng, Russell et al. 2000),
which enables an agent to mimic the behaviors of human experts. For vision-based autonomous driving, benefiting from
IL, quite a few works focus on developing an end-to-end
behavior cloning system (Codevilla et al. 2018; Sauer, Savinov, and Geiger 2018; Codevilla et al. 2019), which directly
learns a mapping from the raw observations to the control
actions, e.g., steer, brake, and throttle. However, as mentioned in Codevilla et al. (2019), there are several key limitations in IL for vision-based autonomous driving:

Vision-based autonomous urban driving in dense traffic is
quite challenging due to the complicated urban environment
and the dynamics of the driving behaviors. Widely-applied
methods either heavily rely on hand-crafted rules or learn
from limited human experience, which makes them hard
to generalize to rare but critical scenarios. In this paper,
we present a novel CAscade Deep REinforcement learning
framework, CADRE, to achieve model-free vision-based autonomous urban driving. In CADRE, to derive representative
latent features from raw observations, we first offline train a
Co-attention Perception Module (CoPM) that leverages the
co-attention mechanism to learn the inter-relationships between the visual and control information from a pre-collected
driving dataset. Cascaded by the frozen CoPM, we then
present an efficient distributed proximal policy optimization
framework to online learn the driving policy under the guidance of particularly designed reward functions. We perform
a comprehensive empirical study with the CARLA NoCrash
benchmark as well as specific obstacle avoidance scenarios
in autonomous urban driving tasks. The experimental results
well justify the effectiveness of CADRE and its superiority
over the state-of-the-art by a wide margin.

1) The collected dataset from human experts is biased since
most of the data are simple behaviors like following the
lane. Consequently, the diversity of the data decreases as
the dataset grows, which reduces the generalization ability of the agent.
2) IL methods suffer from the distribution shift, i.e., the
training data from experts and the testing observations
in the environment are not independent and identically
distributed (Bottou 2010).
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is another promising technique for model-free control and has achieved remarkable success in various complex tasks such as video
games and robot control (Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver
2016; Fujimoto, Hoof, and Meger 2018; Haarnoja et al.
2018). With the guidance of reward signals, DRL methods
can alleviate the distribution shift problem through continuously interacting with the environment and effectively correcting current control policies. Some prior works (Dosovitskiy et al. 2017; Kendall et al. 2019; Sallab et al. 2017)
have presented DRL-based autonomous driving frameworks, which, however, can only achieve high performance
in simple scenarios, like steering control in an empty town,
but fail in dense traffic scenarios. This may be due to two aspects: 1) The urban environment is very complex, especially
in dense traffic containing many vehicles and pedestrians,
which requires stronger perception and generalization ability of the DRL agent; 2) Unlike other control tasks (e.g.,
video games), the DRL agent is hard to evaluate its derived
actions during the long-term and complicated behaviors only
through a simple sparse reward signal.
In this work, we present a novel CAscade Deep REin-

Introduction
Autonomous driving (Dickmanns 2002; Leonard et al. 2008;
Chen et al. 2015; Bojarski et al. 2016; Codevilla et al. 2018)
has been widely studied over the last few decades and attracted increasing interest due to its huge potential to change
the way people travel, while still remaining many technical
barriers that must be conquered. Urban driving is one of the
most challenging problems due to the high complexity and
dynamics of the urban environment (e.g., surrounding vehicles and moving pedestrians). Given the start and target position, the goal of autonomous urban driving is to successfully
complete the route within limited time and meet the requirements of pre-defined conditions, such as no collisions. Under complex urban environment and traffic conditions, it is
hard for classic rule-based control approaches to handle all
corner cases and avoid violations during driving.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3481

