The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Meta-Learning for Online Update of Recommender Systems
Minseok Kim1 , Hwanjun Song2 , Yooju Shin1 , Dongmin Park1 , Kijung Shin1 , Jae-Gil Lee1 *
1

KAIST,
NAVER AI Lab,
{minseokkim, yooju.shin, dongminpark, kijungs, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr, hwanjun.song@navercorp.com
2

𝑥1
𝑥2

Interaction-wise

Online recommender systems should be always aligned with
users’ current interest to accurately suggest items that each
user would like. Since user interest usually evolves over time,
the update strategy should be flexible to quickly catch users’
current interest from continuously generated new user-item
interactions. Existing update strategies focus either on the importance of each user-item interaction or the learning rate
for each recommender parameter, but such one-directional
flexibility is insufficient to adapt to varying relationships between interactions and parameters. In this paper, we propose
MeLON, a meta-learning based novel online recommender
update strategy that supports two-directional flexibility. It is
featured with an adaptive learning rate for each parameterinteraction pair for inducing a recommender to quickly learn
users’ up-to-date interest. The procedure of MeLON is optimized following a meta-learning approach: it learns how a
recommender learns to generate the optimal learning rates for
future updates. Specifically, MeLON first enriches the meaning of each interaction based on previous interactions and
identifies the role of each parameter for the interaction; and
then combines these two pieces of information to generate
an adaptive learning rate. Theoretical analysis and extensive
evaluation on three real-world online recommender datasets
validate the effectiveness of MeLON.

𝜃: parameter

𝑥1

𝑤1,∙

𝑥1
𝑤∙,1

𝜃1

𝑤∙,2

𝑥2

𝑤2,∙

𝜃2

(a) Importance Reweighting.

𝑤: learning rate

𝑥2
Parameter-wise

𝜃1

𝜃2

(b) Meta-Optimization.

Interaction-wise

𝑥: user-item interaction

Abstract

𝑤1,1

𝑤1,2

𝑤2,1

𝑤2,2

Parameter-wise

𝜃1

𝜃2

(c) Ours: MeLON.

Figure 1: Flexibility comparison of adjusting a learning
rate w to update a parameter θ given a user-item interaction x. While (a) importance reweighting and (b) metaoptimization support only one of the two learning perspectives, (c) MeLON supports both of them.
to re-train the models from scratch whenever new user-item
interactions come in. Specifically, pre-trained models (i.e.,
snapshots trained on past user-item interactions) are finetuned based only on new user-item interactions. Fine-tuning
not only requires less computational cost but also has sufficient capability to reflect up-to-date information (Zhang
et al. 2020). However, because few-shot incoming user-item
interactions are very sparse in the user-item domain (Finn
et al. 2019), the standard fine-tuning scheme would not suit
online recommender systems to quickly adapt to up-to-date
user interest. Therefore, the key challenge is to overcome
this data sparsity for fine-tuning.
To cope with this challenge, previous researches have
been actively studied in two directions.
• Importance reweighting adjusts the importance of each
new user-item interaction (He et al. 2016; Shu et al. 2019).
These methods receive the loss of a new user-item interaction from a recommender as a supervisory signal and then
determine how much the recommender should be finetuned by each user-item interaction.
• Meta-optimization controls how much each recommender parameter should be fine-tuned from new useritem interactions (Zhang et al. 2020). These methods determine a parameter-wise optimization strategy such as a
learning rate, given the loss of the new user-item interactions and each parameter’s previous optimization history.
These two orthogonal approaches focus on different aspects on learning: importance reweighting focuses on the
impact of each user-item interaction, as shown in Figure
1(a), while meta-optimization focuses on that of each pa-

Introduction
The widespread of mobile devices enables a large number
of users to connect to a variety of online services, such as
video streaming (Davidson et al. 2010), shopping (Linden,
Smith, and York 2003), and news (Gulla et al. 2017), where
each user seeks only a few items out of a myriad of items
in services. To keep users involved, online services struggle
to meet each user’s needs accurately by deploying personalized recommender systems (Koren 2008), which suggest the
items potentially interesting to him/her. In an online setting
where a user’s current interest changes constantly, the online
recommender should catch up each user’s up-to-date interest to prevent its service from being stale (He et al. 2016).
To this end, recommender models are updated continuously
in response to new user-item interactions.
In modern online recommender systems, fine-tuning has
been widely employed to update models since it is infeasible
* Jae-Gil Lee is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4065

