The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Neural Networks Learn Meta-Structures from Noisy Labels in Semantic
Segmentation
Yaoru Luo1,2 , Guole Liu1,2 , Yuanhao Guo1,2 , Ge Yang1,2 *
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{luoyaoru2019, yuanhao.guo}@ia.ac.cn, {liuguole, yangge}@ucas.edu.cn

Abstract
How deep neural networks (DNNs) learn from noisy labels
has been studied extensively in image classification but much
less in image segmentation. So far, our understanding of the
learning behavior of DNNs trained by noisy segmentation labels remains limited. In this study, we address this deficiency
in both binary segmentation of biological microscopy images
and multi-class segmentation of natural images. We generate
extremely noisy labels by randomly sampling a small fraction (e.g., 10%) or flipping a large fraction (e.g., 90%) of
the ground truth labels. When trained with these noisy labels,
DNNs provide largely the same segmentation performance
as trained by the original ground truth. This indicates that
DNNs learn structures hidden in labels rather than pixellevel labels per se in their supervised training for semantic
segmentation. We refer to these hidden structures in labels as
meta-structures. When DNNs are trained by labels with different perturbations to the meta-structure, we find consistent
degradation in their segmentation performance. In contrast,
incorporation of meta-structure information substantially improves performance of an unsupervised segmentation model
developed for binary semantic segmentation. We define metastructures mathematically as spatial density distributions and
show both theoretically and experimentally how this formulation explains key observed learning behavior of DNNs.

Abbreviation

Meaning

CL

Clean Label

RCL

Randomized
Clean Label

PCL

Perturbed
Clean Label

RL

Random Label

Description
Ground truth labels
annotated by human
experts
Randomly sampled
or flipped pixel labels
from ground truth
Dilation/Erosion/
Skeleton of ground
truth
Randomly generated
pixel labels

Table 1: Different types of labels used in this study.
but also will provide insights into the learning behavior of
DNNs.
Different types of noisy labels have been used to elucidate the learning behaviors of DNNs in image classification, including partially corrupted or randomly shuffled labels (Zhang et al. 2017; Arpit et al. 2017). In image segmentation, there are image-level and pixel-level label noises.
Image-level label noise refer to erroneous semantic annotation of image objects. Pixel-level label noise refer to erroneous semantic annotation of image pixels. In this study, we
focus on pixel-level label noise.
We examine the performance of DNNs trained by four
different types of labels, as summarized in Table 1 and
shown in Figure 1 and Figure 4. To quantitatively analyze
the segmentation performance of DNNs trained by these
labels, we experiment on two representative segmentation
models, U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) and
DeepLabv3+ (Chen et al. 2018), with the same loss function
(binary cross-entropy loss) and optimizer (stochastic gradient descent, SGD). Performance of DNNs trained by the labels ranks from the best to the worst as follows:

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown excellent performance in challenging image segmentation tasks (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Yu and Koltun 2016; Jégou
et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017a). But their supervised training
requires pixel labels for each training image. Manual annotation of pixels not only is laborious but also easily introduces label noise, especially in border regions. Compared
to image classification, label noise is more common in image segmentation. So far, however, studies on the learning
behavior of DNNs trained by noisy labels have focused primarily on classification. Is it necessary to accurately label
each pixel for accurate segmentation? How is segmentation
performance of DNNs influenced when trained by different
types of noisy labels? Answering these questions not only
will help us understand the role of labels in training of DNNs

CL ≈ RCL > P CL > RL

(1)

As shown in Figure 1, when U-Net is trained with 45% of
the labels randomly flipped (RCL) in binary segmentation,
its performance remains largely the same as trained by the
original ground truth (CL). Similar results on DeepLabv3+
are shown in Appendix A. These results indicate that DNNs

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1908

