The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reasoning about Causal Models with Infinitely Many Variables
Joseph Y. Halpern, Spencer Peters
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu, sp2473@cornell.edu

Abstract

1 for details), produces a set of assignments to the variables
given in S, called outcomes; intuitively, they correspond to
possible outcomes after the intervention is performed. If the
signature S is finite (i.e., there are finitely many variables,
each of which can take on only finitely many values), there
can be only finitely many outcomes. This is, in particular, the
case with SEMs. But in general, in a GSEM, there may be
infinitely many outcomes. This complicates reasoning about
them, as we shall see.
Another complication involves allowed interventions. In
SEMs, all possible interventions are allowed; that is, we can
intervene by setting any subset of the variables to any of
the values in their ranges. In GSEMs, we have more expressive power: we can specify which interventions are allowed.
The idea of limiting the set of interventions has already appeared in earlier work (Beckers and Halpern 2019; Rubenstein et al. 2017). Intuitively, allowed interventions are the
ones that are feasible or meaningful. The set of allowed interventions is part of the signature; it also has an impact on
the language. In the language L(S), we allow a formula of
~ ← ~x]ϕ (which can be read “after intervening by
the form [X
~ to ~x, ϕ holds”) only if X
~ ← ~x is
setting the variables in X
an allowed intervention: if an intervention is not allowed, we
cannot talk about it in the language. As shown by the shell
game example in (Peters and Halpern 2021), restricting to
allowed interventions is useful even when the signature is
finite; we can describe interesting situations that are inconsistent with all interventions being allowed.
Besides creating the possibility for infinitely many outcomes, the infinitary signatures required for continuous-time
systems pose certain technical problems. If, for example, we
have variables ranging over the reals, and we can refer to
all possible real numbers in the language, then the language
must be uncountable. Although we believe that all our results continue to hold for uncountable languages, having uncountably many formulas makes soundness and completeness arguments much more complicated. We thus restrict
the language so that it can refer explicitly to only countably many values and countably many interventions. This
still leaves us with an extremely rich language, which easily
suffices to characterize systems that occur in practice.
It is shown in (Peters and Halpern 2021, Theorem 2.1)
that L(S) is rich enough to completely characterize SEMs,
as well as GSEMs over infinitary signatures where there

Generalized structural equations models (GSEMs) (Peters
and Halpern 2021), are, as the name suggests, a generalization of structural equations models (SEMs). They can deal
with (among other things) infinitely many variables with infinite ranges, which is critical for capturing dynamical systems. We provide a sound and complete axiomatization of
causal reasoning in GSEMs that is an extension of the sound
and complete axiomatization provided by Halpern (2000)
for SEMs. Considering GSEMs helps clarify what properties
Halpern’s axioms capture.

1

Introduction

Systems that evolve in continuous time are ubiquitous in all
areas of science and engineering. A number of approaches
have been used to model causality in such systems, ranging from dynamical systems involving differential equations
to rule-based models (Laurent, Yang, and Fontana 2018)
for capturing complex interactions in molecular biology and
hybrid automata (Alur et al. 1992) for describing mixed
discrete-continuous systems. The standard approach to modeling causality, structural-equations models (SEMs), introduced by Pearl (2000), cannot handle such systems, since it
allows only finitely many variables, which each have finite
ranges. But continuous systems typically have real-valued
variables indexed by time, which ranges over the reals (e.g.,
the temperature at time t).
An extension of SEMs, generalized structural-equations
models (GSEMs), which can capture such systems was
recently proposed (Peters and Halpern 2021).The goal of
this paper is to provide a sound and complete axiomatization of GSEMs, in the spirit of that provided for SEMs by
Halpern (2000). There are a number of features of GSEMs
that make reasoning about them subtle. We briefly discuss
some of them here.
Like SEMs, GSEMs are defined with respect to a signature S that describes the variables in the model, their
possible values, and the allowed interventions. The language L(S) of causal formulas that we consider (like that of
Halpern (2000)) is parameterized by S. A GSEM is a mapping that, given an intervention (and a context, see Section
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5668

