The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

iDECODe: In-Distribution Equivariance for Conformal Out-of-Distribution
Detection
Ramneet Kaur1 , Susmit Jha2 , Anirban Roy2 , Sangdon Park13 , Edgar Dobriban4 , Oleg Sokolsky1 ,
Insup Lee1
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
2
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International, Menlo Park, USA
3
School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Statistics & Computer Science, University of Pennsylvania
ramneetk@seas.upenn.edu,{susmit.jha,anirban.roy}@sri.com, dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu, {sangdonp, sokolsky,
lee}@cis.upenn.edu
Abstract

Equivariance of outputs to certain geometric data transforms is a general desired property of ML systems. For example, it is desirable for a classifier trained on images of
upright cats to also correctly classify rotated images of cats.
In other words, classifiers should learn a representation that
is invariant to the orientation of the training data. Sharing of
kernels in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and more
generally group CNNs, leads to learning features equivariant to translations, and more generally to group transforms.
Therefore, group CNNs are mathematically guaranteed to be
equivariant to translations for all inputs, which has played
a critical role in the success of CNNs (Cohen and Welling
2016; Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton 2017). Another common
approach to encode these transformations is data augmentation (Baird 1992; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
Chen, Dobriban, and Lee 2020; Chatzipantazis et al. 2021).
This is not guaranteed to lead to equivariance for all inputs,
and is more likely to work for in-distribution data used for
training than for out-of-distribution data dissimilar to that
used for training. This is the crucial insight for us: we propose
using deviations from equivariance to test OOD-ness.
To get rigorous control on the false detection rate, we leverage conformal prediction (Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer
2005; Balasubramanian, Ho, and Vovk 2014), which is a general methodology to test if an input conforms to the training
data. It uses a non-conformity measure (NCM) to quantitatively estimate how different an input is from the training distribution. Commonly used NCMs are based on the
properties of the input’s k-nearest neighbors from the training data (Balasubramanian, Ho, and Vovk 2014; Papernot
and McDaniel 2018), and kernel density estimation methods (Smith et al. 2014). Inductive conformal anomaly detection (ICAD) (Laxhammar and Falkman 2015) uses an NCM
to assign a non-conformity score to the input for computing
its p-value indicating anomalous behavior. The performance
of ICAD can depend strongly on the choice of the NCM (Balasubramanian, Ho, and Vovk 2014). We propose using the
deviation (or error) in the predictable behavior of a model
equivariant in-distribution (iD) with respect to a set G of
transformations as the NCM for OOD detection.
ICAD uses a single score from the NCM to compute the pvalue. We instead propose using a vector of n non-conformity

Machine learning methods such as deep neural networks
(DNNs), despite their success across different domains, are
known to often generate incorrect predictions with high confidence on inputs outside their training distribution. The deployment of DNNs in safety-critical domains requires detection of
out-of-distribution (OOD) data so that DNNs can abstain from
making predictions on those. A number of methods have been
recently developed for OOD detection, but there is still room
for improvement. We propose the new method iDECODe,
leveraging in-distribution equivariance for conformal OOD
detection. It relies on a novel base non-conformity measure
and a new aggregation method, used in the inductive conformal anomaly detection framework, thereby guaranteeing a
bounded false detection rate. We demonstrate the efficacy of
iDECODe by experiments on image and audio datasets, obtaining state-of-the-art results. We also show that iDECODe can
detect adversarial examples. Code, pre-trained models, and
data are available at https://github.com/ramneetk/iDECODe.

Introduction
Powerful modern machine learning methods, such as deep
neural networks (DNNs) exhibit remarkable performance
in domains such as computer vision (Gkioxari, Girshick,
and Malik 2015), audio recognition (Hannun et al. 2014),
and natural language processing (Majumder et al. 2017).
However, DNNs are known to generate overconfident and
incorrect predictions on inputs outside their training distribution (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016). The responsible deployment of machine learning (ML) in safety-critical domains such as autonomous vehicles (Bojarski et al. 2016),
and medicine (De Fauw et al. 2018) requires detection of
out-of-distribution (OOD) data, so that these ML models can
abstain from making predictions on those. A great number of
methods have been developed for OOD detection, but there
is still significant room for improvement. In this paper, we
propose iDECODe, a novel OOD detection method based
on conformal prediction with transformation equivariance
learned on in-distribution (iD) data.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7104

