The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Synthetic Disinformation Attacks on Automated Fact Verification Systems
Yibing Du1 * , Antoine Bosselut2 * , Christopher D. Manning1
1

Stanford University 2 EPFL
antoine.bosselut@epfl.ch, {yibingdu,manning}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Automated fact-checking is a needed technology to curtail the
spread of online misinformation. One current framework for
such solutions proposes to verify claims by retrieving supporting or refuting evidence from related textual sources. However,
the realistic use cases for fact-checkers will require verifying
claims against evidence sources that could be affected by the
same misinformation. Furthermore, the development of modern NLP tools that can produce coherent, fabricated content
would allow malicious actors to systematically generate adversarial disinformation for fact-checkers.
In this work, we explore the sensitivity of automated factcheckers to synthetic adversarial evidence in two simulated
settings: A DVERSARIAL A DDITION, where we fabricate documents and add them to the evidence repository available to the
fact-checking system, and A DVERSARIAL M ODIFICATION,
where existing evidence source documents in the repository
are automatically altered. Our study across multiple models
on three benchmarks demonstrates that these systems suffer
significant performance drops against these attacks. Finally,
we discuss the growing threat of modern NLG systems as
generators of disinformation in the context of the challenges
they pose to automated fact-checkers.

AdvAdd

“COVID-19 is caused by
radiation from 5G Towers”

AdvMod

Evidence Repository
COVID-19 doesn't
exist. 5G radio
frequency
communications
have a damaging
health impact and
these are making
people sick. The
radiation depresses
peoples’ immune
systems and makes
them more likely to
suffer…

COVID-19 is
caused by
severe acute
respiratory
syndrome
coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2).
The novel virus
was identified
in Wuhan,
China, in
December
2019.

Recommended
preventive
measures
include social
distancing,
wearing face
masks in public,
ventilation and
air-filtering,
hand washing,
covering one's
mouth…

Severe illness is
more likely in
elderly patients,
and those who
have certain
underlying
medical
conditions.
They are more
sensitive to radio
waves from 5G
communication.

Evidence Selection
COVID-19 is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).

COVID-19 doesn't exist. 5G radio frequency communications have a
damaging health impact and these are directly making people sick.

Claim Verification
Claim: “COVID-19 is caused by radiation from 5G Towers”
Prediction: False True

Introduction
From QAnon’s deep state1 to anti-vaccination campaigns
(Germani and Biller-Andorno 2021), misinformation and
disinformation have flourished in online ecosystems. As misinformation continues to induce harmful societal effects,
factchecking online content has become critical to ensure
trust in the information found online.2 However, manual efforts to filter misinformation cannot keep pace with the scale
of online information that must be reliably verified to avoid
false claims spreading and affecting public opinion.3 Consequently, new research in automated fact-checking explores
designing systems that can rapidly validate political, medical,
and other domain-specific claims made and shared online
(Thorne and Vlachos 2018; Guo, Zhang, and Lu 2019).
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.nytimes.com/article/what-is-qanon.html
2
https://nationalpress.org/topic/the-truth-about-fact-checking/
3
https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/why-twitters-fact-checkof-trump-might-not-be-enough-to-combat-misinformation/

10581

Figure 1: Outline of our two settings for adversarial injection
of poisoned content into fact-checker evidence repositories.

A popular emergent paradigm in automated fact-checking,
Fact Extraction and Verification (F EVER; Thorne et al. 2018),
frames the problem as claim verification against a large repository of evidence documents. As one of the first large-scale
datasets designed in this framework, F EVER was released
with 185k annotated claims that could be verified against
Wikipedia articles. When checking a claim, systems designed in this framework search for related documents in
the database, and retrieve relevant supporting or refuting
evidence from these sources. Then, these systems evaluate
whether the retrieved evidence sentences validate or contradict the claim, or whether there is not enough information to
make a judgment. More recently, the S CI FACT (Wadden et al.
2020) and C OVID FACT (Saakyan, Chakrabarty, and Muresan
2021) benchmarks re-purposed this framework for the sci-

