The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Boosting Active Learning via Improving Test Performance
Tianyang Wang,1 * Xingjian Li,2 6 * Pengkun Yang,3 Guosheng Hu,4
Xiangrui Zeng,7 Siyu Huang,5 Cheng-Zhong Xu,6 Min Xu7†
1

Austin Peay State University, 2 Baidu Inc, 3 Tsinghua University,
Oosto, Harvard University, 6 University of Macau, 7 Carnegie Mellon University
toseattle@siu.edu, lixingjian@baidu.com, yangpengkun@tsinghua.edu.cn, huguosheng100@gmail.com,
xiangruz@andrew.cmu.edu, huang@seas.harvard.edu, czxu@um.edu.mo, mxu1@cs.cmu.edu
4

5

Abstract

(e.g. (Caramalau, Bhattarai, and Kim 2021; Zhang et al. 2020;
Yoo and Kweon 2019; Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019)),
whereas the latter group aims to select unlabeled data that
can diversify the labeled pool (Hasan and Roy-Chowdhury
2015; Yang et al. 2015; Mac Aodha et al. 2014; Elhamifar
et al. 2013; Bilgic and Getoor 2009; Nguyen and Smeulders
2004), which can also be achieved by synthesizing new diverse labeled data (Mayer and Timofte 2020; Mahapatra et al.
2018; Zhu and Bento 2017).
Although these two main streams of methods define the
state-of-the-art baselines, very little work has explored the
connection between selected data and the test performance of
the task model used in AL. Such a connection can be restated
as: if an unlabeled sample is selected for annotation and used
to train the task model, then how the test performance of
the model will be impacted. Conversely, this connection can
guide us to select unlabeled data which helps improve the
test performance.
This work focuses on exploring the aforementioned connection. To do so, we exploit the influence function (Koh and
Liang 2017) to analyze how the test performance is impacted
if an individual sample is selected for annotation and used in
training. Our theoretical analysis shows that selecting and annotating unlabeled data of higher gradient norm1 will result
in a lower upper-bound of test loss, leading to a better test
performance. This finding naturally leads to a data selection
criterion in AL. To our best knowledge, this is the first work
that theoretically analyzes how data selection impacts the test
performance in AL. Moreover, to leverage our theoretical
findings, we propose two independent schemes to compute
the gradient norm since it cannot be directly obtained during data selection due to the lack of label information in AL
settings. In the first scheme (namely expected-gradnorm),
inspired by (Cai et al. 2017; Cai, Zhang, and Zhou 2013),
we make use of all possible labels to compute an expected
empirical loss that is adopted to compute the gradient norm.
In the second scheme (namely entropy-gradnorm), we use
entropy as a loss to compute the gradient norm without resorting to any label information. The rationale of the two
schemes is also explained. We then propose a universal AL
framework to integrate these two schemes.
Note that although we aim to boost AL via improving

Central to active learning (AL) is what data should be selected
for annotation. Existing works attempt to select highly uncertain or informative data for annotation. Nevertheless, it remains unclear how selected data impacts the test performance
of the task model used in AL. In this work, we explore such
an impact by theoretically proving that selecting unlabeled
data of higher gradient norm leads to a lower upper-bound of
test loss, resulting in a better test performance. However, due
to the lack of label information, directly computing gradient
norm for unlabeled data is infeasible. To address this challenge, we propose two schemes, namely expected-gradnorm
and entropy-gradnorm. The former computes the gradient
norm by constructing an expected empirical loss while the
latter constructs an unsupervised loss with entropy. Furthermore, we integrate the two schemes in a universal AL framework. We evaluate our method on classical image classification
and semantic segmentation tasks. To demonstrate its competency in domain applications and its robustness to noise, we
also validate our method on a cellular imaging analysis task,
namely cryo-Electron Tomography subtomogram classification. Results demonstrate that our method achieves superior
performance against the state of the art. We refer readers to
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.05683.pdf for the full version of
this paper which includes the appendix and source code link.

Introduction
In most scenarios, supervised learning is still the most reliable fashion for training deep neural networks. However,
data annotation is often arguably expensive. To reduce the
cost, active learning (AL) can be used to select a portion of
all unlabeled data for annotation and the annotated data is
then used to train a task model (e.g. CNN) in a supervised
fashion. The goal of AL is to obtain the best test performance
of the task model given a specific annotation budget. Therefore, the question becomes: what data should be selected for
annotation to achieve this goal?
According to the fashion for data selection, existing AL
methods can be generally categorized into two groups,
namely uncertainty-based and diversity-based. The former
group aims to select the most uncertain data for annotation
* The first two authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8566

Here, the gradient is w.r.t. model parameters rather than input.

