The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FINet: Dual Branches Feature Interaction for
Partial-to-Partial Point Cloud Registration
Hao Xu1,2 , Nianjin Ye2 , Guanghui Liu1 * , Bing Zeng1 , Shuaicheng Liu1,2∗
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Megvii Technology
{xuhao02@std., guanghuiliu@, eezeng@, liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn
{xuhao02, yenianjin, liushuaicheng}@megvii.com
Abstract
Data association is important in the point cloud registration.
In this work, we propose to solve the partial-to-partial registration from a new perspective, by introducing multi-level
feature interactions between the source and the reference
clouds at the feature extraction stage, such that the registration can be realized without the attentions or explicit mask
estimation for the overlapping detection as adopted previously. Specifically, we present FINet, a feature interactionbased structure with the capability to enable and strengthen
the information associating between the inputs at multiple
stages. To achieve this, we first split the features into two
components, one for rotation and one for translation, based
on the fact that they belong to different solution spaces, yielding a dual branches structure. Second, we insert several interaction modules at the feature extractor for the data association. Third, we propose a transformation sensitivity loss
to obtain rotation-attentive and translation-attentive features.
Experiments demonstrate that our method performs higher
precision and robustness compared to the state-of-the-art traditional and learning-based methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/megvii-research/FINet.

Figure 1: The structure comparison of partiality handling.
The specific designs are shown in different colors. Our
method use the multi-level feature interaction to deal with
the partiality without using any attention mechanism in (a)
or explicit overlapping region prediction in (b).

Introduction
Point cloud registration is a longstanding research problem in the areas of computer vision and computer graphics, including augmented reality (Azuma 1997; Billinghurst,
Clark, and Lee 2014), object pose estimation (Fang et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2019a) and 3D reconstruction (Lin, Kong,
and Lucey 2018). It aims to predict a rigid 3D transformation, aligning the source point cloud to the reference. Data
association is critical for aligning two point clouds, especially for the practical partial-to-partial scenes where inputs
are obscured by partiality and contaminated by noise. Algorithms for this task have been improved steadily, which can
be divided into two categories: correspondence matchingbased and global feature-based methods.
Iterative Closest Point (ICP) (Besl and McKay 1992)
is the most classical algorithm among the correspondence
matching-based methods, where the correspondences are
obtained by the nearest neighbor search. Subsequently, several methods (Segal, Haehnel, and Thrun 2009; Pomerleau,

Colas, and Siegwart 2015; Yang, Li, and Jia 2013) are proposed to either improve the matching quality or search a
larger transformation space. Recently, some learning-based
approaches implement descriptor with neural network to improve the performance. Specifically, (Wang and Solomon
2019b) adopts Graph Neural Network (GNN) (Wang et al.
2019b) and attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017),
which enables the information exchange between the inputs.
However, most of them rely on the deep features that extracted from the local geometric structures. As a result, they
can hardly utilize the knowledge of the entire point clouds.
Without a global picture, the data association is inefficient.
In contrast, global feature-based methods can overcome
the above-mentioned issues by aggregating global information without correspondences, e.g., PointNetLK (Aoki et al.
2019) and Feature-metric Registration (FMR) (Huang, Mei,
and Zhang 2020). Although they can learn features from the
entire point cloud, they perform poorly in partial-to-partial
registration due to the lack of data association. Recently,
OMNet (Xu et al. 2021) predicts overlapping masks, con-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2848

