The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-View Clustering on Topological Manifold
Shudong Huang1 , Ivor Tsang2 , Zenglin Xu3 , Jiancheng Lv1 , Quan-Hui Liu1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, China
{huangsd,lvjiancheng,quanhuiliu}@scu.edu.cn, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au, xuzenglin@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

their efficiency of learning relationships and underlying
common structure shared by multiple views. (Liang, Huang,
and Wang 2019) designed a new alternating optimization
scheme such that the consistent and inconsistent parts of
each single-view graph can be explicitly detected. (Huang
et al. 2021a) proposed to simultaneously leverage the multiview consistency and the multi-view diversity in a joint
framework. Due to the efficiency of extracting similarities between multiple views, the kernel strategy is widely
utilized to boost the learning performance of multi-view
clustering methods. (Tzortzis and Likas 2012) expressed
each view in terms of given kernel matrix, and learned a
weighted combination of the kernels in parallel to the partitioning. (Houthuys, Langone, and Suykens 2018) formulated the multi-view kernel spectral clustering as a weighted
kernel canonical correlation analysis in a primal-dual optimization setting, in which a coupling term is included to
enforce the clustering scores corresponding to the different views to align. (Huang et al. 2019) further performed
multi-view clustering task and learned similarity relationships in kernel spaces simultaneously. Moreover, multiple
kernel learning is adopted such that the clustering performance is robust to the input kernel matrix. (Chen, Xiao, and
Zhou 2019) presented a novel kernelized method to handle
nonlinear data structures by jointly learning the representation tensor and affinity matrix.
There are also several works that seek for a joint graph
compatible across multiple views by making use of the bipartite graph fusion method. For instance, (Li et al. 2015)
used the local manifold fusion to integrate heterogeneous
features, and approximated the similarity graphs using bipartite graphs for multi-view spectral clustering. Furthermore, this kind of multi-view spectral clustering method is
able to handle the out-of-sample problem. Inspired by the
idea of anchor graph, (Nie et al. 2020) and (Kang et al. 2020)
involved a small number of the data points as anchors so that
the bipartite relations of anchor points and the data points
can be used to cover the affinity of the entire point cloud.
Although graph-oriented multi-view clustering methods
achieve promising results, there still exist several drawbacks.
For one thing, the similarity predefined in data graph is large
only for the neighbors. Considering that real world data are
typically sampled from a nonlinear manifold, the distant data
points may keep high consistency if they are linked by con-

Multi-view clustering has received a lot of attentions in data
mining recently. Though plenty of works have been investigated on this topic, it is still a severe challenge due to the complex nature of the multiple heterogeneous features. Particularly, existing multi-view clustering algorithms fail to consider the topological structure in the data, which is essential
for clustering data on manifold. In this paper, we propose to
exploit the implied data manifold by learning the topological
relationship between data points. Our method coalesces multiple view-wise graphs with the topological relevance considered, and learns the weights as well as the consensus graph
interactively in a unified framework. Furthermore, we manipulate the consensus graph by a connectivity constraint such
that the data points from the same cluster are precisely connected into the same component. Substantial experiments on
benchmark datasets are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, compared to the state-of-the-art
algorithms over the clustering performance.

Introduction
In many real scenarios, data are often generated from different sources in diverse domains or described by various
feature sets (i.e., views) (Bickel and Scheffer 2004; Huang,
Kang, and Xu 2020). A prime example is the documents,
which can be written in different languages; other prominent examples include images as well as web pages, the former is represented by different visual descriptors, and the
latter is typically classified based on their content or citation
links (Liu et al. 2018; Wang, Yang, and Liu 2019). These
data are referred to as multi-view data. Usually, different
views capture different aspects of information, any of which
suffices for mining knowledge (Li, Chen, and Wang 2019).
Multi-view clustering, which partitions the data points into
distinct clusters according to their compatible and complementary information encoded in heterogeneous features, has
attracted widespread attention in the domain of unsupervised
learning during the past two decades (Huang et al. 2021b;
Nie, Cai, and Li 2017).
Numerous multi-view clustering methods have been investigated up to now, among which the graph-oriented multiview clustering methods make up a large proportion due
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6944

