The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Open Vocabulary Electroencephalography-to-Text Decoding and Zero-Shot
Sentiment Classification
Zhenhailong Wang, Heng Ji
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{wangz3, hengji}@illinois.edu

Abstract

semantically close words that do not exist in the training set.
In this paper, we extend the problem from closed vocabulary to open vocabulary Electroencephalography(EEG)-ToText Sequence-To-Sequence decoding as well as zero-shot
sentiment classification on natural reading tasks. We enlarge
the vocabulary size for more than 100 times from several
hundred (Makin, Moses, and Chang 2020; Sun et al. 2019)
to 50,2651 . We utilize data (Hollenstein et al. 2018, 2020)
from various subjects and sources recorded by non-invasive
devices.
Previous work on brain-to-speech (Herff et al. 2015; Anumanchipalli, Chartier, and Chang 2019; Makin, Moses, and
Chang 2020; Moses et al. 2021) decoding has successfully
captured low-level auditory features from the movement of
our vocal tract to reconstruct words. Instead of only capturing articulation features, another line of work demonstrated that the human brain encodes language into higher
dimensional semantic representations (Gauthier and Ivanova
2018; Correia et al. 2014). Interestingly, we have seen similar behavior in large-scale pretrained language models, such
as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), BART (Lewis et al. 2020),
GPT2 (Radford et al. 2019) and GPT3 (Brown et al. 2020),
which encode words into contextualized semantic embeddings (Ethayarajh 2019). Recent findings on multimodal
neurons (Goh et al. 2021) in CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) revealed another level of resemblance between artificial neurons and human brain neurons in the sense that they all
respond to highly abstract concepts. The major contributions of the aforementioned large-scale pretrained language
models are their transfer learning abilities. By fine-tuning
them on specific downstream tasks, we observe a substantial improvement in various NLP tasks, including sequence
classification, text generation, etc. Although covariate shift
has been generally observed in brain signal data due to
intra- and inter-subject variability (Lund et al. 2005; Saha
and Baumert 2020), previous work demonstrated promising transfer learning ability in brain signal decoding using
deep learning models (Roy et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020;
Makin, Moses, and Chang 2020). Furthermore, various studies (Muttenthaler, Hollenstein, and Barrett 2020; Hollenstein

State-of-the-art brain-to-text systems have achieved great
success in decoding language directly from brain signals
using neural networks. However, current approaches are
limited to small closed vocabularies which are far from
enough for natural communication. Additionally, most of the
high-performing approaches require data from invasive devices (e.g., ECoG). In this paper, we extend the problem
to open vocabulary Electroencephalography(EEG)-To-Text
Sequence-To-Sequence decoding and zero-shot sentence sentiment classification on natural reading tasks. We hypothesize
that the human brain functions as a special text encoder and
propose a novel framework leveraging pre-trained language
models (e.g., BART). Our model achieves a 40.1% BLEU1 score on EEG-To-Text decoding and a 55.6% F1 score on
zero-shot EEG-based ternary sentiment classification, which
significantly outperforms supervised baselines. Furthermore,
we show that our proposed model can handle data from various subjects and sources, showing great potential for a highperformance open vocabulary brain-to-text system once sufficient data is available. The code is made publicly available
for research purpose at https://github.com/MikeWangWZHL/
EEG-To-Text.

Introduction
Understanding and decoding the human brain has always
been a fascinating topic for centuries. In recent years,
Brain-Computer-Interface (BCI) based on motor imagery
has gained great success in helping paralytic people restoring motor functionalities such as reaching and grasping (Hochberg et al. 2012; Aflalo et al. 2015; Bouton et al.
2016). Decoding natural language from brain signals, on the
other hand, remains a major challenge. We point out that previous approaches on brain-to-text and brain-to-speech decoding (Herff et al. 2015; Anumanchipalli, Chartier, and
Chang 2019; Makin, Moses, and Chang 2020; Sun et al.
2019; Panachakel and Ramakrishnan 2021; Nieto et al.
2021; Moses et al. 2021) still have limitations in terms of
vocabulary size, device, and articulation dependency, etc.
Previous work mainly focuses on achieving high accuracy,
thus decodes sentences and words in small closed vocabularies. Moreover, current systems lack the ability to decode

1

We use pretrained BART vocabulary: https://huggingface.co/
transformers/model doc/bart.html?highlight=bart\#transformers.
BartConfig

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5350

