The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How to Distribute Data across Tasks for Meta-Learning?
Alexandru Cioba, 1 Michael Bromberg, 1 Qian Wang, 1 Ritwik Niyogi, 1
Georgios Batzolis, 2 Jezabel Garcia, 1 Da-shan Shiu, 1 Alberto Bernacchia 1
1

MediaTek Research, 2 University of Cambridge

Abstract

such as mini-ImageNet (Vinyals et al. 2017), (Ravi and
Larochelle 2017) and CIFAR-FS (Bertinetto et al. 2019),
each task has five classes (5-way) and either one or five images per class is used during testing (1-shot or 5-shots). During training, the number of data points per class is usually set
to an arbitrary value, and it remains unclear how this number
should be set to achieve the best testing performance. We focus on training, rather than testing data, because the former
can be optimized by following specific procedures for data
partitioning and collection.
Intuitively, one would think that the performance always
improves with the number of training data points. However,
if the total number of labels is limited, is it better to have
a large number of tasks with little data in each task, or a
smaller number of highly labelled tasks? Should some tasks
be given more labels than other tasks? The answers to these
questions remain unknown, although they are important to
inform the design of new meta-learning benchmarks and the
application of meta-learning algorithms to real problems, especially given that data labelling is costly. Hence, we address
these questions for the first time, for a specific meta-learning
algorithm: MAML (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017). Our
contributions are:

Meta-learning models transfer the knowledge acquired from
previous tasks to quickly learn new ones. They are trained on
benchmarks with a fixed number of data points per task. This
number is usually arbitrary and it is unknown how it affects
performance at testing. Since labelling of data is expensive,
finding the optimal allocation of labels across training tasks
may reduce costs. Given a fixed budget of labels, should we
use a small number of highly labelled tasks, or many tasks
with few labels each? Should we allocate more labels to some
tasks and less to others? We show that: 1) If tasks are homogeneous, there is a uniform optimal allocation, whereby all
tasks get the same amount of data; 2) At fixed budget, there
is a trade-off between number of tasks and number of data
points per task, with a unique solution for the optimum; 3)
When trained separately, harder task should get more data, at
the cost of a smaller number of tasks; 4) When training on
a mixture of easy and hard tasks, more data should be allocated to easy tasks. Interestingly, Neuroscience experiments
have shown that human visual skills also transfer better from
easy tasks. We prove these results mathematically on mixed
linear regression, and we show empirically that the same results hold for few-shot image classification on CIFAR-FS and
mini-ImageNet. Our results provide guidance for allocating
labels across tasks when collecting data for meta-learning.

• We introduce the problem of optimizing data allocation
in meta-learning, with a fixed budget of total data points
to distribute across training tasks. We show that, when
tasks are homogeneous, the optimal solution is distributing data uniformly across tasks: all tasks get the same
amount of data. This setting is considered in most metalearning problems (See ’The data allocation problem’
section , Theorem 1).

Introduction
Deep learning (DL) models require a large amount of data
in order to perform well, when trained from scratch, but labeling data is expensive and time consuming. An effective
approach to avoid the costs of collecting and labeling a large
amount of data is transfer learning: train a model on one big
dataset, or a few related datasets that are already available,
and then fine-tune the model on the target dataset, which can
be of much smaller size (Donahue et al. 2014). In this context, there has been a recent surge of interest in the field of
meta-learning, which is inspired by the ability of humans
to learn how to learn (Hospedales et al. 2020). A model is
meta-trained on a large number of tasks, each characterized
by a small dataset, and meta-tested on the target dataset.
The number of data points per task is usually set to
an arbitrary number in standard meta-learning benchmarks.
For example, in few-shot image classification benchmarks,

• When data is distributed uniformly across tasks, we show
that the trade-off between number of tasks and number of
data points per task, at fixed budget, has a unique solution
for the optimum for large budgets (section ’Solution of
the uniform allocation’, Theorems 2, 3, Figures 1, 2).
• Next, we consider the problem of two sets of tasks, easy
and hard. When trained separately, we show that hard
tasks need more data (per task) than easy tasks. While
it is intuitive that hard tasks require more data for training, we emphasize that the total number of data points is
fixed by the given budget, therefore the number of tasks
is smaller (section ’Separate training’, Figure 3).

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6394

