The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Procrastinated Tree Search: Black-Box Optimization
with Delayed, Noisy, and Multi-Fidelity Feedback
Junxiong Wang,1 Debabrota Basu,2 Immanuel Trummer1
1

2

Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 14850
Équipe Scool, Inria, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, CNRS, Univ. Lille, Centrale Lille, Lille, France 59000

Abstract

In this setting, the optimizer does not have access to the
derivatives of f , rather can access f only by sequentially querying a simulation or evaluation oracle (Jamieson,
Nowak, and Recht 2012). The goal is to minimize the expected error in optimization, i.e. E[f (x∗ ) − f (xT )], after
T queries (Munos 2014), or to reach a fixed error threshold with as few queries as possible (Jamieson, Nowak, and
Recht 2012). We adopt the first approach in this paper.

In black-box optimization problems, we aim to maximize an
unknown objective function, where the function is only accessible through feedbacks of an evaluation or simulation oracle.
In real-life, the feedbacks of such oracles are often noisy and
available after some unknown delay that may depend on the
computation time of the oracle. Additionally, if the exact evaluations are expensive but coarse approximations are available
at a lower cost, the feedbacks can have multi-fidelity. In order
to address this problem, we propose a generic extension of
hierarchical optimistic tree search (HOO), called ProCrastinated Tree Search (PCTS), that flexibly accommodates a delay and noise-tolerant bandit algorithm. We provide a generic
proof technique to quantify regret of PCTS under delayed,
noisy, and multi-fidelity feedbacks. Specifically, we derive regret bounds of PCTS enabled with delayed-UCB1 (DUCB1)
and delayed-UCB-V (DUCBV) algorithms. Given a horizon
T , PCTS retains the regret bound of non-delayed HOO for
1−α
expected delay of O(log T ) and worsens by O(T d+2 ) for
expected delays of O(T 1−α ) for α ∈ (0, 1]. We experimentally validate on multiple synthetic functions and hyperparameter tuning problems that PCTS outperforms the stateof-the-art black-box optimization methods for feedbacks with
different noise levels, delays, and fidelity.

1

Approaches to Black-box Optimization. (Jamieson,
Nowak, and Recht 2012) have shown that black-box optimization for convex functions is in general efficient. For
convex functions, typically a Zeroth-order (ZO) Gradient Descent (GD) framework is used that replaces the
gradient with the difference between functional evaluations (Jamieson, Nowak, and Recht 2012; Kumagai 2017;
Liu et al. 2018). This approach requires double evaluation
queries per-step and also multiple problem-specific hyperparameters to be tuned to obtain reasonable performance.
Still, these methods are less robust to noise and stochastic
delay (Li, Chen, and Giannakis 2019) than the next two other
approaches, i.e. Bayesian Optimization (BO) and Hierarchical Tree Search.
For an objective function with no known structure except
local smoothness, solving the black-box optimization problem is equivalent to estimating f almost everywhere in its
domain X (Goldstein 1977). This can lead to an exponential complexity in the dimensionality of the domain (Chen
1988; Wang, Balakrishnan, and Singh 2019). Thus, one approach for this problem is to learn a surrogate fˆ of the actual
function f , such that fˆ is a close approximation of f and
fˆ can be learned and optimized with fewer samples. This
has led to research in Bayesian Optimization (BO) and its
variants (Srinivas et al. 2010; Jones, Schonlau, and Welch
1998; Huang et al. 2006; Kandasamy et al. 2016), where
specific surrogate regressors are fitted to the Bayesian posterior of f . However, if f is highly nonlinear or high dimensional, the Bayesian surrogate, namely Gaussian Process (GP) (Srinivas et al. 2010) or Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) (Springenberg et al. 2016), requires many samples to fit and generalize well. Also, there are two other
issues. Firstly, often myopic acquisition used in BO algorithms leads to excessive exploration of the boundary of the
search domain (Oh, Gavves, and Welling 2018). Secondly,

Introduction

Black-box optimization (Munos 2014; Sen, Kandasamy, and
Shakkottai 2019), alternatively known as zeroth-order optimization (Xu et al. 2020) or continuous-arm multi-armed
bandit (Bubeck et al. 2011), is a widely studied problem and has been successfully applied in reinforcement
learning (Munos 2014; Grill et al. 2020), neural architecture search (Wang et al. 2019), large-scale database tuning (Pavlo et al. 2017; Wang, Trummer, and Basu 2021),
robotics (Martinez-Cantin 2017), AutoML (Fischer, Gao,
and Bernstein 2015), material science (Xue et al. 2016; Kajita, Kinjo, and Nishi 2020), and many other domains. In
black-box optimization, we aim to maximize an unknown
function f : X → R, i.e. to find
x∗ ≜ arg max f (x).

(1)

x∈X

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10381

