The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Handling Slice Permutations Variability in Tensor Recovery
Jingjing Zheng1,2 , Xiaoqin Zhang2∗ , Wenzhe Wang2 , Xianta Jiang1
1

Department of Computer Science, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada
2
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University, Zhejiang, China
jjzheng233@gmail.com, zhangxiaoqinnan@gmail.com, woden3702@gmail.com, xiantaj@mun.ca

Abstract

and video processing (Tan et al. 2014; Dian, Li, and Fang
2019; Wei et al. 2018), data dimension reduction (Luo et al.
2015), etc.
A key problem of tensor recovery is how to define the
tensor rank. Unlike matrix rank, there are several ways to
define a tensor rank. For example, Kolda and Bader (Kolda
and Bader 2009) have adopted the minimum number of tensor rank-one decomposition (CP decomposition) of a given
tensor as the rank of tensor (CP rank), which corresponds
to one equivalent definition of matrix rank i.e. matrix rank
of a matrix is equal to the minimum number of rank-one
decomposition of the given matrix. Unfortunately, because
the computing of CP rank is a NP-hard problem, the application of the CP rank in tensor recovery has been greatly
restricted. In addition, due to the breakthroughs in low rank
matrix recovery, the method based on Tucker decomposition
(the unfolding matrices of the tensor) has become more popular than the one based on CP rank. For example, in (Gandy,
Recht, and Yamada 2011), the rank of the tensor (Tucker
rank) was defined as the sum of the ranks of the different
unfolding matrices. Besides, since the corresponding tensor
rank minimization problem is a NP-hard problem, Gandy et
al. utilized the sum of nuclear norms of the different unfolding matrices (SNN) instead of the sum of ranks for tensor
recovery. However, as stated in (Lu et al. 2019), SNN is not
the convex envelope of the sum of the ranks. Therefore, a
weighted sum of the ranks of the unfolding matrices was
considered in (Liu et al. 2012).
Recently, tensor recovery method based on tensor-tensor
product (t-product) has received more and more attention
because of its effectiveness in data processing and computer vision(Hu et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2014b). Based on tproduct, tensor tubal rank was proposed, which utilized tensor
Singular Value Decomposition (t-SVD) based on t-product.
Assuming A = U ∗ S ∗ V T (∗ stands for t-product) is the
t-SVD of A, tensor tubal rank of A is defined as the number
of non-zero singular tubes of S. Since tensor tubal rank is
non-convex and discrete which leads to NP-hard problem.
A convex norm, tensor nuclear norm (TNN) (Zhang et al.
2014b), was applied to solve the tensor completion problem
which aimed to recover a low rank tensor from tensor data
with missing entries. Later, (Lu et al. 2019) proposed tensor
average rank of tensor (corresponding to the rank of block
circulant matrix of the tensor), and proved the tensor nuclear

This work studies the influence of slice permutations on tensor recovery, which is derived from a reasonable assumption
about algorithm, i.e. changing data order should not affect
the effectiveness of the algorithm. However, as we will discussed in this paper, this assumption is not satisfied by tensor
recovery under some cases. We call this interesting problem
as Slice Permutations Variability (SPV) in tensor recovery. In
this paper, we discuss SPV of several key tensor recovery problems theoretically and experimentally. The obtained results
show that there is a huge gap between results by tensor recovery using tensor with different slices sequences. To overcome
SPV in tensor recovery, we develop a novel tensor recovery
algorithm by Minimum Hamiltonian Circle for SPV (TRSPV)
which exploits a low dimensional subspace structures within
data tensor more exactly. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work to discuss and effectively solve the SPV problem
in tensor recovery. The experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in eliminating SPV in
tensor recovery.

Introduction
With the explosion of high-dimensional data such as images
and videos, the problem of exploiting low-dimensional structures in such high-dimensional data has become increasingly
important in computer vision and pattern recognition (Candes
and Plan 2010; Candès and Recht 2009; Candès et al. 2011;
Chandrasekaran et al. 2009; Xu, Caramanis, and Sanghavi
2012; Wright et al. 2009; Eckart and Young 1936; Wold,
Esbensen, and Geladi 1987; Zhou et al. 2010). Since most
visual data including color images and videos are in the form
of tensor, dealing with such tensor data has attracted more
and more attention recently. Lots of low rank tensor recovery
methods have been proposed (Gandy, Recht, and Yamada
2011; Lu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2014a, 2019; Zheng et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2020; Cai et al. 2021; Lu,
Peng, and Wei 2019) to recover low rank tensors form the
high-dimensional data tensor with various of perturbation,
with the basic assumption that the tensor data lie approximately on a low-dimensional linear subspace. These methods
have been widely used in various fields such as color images
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3499

