The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

EqGNN: Equalized Node Opportunity in Graphs
Uriel Singer, Kira Radinsky
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
urielsinger@cs.technion.ac.il, kirar@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract

or gender. The little existing work, focused on ignoring the
sensitive attributes (Obermeyer et al. 2019). However, “fairness through unawareness” has already been shown to predict sensitive attributes from other features (Barocas, Hardt,
and Narayanan 2019). Others (Bose and Hamilton 2019; Dai
and Wang 2021; Buyl and De Bie 2020; Rahman et al. 2019)
focused on the criteria of Statistical Parity (SP) for fairness
when training node embeddings, defined as follows:

Graph neural networks (GNNs), has been widely used for
supervised learning tasks in graphs reaching state-of-the-art
results. However, little work was dedicated to creating unbiased GNNs, i.e., where the classification is uncorrelated
with sensitive attributes, such as race or gender. Some ignore
the sensitive attributes or optimize for the criteria of statistical parity for fairness. However, it has been shown that neither approaches ensure fairness, but rather cripple the utility of the prediction task. In this work, we present a GNN
framework that allows optimizing representations for the notion of Equalized Odds fairness criteria. The architecture is
composed of three components: (1) a GNN classifier predicting the utility class, (2) a sampler learning the distribution
of the sensitive attributes of the nodes given their labels. It
generates samples fed into a (3) discriminator that discriminates between true and sampled sensitive attributes using a
novel “permutation loss” function. Using these components,
we train a model to neglect information regarding the sensitive attribute only with respect to its label. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to optimize GNNs for the
equalized odds criteria. We evaluate our classifier over several graph datasets and sensitive attributes and show our algorithm reaches state-of-the-art results.

1

Definition 1 (Statistical parity). A predictor Ŷ satisfies statistical parity with respect to a sensitive attribute A, if Ŷ
and A are independent:
Ŷ ⊥
⊥A

(1)

Recently, Dwork et al. (2012) showed that SP does not
ensure fairness and might actually cripple the utility of the
prediction task. Consider the task of recommending a job
to a person given their social network. Given a sensitive attribute of gender, SP will require the same amount of men
and women per job. However, it allows accepting qualified
applicants in one gender, but unqualified in another, as long
as the percentages of acceptance match. This is not ideal because it does not consider the qualification of the person to
a job. Lately, the notion of Equalized Odds (EO) was presented as an alternative fairness criteria (Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016). Unlike SP, EO allows dependence on the sensitive attribute A but only through the target variable Y :

Introduction

Supervised learning was shown to exhibit bias depending
on the data it was trained on (Pedreshi, Ruggieri, and Turini
2008). This problem is further amplified in graphs, where the
graph topology was shown to exhibit different biases (Kang,
Lijffijt, and Bie 2019; Singer, Radinsky, and Horvitz 2020).
Many popular supervised-learning graph algorithms, such
as graph neural networks (GNNs), employ message-passing
with features aggregated from neighbors; which might further intensify this bias. For example, in social networks,
communities are usually more connected between themselves. As GNNs aggregate information from neighbors, it
makes it even harder for a classifier to realize the potential
of an individual from a discriminated community.
Despite their success (Wu et al. 2020), little work has been
dedicated to creating unbiased GNNs, where the classification is uncorrelated with sensitive attributes, such as race

Definition 2 (Equalized odds). A predictor Ŷ satisfies
equalized odds with respect to a sensitive attribute A, if Ŷ
and A are independent conditional on the true label Y:
Ŷ ⊥
⊥A|Y

(2)

The definition encourages the use of features that allow
to directly predict Y, while not allowing to leverage A as
a proxy for Y. Consider our job acceptance example. For
the outcome of Y=Accept, we require Ŷ to have similar
true and false positive rates across both genders. Notice that,
Ŷ = Y aligns with the EO constraint, but we enforce that
the accuracy is equally high in both genders, and penalize
models that have good performance on only one gender.
In this work, we present an architecture that optimizes
graph classification for the EO criteria. Given a GNN classifier predicting a target class, we expand it with an EO regularization using a sampler and a discriminator components.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8333

