The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Video as Conditional Graph Hierarchy for Multi-Granular Question Answering
Junbin Xiao, Angela Yao, Zhiyuan Liu, Yicong Li, Wei Ji, Tat-Seng Chua
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{junbin, ayao, chuats}@comp.nus.edu.sg, acharkq@gmail.com, liyicong@u.nus.edu, jiwei@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

are unaccounted, current models are limited in insight and
interpretability, and also their results can be sub-optimal.
In this work, we delve into the problem of video question
answering based on a bottom-up and top-down insight1 . As
demonstrated in Figure 1, from a bottom-up view, video contents are hierarchical in semantic space. Each atomic action
(e.g., pick up) involves a visual subject (e.g., lady) and
optionally an object (e.g., lemon). Besides, the atomic actions (e.g., pick up, squeeze, pour) compositionally form a super-action or activity (e.g., cook), while activities (e.g., cook and play) further constitute a global event
(e.g., camping). From a top-down view, questions are diverse and answering them demands visual information from
different granularity levels. Generally, questions concerning
objects and their attributes rely on specific visual entities
for answers; questions regarding spatial relations and contact actions (e.g., hug, kiss, hold, carry) are better answered based on object interactions at certain frames;
while questions about dynamic actions (e.g., pick up,
put down), temporal interactions and global event may require aggregating information from multiple video frames
or clips. In addition, a single question may also invoke multiple levels of visual elements, which further demands the
awareness of the multi-granularity of both video elements
and linguistic concepts.
To capture such insight, we propose to model video as a
graph hierarchy with the condition of language query in a
level-wise fashion. Concretely, the model weaves together
visual facts from low-level entities to higher level video elements through graph aggregation and pooling, during which
the local and global textual query are incorporated into different levels to match and pinpoint the relevant video elements at the corresponding granularity levels (e.g., objects,
actions, activities and events). In this way, our model can
not only identify the query-specific visual objects and actions, but also capture their local interactions as well as infer
the constituted activities and events. Such versatility is the
first of its kind in VideoQA and is of crucial importance in
handling diverse questions concerning different video elements. To validate the effectiveness, we test the model on
four VideoQA datasets that challenge the various aspects of

Video question answering requires the models to understand
and reason about both the complex video and language data
to correctly derive the answers. Existing efforts have been focused on designing sophisticated cross-modal interactions to
fuse the information from two modalities, while encoding the
video and question holistically as frame and word sequences.
Despite their success, these methods are essentially revolving
around the sequential nature of video- and question-contents,
providing little insight to the problem of question-answering
and lacking interpretability as well. In this work, we argue
that while video is presented in frame sequence, the visual
elements (e.g., objects, actions, activities and events) are not
sequential but rather hierarchical in semantic space. To align
with the multi-granular essence of linguistic concepts in language queries, we propose to model video as a conditional
graph hierarchy which weaves together visual facts of different granularity in a level-wise manner, with the guidance of
corresponding textual cues. Despite the simplicity, our extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of such conditional hierarchical graph architecture, with clear performance
improvements over prior methods and also better generalization across different type of questions. Further analyses also
demonstrate the model’s reliability as it shows meaningful
visual-textual evidences for the predicted answers.

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed a flourish of research in
video-language tasks. Video question answering (VideoQA)
is one of the most prominent, given its promise to develop
interactive AI and communicate with the dynamic visual
world via natural language. Despite its popularity, the challenge in VideoQA remains significant; it demands a wide
spectrum of recognitive (Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2016;
Carreira and Zisserman 2017), reasoning (Hu et al. 2018) as
well as grounding (Hu et al. 2017; Xiao et al. 2020) capabilities to comprehend the questions (Mao et al. 2016) and deduce the correct answers. Existing efforts (Jang et al. 2017;
Gao et al. 2018; Yu, Kim, and Kim 2018; Fan et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2019b; Jiang et al. 2020) concentrate on capturing
the sequential nature of video frames and question words.
As the hierarchical, compositional structure of video contents and the multi-granular essence of linguistic concepts

1
Bottom-up is from low-level visual contents (video) to highlevel semantics (language query), and vice versa for top down.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2804

