The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Lyapunov-Based Methodology for Constrained
Optimization with Bandit Feedback
Semih Cayci,1 * Yilin Zheng,2 * Atilla Eryilmaz2
1

2

Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801.
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210
scayci@illinois.edu, zheng.1443@osu.edu, eryilmaz.2@osu.edu

Abstract

This motivates us in this paper to formulate and solve the
following budget-constrained bandit problem in a stochastic
setting. Each arm pull takes a random and arm-dependent
resource (e.g. time, energy, etc.) from the budget, and the
decision-making process continues until the total consumed
resource exceeds a given budget B > 0. At the end of each
arm pull, the controller receives a random reward and a random penalty. The objective of the controller is to maximize
the expected total reward subject to an inequality constraint
on the average penalty per unit resource consumption.

In a wide variety of applications including online advertising,
contractual hiring, and wireless scheduling, the controller is
constrained by a stringent budget constraint on the available
resources, which are consumed in a random amount by each
action, and a stochastic feasibility constraint that may impose
important operational limitations on decision-making. In this
work, we consider a general model to address such problems,
where each action returns a random reward, cost, and penalty
from an unknown joint distribution, and the decision-maker
aims to maximize the total reward under a budget constraint
B on the total cost and a stochastic constraint on the timeaverage penalty. We propose a novel low-complexity algorithm based on Lyapunov optimization methodology,
named
√
LyOn, and prove that for K arms it achieves O( KB log B)
regret and zero constraint-violation when B is sufficiently
large. The low computational cost and sharp performance
bounds of LyOn suggest that Lyapunov-based algorithm design methodology can be effective in solving constrained bandit optimization problems.

Main Contributions
In this work, we tackle the aforementioned general constrained optimization problem with bandit feedback, and
propose a novel Lyapunov-based design methodology to develop efficient algorithms that achieve sharp convergence results. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• General model: We consider a generic constrained bandit optimization problem which: (i) incorporates random
costs for each action; (ii) is subject to a stringent budget
(knapsack) constraint; and (iii) has stochastic feasibility
constraints as required by many applications.
• Lyapunov methodology for bandit optimization: Based
on a Lyapunov-drift minimization technique from
stochastic control, we design novel low-complexity bandit algorithms with provably sharp convergence properties. This approach suggests a general design methodology that can be utilized in other constrained bandit optimization scenarios.
• Analysis techniques: We also employ new analysis techniques for the reward maximization problem subject to
stochastic and knapsack constraints based on a combination of renewal theory, stochastic control, and bandit
optimization.

Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) have been predominantly used
to model exploration-and-exploitation problems since its inception (Robbins 1952; Lai and Robbins 1985; Berry and
Fristedt 1985). As a consequence of the universality of the
dilemma, bandit algorithms have found a broad range of applications from medical trials and adaptive routing to server
allocation (Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi et al. 2012). In many applications of interest, the controller is required to satisfy
multiple constraints while achieving the optimal expected
total reward under a given finite budget.
To take one example, in fair resource allocation problems,
such as task scheduling or contractual hiring, each arm (e.g.,
a user or a social group) must receive at least a given fraction of the total budget (e.g., total time) while maximizing
the total reward. Other examples from diverse domains, such
as wireless resource allocation, online advertising, etc., also
take this form (see examples after problem formulation for
more discussion). In order to solve fundamental learning applications such as these, a fast and effective constrained bandit optimization framework is required.

Related Work
Knapsack-constrained bandit problem was considered in
(Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Slivkins 2013), where the
objective of the controller is to maximize the expected
total reward under a stringent budget constraint.
The au√
thors proposed a learning algorithm with O( B) problemindependent regret. Bandit algorithms with O(log(B))

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3716

