The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generalizing Reinforcement Learning through Fusing Self-Supervised Learning
into Intrinsic Motivation
Keyu Wu, Min Wu, Zhenghua Chen * , Yuecong Xu, Xiaoli Li
Institute for Infocomm Research , A*STAR, Singapore
{wu keyu, wumin}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, {chen0832, xuyu0014}@e.ntu.edu.sg, xlli@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

due to the high-dimensional and partially-observable nature
of pixel inputs.
As one of the well explored solutions, domain randomization typically creates a variety of environments with randomly sampled properties and ﬁnds the best policy which
works across all of the environments (Tobin et al. 2017).
Nevertheless, domain randomization can lead to large model
complexity and is sensitive to sampling distribution and
choice of randomized parameters. Another typical class
of solutions is domain adaptation, which learns domaininvariant representations and mitigates the distribution discrepancy between the source and target domains (Bousmalis
et al. 2018; Gamrian and Goldberg 2019). However, the target domain data are assumed to be accessible in domain
adaptation settings while RL agents typically need to generalize to truly unknown environments.
Furthermore, the incorporation of data augmentations
on input observations can also result in signiﬁcantly improved generalization capability of RL agents (Laskin et al.
2020; Kostrikov, Yarats, and Fergus 2020; Raileanu et al.
2020). Recently, studies have also demonstrated that various self-supervised learning methods can be applied to improve both sample efﬁciency and generalization of RL policies substantially via better representation learning (Srinivas, Laskin, and Abbeel 2020; Hansen et al. 2020; Hansen
and Wang 2021). However, prior works only combine selfsupervised representation learning with reinforcement learning naively while it is promising to achieve greater improvement through linking self-supervised learning to reinforcement learning more ingeniously.
In this paper, we propose to improve the generalization
of RL algorithms through fusing Self-supervised learning
into Intrinsic Motivation (SIM). Similar to SODA (Hansen
and Wang 2021), SIM decouples augmentation from policy learning to simplify RL optimization. It only uses augmented data to perform auxiliary representation learning
while strictly using non-augmented samples for policy learning. In contrast to SODA, SIM does not require any prediction networks, momentum updates, or stop-gradients. It
feeds the augmented and non-augmented data to two identical networks respectively, and makes the cross-correlation
matrix between the two embeddings close to the identity
matrix. This is to increase the similarity between the embeddings of a sample and its augmented version while mini-

Despite the great potential of reinforcement learning (RL)
in solving complex decision-making problems, generalization remains one of its key challenges, leading to difﬁculty
in deploying learned RL policies to new environments. In
this paper, we propose to improve the generalization of RL
algorithms through fusing Self-supervised learning into Intrinsic Motivation (SIM). Speciﬁcally, SIM boosts representation learning through driving the cross-correlation matrix
between the embeddings of augmented and non-augmented
samples close to the identity matrix. This aims to increase the
similarity between the embedding vectors of a sample and
its augmented version while minimizing the redundancy between the components of these vectors. Meanwhile, the redundancy reduction based self-supervised loss is converted
to an intrinsic reward to further improve generalization in RL
via an auxiliary objective. As a general paradigm, SIM can be
implemented on top of any RL algorithm. Extensive evaluations have been performed on a diversity of tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that SIM consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods and exhibits superior generalization
capability and sample efﬁciency.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is capable of learning from
previous experiences automatically without any labeled
data, and has demonstrated great potential in solving various complex decision-making problems. By combining with
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), vision-based RL has
achieved prominent success in a broad range of areas, such
as video games (Mnih et al. 2015), continuous control (Lillicrap et al. 2015), robot grasping (Kalashnikov et al. 2018),
robot navigation (Wu et al. 2021) and so on. Despite its remarkable achievements, vision-based RL remains plagued
by poor generalization capabilities, which signiﬁcantly limits its deployment in real-world applications. Often, RL
agents trained in one environment can hardly generalize well
to unseen scenarios, even after they have been trained in a
large number of diverse yet semantically similar environments (Gamrian and Goldberg 2019). The adaptation problems of vision-based RL agents can be further exacerbated
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8683

