The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Enhancing Pseudo Label Quality for Semi-supervised Domain-Generalized
Medical Image Segmentation
Huifeng Yao1 , Xiaowei Hu2 , Xiaomeng Li1,3 *
1

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Shenzhen Research Institute
hyaoad@connect.ust.hk, xwhu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, eexmli@ust.hk
Abstract

Generalizing the medical image segmentation algorithms to
unseen domains is an important research topic for computeraided diagnosis and surgery. Most existing methods require a
fully labeled dataset in each source domain. Although some
researchers developed a semi-supervised domain generalized
method, it still requires the domain labels. This paper presents
a novel confidence-aware cross pseudo supervision algorithm
for semi-supervised domain generalized medical image segmentation. The main goal is to enhance the pseudo label
quality for unlabeled images from unknown distributions. To
achieve it, we perform the Fourier transformation to learn
low-level statistic information across domains and augment
the images to incorporate cross-domain information. With
these augmentations as perturbations, we feed the input to a
confidence-aware cross pseudo supervision network to measure the variance of pseudo labels and regularize the network
to learn with more confident pseudo labels. Our method sets
new records on public datasets, i.e., M&Ms and SCGM. Notably, without using domain labels, our method surpasses the
prior art that even uses domain labels by 11.67% on Dice
on M&Ms dataset with 2% labeled data. Code is available
at https://github.com/XMed-Lab/EPL SemiDG.

A

B

C

D

Figure 1: Some 2D slices of MRI from M&Ms dataset. The
first row is images from four different domains (A,B,C,D)
and the second row is the corresponding segmentation
masks. The red, blue, and green colors refer to the left ventricle blood pool,the right ventricle blood pool, and the left
ventricular myocardium, respectively.

One naive solution to address the domain shifts is to obtain and annotate as much data as possible. However, the annotation cost is quite expensive to the community. Another
solution is to train the model on the source domains and generalize it to the target domain with some information from
the target domain, namely domain adaptation (DA) (Bian
et al. 2020; Pomponio et al. 2020). For example, Pomponio
et al. (2020) developed cross-site MRI harmonization to enforce the source and target domains to share similar imagespecific characteristics. Domain generalization (DG) is a
more strict setting, where the difference with DA is that the
model does not use any information from the target domain.
In this paper, we focus on this challenging but more practical problem, i.e., train the model on the source domains (A,
B, and C) and test it on an unseen domain (D).
Existing domain generalization methods have been developed for various medical image applications, such as cardiac
segmentation (Liu et al. 2020), skin lesion classification (Li
et al. 2020a), spinal cord gray matter segmentation (Li
et al. 2020a) and prostate MRI segmentation (Liu, Dou, and
Heng 2020). For example, Liu et al. (2020) proposed two
data augmentation methods: “Resolution Augmentaion” and
“Factor-based Augmentation” to generate more diverse data.

Introduction
Medical image segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks
in computer-aided diagnosis and computer-aided surgery.
In recently years, researchers have developed many convolutional neural networks for medical image segmentation, such as U-Net (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015),
DenseUNet (Li et al. 2018a), nnUNet (Isensee et al. 2021),
and HyperDenseNet (Dolz et al. 2018). Medical images are
usually collected from different clinical centers with different scanners (Li et al. 2020c; Puyol-Anton et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2020). As a result, they may have apparent domain shifts due to variation in patient populations, scanners, and scan acquisition settings; see examples in Figure 1.
However, the above methods generate inferior results when
testing on images from unseen domains; see results in Table 1 and Table 2 in the experiments. Hence, it is crucial to
strengthen the model’s generalization ability over different
domain shifts.
* Corresponding Author: eexmli@ust.hk
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3099

