The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Lifelong Generative Modelling Using Dynamic Expansion Graph Model
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

where pθ (x | z) and p(z) = N (0, I) are the decoding and
prior distribution, respectively, while KL[·] represents the
Kullback–Leibler divergence. Defining a tighter ELBO to
the marginal log-likelihood, achieved by using a more expressive posterior (Kim and Pavlovic 2020; Maaløe et al.
2016), importance sampling (Burda, Grosse, and Salakhutdinov 2015; Domke and Sheldon 2018) or through hierarchical variational models (Molchanov et al. 2019; Vahdat and
Kautz 2020), has been successful for improving the performance of VAEs. However, these approaches can only guarantee a tight ELBO for learning a single domain and do
not work under the lifelong learning (LLL) setting, which
involves learning sequentially several tasks associated with
different databases. VAEs, similarly to other deep learning
methods (Guo et al. 2020), suffer from catastrophic forgetting (French 1999), when learning new tasks, leading to degenerate performance on the previous tasks. One direct way
to enable VAEs for LLL is by using Generative Replay (GR)
processes (Ramapuram, Gregorova, and Kalousis 2020).
Let us consider a VAE model trained on a sequence of t
tasks. After the i-th task learning is finished, the GR process
allows the model to generate a pseudo dataset X̃i which will
be mixed with the incoming data set Xnew to form a joint
dataset for the (i + 1)-th task learning. Usually, the distribution of {X̃i , Xnew } does not match the real data distribution exactly and the optimal parameters {θ∗ , ω ∗ } are estimated by maximizing ELBO, on samples x0 drawn from
{X̃i , Xnew }. LELBO (·) is not a tight ELBO in Eq. (1)
by using the model’s parameters {θ∗ , ω ∗ } which actually
are not optimal for the real sample log-likelihood log pθ (x)
(See Proposition 6 in Appendix-I from SM1 ). In this paper, we aim to evaluate the tightness between log pθ (x)
and LELBO (x0 ; θ∗ , ω ∗ ), by developing an upper bound to
the negative marginal log-likelihood, called Lifelong ELBO
(LELBO). LELBO involves the discrepancy distance (Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009) between the target and
the evolved source distributions, as well as the resulting accumulated errors when learning each new task. This analysis
provides insights into how a VAE model is losing previously
learnt knowledge during LLL. We also generalize the proposed theoretical analysis to ENA models, which leads to
a novel dynamic expansion graph model (DEGM) enabled
with generating graph structures linking the existing components and a newly created component, benefiting on the

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) suffer from degenerated
performance, when learning several successive tasks. This
is caused by catastrophic forgetting. In order to address
the knowledge loss, VAEs are using either Generative Replay (GR) mechanisms or Expanding Network Architectures
(ENA). In this paper we study the forgetting behaviour of
VAEs using a joint GR and ENA methodology, by deriving
an upper bound on the negative marginal log-likelihood. This
theoretical analysis provides new insights into how VAEs forget the previously learnt knowledge during lifelong learning. The analysis indicates the best performance achieved
when considering model mixtures, under the ENA framework, where there are no restrictions on the number of components. However, an ENA-based approach may require an
excessive number of parameters. This motivates us to propose
a novel Dynamic Expansion Graph Model (DEGM). DEGM
expands its architecture, according to the novelty associated
with each new database, when compared to the information
already learnt by the network from previous tasks. DEGM
training optimizes knowledge structuring, characterizing the
joint probabilistic representations corresponding to the past
and more recently learned tasks. We demonstrate that DEGM
guarantees optimal performance for each task while also minimizing the required number of parameters.

Introduction
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013) is a popular generative deep learning model with remarkable successes in learning unsupervised tasks by inferring probabilistic data representations (Chen et al. 2018), for
disentangled representation learning (Higgins et al. 2017;
Ye and Bors 2021d) and for image reconstruction tasks
(Ye and Bors 2020c, 2021b,c,d). Training a VAE model involves
R maximizing the marginal log-likelihood log pθ (x) =
log pθ (x|z)p(z)dz which is intractable during optimization due to the integration over the latent space defined by
the variables z. VAEs introduce using a variational distribution qω (z|x) to approximate the posterior while trained by
maximizing a lower bound, called Evidence Lower Bound
(ELBO), (Kingma and Welling 2013) :
log pθ (x) ≥ Eqω (z|x) [log pθ (x | z)]
(1)
− KL [qω (z | x) || p (z)] := LELBO (x; {θ, ω})
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8857

