The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Social Interpretable Tree for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Liushuai Shi1 , Le Wang2 * , Chengjiang Long3
Sanping Zhou2 , Fang Zheng1 , Nanning Zheng2 , Gang Hua4
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
JD Finance America Corporation
4
Wormpex AI Research
{shiliushuai,zhengfang}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang,spzhou,nnzheng}@xjtu.edu.cn, {cjfykx, ganghua}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

B

C

Real Traffic
Scenario

A

Proposed Method

CVAE-based
Method

Understanding the multiple socially-acceptable future behaviors is an essential task for many vision applications. In this
paper, we propose a tree-based method, termed as Social Interpretable Tree (SIT), to address this multi-modal prediction
task, where a hand-crafted tree is built depending on the prior
information of observed trajectory to model multiple future
trajectories. Specifically, a path in the tree from the root to
leaf represents an individual possible future trajectory. SIT
employs a coarse-to-fine optimization strategy, in which the
tree is first built by high-order velocity to balance the complexity and coverage of the tree and then optimized greedily
to encourage multimodality. Finally, a teacher-forcing refining operation is used to predict the final fine trajectory. Compared with prior methods which leverage implicit latent variables to represent possible future trajectories, the path in the
tree can explicitly explain the rough moving behaviors (e.g.,
go straight and then turn right), and thus provides better interpretability. Despite the hand-crafted tree, the experimental
results on ETH-UCY and Stanford Drone datasets demonstrate that our method is capable of matching or exceeding
the performance of state-of-the-art methods. Interestingly, the
experiments show that the raw built tree without training outperforms many prior deep neural network based approaches.
Meanwhile, our method presents sufficient flexibility in longterm prediction and different best-of-K predictions.

Sampling

Condition
Observed
Trajectory

Latent
Space

Latent
Variable

Selection

Observed
Trajectory

Trajectory
Tree

Selected
Trajectory

Predicted
Trajectory
Ground
Truth
Predicted
Trajectory

Ground
Truth

Figure 1: Illustration of real traffic scenario and comparison
of our method with CVAE-based method. The first row illustrates the future trajectory is largely uncertain only referencing observed trajectory (A). The future trajectory is multimodal and thus can be represented by a tree (B). The yellow
closest path is refined to predict future trajectory (C). The
second and third rows describe the process of CVAE-based
method and our proposed method, respectively.
variational autoencoder (CVAE) or generative adversarial
network (GAN). Then, multiple latent variables sampled repeatedly from the generated latent space are used to represent multimodality. Despite the significant performance, the
latent variables still suffer from uninterpretability, and such
models (CVAE, GAN) are persecuted by the problem of
model collapse (Arjovsky and Bottou 2017). What’s more,
the sampling operation could result in performance variance
due to the disturbance from randomness.
To cope with those problems, we propose to model the
multi-modal future trajectory into a tree as shown in Figure 1 (third row), where the paths from the root to leaf in the
tree could represent multimodality naturally and the closest
path (yellow path) with ground truth is selected to obtain the
final fine-grained predicted trajectory. Compared with the latent variable, the path in the tree could explain rough movement behaviors, e.g., the yellow path expresses go straight
and then turn right, and thus can provide well interpretability. Furthermore, the sampling operation is replaced with the
“selection” to ensure obtaining stable results.

Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction plays an essential role in
many vision systems, e.g., the automatic vehicle understands
the future trajectory of the pedestrian to prevent the accident,
and the monitoring system recognize the abnormal action in
advance by predicting the future trajectory of human.
In a real traffic scenario illustrated in Figure 1 (first row),
due to the intrinsic randomness of pedestrians’ moving and
intangible various intent only based on observed trajectory (A), the future trajectory is largely uncertain and naturally multi-modal, which means there are multiple possible
trajectories that pedestrian could take (B). One kind of approaches (Gupta et al. 2018; Mangalam et al. 2020) to model
this multi-modal future trajectory embed them into an implicit latent space (second row) generated by the conditional
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2235

