The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generalization in Mean Field Games by Learning Master Policies
Sarah Perrin1, ? , Mathieu Laurière2, ? , Julien Pérolat3 , Romuald Élie3 , Matthieu Geist2, † , Olivier
∗
Pietquin1, †
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL
2
Google Research, Brain Team
3
DeepMind Paris
sarah.perrin@inria.fr, {lauriere, mfgeist, pietquin}@google.com, {perolat, relie}@deepmind.com
Abstract

corresponds to a situation where no player can increase their
reward (or decrease their cost) by changing their strategy,
given that other players keep their current behavior. MFGs
are classically described with a forward-backward system of
partial differential equations (PDEs) or stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and can only be solved analytically in
some specific cases. When an analytical solution is not available, numerical methods such as finite differences can be
called to solve the PDE system. However, these techniques
do not scale well with the dimensions of the state and action spaces. Another issue with PDE methods is that they
are very sensitive to initial conditions. Especially, the policy obtained is only valid for a single initial distribution µ0
for the population over the state space. This is a strong limitation for practical applications. For example, in an evacuation or traffic-flow scenario, the solution found by a PDE
solver could potentially lead to an unforeseen congestion if
the agents are not initially distributed as the model expected.
This could have dramatic consequences. On the other hand,
solving for every possible initial distribution is of course
infeasible. Following the traditional trend in the literature,
even solutions to MFGs that use most recent Machine Learning methods consider that the initial distribution is fixed and
thus compute policies that are agnostic to the current population. A sensible idea to alleviate the sensitivity issue is
to incorporate the population as part of the observation for
the representative agent, such that it can behave optimally
against the population, and not only w.r.t. its current state.
Yet, using such a modification of the observation cannot be
done seamlessly as the uniqueness of the initial distribution
is a core assumption of existing methods, including very recent ones based on Machine Learning.
Here we do a first crucial step in this direction using Deep
Reinforcement Learning (Deep RL), which sounds particularly well fitted to overcome the aforementioned difficulty.
Our core contribution is to propose the first Deep RL algorithm that calculates an optimal policy independently of the
initial population distribution.
Main contributions. First, we extend the basic framework of MFGs by introducing a class of populationdependent policies enabling agents to react to any population distribution. Within this class, we identify a Master policy and establish its connection with standard populationagnostic policies arising in MFG Nash equilibria (Thm. 1).

Mean Field Games (MFGs) can potentially scale multi-agent
systems to extremely large populations of agents. Yet, most
of the literature assumes a single initial distribution for the
agents, which limits the practical applications of MFGs. Machine Learning has the potential to solve a wider diversity of
MFG problems thanks to generalizations capacities. We study
how to leverage these generalization properties to learn policies enabling a typical agent to behave optimally against any
population distribution. In reference to the Master equation in
MFGs, we coin the term “Master policies” to describe them
and we prove that a single Master policy provides a Nash
equilibrium, whatever the initial distribution. We propose a
method to learn such Master policies. Our approach relies
on three ingredients: adding the current population distribution as part of the observation, approximating Master policies
with neural networks, and training via Reinforcement Learning and Fictitious Play. We illustrate on numerical examples
not only the efficiency of the learned Master policy but also
its generalization capabilities beyond the distributions used
for training.

Introduction
Although learning in games has a long history (Shannon
1959), most of recent breakthroughs remain limited to a
small number of players, e.g., for chess (Campbell, Hoane Jr,
and Hsu 2002), Go (Silver et al. 2016), poker (Brown and
Sandholm 2018; Moravčı́k et al. 2017) or even video games
such as Starcraft (Vinyals et al. 2019) with a large number
of agents but only a handful of competing players. Learning
in games involving a large number of players remains one of
the challenges of modern game theory. Recently, Mean Field
Games (MFGs), introduced concurrently by Lasry and Lions (2007) and Huang et al. (2006), have been considered as
a promising approach to address this problem. They indeed
model games with an infinite number of players. Instead of
taking into account interactions between individuals, MFGs
model the interaction between a so-called representative
agent (sampled from the population distribution) and the full
population itself. As in many multi-player games, solving an
MFG boils down to finding a Nash equilibrium. Intuitively, it
∗?

equal contribution, † equal contribution
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9413

