The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Restorable Image Operators with Quasi-Invertible Networks
Hao Ouyang* , Tengfei Wang* , Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract

the output image tends to lose important details or inject new
texture patterns. When restoring the original image, the former case raises the difficulty of recovering correct image
details, and the latter case increases the possibility of creating undesired content because of the artificially injected
texture patterns. Although several previous works have investigated using deep neural networks to accelerate image
operators (Chen, Xu, and Koltun 2017) or simulate specific
invertible process (e.g., RGB2Gray (Xiao et al. 2020)), directly applying these works leads to low restoration quality
as in Sec. . In this paper, we seek for a general framework
for a broad range of image operators with the possibility of
faithfully restoring the original image.
Our proposed quasi-invertible network depends on the recent advancement of the deep invertible network (Kingma
and Dhariwal 2018). Specifically, we adopt the model with
invertible split-and-transform-based layers (Dinh, SohlDickstein, and Bengio 2017) to approximate the image processing operators. However, we empirically find that existing invertible models fail to approximate an image operator
if it loses many details (e.g., L0 smooth). We thus design
a quasi-invertible scheme with a non-invertible branch that
significantly increases the approximation capacity. Since the
model is nearly invertible, we can restore the original image by reverse inference in theory. However, due to the information losses caused by computational inaccuracy, quantization and compression, the restored image may contain
severe noises and artifacts. Therefore, we adopt a training
strategy that learns these degradation jointly with the backward restoration loss. This greatly strengthens the robustness
of our model to non-intentional modifications.
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed model on ten image processing operators from various
categories, including detail enhancement, style transfer and
image abstraction. The proposed quasi-invertible model outperforms baselines on both operator approximation quality
and image restoration quality . Our model is also fast when
inference and restoration: it takes around 75ms on a 480p
image. Our contribution can be summarized as follows.
• We demonstrate the feasibility of learning restorable
complex image operators. Extensive experiments show
that our approximated operator generates perceptually indistinguishable results from the desired operator while
restoring high-quality original images.

Image operators have been extensively applied to create visually attractive photos for users to share processed images on
social media. However, most image operators often smooth
out details or generate textures after the processing, which
removes the original content and raises challenges for restoring the original image. To resolve this issue, we propose a
quasi-invertible model that learns common image processing
operators in a restorable fashion: the learned image operators
can generate visually pleasing results with the original content embedded. Our model is trained on input-output pairs
that represent an image processing operator’s behavior and
uses a network that consists of an invertible branch and a noninvertible branch to increase our model’s approximation capability. We evaluate the proposed model on ten image operators, including detail enhancement, abstraction, blur, photographic style, and non-photorealistic style. Extensive experiments show that our approach outperforms relevant baselines
in the restoration quality, and the learned restorable operator
is fast in inference and robust to compression. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the invertible operator can be easily applied to practical applications such as restorable human face
retouching and highlight preserved exposure adjustment.

Introduction
Image operators are broadly utilized for sharing visually appealing images on the internet as social media plays an increasingly important role in daily life. As shown in the second row of Fig. 1, there is a diverse set of image operators
used in practice nowadays. However, a prevalent issue is
how to deal with the original image after we have the processed version. On the one hand, users are often reluctant to
keep the original image as it roughly doubles the storage requirement (on a mobile phone). On the other hand, we may
need the original image for inspection or alternative editing
in the future. Being able to restore the original image from
the processed one will be the desired solution. In this paper,
we explore the problem of restorable image operators, which
performs high-quality image processing while the original
image can be restored from the processed one.
The challenges in learning a restorable operator exist in
two main aspects. As shown in Fig. 1, after the processing,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution

2008

