The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Wasserstein Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning
Shuncheng He, Yuhang Jiang, Hongchang Zhang, Jianzhun Shao, Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University
hesc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

agent to plan in the skill space (Sharma et al. 2020). Unsupervised learning methods may alleviate the cost of supervision: in certain cases, designing reward function requires
human supervision (Christiano et al. 2017). The intrinsic reward derived from unsupervised learning can enhance exploration when combined with task reward (Houthooft et al.
2016); (Gupta et al. 2018).
The key point of unsupervised reinforcement learning is
how to learn a set of policies that can sufficiently explore the
state space. Previous methods make use of a latent variable
and maximize the mutual information (MI) between the latent variable and the behavior (Eysenbach et al. 2019). Consequently the diversity in the latent space is cast into the
state space. These methods are able to obtain different skills
which are distinguishable from each other. However, limitations of MI-based methods are pointed out as the diversity of
learned skills is restricted by the Shannon entropy of the latent variable. In addition, discriminability of skills does not
always lead to the goal of sufficient exploration of the environment.
In this paper, we propose a new approach of unsupervised reinforcement learning which is essentially different
form MI-based methods. The motivation of our method is
to increase the discrepancy of learned policies so that the
agents can explore the state space extensively and reach the
state as “far” as possible compared to other policies. This
idea incentivizes us to employ a geometry-aware metric to
measure the discrepancy between the state distributions induced by different policies. In recent literature of generative modeling, the optimal transport (OT) cost is a new direction to measure distribution distance (Tolstikhin et al.
2018) since it provides a more geometry-aware topology
than f -divergences, including GAN (Nowozin, Cseke, and
Tomioka 2016). Therefore, we choose Wasserstein distance,
a well-studied distance from optimal transport, to measure
the distance between different policies in unsupervised reinforcement learning. By maximizing Wasserstein distance,
the agents equipped with different policies may drive themselves to enter different areas of state space and keep as “far”
as possible from each other to earn greater diversity.
Our contributions are four-fold. First, we propose a
novel framework adopting Wasserstein distance as discrepancy measure for unsupervised reinforcement learning. This
framework is well-designed to be compatible with various

Unsupervised reinforcement learning aims to train agents to
learn a handful of policies or skills in environments without external reward. These pre-trained policies can accelerate learning when endowed with external reward, and can
also be used as primitive options in hierarchical reinforcement learning. Conventional approaches of unsupervised skill
discovery feed a latent variable to the agent and shed its empowerment on agent’s behavior by mutual information (MI)
maximization. However, the policies learned by MI-based
methods cannot sufficiently explore the state space, despite
they can be successfully identified from each other. Therefore we propose a new framework Wasserstein unsupervised
reinforcement learning (WURL) where we directly maximize
the distance of state distributions induced by different policies. Additionally, we overcome difficulties in simultaneously
training N (N > 2) policies, and amortizing the overall reward to each step. Experiments show policies learned by
our approach outperform MI-based methods on the metric
of Wasserstein distance while keeping high discriminability.
Furthermore, the agents trained by WURL can sufficiently
explore the state space in mazes and MuJoCo tasks and the
pre-trained policies can be applied to downstream tasks by
hierarchical learning.

Introduction
Autonomous agents can learn to solve challenging tasks by
deep reinforcement learning, including locomotive manipulation (Lillicrap et al. 2015); (Haarnoja et al. 2018) and
game playing (Mnih et al. 2015); (Silver et al. 2016). The
reward signal specified by the task plays an important role
of supervision in reinforcement learning. However, recent
research reveals the possibilities that agents can acquire diverse skills or policies in the absence of reward signal (Eysenbach et al. 2019); (Gregor, Rezende, and Wierstra 2016);
(Achiam et al. 2018). This setting is called unsupervised reinforcement learning.
Practical applications of unsupervised reinforcement
learning have been studied. The skills learned without reward can serve as primitive options for hierarchical RL in
long horizon tasks (Eysenbach et al. 2019). Also the primitive options may be useful for transferring across different tasks. In model-based RL, the learned skills enables the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6884

