The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A∗ Search and Bound-Sensitive Heuristics for Oversubscription Planning
Michael Katz1 Emil Keyder2
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
Invitae Corporation, San Francisco, CA, USA
michael.katz1@ibm.com, emilkeyder@gmail.com
1

2

planning techniques such as landmarks (Mirkis and Domshlak 2014; Muller and Karpas 2018) or abstractions (Mirkis
and Domshlak 2013), and enhance them with reasoning that
is specific to the context of OSP, such as the knowledge that
there always exists an optimal plan that ends with a utilityincreasing action, or that the cost bound for the problem can
be reduced under specific conditions to aid the search algorithm in detecting that improving over the currently achieved
utility is impossible. Though solving OSP tasks with A∗
search would enable the integration of various search pruning techniques used in classical planning (Alkhazraji et al.
2012; Pochter, Zohar, and Rosenschein 2011), no previous
approach was able to do so.
In contrast to these approaches, we show that general
methods from classical planning, including A∗ search, can
be used in the OSP setting. This previously turned out to be
the case for the related net-benefit planning problem, where
classical planners solving a compiled version of the problem with action costs but no utilities were shown to outperform planners designed specifically for that task (Keyder
and Geffner 2009). Here, we use a similar, recently proposed
compilation that converts OSP problems into classical planning problems with multiple cost functions but no utilities
(Katz et al. 2019a). In addition, we demonstrate that existing
classical planning heuristics can be used to guide the search
for optimal plans. While these heuristics are typically uninformative when applied to the compilation out-of-the-box
(ignoring the secondary cost function), we show how they
can be modified (without any specific reasoning about utilities) to render them sensitive to the secondary cost functions
and bounds that are introduced by the compilation. Our experiments with A∗ and the newly introduced estimators that
we refer to as bound-sensitive heuristics show that they lead
to informed searches that are competitive with, and often
outperform, the state of the art in heuristic search for optimal
OSP. We now briefly review the various flavors of planning
that we consider in this work, and introduce the formalisms
by which we describe them.

Abstract
Oversubscription planning (OSP) is the problem of finding
plans that maximize the utility value of their end state while
staying within a specified cost bound. Recently, it has been
shown that OSP problems can be reformulated as classical planning problems with multiple cost functions but no
utilities. Here we take advantage of this reformulation to
show that OSP problems can be solved optimally using the
A∗ search algorithm, in contrast to previous approaches that
have used variations on branch-and-bound search. This allows many powerful techniques developed for classical planning to be applied to OSP problems. We also introduce novel
bound-sensitive heuristics, which are able to reason about
the primary cost of a solution while taking into account secondary cost functions and bounds, to provide superior guidance compared to heuristics that do not take these bounds into
account. We propose two such bound-sensitive variants of existing classical planning heuristics, and show experimentally
that the resulting search is significantly more informed than
with comparable heuristics that do not consider bounds.

Introduction
Oversubscription planning (OSP) problems are a family
of deterministic planning problems. In contrast to classical
planning, where a set of hard goals is specified and the planner searches for a minimal (or low) cost plan that reaches a
state in which all of the goals are made true, oversubscription planning specifies a utility function that describes the
benefit associated with achieving different possible states,
and asks for a plan that achieves as high a utility as possible,
but whose cost does not exceed a set bound (Smith 2004).
While domain-independent classical planning approaches
have increasingly standardized around variations on A∗
search and heuristics that are automatically extracted from
the problem description (Bonet and Geffner 2001; Keyder
and Geffner 2008; Haslum and Geffner 2000; Edelkamp
2001; Helmert et al. 2014; Helmert and Domshlak 2009),
OSP has generally been solved with branch-and-bound algorithms and heuristics that compute an admissible estimate of the utility achievable from a state. In the context
of OSP, an admissible estimate is one that does not underestimate the utility achievable from a state. In order to obtain these estimates, recent approaches often adapt classical

Background
We describe planning problems in terms of extensions to the
SAS + formalism (Bäckström and Nebel 1995). A classical
planning task Π = hV , O; sI , G, C i is given by a set of
variables V , with each variable v ∈ V having a finite do-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9813

