The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ER: Equivariance Regularizer for Knowledge Graph Completion
Zongsheng Cao 1,2 , Qianqian Xu 3,* , Zhiyong Yang 4 , Qingming Huang 3,4,5,6,*
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
caozongsheng@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract

knowledge graph completion as a tensor completion problem so that these models are highly expressive in theory.
A noteworthy fact is that the relation-specific matrices in
DB and TFB models contain lots of parameters, which can
embrace rich potential relations. However, the performance
of such models usually suffers from the overfitting problem
since the relational matrices induce a high model complexity. For example, (Wang et al. 2017) has shown models such
as RESCAL (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011) are overfitting.
To address this challenge, researchers propose various
regularizers. The squared Frobenius norm regularizer is a
popular choice (Salakhutdinov and Srebro 2010a; Yang et al.
2015; Trouillon et al. 2016) for its convenience in applications. However, since the regularizer only imposes constraints to limit the parameter space (e.g., entities and relations), it cannot effectively improve the performance of
some models with more implicit constraints (Ruffinelli,
Broscheit, and Gemulla 2020) (e.g., RESCAL). Futhermore,
(Lacroix, Usunier, and Obozinski 2018) proposes a tensor
nuclear p-norm regularizer, which encourages to use the matrix trace norm in the matrix completion problem (Srebro,
Rennie, and Jaakkola 2004; Candès and Recht 2009). Unfortunately, it is only suitable for canonical polyadic (CP) decomposition (Hitchcock and Frank 1927) based models such
as ComplEx (Trouillon et al. 2016). For models with more
complex mechanisms such as RESCAL (Nickel, Tresp, and
Kriegel 2011), the tensor nuclear p-norm regularizer cannot
utilize the potential semantic information so that it is weak
in suppressing overfitting. Recently, (Zhang, Cai, and Wang
2020) proposes a regularizer called DURA for TFB models.
It essentially imposes constraints on linked entities, which is
deficient in exploring latent semantic relations. In summary,
most of the aforementioned methods overlook the latent semantic relations and could only improve some specific models for KGC. How to find an efficient regularizer embracing
both DB and TFB models remains wide open.
In this paper, we propose a novel regularizer for both
tensor factorization and distance based KGC models called
Equivariance Regularizer (EA). As mentioned above, our
motivation is based on the observation that previous
work only focuses on limiting the parameter space, overlooking the potential semantic relation between entities.
For example, given triples (head1 , relation, tail1 ) and

Tensor factorization and distanced based models play important roles in knowledge graph completion (KGC). However,
the relational matrices in KGC methods often induce a high
model complexity, bearing a high risk of overfitting. As a
remedy, researchers propose a variety of different regularizers
such as the tensor nuclear norm regularizer. Our motivation is
based on the observation that the previous work only focuses
on the “size” of the parametric space, while leaving the implicit semantic information widely untouched. To address this
issue, we propose a new regularizer, namely, Equivariance
Regularizer (ER), which can suppress overfitting by leveraging the implicit semantic information. Specifically, ER can
enhance the generalization ability of the model by employing the semantic equivariance between the head and tail entities. Moreover, it is a generic solution for both distance based
models and tensor factorization based models. The experimental results indicate a clear and substantial improvement
over the state-of-the-art relation prediction methods.

Introduction
Knowledge Graph (KG) represents a collection of interlinked descriptions of entities, namely, real-world objects,
events, and abstract concepts. Knowledge graphs are applied
for a wide spectrum of applications ranging from question
answering (Ramnath and Hasegawa-Johnson 2020), natural
language processing (Zhang et al. 2019c), computer vision
(Marino, Salakhutdinov, and Gupta 2017) and recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2018). However, the knowledge
graph is usually incomplete with missing relations between
entities. To predict missing links between entities based on
known links effectively, a key step, known as Knowledge
Graph Completion (KGC) has attracted increasing attention
from the community.
There are mainly two important branches of KGC models:
distance based (DB) models and tensor factorization based
(TFB) models. As for the former, they use the Minkowski
distance to calculate the similarity between vectors of entities, and they can achieve reasonable performance relying
on the geometric significance. As for the latter, they treat
*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5512

