The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast and Data Efficient Reinforcement Learning from Pixels via Non-parametric
Value Approximation
Alexander Long,1 Alan Blair,1 Herke van Hoof2
1

University of New South Wales
2
University of Amsterdam
alex.long@unsw.edu.au, blair@cse.unsw.edu.au, h.c.vanhoof@uva.nl

Abstract
We present Nonparametric Approximation of Inter-Trace returns (NAIT), a Reinforcement Learning algorithm for discrete action, pixel-based environments that is both highly
sample and computation efficient. NAIT is a lazy-learning
approach with an update that is equivalent to episodic MonteCarlo on episode completion, but that allows the stable incorporation of rewards while an episode is ongoing. We make
use of a fixed domain-agnostic representation, simple distance based exploration and a proximity graph-based lookup
to facilitate extremely fast execution. We empirically evaluate NAIT on both the 26 and 57 game variants of ATARI100k
where, despite its simplicity, it achieves competitive performance in the online setting with greater than 100x speedup in
wall-time.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has become the standard approach to tackle complex non-linear sequential decision making problems exhibiting a high number of observational variables (Li 2017), a subset of which are image, or
pixel, based. Although tabular Reinforcement Learning (RL)
algorithms will learn (and in fact provably converge) in such
environments, they are too slow to be practically useful. Policy and value function parametrization is thus typically used
to facilitate learning, which has led to several breakthrough
results (Berner et al. 2019; Badia and Piot 2020).
Advances in raw performance, however, have been
achieved at the cost of increased sample, and computational
complexity. Agent 57 (Badia and Piot 2020) for example, requires 256 actors collecting approximately 57 years of realtime game play per game. For systems tackling more complex environments, these numbers are significantly higher.
In an online, real-world setting this presents a major roadblock and, as a consequence, research attention has begun to
shift towards improving sample efficiency with the goal of
broadening the applicability of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) in real world control and robotics. In these domains, sample efficiency is critical as the cost of each interaction is high; a physical robot must actually move. Improvements in sample efficiency, however, typically come at

Figure 1: Comparison of our approach to other online sample efficient RL algorithms baselined on ATARI100k. NAIT
achieves a >100x speedup over all other methods and is only
outperformed in terms of median HNS by augmented SPR.
Up and to the right is better. Algorithm labels are provided
in Related Work.

the cost of increased computational complexity, where additional CPU cycles are used to “squeeze” more from the
available data, through a learned model (Hafner et al. 2019),
data augmentation (Laskin et al. 2020), or similar.
The dominant evaluation framework for online RL algorithms remains simulated environments. In this setting,
high computational complexity is not a bottleneck on performance. It does, however, decrease the practical relevance of
the associated results by increasing the cost (in dollar terms),
and thus reducing accessibility (Henderson et al. 2018). Scientific progress in the area is also impacted, as is visible in
the fact that the high computational cost of SimPLe (Kaiser
et al. 2019) was one cause of the choice to evaluate on the
26 game “easy exploration” subset of the full 57 game suit,
which made comparison to previous work difficult. It also
make comparisons difficult, and expensive, for subsequent
authors.
Computationally efficient approaches increase the scale

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7620

