The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Signaling in Posted Price Auctions
Matteo Castiglioni, Giulia Romano, Alberto Marchesi, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
{matteo.castiglioni, giulia.romano, alberto.marchesi, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it

Amazon and eBay). As a result, growing attention has been devoted to their analysis, both in economics (Seifert 2006) and
in computer science (Chawla et al. 2010; Babaioff et al. 2015,
2017; Adamczyk et al. 2017; Correa et al. 2017), within AI
and machine learning in particular (Kleinberg and Leighton
2003; Shah, Johari, and Blanchet 2019; Romano et al. 2021).
We study Bayesian posted price auctions, where the buyers’
valuations for the item depend on a random state of nature,
which is known to the seller only. By applying the Bayesian
persuasion framework (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011), we
consider the case in which the seller (sender) can send signals
to the buyers (receivers) so as to disclose information about
the state. Thus, in a Bayesian auction, the seller does not
only have to decide price proposals for the buyers, but also
how to partially disclose information about the state so as to
maximize revenue. Our model finds application in several realworld scenarios. For instance, in an e-commerce platform,
the state of nature may reflect the condition (or quality) of
the item being sold and/or some of its features. These are
known to the seller only since the buyers cannot see the item
given that the auction is carried out on the web.

Abstract
We study single-item single-unit Bayesian posted price auctions, where buyers arrive sequentially and their valuations for
the item being sold depend on a random, unknown state of
nature. The seller has complete knowledge of the actual state
and can send signals to the buyers so as to disclose information about it. For instance, the state of nature may reflect the
condition and/or some particular features of the item, which
are known to the seller only. The problem faced by the seller
is about how to partially disclose information about the state
so as to maximize revenue. Unlike classical signaling problems, in this setting, the seller must also correlate the signals
being sent to the buyers with some price proposals for them.
This introduces additional challenges compared to standard
settings. We consider two cases: the one where the seller can
only send signals publicly visible to all buyers, and the case
in which the seller can privately send a different signal to
each buyer. As a first step, we prove that, in both settings, the
problem of maximizing the seller’s revenue does not admit
an FPTAS unless P = NP, even for basic instances with a
single buyer. As a result, in the rest of the paper, we focus
on designing PTASs. In order to do so, we first introduce a
unifying framework encompassing both public and private
signaling, whose core result is a decomposition lemma that
allows focusing on a finite set of possible buyers’ posteriors.
This forms the basis on which our PTASs are developed. In
particular, in the public signaling setting, our PTAS employs
some ad hoc techniques based on linear programming, while
our PTAS for the private setting relies on the ellipsoid method
to solve an exponentially-sized LP in polynomial time. In the
latter case, we need a custom approximate separation oracle,
which we implement with a dynamic programming approach.

1

Original Contributions. We study the problem of maximizing seller’s revenue in single-item single-unit Bayesian
posted price auctions, focusing on two different settings: public signaling, where the signals are publicly visible to all
buyers, and private signaling, in which the seller can send a
different signal to each buyer through private communication
channels. As a first negative result, we prove that, in both settings, the problem does not admit an FPTAS unless P = NP,
even for basic instances with a single buyer. Then, we provide
tight positive results by designing a PTAS for each setting. In
order to do so, we first introduce a unifying framework encompassing both public and private signaling. Its core result
is a decomposition lemma that allows us to focus on a finite
set of buyers’ posterior beliefs over states of nature—called
q-uniform posteriors—, rather than reasoning about signaling
schemes with a (potentially) infinite number of signals. Compared to previous works on signaling, our framework has to
deal with some additional challenges. The main one is that, in
our model, the seller (sender) is not only required to choose
how to send signals, but they also have to take some actions in the form of price proposals. This requires significant
extensions to standard approaches based on decomposition

Introduction

In posted price auctions, the seller tries to sell an item by
proposing take-it-or-leave-it prices to buyers arriving sequentially. Each buyer has to choose between declining the offer—
without having the possibility of coming back—or accepting
it, thus ending the auction. Nowadays, posted pricing is the
most used selling format in e-commerce (Einav et al. 2018),
whose sales reach over $4 trillion in 2020 (eMarketer 2021).
Posted price auctions are ubiquitous in settings such as, for
example, online travel agencies (e.g., Expedia), accommodation websites (e.g., Booking.com), and retail platforms (e.g.,
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4941

