The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Image Difference Captioning with Pre-training and Contrastive Learning
Linli Yao, Weiying Wang, Qin Jin∗
School of Information, Renmin University of China
{linliyao, wy.wang, qjin}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
The Image Difference Captioning (IDC) task aims to describe
the visual differences between two similar images with natural language. The major challenges of this task lie in two aspects: 1) fine-grained visual differences that require learning
stronger vision and language association and 2) high-cost of
manual annotations that leads to limited supervised data. To
address these challenges, we propose a new modeling framework following the pre-training-finetuning paradigm. Specifically, we design three self-supervised tasks and contrastive
learning strategies to align visual differences and text descriptions at a fine-grained level. Moreover, we propose a
data expansion strategy to utilize extra cross-task supervision
information, such as data for fine-grained image classification, to alleviate the limitation of available supervised IDC
data. Extensive experiments on two IDC benchmark datasets,
CLEVR-Change and Birds-to-Words, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed modeling framework. The codes and
models will be released at https://github.com/yaolinli/IDC.

（a）

" The brown matte cube changed to green. "

（b）
" Animal1 is covered in yellow , green and orange feathers , while
animal2 is covered in greenish grey feathers with dark orange
feathers on abdomen and chest ."

Figure 1: Image difference captioning examples. (a) an example from CLEVR-Change that involves an object change;
(b) an example from Birds-to-Words that involves detailed
appearance differences of two birds.

Introduction
Endowing machines with the ability to automatically perceive and understand visual information and express in natural language is a goal that researchers have long aspired
to achieve. Image captioning (Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al.
2015; Rennie et al. 2017), which aims at generating natural
language description of a given image, has been one of the
classic research tasks. Image Difference Captioning (IDC),
which generates natural descriptions of the differences between two similar images, is a further extension of the general image captioning task, and it is more challenging (Jhamtani and Berg-Kirkpatrick 2018; Park, Darrell, and Rohrbach
2019; Tan et al. 2019). IDC has rich potential in real world
applications, such as assisting ornithologists to distinguish
species with similar appearances, detecting and describing
lesions automatically, and reporting salient changes in media assets and surveillance etc.
Intuitively, image difference captioning involves the steps
of first perception, then comparison, and finally description,
which is more complex and challenging than the general

image captioning task. The key challenges of image difference captioning task relate to two aspects. First, the IDC
task requires fine-grained semantic comprehension. Different from general image captioning that describes a single image, IDC needs to perceive the fine-grained contents of two
similar images to identify the usually subtle differences. As
shown in Figure 1 (b), the focused differences lie in the tiny
body parts of bird species (i.e.“feather” and “abdomen”).
Moreover, the fine-grained visual differences can be very
diverse in different scenarios. In case (a), we focus on the
change of geometry objects in the scene, while in case (b),
we only attend to the appearance of bird species regardless
of the complex natural environment. Second, the annotation
for the IDC task is particularly high-cost. Compared with
general image caption annotation, it requires higher cognition load from annotators, including first observing two images, then comparing the differences, and then using natural language to annotate these differences in order to produce the annotation in a triplet format (img1, img2, description). Therefore, existing manually annotated benchmark datasets are limited in data size (Jhamtani and BergKirkpatrick 2018; Forbes et al. 2019; Tan et al. 2019).

∗

Qin Jin is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3108

