The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Temporal Action Proposal Generation with Background Constraint
Haosen Yang1,2 * , Wenhao Wu2∗ , Lining Wang1 , Sheng Jin1 ,
Boyang Xia2,3 , Hongxun Yao1† , Hujie Huang1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{haosen.yang.6, liningwang98, jsh.hit.doc}@gmail.com, {wuwenhao17, xiaboyang20}@mails.ucas.edu.cn,
{h.yao, hjhuang}@hit.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Temporal action proposal generation (TAPG) is a challenging
task that aims to locate action instances in untrimmed videos
with temporal boundaries. To evaluate the confidence of proposals, the existing works typically predict action score of
proposals that are supervised by the temporal Intersectionover-Union (tIoU) between proposal and the ground-truth. In
this paper, we innovatively propose a general auxiliary Background Constraint idea to further suppress low-quality proposals, by utilizing the background prediction score to restrict
the confidence of proposals. In this way, the Background
Constraint concept can be easily plug-and-played into existing TAPG methods (e.g., BMN, GTAD). From this perspective, we propose the Background Constraint Network (BCNet) to further take advantage of the rich information of action and background. Specifically, we introduce an ActionBackground Interaction module for reliable confidence evaluation, which models the inconsistency between action and
background by attention mechanisms at the frame and clip
levels. Extensive experiments are conducted on two popular
benchmarks, i.e., ActivityNet-1.3 and THUMOS14. The results demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-theart methods. Equipped with the existing action classifier, our
method also achieves remarkable performance on the temporal action localization task.

Hitting a pinata

GT

0.9

BMN

Ours

Hitting a pinata

Background

0.8

0.8

(1 - 0.1 ) x 0.9

(1 - 0.1 ) x 0.9
(1 - 0.4 ) x 0.9

Truth Positive

False Positive

BS

AS

Background score

Action score

Figure 1: Illustration of the background constraint concept.
We introduce a background score for the confidence of the
proposal, which helps to restrict false-positive proposals.
(TAPG) and action recognition. Deep learning has recently
been shown to significantly improve action recognition performance (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Lin, Gan, and
Han 2019; Wu et al. 2021a). However, the performance
of the two-stage temporal action detectors in mainstream
benchmarks (Jiang et al. 2014; Caba Heilbron et al. 2015a)
still has much room for improvement, which is mostly influenced by the quality of proposals from temporal action
proposal generation.
Hence, great efforts have been devoted to TAPG task (Lin
et al. 2018, 2019). These research generally use the temporal Intersection-over-Union (tIoU) between the proposal and
instance, called the action score, to evaluate the confidence
of the proposal in order to develop high-quality temporal action proposals with dependable confidence scores. However,
the background information is also significant but was previously overlooked. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, we
can easily restrict false-positive proposals by detecting the
background “Move a chair”. Furthermore, we can evaluate
the inconsistency between the background “Move a chair”
and the action “Hitting a pinata”, leading to better action
score and background score of the proposal.
Motivated by above observations, we propose a general
auxiliary Background Constraint idea to reduce localization

Introduction
With the rapid development of mobile devices and the Internet, a massive amount of video content is being uploaded to
the Internet every second. The volume of video information
has far exceeded the processing capacity of the conventional
manual system, thus video content analysis has attracted the
extensive interest of academic and industrial communities.
One of the most active research topics in video understanding is temporal action detection, which focuses on both
classifying the action instances present in an untrimmed
video and localizing them with temporal boundaries. The
temporal action detection task, like object detection, is divided into two parts: temporal action proposal generation
* Co-first authorship. This work was done when Haosen Yang
was a research intern at Baidu Inc, Wenhao Wu was the project
leader.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3054

