The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Scaling Up Influence Functions
Andrea Schioppa∗ , Polina Zablotskaia, David Vilar, Artem Sokolov
Google Research
{arischioppa, polinaz, vilar, artemsok}@google.com

loss L if x were infinitesimally up-weighted in D, with:

Abstract

IH (x, z) = h∇Θ L(z), H −1 ∇Θ L(x)i,

We address efficient calculation of influence functions for
tracking predictions back to the training data. We propose
and analyze a new approach to speeding up the inverse Hessian calculation based on Arnoldi iteration. With this improvement, we achieve, to the best of our knowledge, the first
successful implementation of influence functions that scales
to full-size (language and vision) Transformer models with
several hundreds of millions of parameters. We evaluate our
approach on image classification and sequence-to-sequence
tasks with tens to a hundred of millions of training examples. Our code will be available at https://github.com/googleresearch/jax-influence.

1

(1)

∇2Θ L is the Hessian of the model at param-

where H =
eters Θ. The straight-forward IF implementation, using the
approximate Hessian inversion procedure LISSA (Agarwal,
Bullins, and Hazan 2017), has O(p) memory and O(r · p)
time complexities, where r is the LISSA iteration count and
p = |Θ|, incurred at every x. Besides the need of careful tuning of LISSA, the O(p)-memory has been the major obstacle on the way of IF deployment for debugging applicationrelevant DNNs with hundreds of millions (or more) training
examples and model parameters; so noise or mislabeling issues remain unfixed or even undetected, and are adversely
impacting predictions.
In this work, we focus on reducing the IF memory footprint by not materializing O(p)-size gradients nor Hessians, and decoupling the required number of H estimations,
O(r · |D|), from the training data size. This allows to parallelize computation over larger b and scale to huge datasets
and models. Specifically, we use Arnoldi iteration (Arnoldi
1951) to find the dominant (in absolute value) eigenvalues
of H and their orthonormal eigenvectors on a random data
subset, |D0 |  |D|, and then cheaply invert the diagonalized
H, avoiding calls to LISSA as well as its convergence and
stability issues. As H is Hermitian, (1) is symmetric w.r.t. x
and z, so previous work cached {∇Θ L(x)} to improve IFs
usability (Guo et al. 2021), however, it only spares one backward pass per x and requires to re-estimate the product of
the (unstorable) H −1 with ∇Θ L(z) every time an influence
on z is requested. The crux of our approach is in caching
instead H in the trivially-invertable diagonalized form and
for the small-dimensional subspace spanned by a few dominant eigenvectors, p̃  p. Hessian-gradient products are
then reduced to simple scalar-gradient products, which do
not need to be materialized in memory as (1) can now be implemented with Jacobian-vector products. In summary, our
approach renders repeated re-estimations of H −1 ∇Θ L(x) at
every x unnecessary and they are replaced with the memoryand time-efficient forward-mode differentiation.
Empirically, IFs with Arnoldi iteration achieve speedups of 3-4 orders of magnitude over the LISSA-powered
IFs (Koh and Liang 2017) and of 10x over TracIn (Pruthi
et al. 2020), a heuristic gradient-only alternative to IFs (§5),

Introduction

Recognizing data’s highest agency in defining deep neural
networks’ (DNNs) performance, the pursuit of state-of-theart has made datasets for training modern DNNs grow to
sizes that can no longer be curated by humans. This has
acutely aggravated data issues like noise and mislabeled
data: Noise is characteristic of tasks where training data is
crawled from the Web (e.g. machine translation) and where
golden-truth labels are heuristically paired to inputs (Uszkoreit et al. 2010), leaving ample room for errors and inheriting biases of the heuristic. Wrong labels can be also introduced by non-expert crowd annotators who, considering
the amount of data to be labeled, are hard to incentivize for
quality within available budgets (Bowman and Dahl 2021).
Given the above, a natural way to interpret and fix DNN
models is to track their bad (or good) predictions down to
the training examples that caused them (Cook and Weisberg
1980; Koh and Liang 2017; Yeh et al. 2018), and take appropriate action on the found examples or annotation policies. Addressing this, Koh and Liang (2017) proposed influence functions (IFs) as a theoretically motivated method,
grounded in robust statistics (Cook and Weisberg 1982), of
quantifying the effect of training examples on predictions:
For a query example z, IFs estimate the most influential example x in training data D, in terms of absolute change of
∗

Google AI Resident.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8179

