The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Combating Adversaries with Anti-adversaries
Motasem Alfarra1 , Juan C. Pérez1 , Ali Thabet2 , Adel Bibi3 ,
Philip H.S. Torr3 , and Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 2 Facebook Reality Labs, 3 University of Oxford
motasem.alfarra@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to small input perturbations known as adversarial attacks. Inspired by the fact that
these adversaries are constructed by iteratively minimizing
the confidence of a network for the true class label, we propose the anti-adversary layer, aimed at countering this effect.
In particular, our layer generates an input perturbation in the
opposite direction of the adversarial one and feeds the classifier a perturbed version of the input. Our approach is trainingfree and theoretically supported. We verify the effectiveness
of our approach by combining our layer with both nominally and robustly trained models and conduct large-scale experiments from black-box to adaptive attacks on CIFAR10,
CIFAR100, and ImageNet. Our layer significantly enhances
model robustness while coming at no cost on clean accuracy.

1

Figure 1: Anti-adversary classifier. The flow field of adversarial perturbations is shown in light green for both classes
C1 and C2 . The anti-adversary we construct pulls a given
point x to (x + γ) by moving in the direction opposite to
that of the adversary flow field (orange arrows).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Official code: https://github.com/MotasemAlfarra/CombatingAdversaries-with-Anti-Adversaries

addition, empirically-evaluated robustness can be overestimated if fewer efforts are invested into adaptively constructing a stronger attack (Tramer et al. 2020; Carlini et al. 2019).
The lack of reliable assessments has been responsible for a
false sense of security, as several thought-to-be-strong defenses against white-box adversaries were later broken with
better carefully-crafted adaptive attacks (Athalye, Carlini,
and Wagner 2018). The few defenses that have stood the
test of time usually come at the expense of costly training and performance degradation on clean samples (Tsipras
et al. 2019). Even worse, while most of these defenses are
meant to resist white-box attacks, little effort has been invested into resisting the black-box counterparts, which may
be more common and practical (Byun, Go, and Kim 2021),
as online APIs such as IBM Watson and Azure tend to abstain from disclosing information about the inner workings
of their models.
In this work, we propose a simple, generic, and trainingfree layer that improves the robustness of both nominallyand robustly-trained models. Specifically, given a base classifier f : Rn → Y, which maps Rn to labels in the set Y, and
an input x, our layer constructs a data- and model-dependent
perturbation γ in the anti-adversary direction, i.e. the direction that maximizes the base classifier’s confidence on the

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to small
input perturbations known as adversarial attacks (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). In particular, a classifier f , which correctly classifies x, can be
fooled by a small adversarial perturbation δ into misclassifying (x+δ) even though x and (x+δ) are indistinguishable
to the human eye. Such perturbations can compromise trust
in DNNs, hindering their use in safety- and security-critical
applications, e.g. self-driving cars (Sitawarin et al. 2018).
While there have been extensive efforts aimed at training
DNNs that are robust to adversarial attacks, assessing the
robustness of defenses remains an elusive task. This difficulty is due to the following reasons. (i) The robustness of
models varies according to the information an attacker is
assumed to know, e.g. training data, gradients, logits, etc.,
which, for ease, dichotomously categorizes adversaries as
being black- or white-box. Consequently, this categorization
results in difficulties when comparing defenses tailored to a
specific type of adversaries. For instance, several defenses
crafted for robustness against white-box adversaries were
later broken by their weaker black-box counterparts (Papernot et al. 2016a; Brendel, Rauber, and Bethge 2018). (ii) In

5992

