The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Explainable Survival Analysis with Convolution-Involved Vision Transformer
Yifan Shen1 * , Li liu2 * , Zhihao Tang1 , Zongyi Chen1 , Guixiang Ma3 , Jiyan Dong2 ,
Xi Zhang1† , Lin Yang2† , Qingfeng Zheng2
1

Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (MoE),
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
3
University of Illinois at Chicago
{shenyifan, innerone, zongyichen, zhangx}@bupt.edu.cn, guixiang.ma@intel.com,
yanglin@cicams.ac.cn, {djy0823lucky, 15732027828, qfzhengpku}@163.com
Abstract

Traditional survival analysis models (Tibshirani 1997; Bair,
Tibshirani, and Golub 2004; Shedden et al. 2008) use statistical data and omics data from patients to predict the
patient’s health, which requires the heavy burden of feature engineering. With the advance of deep learning models,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and their extensions
have been widely used to capture the rich information of
the whole slide images (WSIs) to improve prediction accuracy. However, one unique challenge for WSI-based analysis is that a pathological image is of high resolution (usually
from one billion to one trillion pixels), making most deep
learning models not applicable. To address this issue, these
models (Zhu, Yao, and Huang 2017; Yao et al. 2017) usually pre-select a subset of key patches from the region of
interest (ROI) instead of using all patches as the input of
the model. But the manual selection of regions is laborious
and commonly dependent on the expertise of pathologists to
thoroughly examine the whole slide. To reduce such overhead, some methods (Zhu et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2020) have adopted sampling strategy
to generate candidate patches not limited to ROI. However,
only a small set of patches may not completely capture the
tumor morphology and suffers from a high risk of discarding informative patterns due to the complexity and heterogeneity of tumors. It is of prominent importance to design
a framework that can consider all the patches from WSIs to
improve the prediction accuracy and minimize the risk of
losing important information.

Image-based survival prediction models can facilitate
doctors in diagnosing and treating cancer patients. With
the advance of digital pathology technologies, the big
whole slide images (WSIs) provide increased resolution
and more details for diagnosis. However, the gigabytesize or even terabyte-size WSIs would make most models computationally infeasible. To this end, instead of
using the complete WSIs, most of the existing models
only use a pre-selected subset of key patches or patch
clusters as input, which might discard some important
morphology information. In this work, we propose a
novel survival analysis model to fully utilize the complete WSI information. We show that the use of a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone, together with convolution operations involved in it, is an effective approach to improve the prediction performance. Additionally, we present a post-hoc explainable method to
identify the most salient patches and distinct morphology features, making the model more faithful and the results easier to comprehend by human users. Evaluations
on two large cancer datasets show that our proposed
model is more effective and has better interpretability
for survival prediction. We would make the code publicly available upon acceptance.

Introduction
Automatic histopathological image analysis can be used
to improve the diagnosis process by reducing the workloads of pathologists and the chance of diagnosis mistakes. Histopathological image-based survival analysis aims
to predict the expected duration of time until patients’ death.
Based on the histological details in high resolution, it would
be of great benefit to make early decisions and provide better
treatments for cancer patients.
Recently, many methods have been proposed for cancer
diagnosis and survival prediction using pathological slides.

Another challenge for image-based survival prediction is
the requirement of the model interpretability, which is crucial to make the model faithful and the results get accepted
in the diagnostics. Explainable survival analysis is very challenging due to several reasons: 1) Different from conventional image classification tasks such as tumor classification, survival analysis is formulated as a regression problem that lacks tissue-level or patch-level labels as groundtruth information for visual explanations. 2) Most of the
existing methods (Li et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2020) provide
pixel-wise explanations and salient regions, which ignores
the domain-specific biological features and cannot be easily

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2207

