The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pose-Invariant Face Recognition via Adaptive Angular Distillation
Zhenduo Zhang, Yongru Chen, Wenming Yang* , Guijin Wang, Qingmin Liao
Shenzhen International Graduate School/Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
{zhangzd18@mails, yongru-c19@mails, yang.wenming@sz, wangguijin@, liaoqm@}.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

velopment, disentangled representation learning has become
one of the most effective approaches to learn discriminative
identity features. However, in order to supervise the extraction of disentangled features, the auxiliary information is
usually needed (Peng et al. 2017), which inevitably leads
to additional estimation errors or domain bias.
Our proposed approach tries to overcome the weaknesses
of the above methods. Firstly, to tackle the limitation of
appearance-level face alignment, we follow the line of feature level alignment and propose to learn a pose-invariant
discriminant identity feature. To tackle the limitation of feature disentanglement methods, we try to learn the poseinvariant feature without manual label annotation of poses,
which is needed in feature disentanglement.
In this paper, to assure the pose-invariance and representation capacity of features, we propose to recover the feature
of the frontal face from the features extracted from faces of
arbitrary poses with the same identity. However, the main
difficulty is the full information of the frontal face cannot be
inferred from a profile face, leading to an ill-posed task. We
utilize the frontal face as a supervision signal and encourage
the student network to mimic the feature of the frontal face
when dealing with the non-frontal face.
To implement this perspective, we propose a PoseAdaptive Angular Distillation (PAD) loss to distill the angular knowledge of frontal faces from teacher network to student network. In this way, the features of faces across variant
poses can cluster compactly for the same person, to create a
pose-invariant face representation with small intra-class distance and large inter-class distance. Besides, the PAD loss
endows each sample with different weights according to its
pose and hard level so as to overcome the limitation of the
uneven distribution of pose.
We conduct extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments on two challenging benchmarks: CFP (Sengupta et al.
2016) and IJB-A (Klare et al. 2015). The results illustrate
the effectiveness of our method of recognizing faces with
extreme poses and the superiority over the exsiting methods
on CFP and IJB-A.
• We propose a new perspective to learn pose-invariant feature embeddings: recovering the feature of the frontal
face from the features extracted from faces of arbitrary
poses with the same identity.
• A Pose-Adaptive Angular Distillation(PAD) loss that

Pose-invariant face recognition is a practically useful but
challenging task. This paper introduces a novel method to
learn pose-invariant feature representation without normalizing profile faces to frontal ones or learning disentangled features. We first design a novel strategy to learn pose-invariant
feature embeddings by distilling the angular knowledge of
frontal faces extracted by teacher network to student network,
which enables the handling of faces with large pose variations. In this way, the features of faces across variant poses
can cluster compactly for the same person to create a poseinvariant face representation. Secondly, we propose a PoseAdaptive Angular Distillation loss to mitigate the negative effect of uneven distribution of face poses in the training dataset
to pay more attention to the samples with large pose variations. Extensive experiments on two challenging benchmarks
(IJB-A and CFP-FP) show that our approach consistently outperforms the existing methods.

Introduction
Pose-Invariant Face Recognition(PIFR) has drawn great attention under either controlled lab environment or unrestricted environment due to the increasing demand for face
recognition (FR) systems. Deep learning methods have recently achieved great success in FR, but these approaches
heavily rely on sufficient data. However, as it is impractical to collect massive images containing faces across all the
pose variations, which will lead deep networks to be biased
towards distinguishing frontal faces.
To compensate for the pose, appearance-level face alignment is first conducted as the standard preprocessing. Appearance level alignment usually warps the face to the
frontal or designated pose. Consequently, the FR systems
only need to compare faces under the same pose. Although
these approaches have achieved the state-of-the-art performance in pose-invariant face recognition, they inevitably
bring an extra processing burden and may introduce some artifacts, harming face recognition (Cao et al. 2018b). To avoid
these limitations, feature level alignment methods explore a
discriminative identity feature space, regardless of pose variations (Kan et al. 2016, 2014). Thanks to deep learning de* Corresponding author: Wenming Yang
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3390

