The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Tailor Versatile Multi-Modal Learning for Multi-Label Emotion Recognition
Yi Zhang, Mingyuan Chen, Jundong Shen, Chongjun Wang∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{njuzhangy, mychen, jdshen}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {chjwang}@nju.edu.cn

Modalities

Abstract

Emotions
previous methods

Multi-modal Multi-label Emotion Recognition (MMER)
aims to identify various human emotions from heterogeneous
visual, audio and text modalities. Previous methods mainly
focus on projecting multiple modalities into a common latent space and learning an identical representation for all
labels, which neglects the diversity of each modality and
fails to capture richer semantic information for each label
from different perspectives. Besides, associated relationships
of modalities and labels have not been fully exploited. In
this paper, we propose versaTile multi-modAl learning for
multI-labeL emOtion Recognition (TAILOR), aiming to refine multi-modal representations and enhance discriminative
capacity of each label. Specifically, we design an adversarial multi-modal refinement module to sufficiently explore the
commonality among different modalities and strengthen the
diversity of each modality. To further exploit label-modal dependence, we devise a BERT-like cross-modal encoder to
gradually fuse private and common modality representations
in a granularity descent way, as well as a label-guided decoder
to adaptively generate a tailored representation for each label
with the guidance of label semantics. In addition, we conduct
experiments on the benchmark MMER dataset CMU-MOSEI
in both aligned and unaligned settings, which demonstrate the
superiority of TAILOR over the state-of-the-arts.

happy
sad
surprise

visual modality

audio modality
let's focus on something
... and be good at it
text modality

commonality

identical representation

versus

versus

commonality, diversity tailored representation
our method
happy
sad
surprise

let's focus on something
... and be good at it

label semantics
visual

common

multi-modal
interactions

label-modal
dependence

audio

te

label
correlations

Figure 1: Previous methods versus our method.

However, they neglect the fact that different modalities reveal distinctive characteristic of emotions from different
perspectives.
Concerning the fusion manner,
existing interUni-modal Extractor
Adversarial Multi-modal Refinement (AMR
modal fusion methods can be divided into: aggregationbased fusion, alignment-based fusion and the mixture of
backprop
them (Baltrusaitis, Ahuja, and Morency 2019). AggregationVisual Encoder
based fusion adopts
concatenation (Ngiam et al. 2011), ten(Transformer
sor (Zadeh et al.
2017) Encoder)
or attention (Zadeh et al. 2018b) to
combine multiple modalities. Alignment-based fusion centers on latent cross-modal adaptation, which adapts streams
from one modality to another (Tsai et al. 2019). The key
challenge of multi-modal learning lies in 1) how
to integrate
specific
commonality while
preserving diversity of each individual
Audio Encoder
(Transformer
modality; 2) how
to alignEncoder)
different modality distributions interactively for inter-modal fusion.
Multi-label learning (Zhang and Zhou 2014)
deals with
common
rich semantic meanings of complicated objects, where label correlations are considered as the key to effective multiText Encoder
label learning (Zhu,
Kwok, and Zhou 2018). Many meth(Transformer Encoder)
ods exploit label
correlations by the similarity between label
vectors, and then seamlessly incorporated into an identical
representation. However, they are unable to reflect collaboration relationships among labels. On the other hand, many
backprop
researches have been developed to improve the performance
by learning label-specific representations in a label-by-label
manner, which are generated independently and may lead
to suboptimal problem due to the ignorance of label correlations (Zhang, Fang, and Wang 2021). The key challenge

Introduction
In real-world applications, videos are often characterized by
heterogeneous representations (i.e., visual, audio and text)
and annotated with various emotion labels (e.g., happy,
surprise). Multi-modal Multi-label Emotion Recognition
(MMER) (Ju et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021a) refers to identifying various emotions by leveraging visual, audio and text
modalities presented in videos.
Multi-modal learning (Baltrusaitis, Ahuja, and Morency
2019) processes heterogeneous information collected from
multiple sources, which gives rise to two emergent issues:
intra-modal representation and inter-modal fusion. Intramodal representation learning mainly exploits consistency
and complementarity of multiple modalities to bridge the
heterogeneous modality gap. Previous methods project each
modality into a shared latent space to eliminate redundancy.

let's focus on something
... and be good at it

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9100

...

...

...

...

...
Position
Embeddings

...

Transformer Encoder

...
...

