The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MuMu: Cooperative Multitask Learning-Based Guided Multimodal Fusion
Md Mofijul Islam, Tariq Iqbal
School of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Virginia
{mi8uu,tiqbal}@virginia.edu

Abstract

Lin 2018; Iqbal, Rack, and Riek 2016), and wearable sensors
(Frank, Kubota, and Riek 2019; Batzianoulis et al. 2017).
However, unimodal methods struggle to recognize activity
in various real-world scenarios for multiple reasons. First,
distinct activities can be mistakenly classified as the same
when relying on visual sensors (Kong et al. 2019). For example, carrying a light and a heavy object activities look similar
from visual modalities; however, they have distinct physical
sensor data (Fig.1-a & b: Gyroscope & Acceleration). Second, unimodal methods may fail to recognize activities when
the sensor data is noisy (Fig.1-c). In these cases, using multiple modalities can compensate for the weaknesses of any
particular modality in recognizing an activity.
Several multimodal learning approaches have been proposed to accurately recognize human activities by fusing
data from multiple sensors (Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Kong
et al. 2019; Roitberg et al. 2015; Joze et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2019; Perez-Rua et al. 2019; Hasan et al. 2019; Islam and
Iqbal 2020). Although these approaches work adequately in
many scenarios, some crucial challenges remain in achieving robust recognition performance, particularly when data
from multiple sensors are missing or misaligned.
First, disparate activity-groups require different modalities to accurately recognize activities (an activity-group consists of a set of activities, that exhibit similar characteristics). For example, Kubota et al. (2019) found that data from
the motion capture system helps to recognize gross-motion
activities involving arm and leg movements (e.g., walking),
whereas data from wearable sensors helps to recognize finegrained motion activities involving hand or finger movements (e.g., grasping). Thus, if a model can exploit the
characteristics of activity-groups while extracting the multimodal representations, then that model can improve HAR
performance. Moreover, in many existing datasets, activities
are grouped into categories based on shared characteristics
(Kubota et al. 2019; Awad et al. 2018). For example, Kong
et al. (2019) grouped human activities into three groups:
complex (e.g., carrying), simple (e.g., kicking), and desk
(e.g., using PC). Surprisingly, apart from grouping the activities, these auxiliary activity-groups labels have not been
utilized in extracting multimodal representations.
Second, most existing multimodal learning approaches
assume non-noisy and time-aligned multimodal sensor data
during training and testing phases. These assumptions limit

Multimodal sensors (visual, non-visual, and wearable) can
provide complementary information to develop robust perception systems for recognizing activities accurately. However, it is challenging to extract robust multimodal representations due to the heterogeneous characteristics of data
from multimodal sensors and disparate human activities, especially in the presence of noisy and misaligned sensor data.
In this work, we propose a cooperative multitask learningbased guided multimodal fusion approach, MuMu, to extract robust multimodal representations for human activity
recognition (HAR). MuMu employs an auxiliary task learning approach to extract features specific to each set of activities with shared characteristics (activity-group). MuMu
then utilizes activity-group-specific features to direct our proposed Guided Multimodal Fusion Approach (GM-Fusion) for
extracting complementary multimodal representations, designed as the target task. We evaluated MuMu by comparing its performance to state-of-the-art multimodal HAR approaches on three activity datasets. Our extensive experimental results suggest that MuMu outperforms all the evaluated
approaches across all three datasets. Additionally, the ablation study suggests that MuMu significantly outperforms the
baseline models (p < 0.05), which do not use our guided
multimodal fusion. Finally, the robust performance of MuMu
on noisy and misaligned sensor data posits that our approach
is suitable for HAR in real-world settings.

Introduction
Understanding human activity ensures effective humanautonomous-system collaboration in various settings, from
autonomous vehicles to assistive living to manufacturing
(Sabokrou et al. 2019; Iqbal and Riek 2017, 2021; Yasar and
Iqbal 2021, 2022; Green et al. 2022b,a). For example, accurate activity recognition could aid collaborative robots in assisting a worker by bringing tools or autonomous vehicles in
requesting to take over the controls from a distracted driver
to ensure safety (Iqbal et al. 2019; Pakdamanian et al. 2020).
Human activity recognition (HAR) has been extensively
studied by utilizing unimodal sensor data, such as visual
(Ryoo et al. 2017; Zhang and Parker 2011; Fan et al. 2018),
skeleton (Arzani et al. 2017; Ke et al. 2017; Yan, Xiong, and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1043

