The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Secretary Matching with Vertex Arrivals and No Rejections
Mohak Goyal
Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University
mohakg@stanford.edu

Abstract

the outset and edges are revealed in an online fashion. The
decision to include an edge in the matching has to be made
when it is seen, before the next edge is observed. This is referred to as the edge arrival model (Korula and Pál 2009).
In this paper, we study problems in the vertex arrival model.
Further, we assume that all edge-weights are non-negative.
The models of online matching problems also vary in
the form of stochasticity in the edge weights and in the arrival order of vertices. It is easy to see that if both the edge
weights and the arrival order of vertices are arbitrary then
any online algorithm cannot be competitive against its offline counterpart. Therefore, the commonly studied models
are of one of two forms: secretary matching (Dynkin 1963;
Gnedin 1994) and prophet inequalities (Krengel and Sucheston 1977). In the secretary matching model, vertices arrive
in a uniformly random order but the edge-weights are arbitrary. Whereas, in the prophet inequalities setting, the edge
weights are drawn independently from a known distribution
but the vertex arrival order is arbitrary. In this paper, we consider the secretary matching model.
The secretary matching model of online matching is inspired by the classical secretary problem, in which a known
number of job applicants arrive in a uniformly random order, are interviewed upon arrival, and at most one of them
is hired. The irreversible decision to hire or reject an applicant is taken before the next applicant arrives. The goal
is to maximize the probability of hiring the best applicant.
The optimal algorithm is e-competitive. The problem was
a folklore before being solved formally by (Dynkin 1963).
See (Ferguson 1989) for historical details. The lower bound
of factor e was given by (Gnedin 1994).
Most known algorithms for problems in the secretary
matching model use an explore-and-exploit approach. No
matches are made in the exploration phase. In the exploitation phase, the current vertex is matched only if it has an
edge with weight above a threshold (Korula and Pál 2009).
Alternatively, as in (Kesselheim et al. 2013), it is matched
only if it is in a locally optimal matching computed over the
vertices observed so far. An edge can be added to a matching
only if it satisfies matching constraints, i.e., none of its end
points have been matched previously by the algorithm.
All such algorithms make good use of the option of rejecting (i.e., not matching) several or all of the arriving vertices.
This option may not be available in many resource allocation

Most prior work on online matching problems has been with
the flexibility of keeping some vertices unmatched. We study
three related online matching problems with the constraint
of matching every vertex, i.e., with no rejections. We adopt
a model in which vertices arrive in a uniformly random order and the non-negative edge-weights are arbitrary. For the
capacitated online bipartite matching problem, in which the
vertices of one side of the graph are offline and those of the
other side arrive online, we give a 4.62-competitive algorithm
when the capacity of each offline vertex is 2. For the online
general (non-bipartite) matching problem, where all vertices
arrive online, we give a 3.34-competitive algorithm. We also
study the online roommate matching problem, in which each
room (offline vertex) holds 2 persons (online vertices). Persons derive non-negative additive utilities from their room as
well as roommate. In this model, with the goal of maximizing the social welfare, we give a 7.96-competitive algorithm.
This is an improvement over the 24.72 approximation factor
in prior work.

1

Introduction

Online allocation problems study scenarios in which the input information is presented in steps, and the algorithm must
make irreversible decisions at each step. These problems
have applications in various areas such as ride-hailing platforms (Dickerson et al. 2018) and ad auctions (Mehta 2012).
In each of these applications, the future inputs are unknown
and the goal is typically to maximize the revenue over the
entire time horizon. Mathematically, several online allocation problems can be modeled as the problem of finding
maximum-weight matchings on graphs.
One of the most commonly studied models of online
matching is one with vertex arrivals. In this model, one vertex arrives in each time step and it reveals weights of edges
from itself to the previously arrived and offline vertices. The
algorithm is required to decide whether the current vertex
should be matched and if yes, to which other vertex. This
model is adopted in several seminal papers in online matching theory, for example (Karp, Vazirani, and Vazirani 1990;
Kesselheim et al. 2013; Gamlath et al. 2019). Another wellstudied model is one in which all the vertices are known at
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5051

