The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Elastic-Link for Binarized Neural Network
Jie Hu1 , Ziheng Wu3 , Vince Tan4 , Zhilin Lu2 , Mengze Zeng4 , Enhua Wu* 1,5
1

State Key Lab of Computer Science, ISCAS & University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Alibaba Group
4
ByteDance Inc.
5
University of Macau
hujie@ios.ac.cn, zhoulou.wzh@alibaba-inc.com, vince.tan@bytedance.com, zeitzmz@gmail.com, ehw@um.edu.mo
Abstract
Recent work has shown that Binarized Neural Networks
(BNNs) are able to greatly reduce computational costs
and memory footprints, facilitating model deployment on
resource-constrained devices. However, in comparison to
their full-precision counterparts, BNNs suffer from severe accuracy degradation. Research aiming to reduce this accuracy
gap has thus far largely focused on specific network architectures with few or no 1 × 1 convolutional layers, for which
standard binarization methods do not work well. Because
1×1 convolutions are common in the design of modern architectures (e.g. GoogleNet, ResNet, DenseNet), it is crucial to
develop a method to binarize them effectively for BNNs to be
more widely adopted. In this work, we propose an “ElasticLink” (EL) module to enrich information flow within a BNN
by adaptively adding real-valued input features to the subsequent convolutional output features. The proposed EL module is easily implemented and can be used in conjunction with
other methods for BNNs. We demonstrate that adding EL to
BNNs produces a significant improvement on the challenging
large-scale ImageNet dataset. For example, we raise the top-1
accuracy of binarized ResNet26 from 57.9% to 64.0%. EL
also aids convergence in the training of binarized MobileNet,
for which a top-1 accuracy of 56.4% is achieved. Finally, with
the integration of ReActNet, it yields a new state-of-the-art
result of 71.9% top-1 accuracy.

Figure 1: Example images illustrating the same features on
full-precision ResNet26 (2nd column), Bi-Real-ResNet26
(3rd column) and our proposed EL-ResNet26 (4th column).

Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have led to a series
of breakthroughs for a variety of visual tasks (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2014; Ren et al. 2015; Toshev and Szegedy 2014; Zhu et al.
2016b). However, the challenge of resource constraints in
terms of latency and memory storage is often faced when
deploying CNNs on mobile or embedded devices. Previous
work (Cai et al. 2017; Jacob et al. 2018; McKinstry et al.
2019; Jain et al. 2020; Shuang Wu and Shi 2016; Sung, Shin,
and Hwang 2015; Yang et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2016) has
demonstrated that quantizing the real-valued weights and
activations of CNNs into low-precision representations can
reduce memory footprint while still achieving good performances. This class of methods allows fixed-point arithmetic

to be applied, which substantially accelerates inference and
reduces energy costs. Taken to an extreme, both the weights
and the activations can be represented with binary tensors
{-1, +1}. Such networks are termed Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) (Courbariaux et al. 2016). In BNNs, arithmetic operations for convolutions can be replaced by the
more efficient xnor and bitcount operations.
However, BNNs suffer from significant accuracy degradation as a result of information loss at each binarized layer. To
conduct binarization, a real-valued signal is passed through
the Sign activation, which eliminates the signal’s amplitude
and retains only its sign information. Because this process
is irreversible, information loss increases with each layer of
the BNN. Therefore, a central challenge to improving BNN
accuracy is the reduction of this information loss.

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

942

