The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Equal Bits: Enforcing Equally Distributed Binary Network Weights
Yunqiang Li∗ , Silvia L. Pintea∗ and Jan C. van Gemert
Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
{Y.Li-19, S.L.Pintea, J.C.vanGemert}@tudelft.nl

Abstract

making use of real-valued latent weights that approximate
the binary weights. We quantize these real-valued weights by aligning them to any desired prior Bernoulli distribution, which incorporates our preferred binary weight prior.
Our quantization uses optimal transport (Villani 2003) and
can guarantee any bit ratio. Our method makes it possible
to experimentally test the hypothesis in (Qin et al. 2020b)
that equal bit ratios are indeed preferable to other bit ratios.
We baptize our approach with equal bit ratios: bi-half . Furthermore, we show that enforcing equal priors using our approach leads to optimization benefits by reducing the problem search-space and avoiding local minima.
We make the following contributions: (i) a binary network
optimization method based on optimal transport; (ii) exact
control over weight bit ratios; (iii) validation of the assumption that equal bit ratios are preferable; (iv) optimization
benefits such as search-space reduction and good minima;
(v) favorable results compared to the state-of-the-art, and
can ensure half-half weight distribution even when pruning
is used.

Binary networks are extremely efficient as they use only two symbols to define the network: {+1, −1}. One can make
the prior distribution of these symbols a design choice. The
recent IR-Net of Qin et al. argues that imposing a Bernoulli distribution with equal priors (equal bit ratios) over the
binary weights leads to maximum entropy and thus minimizes information loss. However, prior work cannot precisely control the binary weight distribution during training, and
therefore cannot guarantee maximum entropy. Here, we show
that quantizing using optimal transport can guarantee any
bit ratio, including equal ratios. We investigate experimentally that equal bit ratios are indeed preferable and show that
our method leads to optimization benefits. We show that our
quantization method is effective when compared to state-ofthe-art binarization methods, even when using binary weight
pruning. Our code is available at https://github.com/liyun
qianggyn/Equal-Bits-BNN.

Introduction
Binary networks allow compact storage and swift computations by limiting the network weights to only two bit symbols {−1, +1}. In this paper we investigate weights priors
before seeing any data: is there a reason to prefer predominantly positive bit weights? Or more negative ones? Or is equality preferable? Successful recent work (Qin et al. 2020b)
argues that a good prior choice is to have an equal bit-ratio:
i.e. an equal number of +1 and −1 symbols in the network.
This is done by imposing an equal prior under the standard
Bernoulli distribution (Qin et al. 2020b; Peters and Welling
2018; Zhou et al. 2016). Equal bit distributions minimize information loss and thus maximizes entropy, showing benefits across architectures and datasets (Qin et al. 2020b). However, current work cannot add a hard constraint of making
symbol priors exactly equal, and therefore cannot guarantee
maximum entropy.
Here, we propose a method to add a hard constraint to
binary weight distribution, offering precise control for any
desired bit ratio, including equal prior ratios. We add hard
constraints in the standard quantization setting (Bulat and
Tzimiropoulos 2019; Qin et al. 2020b; Rastegari et al. 2016)

Related Work
For a comprehensive survey on binary networks, see (Qin
et al. 2020a). In Table 1 we show the relation between our
proposed method and pioneering methods, that are representatives of their peers, in terms of the binarization choices made. The XNOR method (Table 1(a)) was the first to
propose binarizing latent real-valued weights using the sign
function (Rastegari et al. 2016). Rather than making each binary weight depend only on its associated real-value weight
or gradient value, IR-Net (Qin et al. 2020b) (Table 1(b)) is
a prototype method that uses filter-weight statistics to update each individual binary weight. Here, we also use filterweight statistics to update the binary weights, however similar to (Helwegen et al. 2019) Table 1(d)) we do not rely
on the sign function for binarization, but instead use binary
weight flips. This is a natural choice, as flipping the sign of a
binary weight is the only operation one can apply to binary
weights.

Sign versus Bit Flips
The front-runners of binary networks are BinaryConnect (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015) and XNOR (Rastegari et al. 2016) and rely on auxiliary real weights and

∗

Both authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1491

