The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Regularizing Graph Neural Networks via Consistency-Diversity
Graph Augmentations
Deyu Bo1 * , BinBin Hu2 , Xiao Wang1 , Zhiqiang Zhang2 , Chuan Shi1 † , Jun Zhou2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{bodeyu, xiaowang, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, {bin.hbb,lingyao.zzq,jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com

Abstract

0.80

0.79

1

Consistency

Despite the remarkable performance of graph neural networks
(GNNs) in semi-supervised learning, it is criticized for not
making full use of unlabeled data and suffering from overfitting. Recently, graph data augmentation, used to improve
both accuracy and generalization of GNNs, has received considerable attentions. However, one fundamental question is
how to evaluate the quality of graph augmentations in principle? In this paper, we propose two metrics, Consistency and
Diversity, from the aspects of augmentation correctness and
generalization. Moreover, we discover that existing augmentations fall into a dilemma between these two metrics. Can
we find a graph augmentation satisfying both consistency and
diversity? A well-informed answer can help us understand
the mechanism behind graph augmentation and improve the
performance of GNNs. To tackle this challenge, we analyze
two representative semi-supervised learning algorithms: label
propagation (LP) and consistency regularization (CR). We
find that LP utilizes the prior knowledge of graphs to improve
consistency and CR adopts variable augmentations to promote diversity. Based on this discovery, we treat neighbors
as augmentations to capture the prior knowledge embodying
homophily assumption, which promises a high consistency
of augmentations. To further promote diversity, we randomly
replace the immediate neighbors of each node with its remote
neighbors. After that, a neighbor-constrained regularization is
proposed to enforce the predictions of the augmented neighbors to be consistent with each other. Extensive experiments on
five real-world graphs validate the superiority of our method
in improving the accuracy and generalization of GNNs.

0.78

0.77

0.76

Raw data
dropout
dropnode
dropedge
LP
NASA
1.0

1.5

2.0

Diversity

2.5

3.0

(a) Dilemma of augmentations (b) A toy semi-supervised dataset

Figure 1: (a) Consistency and diversity of different augmentations on Cora dataset. Dotted line represents the consistency
of the raw data. Circles with different colors indicate different graph augmentations. Black and red crosses show the
consistency and diversity of immediate neighbors and our
proposed augmentation. (b) Toy example of data augmentations in SSL. Blue and red circles are labeled data, gray
circles are unlabeled data and rectangles are augmentations.

2017). Recently, graph data augmentation is used to improve
both accuracy and generalization of GNNs (Rong et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2021; Feng et al. 2019, 2020; Wang et al. 2020).
Although there are some augmentation strategies on
graphs, such as DropEdge (Rong et al. 2020) and DropNode
(Feng et al. 2020), it is still unknown which augmentation is
better for GNNs. Generally, an easy augmentation contributes
less to the generalization of model and a hard augmentation
may bring additional noise (Yin et al. 2019). Therefore, a
natural question is how to evaluate the quality of graph augmentations in principle? To this goal, as the first contribution
of this paper, we propose two metrics of graph augmentation
in SSL: Consistency and Diversity. Consistency indicates
whether the augmented data belong to the same class with
the raw data and diversity reveals how different the distribution captured by augmented data is from raw data. Detailed
descriptions can be found in Sec. 2. If the augmentation and
original data are in different classes, it will hurt the accuracy
of the model. While if the augmentation is similar to original
data, it may contribute less to the generalization of the model.
Therefore, a good augmentation should not only ensure the
correctness but also provide sufficient generalization.
Based on the two evaluations, we test three commonly
used graph augmentations, i.e., Dropout (Srivastava et al.

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs), as a typical graph-based
semi-supervised learning (SSL) method, has achieved stateof-the-art performance (Kipf and Welling 2017; Velickovic
et al. 2018). Despite its success, GNNs has been criticized for
not making full use of unlabeled data (Wang et al. 2020; Feng
et al. 2020), which is an essential requirement of SSL (Yang
et al. 2021). Previous methods tend to use pseudo labels to
overcome this limitation (Sun, Lin, and Zhu 2020; Li, Han,
and Wu 2018), but suffer from poor calibration (Guo et al.
* Work done during Deyu’s internship at Ant Group.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3913

