The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sparse Cross-Scale Attention Network for Efficient LiDAR Panoptic Segmentation
Shuangjie Xu1, 2, ‡ , Rui Wan2 , Maosheng Ye12 , Xiaoyi Zou2 , Tongyi Cao2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
DEEPROUTE.AI
{sxubj, myeag}@connect.ust.hk, {ruiwan, xiaoyizou, tongyicao}@deeproute.ai

65

Abstract

SCAN
60

PQ Performance

Two major challenges of 3D LiDAR Panoptic Segmentation
(PS) are that point clouds of an object are surface-aggregated
and thus hard to model the long-range dependency especially
for large instances, and that objects are too close to separate each other. Recent literature addresses these problems by
time-consuming grouping processes such as dual-clustering,
mean-shift offsets, etc., or by bird-eye-view (BEV) dense
centroid representation that downplays geometry. However,
the long-range geometry relationship has not been sufficiently
modeled by local feature learning from the above methods.
To this end, we present SCAN, a novel sparse cross-scale attention network to first align multi-scale sparse features with
global voxel-encoded attention to capture the long-range relationship of instance context, which can boost the regression accuracy of the over-segmented large objects. For the
surface-aggregated points, SCAN adopts a novel sparse classagnostic representation of instance centroids, which can not
only maintain the sparsity of aligned features to solve the
under-segmentation on small objects, but also reduce the
computation amount of the network through sparse convolution. Our method outperforms previous methods by a large
margin in the SemanticKITTI dataset for the challenging 3D
PS task, achieving 1st place with a real-time inference speed.

Panoptic-PolarNet

55

KPConv/
PointPillars

50

PanopticPolarNet-mini

45

RangeNet++/
PointPillars

40

35

0

5

LPSAD
10

15

20

Runtime (Hz)

Figure 1: PQ performance vs. inference speed (Hz) in SemanticKITTI panoptic task. The blue vertical line represents
the boundary of real-time runtime. The proposed SCAN
achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

due to similarity in both physical metric space and feature
space (Fig. 2 c). Therefore, how to correctly group points
that belong to individual objects through efficient and effective feature learning becomes a crucial problem.
To group the surface-aggregated point clouds, many recent literature (Yang et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Engelmann
et al. 2020) adopts the two-stage framework to first propose bounding boxes and then segment instances. To kick
over the traces of bounding boxes, most approaches (Wang
et al. 2019; Lahoud et al. 2019) adopt clustering algorithms.
VoteNet (Qi et al. 2019) employs voting to offer broader
coverage of “good” seed points. PointGroup (Jiang et al.
2020) proposes a dual-clustering method to refine inaccurate
offset predictions around object boundaries. DS-Net (Hong
et al. 2020) utilizes Mean Shift with kernel functions of
learned bandwidths to cluster shifted points. Such a clustering process requires high time consumption. More importantly, these methods use the center offset as the only guide
to instance clustering, making it hard to capture fine-grained
long-range geometry relationships and thus resulting in potential over-segmentation of large objects.
Due to the increasing demand for real-time deployment in
the industry and academia, plenty of research works focus
on efficient LiDAR 3D PS with range or BEV representations. LPSAD (Milioto et al. 2020) and EfficientLPS (Sirohi

Introduction
3D scene understanding using point clouds has been an
essential and challenging task for many robotics applications, including autonomous driving systems. One of the key
tasks in 3D scene understanding is 3D Panoptic segmentation (PS), with two sub-tasks, semantic and instance segmentation. The semantic segmentation task aims to attach
semantic information at the point level, while the instance
segmentation task intends to identify individual countable
objects. Point clouds have sparse, unordered, and irregularsampled natures and aggregate only on the surface of objects. Such natures pose two main challenges for 3D PS: (1)
The surface-aggregated points are far from their object centroids, leading to false segmentation of big objects (Fig. 2 a,
b); (2) Closely-distributed small objects are falsely merged
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡
The work was done during an internship at DEEPROUTE.AI.

2920

