The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast and More Powerful Selective Inference for Sparse High-Order Interaction
Model
Diptesh Das,1 * Vo Nguyen Le Duy,1,2 Hiroyuki Hanada,2 Koji Tsuda,2,3,4 Ichiro Takeuchi,1,2 *
1

Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan,
2
RIKEN, Japan,
3
The University of Tokyo, Japan,
4
NIMS, Japan.

Abstract

association of multiple mutations along with some crucial
single mutations can best describe the complex biological
phenomenon of drug resistance (Vivet-Boudou et al. 2006;
Iversen et al. 1996; Rhee et al. 2006).
The goal of this study is to fit a SHIM, such as that in
(1), to the given data and subsequently conduct a statistical
significance test to judge the reliability of the model parameters. However, unless the original dimension and the order of interactions are small, fitting a high-order interaction
model can be challenging, requiring some computational
tricks to avoid combinatorial effects. Another challenge of
data-driven modeling is understanding the reliability of the
findings because the model might have cherry-picked the
strong associations given a particular realization of the data.
This is called the “cherry-picking” effect, or selection bias
(Taylor and Tibshirani 2015). A traditional statistical inference, which assumes that the statistical model and the target
for which inferences are conducted must be fixed a priori,
cannot be used for this problem. Any inference conducted
after model selection suffers from selection bias unless it is
corrected.
Related work: Several approaches have been suggested
in the literature to address the problem of selection bias
(Fithian, Sun, and Taylor 2014; Fithian et al. 2015; Choi,
Taylor, and Tibshirani 2017; Tian and Taylor 2018; Chen
and Bien 2020; Hyun et al. 2018; Loftus and Taylor 2014,
2015; Panigrahi, Taylor, and Weinstein 2016; Tibshirani
et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2016; Liu, Markovic, and Tibshirani
2018). A particularly notable approach is the conditional selective inference (SI) introduced in the seminal study conducted by Lee et al. (2016). The basic idea of conditional
SI is to make inferences on a data-driven hypothesis conditional on the selection event that the hypothesis is selected.
Lee et al. (2016) first proposed conditional SI methods for
the selected features using Lasso. Their basic idea is to characterize the selection event by a polytope, i.e., a set of linear
inequalities, in the sample space. When a selection event can
be characterized by a polytope, the practical computational
methods developed by these authors can be used to make
inferences of the selected hypotheses conditional on the selection events.
However, the conditional SI framework based on a polytope has a serious drawback, called the over-conditioning

Automated high-stake decision-making, such as medical diagnosis, requires models with high interpretability and reliability. We consider the sparse high-order interaction model as
an interpretable and reliable model with a good prediction
ability. However, finding statistically significant high-order
interactions is challenging because of the intrinsically high
dimensionality of the combinatorial effects. Another problem
in data-driven modeling is the effect of “cherry-picking” (i.e.,
selection bias). Our main contribution is extending the recently developed parametric programming approach for selective inference to high-order interaction models. An exhaustive search over the cherry tree (all possible interactions)
can be daunting and impractical, even for small-sized problems. We introduced an efficient pruning strategy and demonstrated the computational efficiency and statistical power of
the proposed method using both synthetic and real data.

Introduction
Although blackbox models such as deep neural network
models generally have a high predictive performance, they
are difficult to interpret; hence, they are often considered unreliable. Therefore, for tasks that require high-stake
decision-making, such as medical diagnosis, models with
higher interpretability and reliability are required. We consider the sparse high-order interaction model (SHIM) as an
interpretable and reliable model with a good prediction ability. Considering a regression problem with a response y and
m original covariates z1 , . . . , zm , an example SHIM up to
4th order interactions can be written as
y = β 1 z3 + β 2 z5 + β 3 z2 z6 + β 4 z1 z2 z5 z9 ,

(1)

where β1 , β2 , β3 , β4 are the model parameters (or coefficients). Such a SHIM (Das et al. 2019; Rendle 2010; Hall
1999) has practical importance, including identifying complex genotypic features for HIV-1 drug resistance (Saigo,
Uno, and Tsuda 2007). HIV-1 evolves in the human body,
and exposure to certain drugs causes mutations that lead to
drug resistance. Structural biological studies show that the
* Correspondence: das.diptesh@nitech.ac.jp,
takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9999

