The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Texture Generation Using Dual-Domain Feature Flow
with Multi-View Hallucinations
Seunggyu Chang1 , Jungchan Cho2 , Songhwai Oh1
1

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University
2
School of Computing, Gachon University
seunggyu.chang@rllab.snu.ac.kr, thinkai@gachon.ac.kr, songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Multi-View Hallucinations

Abstract
We propose a dual-domain generative model to estimate a
texture map from a single image for colorizing a 3D human model. When estimating a texture map, a single image
is insufficient as it reveals only one facet of a 3D object.
To provide sufficient information for estimating a complete
texture map, the proposed model simultaneously generates
multi-view hallucinations in the image domain and an estimated texture map in the texture domain. During the generating process, each domain generator exchanges features to
the other by a flow-based local attention mechanism. In this
manner, the proposed model can estimate a texture map utilizing abundant multi-view image features from which multiview hallucinations are generated. As a result, the estimated
texture map contains consistent colors and patterns over the
entire region. Experiments show the superiority of our model
for estimating a directly render-able texture map, which is applicable to 3D animation rendering. Furthermore, our model
also improves an overall generation quality in the image domain for pose and viewpoint transfer tasks.

Texture map
estimation
Rendering

Figure 1: Estimating a texture map from a single image by
hallucinating multi-view images. An arrow from each hallucination image represents a reference part for estimating a
boxed region on the estimated texture map.
Catmull and Smith 1980). When rendering an image using
the 3D model, the surface color values are drawn from the
texture map according to the pre-defined uv parameterization. One hardness of the texture map estimation from a single image is that a single image is insufficient for generating
a complete texture map for the entire surface. Conventionally, a texture map is obtained by aggregating multiple partial texture maps, obtained by unwrapping multi-view images into uv-coordinates, called stitching (Wang et al. 2001;
Thormählen and Seidel 2008). However, when it comes to
generating a texture map from a single image, a half of the
entire surface is unseen, whose colors should be filled by
imagination.
To resolve this issue, we propose a texture map estimation method from a single image for colorizing a 3D human
model utilizing multi-view features. Recently, deep architectures have achieved remarkable success on pose transferred
image generation, and we expect that deep architectures can
provide sufficient alternatives for real multi-view images. To
this end, instead of generating a texture map solely, we design our model to generate images in two different domains:
pose transferred images in the image domain and a texture
map in the texture domain. Our model consists of two main
generators: an image generator and a texture generator. During the generation process, the image generator generates

Introduction
Along with the increase of online activities recently, reconstructing a 3D avatar from photos becomes an important
problem. To reconstruct a 3D avatar, we need a 3D mesh
template for shape representation and a corresponding texture map for colorization. Traditionally, a 3D avatar reconstruction requires multiple image pairs consisting of diverse
poses and viewpoints taken at a dedicated studio. However,
trend has move on to reconstructing a 3D model from fewer
or a single image. Many works (Bogo et al. 2016; Lassner
et al. 2017; Kanazawa et al. 2018; Pavlakos et al. 2018; Varol
et al. 2018; Alldieck et al. 2019; Natsume et al. 2019; Weng,
Curless, and Kemelmacher-Shlizerman 2019; Gabeur et al.
2019; Saito et al. 2019; Kolotouros et al. 2019; Choutas et al.
2020; Saito et al. 2020) have been studied to resolve 3D human shape reconstruction from a single image, however, little has been studied for texture map reconstruction from a
single image for a 3D model (Jian et al. 2019; Lazova, Insafutdinov, and Pons-Moll 2019).
A texture map is an image lying on uv-coordinates containing whole surface colors of a 3D model (Catmull 1974;
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

203

