The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Visual Sound Localization in the Wild by Cross-Modal Interference Erasing
Xian Liu1,2 * , Rui Qian1,3 * , Hang Zhou1 * , Di Hu4 , Weiyao Lin3 , Ziwei Liu5 ,
Bolei Zhou1 , Xiaowei Zhou2♯
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
2
Zhejiang University,
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China,
5
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
alvinliu@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, qr021@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, zhouhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
The task of audiovisual sound source localization has been
well studied under constrained scenes, where the audio
recordings are clean. However, in real world scenarios, audios
are usually contaminated by off screen sound and background
noise. They will interfere with the procedure of identifying
desired sources and building visual sound connections, making previous studies nonapplicable. In this work, we propose
the Interference Eraser (IEr) framework, which tackles the
problem of audiovisual sound source localization in the wild.
The key idea is to eliminate the interference by redefining and
carving discriminative audio representations. Specifically, we
observe that the previous practice of learning only a single audio representation is insufficient due to the additive nature of
audio signals. We thus extend the audio representation with
our Audio Instance Identifier module, which clearly distinguishes sounding instances when audio signals of different
volumes are unevenly mixed. Then we erase the influence of
the audible but off screen sounds and the silent but visible objects by a Cross modal Referrer module with cross modality
distillation. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that our framework achieves superior results on sound
localization tasks, especially under real world scenarios.

Figure 1: An example of an in-the-wild scene1 . It contains sounding clarinet, drum, human, etc. (red); visible but
silent trumpet (green); background sound of water and wind
(blue). Given an image and its corresponding audio as input,
we aim to localize objects that produce sound in the image.

propose to optimize the similarity between audio and visual features according to spatial-level correspondences or
temporal synchronization. Such pipeline effectively detects
sound sources in scenarios with single sound source (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017, 2018; Owens and Efros 2018;
Senocak et al. 2018). However, models learned under such
settings cannot generalize well to mixed sound scenes. To
further improve the model’s capacity, fine-grained audiovisual components are leveraged to establish sound-object
associations for multiple sound source localization. Qian
et al. (2020) propose to solve the problem in a coarse-tofine manner. But it relies on audio class labels, which are
sometimes inaccessible. Hu et al. (2020) design a two-stage
pipeline to transfer single-sound prior to multi-sound cases
and suppress the influence of silent objects. Nevertheless,
they care less about the interference in audios, thus confining the applicable scenarios to clean environments.
The interference in audio is caused by the additive nature
of audio signals. When the audio clip is a mixture of different sources and noise, several challenges occur: 1) In the
localization task, sound sources of different volumes should
be evenly identified. However, machines tend to distinguish
only a few dominant sounds from a mixture as demonstrated

Introduction
Humans can grasp the relevance between audio and visual information by leveraging their natural correspondences (Proulx et al. 2014; Stein and Meredith 1993). Even
for an in-the-wild scenario as shown in Fig. 1, humans are
able to distinguish the sounding objects despite the background sound and noises. In order for machines to achieve
human-like multi-modality perception, researchers have explored the task of visual sound source localization (Zhao
et al. 2018; Senocak et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2020; Qian et al.
2020), which aims at localizing the objects that produce
sound in an image given its corresponding audio clip.
With the recent development of neural networks, studies
have firstly been made on learning audio-visual correspondences towards associating sound and visual objects. They
* Equal contribution. ♯ Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dXbFEOtIbs.

1801

