The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Qubit Routing Using Graph Neural Network Aided Monte Carlo Tree Search
Animesh Sinha∗ , Utkarsh Azad∗ , Harjinder Singh
Center for Computational Natural Sciences and Bioinformatics, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad.
Center for Quantum Science and Technology, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad.
{animesh.sinha, utkarsh.azad}@research.iiit.ac.in, laltu@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

to satisfy the connectivity constraints of the topology of the
hardware (Cowtan et al. 2019). These transformations usually include the addition of SWAP gates and the reversal of
existing CNOT gates. This ensures that any non-local quantum operations are performed only between the qubits that
are nearest-neighbors. This process of circuit transformation
by a compiler routine for the target hardware is known as
qubit routing (Cowtan et al. 2019). The output instructions in
the transformed quantum circuit should follow the connectivity constraints and essentially result in the same overall
unitary evolution as the original circuit (Pozzi et al. 2020).
In the context of NISQ hardware, this procedure is of extreme importance as the transformed circuit will, in general,
have higher depth due to the insertion of extra SWAP gates.
This overhead in the circuit depth becomes more prominent
due to the high decoherence rates of the qubits and it becomes essential to find the most optimal and efficient strategy to minimize it (Cowtan et al. 2019; Herbert and Sengupta 2018; Pozzi et al. 2020). In this article, we present a
procedure that we refer to as QRoute. We use Monte Carlo
tree search (MCTS), which is a look-ahead search algorithm
for finding optimal decisions in the decision space guided by
a heuristic evaluation function (Kocsis and Szepesvari 2006;
Munos 2014). We use it for explicitly searching the decision
space for depth minimization and as a stable and performant
machine learning setting. It is aided by a Graph neural network (GNN) (Wang et al. 2018), with an architecture that
is used to learn and evaluate the heuristic function that will
help guide the MCTS.

Near-term quantum hardware can support two-qubit operations only on the qubits that can interact with each other.
Therefore, to execute an arbitrary quantum circuit on the
hardware, compilers have to first perform the task of qubit
routing, i.e., to transform the quantum circuit either by inserting additional SWAP gates or by reversing existing CNOT
gates to satisfy the connectivity constraints of the target topology. The depth of the transformed quantum circuits is minimized by utilizing the Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) to
perform qubit routing by making it both construct each action
and search over the space of all actions. It is aided in performing these tasks by a Graph neural network that evaluates the
value function and action probabilities for each state. Along
with this, we propose a new method of adding mutex-lock
like variables in our state representation which helps factor in
the parallelization of the scheduled operations, thereby pruning the depth of the output circuit. Overall, our procedure (referred to as QRoute) performs qubit routing in a hardware agnostic manner, and it outperforms other available qubit routing implementations on various circuit benchmarks.

Introduction
The present-day quantum computers, more generally known
as Noisy Intermediate-Scale quantum (NISQ) devices
(Preskill 2018) come in a variety of hardware architectures (IBM 2021; Arute et al. 2019; Karalekas et al. 2020;
Bourassa et al. 2021), but there exist a few problems pervading across all of them. These problems constitute the
poor quality of qubits, limited connectivity between qubits,
and the absence of error-correction for noise-induced errors
encountered during the execution of gate operations. These
place a considerable restriction on the number of instructions that can be executed to perform useful quantum computation (Preskill 2018). Collectively these instructions can
be realized as a sequential series of one or two-qubit gates
that can be visualized more easily as a quantum circuit as
shown in Fig. 1a (Childs, Schoute, and Unsal 2019).
To execute an arbitrarily given quantum circuit on the target quantum hardware, a compiler routine must transform it

Qubit Routing
In this section, we begin by defining the problem of qubit
routing formally and discussing the work done previously in
the field.

Describing the Problem
The topology of quantum hardware can be visualized as a
qubit connectivity graph (Fig. 2). Each node in this graph
would correspond to a physical qubit which in turn might
correspond to a logical qubit. The quantum instruction set,
which is also referred to as quantum circuit (Fig. 1a), is a
sequential series of single-qubit and two-qubit gate operations that act on the logical qubits. The two-qubit gates such
as CNOT can only be performed between two logical qubits

∗

Animesh Sinha and Utkarsh Azad contribute equally to this work
and share first authorship. Corresponding author is Utkarsh Azad.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9935

