The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

StepGame: A New Benchmark for
Robust Multi-Hop Spatial Reasoning in Texts
Zhengxiang Shi1 , Qiang Zhang2 , Aldo Lipani1
1

University College London
2
Zhejiang University
zhengxiang.shi.19@ucl.ac.uk, qiang.zhang.cs@zju.edu.cn, aldo.lipani@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

Earlier works in spatial reasoning focused on spatial instruction understanding in a synthetic environment (Bisk
et al. 2018; Tan and Bansal 2018; Janner, Narasimhan, and
Barzilay 2018) or in a simulated world with spatial information annotation in texts (Pustejovsky et al. 2015), spatial
relation extractions across entities (Petruck and Ellsworth
2018) and visual observations (Anderson et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2019). However, few of the existing datasets are designed to evaluate models’ inference over spatial information in texts. A spatial relational inference task often requires
an conversational system to infer the spatial relation between
two items given a description of a scene. For example, imagine a user asking to a conversational system to recognize the
location of an entity based on the description of other entities in a scene. To do so, the conversational system needs to
be able to reason about the location of the various entities in
the scene using only textual information.
BAbI (Weston et al. 2016) is the most relevant dataset
for this task. It contains 20 synthetic question answering
(QA) tasks to test a variety of reasoning abilities in texts,
like deduction, co-reference, and counting. In particular, the
positional reasoning task (no. 17) and the path finding task
(no. 19) are designed to evaluate models’ spatial reasoning
ability. These two tasks are arguably the most challenging
ones van Aken et al. (2019). The state-of-the-art model on
the bAbI (Le, Tran, and Venkatesh 2020) dataset almost perfectly solve these two spatial reasoning tasks. However, in
this paper, we demonstrate that such good performance is
attributable to issues with the bAbI dataset rather than the
model inference ability.
We find four major issues with bAbI’s tasks 17 and 19: (1)
There is a data leakage between the train and test sets; that is,
most of the test set samples appear in the training set. Hence,
the evaluation results on the test set cannot truly reflect models’ reasoning ability; (2) Named entities are fixed and only
four relations are considered. Each text sample always contains the same four named entities in the training, validation, and test sets. This further biases the learning models
towards these four entities. When named entities in the test
set are replaced by unseen entities or the number of such
entities increases, the model performance decreases dramatically (Chen et al. 2020a). Also, relations such as top-left,
top-right, lower-left, lower-right are not taken into consideration; (3) Learning models are required to reason only over

Inferring spatial relations in natural language is a crucial ability an intelligent system should possess. The bAbI dataset
tries to capture tasks relevant to this domain (task 17 and 19).
However, these tasks have several limitations. Most importantly, they are limited to fixed expressions, they are limited
in the number of reasoning steps required to solve them, and
they fail to test the robustness of models to input that contains
irrelevant or redundant information. In this paper, we present
a new Question-Answering dataset called StepGame for robust multi-hop spatial reasoning in texts. Our experiments
demonstrate that state-of-the-art models on the bAbI dataset
struggle on the StepGame dataset. Moreover, we propose a
Tensor-Product based Memory-Augmented Neural Network
(TP-MANN) specialized for spatial reasoning tasks. Experimental results on both datasets show that our model outperforms all the baselines with superior generalization and robustness performance.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have been successful in a wide array of perceptual tasks, but it is often stated that they are incapable
of solving tasks that require higher-level reasoning (Ding
et al. 2020). Since spatial reasoning is ubiquitous in many
scenarios such as autonomous navigation (Vogel and Jurafsky 2010), situated dialog (Kruijff et al. 2007), and robotic
manipulation (Yang, Lan, and Narasimhan 2020; Landsiedel
et al. 2017), grounding spatial references in texts is essential
for effective human-machine communication through natural language. Navigation tasks require agents to reason about
their relative position to objects and how these relations
change as they move through the environment (Chen et al.
2019). If we want to develop conversational systems able to
assist users in solving tasks where spatial references are involved, we need to make them able to understand and reason
about spatial references in natural language. Such ability can
help conversational systems to successfully follow instructions and understand spatial descriptions. However, despite
its tremendous applicability, reasoning over spatial relations
remains a challenging task for existing conversational systems.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11321

