The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Path-Specific Objectives for Safer Agent Incentives
Sebastian Farquhar1,2 , Ryan Carey1 , Tom Everitt2
1

University of Oxford, 2 DeepMind

Abstract

creating an agent which does not intend to affect the delicate
state (Halpern and Kleiman-Weiner 2018), which is distinct
from both trying not to influence that state or to keep it constant (Turner, Ratzlaff, and Tadepalli 2020; Krakovna et al.
2020).
We use causal influence diagrams (CIDs) which can formally express instrumental control incentives (Everitt et al.
2021a). We show that one can remove the instrumental control incentive over delicate state by training agents to maximize the path-specific causal effect (Pearl 2001) of their
actions on the reward following paths which are not mediated by the delicate state. Moreover, we show how a diverse set of previous proposals for safe agent design can
be motivated by these principles. In this way, we unify and
generalize approaches from topics such as reward tampering (Uesato et al. 2020; Everitt et al. 2021b), online reward
learning (Armstrong et al. 2020), and auto-induced distributional shift (Krueger, Maharaj, and Leike 2020). At the
same time, we show how these methods depend on assumptions about the state-space which have not previously been
acknowledged. We highlight the opportunities and dangers of
these approaches empirically in a content recommendation
environment from Krueger, Maharaj, and Leike (2020). Our
main contributions are:
• We formalize the problem of delicate state as a complement to reward specification (§2);
• We propose path-specific objectives (§5);
• We show this generalizes and unifies prior work (§6).

We present a general framework for training safe agents whose
naive incentives are unsafe. As an example, manipulative or deceptive behaviour can improve rewards but should be avoided.
Most approaches fail here: agents maximize expected return
by any means necessary. We formally describe settings with
‘delicate’ parts of the state which should not be used as a
means to an end. We then train agents to maximize the causal
effect of actions on the expected return which is not mediated
by the delicate parts of state, using Causal Influence Diagram
analysis. The resulting agents have no incentive to control the
delicate state. We further show how our framework unifies and
generalizes existing proposals.

1

Introduction

Artificial agents can have unsafe incentives to influence parts
of their environments in unintended ways. For example, content recommendation systems can achieve good performance
by manipulating their users to develop more predictable
preferences instead of catering to their tastes directly (Russell 2019). These incentives can be instrumental: indirectly
achieving what the system’s designers asked for but did not
intend (Everitt et al. 2021a).
In these cases, it is hard to just pick a better reward function.
Imagine the unenviable task of writing down which userpreferences are desirable! We would rather ensure that the
agent has no systematic incentive to manipulate people’s
preferences at all—as opposed to an agent with an incentive
to encourage its users to have the ‘right’ kind of preference. In
this setting, the users’ preferences are what we call delicate
state: a part of the environment which is hard to define a
reward for and vulnerable to deliberate manipulation.
Even when part of the state-space is delicate, other parts
might be tractable. For example, we might know exactly how
we want to price media-bandwidth consumption driven by
our recommendations. This paper provides a framework for
designing agents to act safely in environments where parts
of the state-space are delicate and other parts are not, under
assumptions which permit causal effects estimation.
We show how to train agents in a way that removes incentives to control delicate state. This can be interpreted as

2

The Problem of Delicate State

Delicate state is a tool for framing safe agent design. When a
state is subtle and manipulable we call it delicate:
Subtle
Hard to specify a reward for.
Manipulable Vulnerable to motivated action—intentional
actions can have bad outcomes.
Jointly, these are dangerous: it is hard to say what we want
for the state and it is easy for influence on the state to have
bad consequences. A person’s political beliefs might be an
example of such a state. The current toolbox for safe agent
design mostly tries to attack subtlety directly by finding a
better way to specify the reward. This is not our approach—
instead we aim to remove any incentive for the agent to
control the delicate part of state-space.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9529

