The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

KGR4 : Retrieval, Retrospect, Refine and Rethink for Commonsense Generation
Xin Liu1,3 Dayiheng Liu2 Baosong Yang2 Haibo Zhang2 Junwei Ding2
Wenqing Yao2 Weihua Luo2 Haiying Zhang1 Jinsong Su1,3,4*
1

3

School of Informatics, Xiamen University 2 Alibaba Group
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible
Cultural Heritage of Fujian and Taiwan, Ministry of Culture and Tourism
4
Pengcheng Lab, Shenzhen
liuxin@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{liudayiheng.ldyh, yangbaosong.ybs, zhanhui.zhb, djw99219,
wenqing.ywq, weihua.luowh}@alibaba-inc.com
{zhang2002,jssu}@xmu.edu.cn
Concepts: {hand, sink, wash, soap}
Outputs: The girl uses soap to wash her hands at the sink.
GPT-2: hands washing soap on the sink.
BERT-Gen: a woman washes her hands with a sink of soaps.
UniLM: hands washing soap in the sink
BART: a man is washing his hands in a sink a sink.
T5: hand washed with soap in a sink.
Ours: A man is washing his hands with soap in a sink.

Abstract
Generative commonsense reasoning requires machines to
generate sentences describing an everyday scenario given
several concepts, which has attracted much attention recently.
However, existing models cannot perform as well as humans,
since sentences they produce are often implausible and grammatically incorrect. In this paper, inspired by the process of
humans creating sentences, we propose a novel Knowledgeenhanced Commonsense Generation framework, termed
KGR4 , consisting of four stages: Retrieval, Retrospect,
Refine, Rethink. Under this framework, we first perform retrieval to search for relevant sentences from external corpus
as the prototypes. Then, we train the generator that either edits or copies these prototypes to generate candidate sentences,
of which potential errors will be fixed by an autoencoderbased refiner. Finally, we select the output sentence from
candidate sentences produced by generators with different
hyper-parameters. Experimental results and in-depth analysis on the CommonGen benchmark strongly demonstrate the
effectiveness of our framework. Particularly, KGR4 obtains
33.56 SPICE points in the official leaderboard, outperforming the previously-reported best result by 2.49 SPICE points
and achieving state-of-the-art performance. We release the
code at https://github.com/DeepLearnXMU/KGR-4.

1

Table 1: Sentences produced by commonly-used pretrained
models given some concepts. Those sentences generated by
existing pretrained models are either implausible (e.g. a sink
of soaps) or suffer from the repetition problem (e.g. in a sink
a sink), while ours generates a more natural sentence.

man beings (Moore 2013). To deal with this issue, Lin et al.
(2020) explore CommonGen, which requires the model to
produce the sentence describing the daily life scenario given
some concepts. As shown in the first two lines of Table 1,
given concepts {hand, sink, wash, soap}, this task aims to
generate a coherent sentence covering all of them, e.g. “The
girl uses soap to wash her hands at the sink”. Compared
with previous tasks, CommonGen is able to better evaluate the generative commonsense reasoning ability of each
model, thus attracting much attention recently.
However, CommonGen remains a difficult task due to the
following challenges: 1) Generated sentences should be consistent with commonsense knowledge; 2) The model is required to possess the compositional generalization ability, so
that it can deal with unseen combinations of concepts. From
Table 1, we can observe that the sentences generated by
commonly-used pretrained models are either not in line with
commonsense knowledge (i.e., “a sink of soaps” produced
by BERT-Gen (Bao et al. 2020)) or suffer from the repetition problem (i.e., “in a sink a sink” generated by BART
(Lewis et al. 2020)).
To strengthen the ability of generative commonsense
reasoning, many researchers resort to introducing external
knowledge to refine pretrained models. Typically, Liu et al.
(2021) exploit the knowledge graph ConceptNet (Liu and
Singh 2004) to refine the BART-based model. However,

Introduction

Recently, integrating commonsense knowledge into artificial intelligence models has become increasingly attractive
to researchers. To assess the ability of these models in understanding the commonsense knowledge from our daily
life, various tasks (Zellers et al. 2018; Talmor et al. 2019a;
Zellers et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020) for commonsense reasoning have been proposed. Typically, SWAG (Zellers et al.
2018), HellaSWAG (Zellers et al. 2019), and CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al. 2019a) are designed to infer an upcoming event by selecting one of the listed choices. However, few of them focus on commonsense reasoning in a generative manner, which is considered as a basic ability of huCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Jinsong Su is the corresponding author. This work was done
when Xin Liu was interning at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.

11029

