The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Object Localization with Joint Graph Partition
Yukun Su1,2 , Guosheng Lin2† , Yun Hao1,3 , Yiwen Cao1,3 , Wenjun Wang1,3 , Qingyao Wu1,4†
2

1
School of Software and Engineering, South China University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
suyukun666@gmail.com

Abstract
Ours

Faster-RCNN

Object localization aims to generate a tight bounding box for
the target object, which is a challenging problem that has been
deeply studied in recent years. Since collecting bounding-box
labels is time-consuming and laborious, many researchers focus on weakly supervised object localization (WSOL). As the
recent appealing self-supervised learning technique shows
its powerful function in visual tasks, in this paper, we take
the early attempt to explore unsupervised object localization
by self-supervision. Specifically, we adopt different geometric transformations to image and utilize their parameters as
pseudo labels for self-supervised learning. Then, the classagnostic activation map is used to highlight the target object
potential regions. However, such attention maps merely focus on the most discriminative part of the objects, which will
affect the quality of the predicted bounding box. Based on
the motivation that the activation maps of different transformations of the same image should be equivariant, we further
design a siamese network that encodes the paired images and
propose a joint graph partition mechanism in an unsupervised
manner to enhance the object co-occurrent regions. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, extensive experiments are conducted on CUB-200-2011, Stanford Cars
and FGVC-Aircraft datasets. Experimental results show that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods using the
same level of supervision, even outperforms some weaklysupervised methods.

TS-CAM
SPA

PSY
SCDA
Ours

ACoL
DiLo
CAM

ReDraw
DUSD

Figure 1: CUB-200-2011 (Wah et al. 2011) GT-Known Loc
accuracy of different methods by different level supervisions. All methods adopt VGG16 as backbone for a fair
comparison. ‘† ’ denotes the backbone is pre-trained on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015) using class-level labels.

recent self-supervised learning techniques (He et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2020b,a; Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018)
arising, image visual representations can be learned without labels in an unsupervised way. To this end, we make
the early attempt to explore unsupervised object localization
with self-supervised learning, which not only outperforms
previous unsupervised works (Zhang et al. 2018a; Zhao et al.
2020), but also even outperforms some weakly-supervised
methods (Zhou et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018b; Baek, Lee,
and Shim 2020) (see in Figure 1).
In this work, we introduce a novel and simple framework
for unsupervised object localization by self-supervision.
Specifically, inspired by RotNet (Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis 2018), the network can extract visual features by
a classification task. The core intuition is that it is essentially impossible for a network to effectively perform the
recognition task unless it has first learned to recognize and
detect classes of objects as well as their semantic parts in
images. But different from it, we consider predicting sim-

Introduction
Recently, deep convolution neural networks have achieved
impressive results in many visual tasks such as recognition (He et al. 2016; Su et al. 2020) and segmentation (Chen
et al. 2017; Su et al. 2022), etc. This is due to the strong
learning ability under supervision. Object localization aims
to locate the object of interest within an image. However,
collecting bounding-box labels is very time-consuming and
labor-intensive, thereby some of these methods are often unavailable in practice.
To relax the demand for expensive annotations, some recent researches (Zhou et al. 2016; Choe and Shim 2019;
Lin et al. 2020) focus on weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL), which only utilizes image-level labels. As the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding authors.

2289

