The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pose-Guided Feature Disentangling for Occluded Person
Re-identification Based on Transformer
Tao Wang, Hong Liu∗ , Pinhao Song, Tianyu Guo, Wei Shi
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception
Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
{taowang, levigty}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {hongliu, pinhaosong, pkusw}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Occluded person re-identification is a challenging task as human body parts could be occluded by some obstacles (e.g.
trees, cars, and pedestrians) in certain scenes. Some existing
pose-guided methods solve this problem by aligning body
parts according to graph matching, but these graph-based
methods are not intuitive and complicated. Therefore, we
propose a transformer-based Pose-guided Feature Disentangling (PFD) method by utilizing pose information to clearly
disentangle semantic components (e.g. human body or joint
parts) and selectively match non-occluded parts correspondingly. First, Vision Transformer (ViT) is used to extract the
patch features with its strong capability. Second, to preliminarily disentangle the pose information from patch information, the matching and distributing mechanism is leveraged
in Pose-guided Feature Aggregation (PFA) module. Third,
a set of learnable semantic views are introduced in transformer decoder to implicitly enhance the disentangled body
part features. However, those semantic views are not guaranteed to be related to the body without additional supervision. Therefore, Pose-View Matching (PVM) module is proposed to explicitly match visible body parts and automatically separate occlusion features. Fourth, to better prevent the interference of occlusions, we design a Pose-guided
Push Loss to emphasize the features of visible body parts.
Extensive experiments over five challenging datasets for two tasks (occluded and holistic Re-ID) demonstrate that our
proposed PFD is superior promising, which performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/WangTaoAs/PFD Net

1

split

Pose Estimation

Transformer
Encoders

Decoders

Matching strategy

Transformer
Encoders

split

Decoders

Pose Estimation

Learnable semantic views
Similarity matching
Occlusions or noise

Figure 1: Illustration of Pose-guided Feature Disentangling
(PFD) method in occluded person Re-ID. PFD represents an
occluded person image by using the transformer to implicitly disentangle disciminative features and explicitly using
pose information to guide the separation of the non-occluded
features and occluded features.
stations, airports, shopping malls, person can be easily occluded by some obstacles (e.g., trees, cars, pedestrians), it is
difficult to match people with incomplete and invisible body
parts. Therefore, the occluded person re-identification task
(Zhuo et al. 2018; Miao et al. 2019; Jia et al. 2021a) is of
important practical significance.
Compared with holistic person Re-ID, there are two major challenges for occluded person Re-ID task: (1) Due to the
existence of occlusion, various noises have been introduced
that result in mismatching. (2) The occlusion may have features similar to human body parts, leading to the failure of
feature learning. Some early methods (Miao et al. 2019) utilize pose information to indicate non-occluded body parts
on the spatial feature map and directly divide global features
into partial features. These methods are intuitive but requires

Introduction

Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) aims to identify a specific person across multiple non-overlapping cameras (Zheng,
Yang, and Hauptmann 2016). It is an important subject in
the field of computer vision and has a wide range of application backgrounds, such as video surveillance, activity analysis, security, and smart city. In recent years, holistic person
Re-ID achieves great progress, and various of methods (Sun
et al. 2018; Shi, Liu, and Liu 2020; Zhang, Zhang, and Liu
2021) have been proposed. However, in real scenes, such as
∗

Corresponding author: hongliu@pku.edu.cn
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2540

