The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SCTN: Sparse Convolution-Transformer Network for Scene Flow Estimation
Bing Li, Cheng Zheng, Silvio Giancola, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
{bing.li, cheng.zheng, silvio.giancola, Bernard.Ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We propose a novel scene flow estimation approach to capture and infer 3D motions from point clouds. Estimating 3D
motions for point clouds is challenging, since a point cloud is
unordered and its density is significantly non-uniform. Such
unstructured data poses difficulties in matching corresponding points between point clouds, leading to inaccurate flow
estimation. We propose a novel architecture named Sparse
Convolution-Transformer Network (SCTN) that equips the
sparse convolution with the transformer. Specifically, by
leveraging the sparse convolution, SCTN transfers irregular
point cloud into locally consistent flow features for estimating continuous and consistent motions within an object/local
object part. We further propose to explicitly learn point relations using a point transformer module, different from exiting
methods. We show that the learned relation-based contextual
information is rich and helpful for matching corresponding
points, benefiting scene flow estimation. In addition, a novel
loss function is proposed to adaptively encourage flow consistency according to feature similarity. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed approach achieves a new state
of the art in scene flow estimation. Our approach achieves an
error of 0.038 and 0.037 (EPE3D) on FlyingThings3D and
KITTI Scene Flow respectively, which significantly outperforms previous methods by large margins.

pc1

pc2

(a) point clouds

(b) FLOT

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Illustrating the advantage of our SCTN in feature extraction, where first and second rows indicate the two
point clouds, (b) and (c) visualize their features extracted by
FLOT and our SCTN, respectively. Circles or triangles 4
in (b)(c) indicate a pair of corresponding points between the
point clouds, respectively.
and 4 are not corresponding
to each other, however, their features extracted by FLOT are
improperly similar, which are less discriminative and would
lead to inaccurate predicted flows. In contrast, our SCTN
extracts locally consistent while discriminative features.

Introduction

learn scene flow from point clouds in an end-to-end way,
which achieves promising estimation performance. However, estimating scene flow from point clouds is still challenging. In particular, existing methods (Liu, Qi, and Guibas
2019; Puy, Boulch, and Marlet 2020) extract feature for each
point by aggregating information from its local neighborhood. However, such extracted features are not discriminative enough to matching corresponding points between point
clouds (see Figure 1), leading to inaccurate flow estimation, since the feature extraction of these methods ignore two
facts. First, the density of points is significantly non-uniform
within a point cloud. It is non-trivial to learn point features
that are simultaneously favorable for both points from dense
regions and those from sparse regions. Second, due to Lidar
and object motions, the density of points within an object
often varies at the temporal dimension, leading that the geometry patterns of corresponding local regions are inconsistent between consecutive point clouds. As a result, extracted
features, that are aggregated from only local regions with-

Understanding 3D dynamic scenes is critical to many realworld applications such as autonomous driving and robotics.
Scene flow is the 3D motion of points in a dynamic scene,
which provides low-level information for scene understanding (Vedula et al. 1999; Liu, Qi, and Guibas 2019; Geiger
et al. 2013). The estimation of the scene flow can be a building block for more complex applications and tasks such as
3D object detection (Shi et al. 2020), segmentation (Thomas
et al. 2019) and tracking (Qi et al. 2020). However, many
previous scene flow methods estimate the 3D motion from
stereo or RGB-D images. With the increasing popularity of
point cloud data, it is desirable to estimate 3D motions directly from 3D point clouds.
Recent methods e.g.,(Wu et al. 2020; Liu, Qi, and Guibas
2019; Wei et al. 2021; Puy, Boulch, and Marlet 2020; Wang
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021) propose deep neural networks to
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1254

