The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deconfounding Physical Dynamics with Global Causal Relation and Confounder
Transmission for Counterfactual Prediction
Zongzhao Li1,2 , Xiangyu Zhu1,2 , Zhen Lei1,2,3∗ , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3
1

NLPR & CBSR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xiangyu.zhu,zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn {lizongzhao2020,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

not experienced. Therefore, the model is supposed to discover causal relations between the intervened variables and the
alternative outcomes. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the frames
display the transformation as well as the reorientation of
four objects. We wish the model to predict future trajectories of these objects if we had changed the initial frame by
applying do − operation (Pearl 2009) intervention. In our
case, do − operation contains object displacement or removal. Note that counterfactual future prediction is different
from feedforward future prediction in Figure 1 (b), which
learns spatio-temporal regularities from a few past frames
to make future predictions. Counterfactual prediction aims
to estimate unobservable confounders as references. It benefits from the observation of the original sequence I 0...T .
It takes unobservable confounders into account, which has
an important impact on the system. Recently, there are a
few methods that model physical dynamics systems from an
object-centric view and predict the counterfactual outcome.
CoPhyNet (Baradel et al. 2020) models the interactions of
objects based on Graph Convolution Networks (Kipf and
Welling 2016) and further predicts the future outcomes by
GRU (Cho et al. 2014). V-CDN (Li et al. 2020c) proposes a keypoint-based model to infer the hidden confounders
and predict the future movements of the keypoints. Although
they can discover the relations of objects and make future
predictions, there is still room for further improvement.

Discovering the underneath causal relations is the fundamental ability for reasoning about the surrounding environment
and predicting the future states in the physical world. Counterfactual prediction from visual input, which requires simulating future states based on unrealized situations in the past,
is a vital component in causal relation tasks. In this paper,
we work on the confounders that have effect on the physical dynamics, including masses, friction coefficients, etc., to
bridge relations between the intervened variable and the affected variable whose future state may be altered. We propose
a neural network framework combining Global Causal Relation Attention (GCRA) and Confounder Transmission Structure (CTS). The GCRA looks for the latent causal relations between different variables and estimates the confounders
by capturing both spatial and temporal information. The CTS
integrates and transmits the learnt confounders in a residual way, so that the estimated confounders can be encoded into
the network as a constraint for object positions when performing counterfactual prediction. Without any access to ground
truth information about confounders, our model outperforms
the state-of-the-art method on various benchmarks by fully utilizing the constraints of confounders. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our model can generalize to unseen environments and maintain good performance.

Introduction
One of the main distinctions that differentiate human-like
intelligence from others may lie in the understanding, reasoning and predicting ability, especially when the agent is confronted with a novel and complicated environment (Spelke and Kinzler 2007; Martin-Ordas, Call, and Colmenares 2008). Discovering the causality and inferring timeinvariant variables from visual input, has served as the core
abilities for intelligent agent to build a basic understanding
of the world (Glymour, Zhang, and Spirtes 2019). Furthermore, based on the obtained knowledge, agent can forecast
the future outcome involving external interventions. In this
paper, we utilize counterfactual prediction as our main quantitative indicator to probe model’s capability.
In counterfactual prediction tasks, interventions will be
employed to the system, producing situations that model has

In this paper, we concentrate on the confounders, which
is tied to physics laws and independent of the data, to tackle counterfactual prediction tasks. Our model aims to estimate the unobservable confounders, such as masses, friction coefficients, and gravity, reason interactions across different objects, and discover the relations between the intervened variable with the variable whose alternative future
should be predicted. Our model first learns the reflect function to represent each object as a compact vector and uses a Graph Convolution Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2016) to update object embeddings. Then it reasons causal
relationships of objects and deconfounds the object embeddings based on a proposed Global Causal Relation Attention
(GCRA). GCRA captures the spatial-temporal information
across objects and frames, and contributes to the accurate
identification of the confounders. Finally, reposed on the inferred confounders and the modified initial state, a new forward module Confounder Transmission Structure (CTS) in-

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1536

