The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

STDEN: Towards Physics-Guided Neural Networks for Traffic Flow Prediction
Jiahao Ji, 1 Jingyuan Wang, 1,2 * Zhe Jiang, 3 Jiawei Jiang, 4 Hu Zhang 4
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment,
School of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer & Information Science & Engineering, The University of Florida
4
MOE Engineering Research Center of Advanced Computer Application Technology,
School of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{jiahaoji, jywang, jwjiang, zhanghu2006}@buaa.edu.cn, zhe.jiang@ufl.edu
Abstract

prediction, aiming at forecasting the future status of traffic
systems given historical observations, plays a crucial role in
many important urban applications, such as public safety,
congestion management and navigation (Li et al. 2020).
In the literature, traffic flow prediction methods mainly
fall into two categories: physics-based and data-driven.
The former one usually relies on traffic flow theory (Ni
2015), which represents traffic system as coupled Differential Equations (DEs). Traffic flow prediction is then achieved
through conducting system simulation governed by these
DEs. The physics-based models are able to guarantee the
simulation results consistently represent the traffic dynamics over the entire domain, not only where it was calibrated
by observation data. However, these models usually make
strong assumptions about traffic flow with a small set of parameters (Mo, Shi, and Di 2021), which may not be able
to capture the complex human behaviors and the uncertain
factors in real-world traffic. Besides, the simulation process
relies on solving DEs through numerical differentiation and
integration techniques, which requires a lot of computing resources (Wang et al. 2020).
The second category is data-driven methods, which usually utilize historical observational data to train a statistical
learning model, and then use the trained model to generate
predictions. Among the data-driven methods, the most representative branch is traffic flow prediction based on deep
learning. For example, using recurrent neural networks (Li
et al. 2018) or temporal convolution (Wu et al. 2019) to
model temporal dependencies, using convolutional neural
networks (Tang et al. 2020) to capture spatial correlations,
and using graph convolutional (Song et al. 2020; Tian and
Chan 2021) to introduce road network information into traffic prediction. In recent years, with a huge volume of traffic data becoming available, the deep learning-based datadriven methods have drawn great attention from both industry and academia, and achieved great success in many
real-world applications. However, these methods also have
defects. First, without the physical knowledge to guarantee
generalization ability, the data-driven models are very likely
to lose effectiveness in scenarios that are not sampled by
the training data. Second, the “black-box” structure of deep
learning models introduces unknown risks in the ITS, which
may cause potential threats to urban safety.

High-performance traffic flow prediction model designing,
a core technology of Intelligent Transportation System, is a
long-standing but still challenging task for industrial and academic communities. The lack of integration between physical principles and data-driven models is an important reason for limiting the development of this field. In the literature, physics-based methods can usually provide a clear interpretation of the dynamic process of traffic flow systems
but are with limited accuracy, while data-driven methods, especially deep learning with black-box structures, can achieve
improved performance but can not be fully trusted due to lack
of a reasonable physical basis. To bridge the gap between
purely data-driven and physics-driven approaches, we propose a physics-guided deep learning model named SpatioTemporal Differential Equation Network (STDEN), which
casts the physical mechanism of traffic flow dynamics into
a deep neural network framework. Specifically, we assume
the traffic flow on road networks is driven by a latent potential energy field (like water flows are driven by the gravity field), and model the spatio-temporal dynamic process
of the potential energy field as a differential equation network. STDEN absorbs both the performance advantage of
data-driven models and the interpretability of physics-based
models, so is named a physics-guided prediction model. Experiments on three real-world traffic datasets in Beijing show
that our model outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by a significant margin. A case study further verifies that STDEN can
capture the mechanism of urban traffic and generate accurate
predictions with physical meaning. The proposed framework
of differential equation network modeling may also cast light
on other similar applications.

Introduction
Rapid urbanization has brought about the growth of urban
population, and presented huge transportation and sustainability challenges to modern cities. Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) has become an active research area because of its potential to improve transportation efficiency
and solve the sustainability problem of cities (Snyder and
Do 2019). As the core technology of the ITS, traffic flow
* Corresponding author: jywang@buaa.edu.cn
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4048

