The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Training Multi-Sequence Learning with Transformer for Weakly Supervised
Video Anomaly Detection
Shuo Li, Fang Liu∗ , Licheng Jiao
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
International Research Center for Intelligent Perception and Computation,
Joint International Research Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Computation,
School of Artificial Intelligent, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, P.R. China,
alisure@stu.xidian.edu.cn, f63liu@163.com, lchjiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract

Hong, and Zheng 2021). Recently, many researchers have
focused on weakly supervised VAD (Zhong et al. 2019).
Most weakly supervised VADs are based on MultiInstance Learning (MIL) (Sultani, Chen, and Shah 2018;
Zhu and Newsam 2019; Wan et al. 2020; Tian et al. 2021).
MIL-based methods treat a video as a bag, which contains
multiple instances. Each instance is a snippet. The bag generated from an abnormal video is called a positive bag, and
the bag generated from a normal video is called a negative
bag. Since the video-level label indicates whether the video
contains anomalies, the positive bag contains at least one
abnormal snippet and the negative bag contains no abnormal
snippet. MIL-based methods learn instance-level anomaly scores through the bag-level labels (Zhong et al. 2019).
In MIL-based methods, at least one instance of the positive bag contains the anomaly, and any instance of the negative bag does not contain the anomaly (Sultani, Chen, and
Shah 2018). Generally, MIL-based methods assume that the
instance with the highest anomaly score in the positive bag
should rank higher than the instance with the highest anomaly score in the negative bag (Zhu and Newsam 2019). Therefore, the important thing for MIL-based methods is to correctly select anomalous instance in the positive bag. Most
MIL-based methods regard an instance as an optimization
unit (Zhang, Qing, and Miao 2019; Feng, Hong, and Zheng
2021; Tian et al. 2021). However, if the model predicts the
anomalous instances incorrectly in the positive bag, this error will be strengthened as the training progresses. That is, if
a normal instance is predicted as an abnormal instance, this
error will affect subsequent instance selection. In addition,
the abnormal event is usually multiple consecutive snippets,
but MIL-based methods do not consider this prior.
In order to alleviate the above-mentioned shortcomings,
we propose a Multi-Sequence Learning (MSL) method. Our
MSL no longer uses an instance as the optimization unit, but
a sequence composed of multiple instances as the optimization unit. In other words, instead of choosing the instance
with the highest anomaly score, our MSL method chooses the sequence with the highest sum of anomaly scores.
This reduces the probability of incorrect selection of anomalous instances. In order to achieve our MSL, we propose
a Transformer-based Multi-Sequence Learning Network,
which includes a multi-layer Convolutional Transformer Encoder to encode extracted snippet features, a Video Classifier

Weakly supervised Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) using
Multi-Instance Learning (MIL) is usually based on the fact
that the anomaly score of an abnormal snippet is higher than
that of a normal snippet. In the beginning of training, due
to the limited accuracy of the model, it is easy to select the
wrong abnormal snippet. In order to reduce the probability of
selection errors, we first propose a Multi-Sequence Learning
(MSL) method and a hinge-based MSL ranking loss that uses
a sequence composed of multiple snippets as an optimization
unit. We then design a Transformer-based MSL network to
learn both video-level anomaly probability and snippet-level
anomaly scores. In the inference stage, we propose to use the
video-level anomaly probability to suppress the fluctuation
of snippet-level anomaly scores. Finally, since VAD needs to
predict the snippet-level anomaly scores, by gradually reducing the length of selected sequence, we propose a self-training
strategy to gradually refine the anomaly scores. Experimental
results show that our method achieves significant improvements on ShanghaiTech, UCF-Crime, and XD-Violence.

Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to detect abnormal
events in the video, which has important practical value
(Zhang, Qing, and Miao 2019; Guo et al. 2021). Generally, VAD predicts the anomaly score of each snippet in the
video. There are three main paradigms: unsupervised VAD
(Gong et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2021), weakly supervised VAD
(Zhong et al. 2019), and supervised VAD (Liu and Ma 2019;
Wan et al. 2021). Unsupervised VAD only learns on normal
videos, assuming that unseen abnormal videos have high reconstruction errors. Due to the lack of prior knowledge of
abnormality and inability to learn all normal video patterns,
the performance of unsupervised VAD is usually poor (Tian
et al. 2021). Because fine-grained anomaly label is timeconsuming and laborious, it is difficult to collect large-scale
datasets for supervised paradigm. With whether the video
contains anomalies as video-level label, the weakly supervised paradigm predicts the anomaly score of each frame.
The weakly supervised paradigm is verified to be a feasible method because of its competitive performance (Feng,
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1395

