The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Attention Biasing and Context Augmentation for Zero-Shot Control of
Encoder-Decoder Transformers for Natural Language Generation
Devamanyu Hazarika 2 * , Mahdi Namazifar 1 , Dilek Hakkani-Tür 1
AAAI 1
Version
Amazon Alexa AI
2

National University of Singapore
hazarika@comp.nus.edu.sg, {mahdinam,hakkanit}@amazon.com

Abstract
Controlling neural network-based models for natural language generation (NLG) to realize desirable attributes in the
generated outputs has broad applications in numerous areas
such as machine translation, document summarization, and
dialog systems. Approaches that enable such control in a
zero-shot manner would be of great importance as, among
other reasons, they remove the need for additional annotated data and training. In this work, we propose novel approaches for controlling encoder-decoder transformer-based
NLG models in zero shot. While zero-shot control has previously been observed in massive models (e.g., GPT3), our
method enables such control for smaller models. This is done
by applying two control knobs, attention biasing and context augmentation, to these models directly during decoding
and without additional training or auxiliary models. These
knobs control the generation process by directly manipulating
trained NLG models (e.g., biasing cross-attention layers). We
show that not only are these NLG models robust to such manipulations, but also their behavior could be controlled without an impact on their generation performance.

Training

Inference

“Controlled
generation is a
difficult task!”

“Did you know controlled
generation could be
done in zero-shot?”

Encoder-Decoder
Transformer

Encoder-Decoder
Transformer

Control
Knobs
(Ask Question)

Input
(No control)

Input
(Zero-shot control)

Figure 1: Zero-Shot Controlled Generation on an EncoderDecoder Transformer at inference time using Control
Knobs. Control knobs influence the generation process such
that the output has the desired attributes (e.g., asking questions).

In general, being able to control an NLG model in a zeroshot fashion would be highly instrumental since such zeroshot control would not require large amounts of attribute
annotated data, nor would it require any control-specific
fine-tuning of the NLG model or auxiliary attribute models to guide the generation (Dathathri et al. 2020; Yang and
Klein 2021). However, zero-shot control of NLG models is
a non-trivial task with multiple challenges. Previous zeroshot works only control lexical constraints, like controlling
token diversity or sentence length using decoding heuristics (Keskar et al. 2019; Vijayakumar et al. 2016; Holtzman et al. 2020), and thus cannot be extended to control a
broader range of attributes. Furthermore, encoder-decoder
transformer NLG (EDT-NLG) models are often used for
grounded (or directed) NLG tasks, like dialog response generation and summarization, requiring the models to be fluent
in their generation and relevant to the conditioning input. As
such, adding requirements for zero-shot control during generation increases the complexity of the task as the model has
to achieve the control without compromising its fluency and
relevance. Given this reduced degree of freedom, balancing
the trade-off between the amount of control and quality of
the generations is extremely difficult, particularly since the
model is trained only for the latter and introduced with the
former only during inference (testing) phase.

Introduction
Natural language generation (NLG) aims at producing fluent
and coherent sentences and phrases in different problem settings such as dialog systems (Huang, Zhu, and Gao 2020),
machine translation (Yang, Wang, and Chu 2020), and text
summarization (Syed, Gaol, and Matsuo 2021). Most recently, the majority of the research in NLG leverages transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) and specifically transformer
decoders to generate natural language (Radford et al. 2019;
Brown et al. 2020; Lewis et al. 2020). Although these statistical approaches to NLG have proven to be highly effective,
their stochastic nature and complex architectures make them
difficult to control in order for them to reflect any set of desired attributes in the output. These attributes could range
from persona, sentiment, empathy, dialog acts for dialog response generation (Niu and Bansal 2018; Zhang et al. 2018;
See et al. 2019; Madotto et al. 2020) to story ending control for story generation (Peng et al. 2018) or formality and
politeness control for drafting emails (Madaan et al. 2020).
* Work done during an internship at Amazon Alexa AI.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10738

