The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning to Solve Travelling Salesman Problem
with Hardness-Adaptive Curriculum
Zeyang Zhang, Ziwei Zhang, Xin Wang* , Wenwu Zhu*
Tsinghua University
zy-zhang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zwzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn
xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

learning to facilitate solving the NP-hard travelling salesman
problem (TSP) in an end-to-end fashion (Vinyals, Fortunato,
and Jaitly 2015; Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2019; Khalil
et al. 2017; Bello et al. 2017; Kwon et al. 2020; Deudon et al.
2018; Ma et al. 2019; Bresson and Laurent 2021). However,
the existing methods independently sample training and testing data from the same distribution, i.e., the i.i.d. setting.
More concretely, most methods directly adopt a uniform
sampling within the unit square to generate TSP instances.
Therefore, though these existing methods show reasonably
good performance in such a setting, it is unclear whether
the solver trained under the existing i.i.d. setting can actually solve the TSP problem by modeling and capturing the
underlying relationships between instances and solutions or
simply memorizing training instances. If the latter, the existing TSP solver will fail to handle when training and testing
TSP have various distributions.
To answer this question, we first conduct some preliminary studies for the existing TSP solvers. Specifically, we
replace the uniform samples in the testing phase with Gaussian mixture samples, which are significantly harder TSP instances whose solutions obtained from a TSP solver have
a larger gap from the optimal solution (for more details,
please refer to Section ). The results are shown in Figure 1.
The figure shows that indeed as we speculate, the existing
TSP solvers fail to generalize to this more challenging setting where training and testing data have different distributions. As the distribution changes, the model performance
degrades several times with respect to all metrics. The results clearly demonstrate that the existing TSP solvers have
serious deficiencies when training and testing data have different distributions, and these instances from different distributions are much more difficult.
To solve this problem, in this paper, we study learningbased TSP methods when training and testing data have different distributions using adaptive-hardness. However, there
exist several challenges.
• Defining a quantitative hardness measurement is nontrivial since obtaining the optimal ground-truth solution
of a TSP instance is NP-hard. Besides, as the TSP solver
learns continuously during training, the hardness measurement must be updated adaptively.
• Even equipped with a hardness measurement, we need a
generative model to generate TSP instances with differ-

Various neural network models have been proposed to
tackle combinatorial optimization problems such as the
travelling salesman problem (TSP). Existing learningbased TSP methods adopt a simple setting that the
training and testing data are independent and identically distributed. However, the existing literature fails
to solve TSP instances when training and testing data
have different distributions. Concretely, we find that
different training and testing distribution will result in
more difficult TSP instances, i.e., the solution obtained
by the model has a large gap from the optimal solution. To tackle this problem, in this work, we study
learning-based TSP methods when training and testing data have different distributions using adaptivehardness, i.e., how difficult a TSP instance can be for
a solver. This problem is challenging because it is nontrivial to (1) define hardness measurement quantitatively; (2) efficiently and continuously generate sufficiently hard TSP instances upon model training; (3)
fully utilize instances with different levels of hardness
to learn a more powerful TSP solver. To solve these
challenges, we first propose a principled hardness measurement to quantify the hardness of TSP instances.
Then, we propose a hardness-adaptive generator to generate instances with different hardness. We further propose a curriculum learner fully utilizing these instances
to train the TSP solver. Experiments show that our
hardness-adaptive generator can generate instances ten
times harder than the existing methods, and our proposed method achieves significant improvement over
state-of-the-art models in terms of the optimality gap.

Introduction
The travelling salesman problem (TSP), as one important
NP-hard problem, serves as a common benchmark for evaluating combinatorial optimization (CO) algorithms that have
many practical real-world applications. As a trade-off between computational costs and solution qualities, a collection of approximate solvers and heuristics have been studied (Punnen, Margot, and Kabadi 2003; Helsgaun 2017). On
the other hand, there is a recent advent of using machine
* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9136

