The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Chaining Value Functions for Off-Policy Learning
Simon Schmitt1,2 , John Shawe-Taylor2 , Hado van Hasselt1
1

2

DeepMind
University College London, UK
suschmitt@google.com

Abstract

imize costly mistakes (Hauskrecht and Fraser 2000) or to
learn from demonstrations (Hester et al. 2018).
However, off-policy learning is non-trivial, because standard reinforcement-learning algorithms can be unstable:
(Baird 1995) showed that off-policy TD predictions can diverge to infinity in what is now known as Baird’s MDP. (Sutton and Barto 2018) attribute this to the popular combination
of function approximation (to support large state spaces) and
bootstrapping (to reduce variance) in the off-policy context
since called the deadly triad. Both are essential and ubiquitous in deep reinforcement learning (van Hasselt et al. 2018)
hence algorithms that are convergent even in the face of the
deadly triad are a prominent research direction.
Over the years, several variants and solutions have been
proposed (Sutton et al. 2009; Maei 2011; van Hasselt, Mahmood, and Sutton 2014; Sutton, Mahmood, and White 2016),
but these do not uniformly outperform off-policy TD (Hackman 2013) and sometimes suffer from high (even infinite)
variance (Sutton, Mahmood, and White 2016).
In this paper we analyze a novel family of off-policy prediction algorithms that is convergent (i.e. breaks the deadly triad)
and conceptually simple. The idea is to first learn on-policy
about the data-generating behaviour, and then bootstrap an
off-policy value estimate on this on-policy estimate, thereby
constructing a value estimate that is partially off-policy. This
process can be repeated to build a chain of value functions,
each time bootstrapping a new estimate on the previous estimate in the chain. Each step in the chain is stable and hence
the complete algorithm is guaranteed to be stable. When
employing off-policy TD at each step in the chain we call
it chained TD learning. While off-policy TD sometimes diverges and is unable to obtain its own solution (fixed point)
we prove that chained TD always converges and that its solution comes arbitrarily close to the off-policy TD solution
under mild conditions when we increase the length of the
chain.
Interestingly our approach can be interpreted as estimating
the value of following the target policy for a finite number
of steps k and then following the behaviour indefinitely. We
call this behaviour a k-step π-expedition (k-step expedition
in short) as the prediction envisions a k-steps limited ‘expedition’ following a potentially novel π before continuing with
the well known behaviour µ. Naturally longer and longer
expeditions (larger k) approach the target policy. Chained

To accumulate knowledge and improve its policy of behaviour,
a reinforcement learning agent can learn ‘off-policy’ about
policies that differ from the policy used to generate its experience. This is important to learn counterfactuals, or because
the experience was generated out of its own control. However,
off-policy learning is non-trivial, and standard reinforcementlearning algorithms can be unstable and divergent.
In this paper we discuss a novel family of off-policy prediction
algorithms which are convergent by construction. The idea is
to first learn on-policy about the data-generating behaviour,
and then bootstrap an off-policy value estimate on this onpolicy estimate, thereby constructing a value estimate that
is partially off-policy. This process can be repeated to build
a chain of value functions, each time bootstrapping a new
estimate on the previous estimate in the chain. Each step in the
chain is stable and hence the complete algorithm is guaranteed
to be stable. Under mild conditions this comes arbitrarily close
to the off-policy TD solution when we increase the length of
the chain. Hence it can compute the solution even in cases
where off-policy TD diverges.
We prove that the proposed scheme is convergent and corresponds to an iterative decomposition of the inverse key matrix.
Furthermore it can be interpreted as estimating a novel objective – that we call a ‘k-step expedition’ – of following the
target policy for finitely many steps before continuing indefinitely with the behaviour policy. Empirically we evaluate the
idea on challenging MDPs such as Baird’s counter example
and observe favourable results.

1

Introduction

Value estimation is key to decision making and reinforcement
learning (Sutton and Barto 2018). To accumulate knowledge
and improve its policy of behaviour, an agent can estimate
values off-policy corresponding to policies that differ from
the policy used to generate the experience it learns from.
This can be useful to learn counterfactuals, or because the
experience was generated out of its own control. Indeed the
applications of off-policy learning are manifold: learning to
exploit while exploring as e.g. in ϵ-greedy, learning multiple
policies concurrently (Sutton et al. 2011; Badia et al. 2020),
for representation shaping (Jaderberg et al. 2017), to minCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8187

