The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SAIL: Self-Augmented Graph Contrastive Learning
Lu Yu2,1 , Shichao Pei1 , Lizhong Ding5 , Jun Zhou2 , Longfei Li2 ,
Chuxu Zhang4∗ , Xiangliang Zhang3,1 *
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
3
University of Notre Dame, USA
4
Brandeis University, USA
5
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
bruceyu.yl@alibaba-inc.com, shichao,pei@kaust.edu.sa, lizhong.ding@inceptioniai.org,
{jun.zhoujun,longyao.llf}@antgroup.com,chuxuzhang@brandeis.edu,xzhang33@nd.edu
Abstract

supervising signals of this method are designed to extract
local structure dependency but discard the contribution of
node feature smoothness which has been utilized to improve
expressive capability of GNNs (Kipf and Welling 2017; Wu
et al. 2019). Another line pays attention to maximizing the
mutual information (MI) criterion to make agreement on
multi-view graph representations (Hassani and Khasahmadi
2020; You et al. 2020a), in which each view of augmented
graph is generated by operations on nodes, attributes, etc.
However, most of them aim at making agreement on the
graph-level representations (You et al. 2020a; Sun et al.
2019), which might be not suitable for node-level tasks.
Instead of creating multiple views through graph augmentation (Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020) methods, there are
recent works building upon self-augmented views created
by the intermedian hidden layers of GNN. As a pioneering
work, deep graph infomax (DGI) (Veličković et al. 2019)
proposes to maximize MI between the summarized graph
and node embeddings. However, the summarized graph embedding contains the global context that might not be shared
by all nodes. Inspired by DGI, graphical mutual information
(GMI) (Peng et al. 2020) turns to maximize the edge MI
between the created views of two adjacent nodes. As GMI
focuses on the edge MI maximization task, it lacks a bird’s
eye on the learned node representations. The learned GNN
might bias towards performing well on edge prediction task,
but downgrades on the other tasks like node clustering or
classification. Recently some works (Mandal et al. 2021) attempt to bring the idea of meta-learning to train GNNs with
meta knowledge which can help to avoid the bias caused
by single pretext task. However, the meta-GNN might contain knowledge that cause task discrepancy issue (Tian et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020).
With the knowledge of the previous work, we just wonder
can we advance the expressivity of GNNs with the knowledge extracted by themselves in an unsupervised way? In
order to answer this question, we theoretically dissect the
graph convolution operations (shown in Theorem 1), and
find that the smoothness of node representations generated
by GNNs is dominated by smoothness of neighborhood embeddings from previous layers and the structural similarity. It suggests that improving the graph representations of
shallow layer can indirectly help get better node embed-

This paper studies learning node representations with graph
neural networks (GNNs) for unsupervised scenario. Specifically, we derive a theoretical analysis and provide an empirical demonstration about the non-steady performance of
GNNs over different graph datasets, when the supervision
signals are not appropriately defined. The performance of
GNNs depends on both the node feature smoothness and the
locality of graph structure. To smooth the discrepancy of node
proximity measured by graph topology and node feature, we
proposed SAIL - a novel Self-Augmented graph contrastive
Learning framework, with two complementary self-distilling
regularization modules, i.e., intra- and inter-graph knowledge
distillation. We demonstrate the competitive performance of
SAIL on a variety of graph applications. Even with a single
GNN layer, SAIL has consistently competitive or even better
performance on various benchmark datasets, comparing with
state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been a leading effective framework of learning graph representations. The key of
GNNs roots at the repeated aggregation over local neighbors
to obtain smoothing node representations by filtering out
noise existing in the raw node features. With the enormous
architectures proposed (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Veličković et al. 2018), learning GNN models to maintain local smoothness usually depends on supervised signals (e.g., node labels or graph labels). However, labeled information is not always available
in many scenarios. Along with the raising attention on selfsupervised learning (Veličković et al. 2019; Hassani and
Khasahmadi 2020), pre-training GNNs without labels has
become an alternative way to learn GNN models.
There are a group of unsupervised node representation
learning models in the spirit of self-supervised learning. As
one of the most representatives, predicting contextual neighbors (e.g., DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014)
or node2vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016)) enforces the locally connected nodes to have similar representations. Self* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8927

