The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

VITA: A Multi-Source Vicinal Transfer Augmentation Method for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Minghui Chen1 , Cheng Wen2 , Feng Zheng1 * , Fengxiang He3 , Ling Shao4
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Sydney
3
JD Explore Academy, JD.com Inc
4
National Center for Artificial Intelligence, Saudi Data and Artificial Intelligence Authority, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
ming hui.chen@outlook.com, cwen6671@uni.sydney.edu.au, f.zheng@ieee.org, hefengxiang@jd.com, ling.shao@ieee.org
Abstract

2019) based on human expertise brings limited benefit to
corruption robustness. This is due to the fact that these
two methods of augmentation fail to provide sufficiently diverse vicinal samples. While advanced methods based on
generative models (Geirhos et al. 2019; Rusak et al. 2020;
Hendrycks et al. 2020a) and combination strategies (Cubuk
et al. 2019; Hendrycks et al. 2020b) are capable of producing
diverse samples, they frequently generate samples that deviate severely from the data manifold. These samples impair
the classifier’s ability to estimate the underlying data manifold accurately, resulting in performance degradation and
bias towards specific corruptions.
To mitigate this defect in data augmentation, we propose
a multi-source vicinal transfer augmentation (VITA) method
for generating diverse on-manifold samples. The proposed
VITA is composed of two components: tangent transfer and
integration of multi-source vicinal samples. First, we leverage vicinal differences to approximate the manifold tangents to acquire initial augmented samples. Subsequent experiments show that these weakly augmented samples effectively improve corruption robustness. Second, we use a
generative model to characterize the underlying data manifold constructed by weakly augmented samples (e.g., samples rotated by 5 degrees) and adversarial examples. This is
to ensure that a diverse set of samples is generated while
avoiding significant deviance from the data manifold (Bengio et al. 2013). Detailed experiments confirm that our VITA
can significantly improve corruption robustness and encourage a balanced performance on corrupted datasets.
In summary, our key contributions are as follows:

Invariance to diverse types of image corruption, such as noise,
blurring, or colour shifts, is essential to establish robust models in computer vision. Data augmentation has been the major approach in improving the robustness against common
corruptions. However, the samples produced by popular augmentation strategies deviate significantly from the underlying data manifold. As a result, performance is skewed toward
certain types of corruption. To address this issue, we propose
a multi-source vicinal transfer augmentation (VITA) method
for generating diverse on-manifold samples. The proposed
VITA consists of two complementary parts: tangent transfer and integration of multi-source vicinal samples. The tangent transfer creates initial augmented samples for improving
corruption robustness. The integration employs a generative
model to characterize the underlying manifold built by vicinal samples, facilitating the generation of on-manifold samples. Our proposed VITA significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art augmentation methods, demonstrated in
extensive experiments on corruption benchmarks.

Introduction
Existing computer vision systems are not as robust as human vision systems (Recht et al. 2018; Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). A human vision system would not confused
by a wide range of naturally occurring corruptions, including noise, blurring, and pixelation, as well as some unexpected combinations of them. However, existing deep models (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Xie et al.
2017) trained on clean images usually perform substantially
worse, confronted with corrupted images (Geirhos et al.
2018; Hendrycks and Dietterich 2019). Achieving corruption robustness is a primary objective of a variety of computer vision tasks.
The most effective and commonly used method for improving corruption robustness is data augmentation, in
which training samples undergo label-preserving transformations (Dao et al. 2019), formalized by the vicinal risk
minimization (VRM) principle (Chapelle et al. 2000). Employing adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018) or transformation strategies (Devries and Taylor 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Yun et al.

• To address the uneven performance toward various corrupted images, we propose a multi-source vicinal transfer
augmentation (VITA) method for generating diverse onmanifold samples.
• We introduce tangent transfer that enforces the local invariance of the classifier, which facilitates the discovery
of shared structures in the tangent planes.
• We design an integration module of multi-source vicinal samples that constructs a proper data manifold and is
shown to effectively generate on-manifold samples.
• Our proposed VITA achieves state-of-the-art performances on corruption benchmark datasets CIFAR-10-C,
CIFAR-100-C, and ImageNet-C. Meanwhile, we demon-

* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

321

