The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Competing for Resources: Estimating Adversary Strategy for Effective Plan
Generation
Lukáš Chrpa, Pavel Rytı́ř, Rostislav Horčı́k, Stefan Edelkamp
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{lukas.chrpa, pavel.rytir, rostislav.horcik, stefan.edelkamp}@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract

2018). MCTS and DRL approaches work “online”: they select the most promising action (or move) in the current state
of the environment and they continue to do so until the terminal state is reached.
From the planning side, Speicher et al. (2018) used the
game-theoretic framework of Stackelberg games for generating robust plans against actions of the adversary. In a similar spirit, Plan Interdiction Games have been proposed to
describe the problem of attackers and defenders, where the
former plans to intrude a computer network, while the latter
tries to prohibit attackers’ actions (Letchford and Vorobeychik 2013; Vorobeychik and Pritchard 2020). A recent work
about “Counterplanning” goes in a similar direction as one
agent tries to invalidate landmarks required by the opposite agent (Pozanco et al. 2018). Planning-based techniques
work offline, i.e., they generate plans upfront, which are then
executed (as they are).
In this paper, we define a class of Resource Competition problems in which two agents compete for limited resources. Such problems involve, for example, competing for
limited resources in strategy games, or on-demand transport companies competing for passengers requiring transporting from one place to another. We also assume that each
agent has to generate its plan upfront and the plan cannot
be amended after the agent starts executing it because, for
instance, there is a lack of reliable communication between
the units (e.g. UAVs) the agent controls. Although Resource
Competition problems can be addressed by MCTS (Lelis
2020) or DRL (Silver et al. 2018), these techniques do not
seem to be feasible for our assumption.
To generate mixed strategies (composed from plans) in
Nash Equilibrium, we can leverage the Double Oracle algorithm (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003), which can
take tens of iterations until it converges (and none of the
player can improve its strategy) even for smaller tasks (Rytı́ř,
Chrpa, and Bošanský 2019). It involves cost-optimally solving n planning tasks in each iteration (n is the number of
players), which is computationally expensive. This paper
tackles the issue by proposing a heuristic method for estimating a mixed strategy of the other (adversarial) agent.
Leveraging a heuristic for estimating earliest action application time, developed by Chrpa, Rytı́ř, and Horčı́k (2020),
we propose a “sampling” method which provides potential application times of actions of the adversary that inter-

Effective decision making while competing for limited resources in adversarial environments is important for many
real-world applications (e.g. two Taxi companies competing
for customers). Decision-making techniques such as Automated planning have to take into account possible actions of
adversary (or competing) agents. That said, the agent should
know what the competitor will likely do and then generate its
plan accordingly.
In this paper we propose a novel approach for estimating
strategies of the adversary (or the competitor), sampling its
actions that might hinder agent’s goals by interfering with the
agent’s actions. The estimated competitor strategies are used
in plan generation such that agent’s actions have to be applied
prior to the ones of the competitor, whose estimated times
dictate the deadlines. We empirically evaluate our approach
leveraging sampling of competitor’s actions by comparing it
to the naive approach optimising the make-span (not taking
the competing agent into account at all) and to Nash Equilibrium (mixed) strategies.

Introduction
Planning in static environments accounts for generating
plans that are optimised, for instance, for their length,
makespan or action cost. However, in environments, where
an adversarial (or competing) agent is present, such a naive
approach is rarely effective.
The concept of planning in adversarial environment is
not new (Applegate, Elsaesser, and Sanborn 1990). Succinct
symbolic representations of state sets helped generating optimistic and strong cyclic adversarial plans (Jensen, Veloso,
and Bowling 2001; Kissmann and Edelkamp 2009), a setting conceptually related to FOND planning (Cimatti et al.
2003). Such a setting, however, has to explore most if not
all alternatives (in analogy to traditional game-tree methods
such as minimax). Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and
Online Evolutionary Planning have been applied in adversarial environments such as the Hero Academy game (Justesen et al. 2018), or Starcraft (Justesen and Risi 2017). Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has shown impressive results in Starcraft (Vinyals et al. 2019) and other (adversarial) domains such as the games of Chess or Go (Silver et al.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9707

