The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Understanding Enthymemes in Deductive Argumentation
Using Semantic Distance Measures
Anthony Hunter
Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, UK
anthony.hunter@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

are demanding assumptions. It is difficult to acquire commonsense knowledge, and in particular, there are often gaps
in the explicit knowledge that connects concepts. Relationships between concepts are often known but they are implicit. For instance, different symbols for the same concept are used (e.g. dad and father) or for similar concepts
(showery and rainy), though sometimes such correspondences are context dependent (e.g. in the context of a church,
dad and father often refer to different concepts).
To address this need for a scalable and robust way of connecting concepts, we propose in this paper a solution based
on distance measures between semantic concepts. We assume that each semantic concept is represented by a word,
and so in propositional logic, each propositional atom is
a word (or compound word), and in predicate logic, each
predicate, function, and constant, symbol is a word (or compound word). So with a distance measure, we want the distance between dad and father to be low, and between dad
and grass to be high. Fortunately, there are now some robust and scalable options for distance measures that we can
use (as itemized below). None of these will be totally correct, but the error rate could be tolerable, and the benefits of
using them far outweighing this.
Word embeddings Recent developments in deep learning
allow learning of meanings of words in the form of word
embeddings (e.g. Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) and
GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014)) where
the meaning of an individual word is represented by a
vector. Each entry in the vector represents an aspect of
the meaning of the word, though normally not in human
meaningful terms. Rather it reflects co-occurrence information from the training data. Words can be compared by
the cosine similarity of their vector representation (which
is a distance measure), and so the smaller the value, the
more similar the words are (according to the training
data). Some word-embedding models are pre-trained on
a large corpora of text, and have been shown to have good
performance in recognizing similar concepts.
Semantic networks Whilst semantic networks have been
considered in AI for decades, there has been a resurgence of interest in them (e.g. knowledge graphs (Paulheim 2017)) through the use of machine learning to construct them (e.g. the use of distantly supervised learning
(Mintz et al. 2009)). A semantic network is a directed

An argument can be regarded as some premises and a claim
following from those premises. Normally, arguments exchanged by human agents are enthymemes, which generally means that some premises are implicit. So when an enthymeme is presented, the presenter expects that the recipient
can identify the missing premises. An important kind of implicitness arises when a presenter assumes that two symbols
denote the same, or nearly the same, concept (e.g. dad and
father), and uses the symbols interchangeably. To model
this process, we propose the use of semantic distance measures (e.g. based on a vector representation of word embeddings or a semantic network representation of words) to determine whether one symbol can be substituted by another. We
present a theoretical framework for using substitutions, together with abduction of default knowledge, for understanding enthymemes based on deductive argumentation, and investigate how this could be used in practice.

Introduction
There are a number of frameworks for modelling argumentation in logic. They incorporate a formal representation of
individual arguments, where the premises imply the claim,
and techniques for comparing conflicting arguments (Atkinson et al. 2017). However, real arguments (i.e. arguments
presented by humans) usually do not have enough explicitly
presented premises for the entailment of the claim. This is
because there is some common or commonsense knowledge
that can be assumed by a proponent of an argument and the
recipient of it (Walton 2001). This allows the proponent of
an argument to encode it as an enthymeme by ignoring some
of the common or commonsense knowledge, and it allows a
recipient of the enthymeme to decode it into an argument by
drawing on commonsense reasoning.
Whilst human agents constantly need to understand enthymemes, there is a lack of adequate AI methods for supporting or automating this process, The coding/decoding can
be modelled as abduction (Hunter 2007; Black and Hunter
2012; Hosseini, Modgil, and Rodrigues 2014). However,
these proposals assume an extensive set of common or commonsense knowledge with a preference ordering over the appropriateness of any formula for a specific audience. These
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5729

