The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Pretraining for RGB-D Salient Object Detection
Xiaoqi Zhao1 , Youwei Pang1 , Lihe Zhang1 * , Huchuan Lu1,2 , Xiang Ruan3
1

Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Tiwaki Co.,Ltd., Japan
{zxq,lartpang}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zhanglihe,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, ruanxiang@tiwaki.com

Abstract

Pang et al. 2020a) can achieve satisfactory performance.
They all are required to be pretrained on the ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009) to learn rich and high-performance visual representations for downstream tasks. However, the ImageNet
contains about 1.3 million labeled images covering 1,000
classes while each image is labeled by human workers
with one class label. Such expensive labor costs are immeasurable. Recently, Doersch et al. (Doersch, Gupta, and
Efros 2015), Wang and Gupta (Wang and Gupta 2015) and
Agrawal et al. (Agrawal, Carreira, and Malik 2015) have
explored a novel paradigm for unsupervised learning called
self-supervised learning (SSL). The main idea is to exploit
different labeling that is freely available besides or within
visual data and to use them as intrinsic reward signals to
learn general-purpose features. In the learning process, the
context has proven to be a powerful source of automatic
supervisory signal for learning representations (Ando and
Zhang 2005; Okanohara and Tsujii 2007; Collobert and Weston 2008; Mikolov et al. 2013). The SSL needs to design
a “pretext” task to learn rich context and then utilizes the
pretrained model for some other “downstream” tasks, such
as classification, detection, and semantic segmentation. In
addition, for the RGB-D SOD task, how to fully integrate
the features of two modalities is still an open problem of
great concern, just like the cross-level feature fusion. How
to better design a general module suitable for feature pairs
with multiple complementary relationships is a currently neglected issue.

Existing CNNs-Based RGB-D salient object detection (SOD)
networks are all required to be pretrained on the ImageNet to
learn the hierarchy features which helps provide a good initialization. However, the collection and annotation of largescale datasets are time-consuming and expensive. In this paper, we utilize self-supervised representation learning (SSL)
to design two pretext tasks: the cross-modal auto-encoder and
the depth-contour estimation. Our pretext tasks require only
a few and unlabeled RGB-D datasets to perform pretraining, which makes the network capture rich semantic contexts and reduce the gap between two modalities, thereby
providing an effective initialization for the downstream task.
In addition, for the inherent problem of cross-modal fusion
in RGB-D SOD, we propose a consistency-difference aggregation (CDA) module that splits a single feature fusion
into multi-path fusion to achieve an adequate perception of
consistent and differential information. The CDA module
is general and suitable for cross-modal and cross-level feature fusion. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets
show that our self-supervised pretrained model performs favorably against most state-of-the-art methods pretrained on
ImageNet. The source code will be publicly available at
https://github.com/Xiaoqi-Zhao-DLUT/SSLSOD.

Introduction
RGB-D salient object detection (SOD) task aims to utilize
the depth map, which contains stable geometric structures
and extra contrast cues, to provide important supplemental information for handling complex environments such as
low-contrast salient objects that share similar appearances
to the background. Benefiting from Microsoft Kinect, Intel RealSense, and some modern smartphones (e.g., Huawei
Mate30, iPhone X, and Samsung Galaxy S20), depth information can be conveniently obtained.
With the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), many CNNs-Based SOD methods (Zhang
et al. 2019, 2020b; Li et al. 2021b; Liu, Zhang, and Han
2020; Fan et al. 2020b; Li et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020a,
2021b; Sun et al. 2021; Zhao, Zhang, and Lu 2021; Zhao
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021a; Zhao et al. 2020a; Pang et al.
2020b; Ji et al. 2021b; Li et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021a;

Two-stream RGB-D SOD networks (Piao et al. 2019; Liu,
Zhang, and Han 2020; Fu et al. 2020; Pang et al. 2020a; Jin
et al. 2021; Ji et al. 2020) usually load ImageNet-pretrained
weights. Their encoders for RGB and depth streams have
the same pretraining task, i.e., image classification. Their
decoders also have the same task of saliency prediction.
This kind of task homogeneousness in both encoder and decoder can greatly reduce the inter-modal gap between the
two streams. We know that image classification network often activates the corresponding semantic region in feature
maps (e.g., Class Activation Map), while the depth map possibly highlights salient regions. Inspired by this, we firstly
design a pretext task of depth estimation, which can promote the RGB encoder to capture localization, boundary and
shape information of objects by comparing relative spatial
positions at the pixel level. Moreover, the depth map plays

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3463

