The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Recurrent Neural Network with Multi-Scale Bi-directional Propagation for
Video Deblurring
Chao Zhu1 * , Hang Dong2 * † , Jinshan Pan3 , Boyang Liang1 , Yuhao Huang1 , Lean Fu2 , Fei Wang1
1

Xian Jiaotong University
ByteDance Intelligent Creation Lab
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
zhu chao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

The goal of video deblurring algorithm is to recover a
sharp video from a blurry one, which is highly ill-posed.
Lots of traditional methods (Bar et al. 2007; Kim and Lee
2014, 2015; Wulff and Black 2014) usually impose kinds of
hand-crafted priors on both blur kernels and latent frames
and alternatively estimate the blur kernels and latent frames.
However, these methods highly rely on the accuracy of kernel estimation which leads to unstable deblurring performance. Instead of using hand-crafted priors and alternative
solutions, the deep convolutional neural network (CNN),
provides an effective way to directly estimate the clear
videos from blurry ones (Zhang et al. 2018a; Zhou et al.
2019b; Gast and Roth 2019; Kim et al. 2018; Nah, Son, and
Lee 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Pan, Bai, and Tang 2020; Kim
et al. 2017; Zhong et al. 2020; Suin and Rajagopalan 2021).
We note that when restoring the clear frames, most traditional methods (Dai and Wu 2008; Kim and Lee 2014, 2015)
and the CNN-based ones (Kim et al. 2018, 2017; Wang et al.
2019; Pan, Bai, and Tang 2020) usually involve the alignment estimations by optical flow, deformable convolution,
or alignment filters and so on. For example, EDVR (Wang
et al. 2019) and CDVD-TSP (Pan, Bai, and Tang 2020) use
multi-scale deformable convolution and optical flow estimation to align inter-frame information respectively. Intuitively, these video deblurring algorithms should outperform
the image deblurring algorithms by taking advantages of
both intra-frame (spatial) and inter-frame (temporal) information from the adjacent frames. However, it is not trivial
to estimate the alignment from blurry videos and most existing methods may fail due to the presence of motion blur
and occlusion (Xue et al. 2019). The inaccurate estimations
of the alignment will affect the deblurred results. Therefore,
on some popular public video deblurring dataset (e.g. GOPRO (Nah, Kim, and Lee 2017)), most existing video deblurring methods do not perform well while top three methods
(HINet (Chen et al. 2021), MIMO-UNet (Cho et al. 2021),
and MPRNet (Zamir et al. 2021)) on GOPRO dataset are all
image deblurring algorithms.

The success of the state-of-the-art video deblurring methods
stems mainly from implicit or explicit estimation of alignment among the adjacent frames for latent video restoration. However, due to the influence of the blur effect, estimating the alignment information from the blurry adjacent
frames is not a trivial task. Inaccurate estimations will interfere the following frame restoration. Instead of estimating alignment information, we propose a simple and effective deep Recurrent Neural Network with Multi-scale Bidirectional Propagation (RNN-MBP) to effectively propagate and gather the information from unaligned neighboring
frames for better video deblurring. Specifically, we build a
Multi-scale Bi-directional Propagation (MBP) module with
two U-Net RNN cells which can directly exploit the interframe information from unaligned neighboring hidden states
by integrating them in different scales. Moreover, to better
evaluate the proposed algorithm and existing state-of-the-art
methods on real-world blurry scenes, we also create a RealWorld Blurry Video Dataset (RBVD) by a well-designed Digital Video Acquisition System (DVAS) and use it as the training and evaluation dataset. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed RBVD dataset effectively improves the performance of existing algorithms on real-world
blurry videos, and the proposed algorithm performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art methods on three typical benchmarks. The code is available at https://github.com/XJTUCVLAB-LOWLEVEL/RNN-MBP.

Introduction
With the rapid development of smart-phone, live-streaming
businesses and cloud computing services, videos become
one of the most popular communication mediums in our
daily life, plenty of people enjoy using hand-held devices
to record their moments and share online. However, the
captured videos often suffer from motion blur effect which
is usually caused by camera shaking and object moving.
Therefore, how to remove the motion blur in the videos becomes an urgent issue in both the academic and industrial
communities.

Figure 1 shows the intermediate and deblurred results of
two video deblurring methods with explicit alignment using
a video with significant blur from the GOPRO dataset. We
feed the blurry frames and corresponding sharp frames to the
flow-based method CDVD-TSP (Pan, Bai, and Tang 2020)
and deformable-based method EDVR (Wang et al. 2019),

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3598

