The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

LeSICiN: A Heterogeneous Graph-Based Approach for Automatic
Legal Statute Identification from Indian Legal Documents
Shounak Paul, Pawan Goyal, Saptarshi Ghosh
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
shounakpaul95@kgpian.iitkgp.ac.in, pawang@cse.iitkgp.ac.in, saptarshi@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

Abstract

Historically maintained court case data have been popularly used to create datasets to train the LSI models (Chalkidis, Androutsopoulos, and Aletras 2019; Xiao
et al. 2018). However, almost all existing methods for this
task rely only on the text of the facts (and statutes) to perform the classification task. The existing methods do not
utilize the legal statute citation network between court case
documents and statutes, that has been shown to be a rich
source of legal knowledge that is useful for tasks such as
estimating legal document similarity (Bhattacharya et al.
2020). However, there has not been any attempt to utilize
the legal citation network for the LSI task.
Graph formulation of LSI: This work is the first attempt
towards LSI by utilizing both the textual content of statutes/facts and a heterogeneous statute citation network. In this
network, statutes and document are nodes of different types,
and citation links exist between these nodes iff a particular section is cited by a particular document. Additionally,
statute nodes may also be connected via defined hierarchies
specified in the written law itself. Given such a network, the
task of LSI boils down to predicting the existence of links
between statute-nodes and newly entering document-nodes.
However, most existing supervised network-based training methods for link prediction do not work well for out-ofsample nodes, or nodes that the model has not seen during
training. Indeed, in our case, we can only provide the document nodes and their citation links during training time.
While testing, every document-node is previously unseen to
the model, and the model must predict whether links exist
between a new document-node and the statute nodes. Thus,
approaches that seek to learn effective node representations
for link prediction will fail during test time in our setting.
Rather, one has to capitalize on the fact that two kinds of information are available at all times — the texts corresponding to each statute/document, and the statute nodes themselves (and hierarchical links between them).
We, therefore, formulate the LSI problem as an inductive
link prediction task (Hao et al. 2020) on the heterogeneous
citation network, between the previously seen Section nodes
and a new, unknown fact node. We use a hybrid learning
mechanism to learn two kinds of representations for each
node – attribute (generated from text) and structural (generated from network). By forcing the model to learn attribute
representations that closely match structural representations

The task of Legal Statute Identification (LSI) aims to identify
the legal statutes that are relevant to a given description of
facts or evidence of a legal case. Existing methods only utilize the textual content of facts and legal articles to guide such
a task. However, the citation network among case documents
and legal statutes is a rich source of additional information,
which is not considered by existing models. In this work, we
take the first step towards utilising both the text and the legal citation network for the LSI task. We curate a large novel
dataset for this task, including facts of cases from several major Indian Courts of Law, and statutes from the Indian Penal
Code (IPC). Modeling the statutes and training documents
as a heterogeneous graph, our proposed model LeSICiN can
learn rich textual and graphical features, and can also tune
itself to correlate these features. Thereafter, the model can
be used to inductively predict links between test documents
(new nodes whose graphical features are not available to the
model) and statutes (existing nodes). Extensive experiments
on the dataset show that our model comfortably outperforms
several state-of-the-art baselines, by exploiting the graphical
structure along with textual features.

Introduction
The task of Legal Statute Identification (LSI) is important in
the judicial field, and involves identifying the possible set of
statutory laws that are relevant, or might have been violated,
given the natural language description of the facts of a situation. This task needs to be performed at different stages
of litigation by different experts, including police personnel, lawyers and judges. An automated system for LSI can
greatly promote access to Law by the common masses.
Existing LSI methods and their limitations: Early methods for LSI modeled the task using statistical or simple machine learning methods (Kort 1957; Lauderdale and Clark
2012). Recently, several neural architectures have modeled
the problem as a text classification task, attempting to extract increasingly richer features from the text (Luo et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018, 2019; Xu et al. 2020). Some of these
methods simplify the task by trying to identify only the most
relevant statute, no longer retaining its multi-label nature.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11139

