The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Implicit Gradient Alignment in Distributed and Federated Learning
Yatin Dandi* 1 2 , Luis Barba* 2 , Martin Jaggi 2
1

IIT Kanpur, India
EPFL, Switzerland
yatind@iitk.ac.in, luis.barbaflores@epfl.ch, martin.jaggi@epfl.ch
2

Abstract

whose minimization leads to the alignment of different gradients. As demonstrated recently by Smith et al. (2021),
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro 1951)
already contains an implicit regularization effect over gradient descent (GD) corresponding to the minimization of r(x),
when comparing updates over an entire epoch. Our analysis
applicable to arbitrary sequences of SGD steps further reveals that the optimization trajectory followed by SGD can
be approximated through gradient descent on the surrogate
function fˆ(x) := f (x) + λr(x) with the strength of the regularization being controlled by the step size. This motivates
us to devise new algorithms tailored to implicitly minimize
this surrogate function fˆ(x).
While control variates-based variance reduction techniques
can effectively reduce the variance across different updates
(Johnson and Zhang 2013), they do not directly promote
variance reduction through the alignment of different fi ’s
gradients for the current iterate, i.e., such methods do not
encourage the decrease of r(x) throughout training. A small
variance of gradients across mini-batches, i.e., small r(x),
corresponds to the alignment of gradients for different data
points. Such alignment can benefit generalization throughout training, since large gradient alignment across datapoints
implies that gradient updates on fi corresponding to empirical risk on a subset of the data may reduce the loss for a
much larger number of data points, even outside the training
set. A similar observation was recently utilized to improve
transfer in error reduction across datapoints in meta-learning
(Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman 2018). The gradient alignment in SGD arises due to its sequential nature and the use
of small mini-batches, which together induce dependencies
between successive updates contributing to the implicit minimization of r(x). These effects, however, decrease as the
mini-batch size is increased, since the variance across minibatches diminishes. This imposes a trade-off between using
large mini-batches per update and obtaining gradient alignment and hence better generalization. A similar trade-off has
been observed empirically (Keskar et al. 2017; Ma, Bassily, and Belkin 2018; Yin et al. 2018), where using larger
mini-batches has been shown to worsen the generalization
performance.
We argue that the utilization of gradient alignment to
improve generalization can be especially beneficial in distributed and federated learning. In datacenter distributed

A major obstacle to achieving global convergence in distributed and federated learning is the misalignment of gradients across clients, or mini-batches due to heterogeneity and
stochasticity of the distributed data. In this work, we show that
data heterogeneity can in fact be exploited to improve generalization performance through implicit regularization. One way
to alleviate the effects of heterogeneity is to encourage the
alignment of gradients across different clients throughout training. Our analysis reveals that this goal can be accomplished
by utilizing the right optimization method that replicates the
implicit regularization effect of SGD, leading to gradient alignment as well as improvements in test accuracies. Since the
existence of this regularization in SGD completely relies on
the sequential use of different mini-batches during training,
it is inherently absent when training with large mini-batches.
To obtain the generalization benefits of this regularization
while increasing parallelism, we propose a novel GradAlign
algorithm that induces the same implicit regularization while
allowing the use of arbitrarily large batches in each update.
We experimentally validate the benefits of our algorithm in
different distributed and federated learning settings.

Introduction
In this paper we focus
Pn on sum structured optimization of the
form f (x) := n1 i=1 fi (x), where each fi is a different
function representing the loss function of either distinct data
points, mini-batches or clients. To prove convergence, many
assumptions over the fi ’s have been studied. For example,
one may assume fixed bounds on the variance or dissimilarity of gradients across different fi . However, in practice,
for non-convex optimization problems such as deep neural
networks, the dissimilarity across gradients is likely to vary
across different values of x. We instead argue that to obtain
optimal generalization performance, it is desirable to not only
converge to a solution that minimizes the mean loss f (x), but
also encourage convergence to regions with reduced gradient
dissimilarity.
We propose to achieve convergence to such solutions by
aligning the gradients across different
Pn fi . To this end, we in1
2
troduce a regularizer r(x) = 2n
i=1 k∇fi (x) − ∇f (x)k
measuring the variance of gradients across the mini-batches,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6454

