The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

When Facial Expression Recognition Meets Few-Shot Learning: A Joint and
Alternate Learning Framework
Xinyi Zou1 , Yan Yan1 * , Jing-Hao Xue2 , Si Chen3 , Hanzi Wang1
1 Xiamen University, China
2 University College London, UK
3 Xiamen University of Technology, China

{yanyan, hanzi.wang}@xmu.edu.cn, zouxinyi0625@gmail.com,
jinghao.xue@ucl.ac.uk, chensi@xmut.edu.cn
Abstract

datasets (Lucey et al. 2010; Li, Deng, and Du 2017; Zhao
et al. 2011) have been collected, and impressive progress
(Li et al. 2018; Ruan et al. 2020; Zhao, Liu, and Zhou 2021)
has been made to address large facial appearance variations
caused by identity, pose, occlusion, illumination, and so on.
In this paper, we refer to the above conventional FER task as
the basic FER task.
Regrettably, these basic expressions cannot completely
characterize the diversity of human emotions in nature. Du
et al. (Du, Tao, and Martinez 2014) reveal that human emotions involve compound expressions, beyond the above basic expressions. They enlarge the number of expressions to
22 by combining basic expressions. Later, the EmotioNet
dataset (Fabian Benitez-Quiroz, Srinivasan, and Martinez
2016) is constructed with large-scale compound expression
data. To classify the above compound expressions, conventional deep learning based methods (Slimani et al. 2019;
Guo et al. 2017) usually rely heavily on a large amount of
labeled compound expression training data. However, collecting such data is laborious and often demands the professional instruction of psychology.
As humans, given only a few reference images (a support
set), we can easily recognize an unseen expression (a query)
based on the prior knowledge of various seen expressions.
Recent research on few-shot learning (FSL) exhibits the potential of quickly generalizing to novel classes with only a
few labeled data of these classes, thereby reducing the gap
between humans and artificial intelligence (Lu et al. 2020).
In this paper, we investigate compound FER in the crossdomain FSL (CD-FSL) paradigm, which greatly alleviates
the burden of collecting large-scale labeled compound expression data. Notably, instead of manually splitting a compound expression dataset into a base class set and a novel
class set, we explore a more challenging but practical setup,
which aims to classify compound expressions from the unseen domain by using the model trained only on easily accessible basic expression datasets.
Traditional FSL methods have achieved promising performance in many computer vision tasks, such as image classification (Li et al. 2019; Yao et al. 2020) and object detection
(Dong et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2020). However, few work
is concerned with the compound FER task in the CD-FSL
setting. Different from widely used FSL benchmarks (e.g.,
miniImageNet (Vinyals et al. 2016) and Ominiglot (Lake,

Human emotions involve basic and compound facial expressions. However, current research on facial expression recognition (FER) mainly focuses on basic expressions, and thus
fails to address the diversity of human emotions in practical
scenarios. Meanwhile, existing work on compound FER relies heavily on abundant labeled compound expression training data, which are often laboriously collected under the professional instruction of psychology. In this paper, we study
compound FER in the cross-domain few-shot learning setting, where only a few images of novel classes from the target
domain are required as a reference. In particular, we aim to
identify unseen compound expressions with the model trained
on easily accessible basic expression datasets. To alleviate the
problem of limited base classes in our FER task, we propose a
novel Emotion Guided Similarity Network (EGS-Net), consisting of an emotion branch and a similarity branch, based
on a two-stage learning framework. Specifically, in the first
stage, the similarity branch is jointly trained with the emotion branch in a multi-task fashion. With the regularization
of the emotion branch, we prevent the similarity branch from
overfitting to sampled base classes that are highly overlapped
across different episodes. In the second stage, the emotion
branch and the similarity branch play a “two-student game” to
alternately learn from each other, thereby further improving
the inference ability of the similarity branch on unseen compound expressions. Experimental results on both in-the-lab
and in-the-wild compound expression datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our proposed method against several stateof-the-art methods.

Introduction
Over the past few decades, facial expression recognition
(FER) has attracted considerable attention because of its
wide range of applications in human-robot interaction, online education, driver monitoring, etc (Corneanu et al. 2016).
Based on Ekman and Friesen’s study (Ekman and Friesen
1971), facial expressions are typically classified into seven
basic expressions, including happiness, sadness, disgust,
anger, fear, surprise, and neutral. Previous work on FER
chiefly focuses on the classification of these pre-defined
basic expressions. Accordingly, numerous basic expression
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5367

