The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MOST-GAN: 3D Morphable StyleGAN for
Disentangled Face Image Manipulation
Safa C. Medin1,2
Bernhard Egger2,3
Anoop Cherian1
Ye Wang1
2
4
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Xiaoming Liu
Tim K. Marks1
1

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg
4
Michigan State University
Abstract

Changing certain attributes of a given portrait image, also
referred to as face image manipulation, is a popular research
topic that demonstrates the synergy between computer vision and computer graphics. Face image manipulation has a
wide range of applications such as varying the illumination
conditions to make a portrait image more appealing (Sun
et al. 2019), changing the identity of a person to anonymize
an image (Gafni, Wolf, and Taigman 2019), and exchanging the hairstyle in a virtual try-out setting (Tan et al. 2020).
Two key factors make face image manipulation particularly
challenging. First, the human visual system is sensitive to
the smallest artifacts in synthesized face images, and careful handling of detail is therefore crucial to achieve photorealism. Second, faces are 3D objects with rich variations
in shape, expression, and appearance, and inferring such 3D
variations from 2D images is inherently an ill-posed problem.
StyleGAN2 (Karras et al. 2020) is currently one of the
most advanced models for 2D image generation, reaching

unprecedented quality and photorealism in synthesizing face
images. At the same time, 3D face models, such as those
based on 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) (Blanz and Vetter 1999; Egger et al. 2020), are commonly used in recovering 3D faces from 2D images; however, these reconstruction
methods often lack photorealism (Tewari et al. 2017; Deng
et al. 2019b). There are a few recent approaches that aim to
combine the physically grounded modeling of 3DMMs with
the synthesizing capabilities of style-based GANs (Tewari
et al. 2020a,b). However, these approaches build on a fixed
generative model, StyleGAN, and apply the explicit 3D
model as a guiding tool to disentangle the learned StyleGAN
latent space. As a result, these models cannot escape the data
manifold characterized by a trained StyleGAN. Thus, while
they provide some amount of control, they lack the generalization capabilities or physical disentanglement of 3D models, which limits their ability to synthesize large variations
in the physical attributes of a face image.
In this work, we propose a nonlinear 3D face model that
explicitly separates shape, albedo, lighting, and pose, which
we refer to as physical attributes. Since we represent each
of these attributes explicitly, we are able to control each of
them independently, either within their learned latent spaces
or by direct manipulation of their 3D physical realization.
By processing each physical attribute separately, our novel
real-image manipulation method achieves full disentanglement of these attributes. This is in sharp contrast to stateof-the-art methods such as Deng et al. (2020), Tewari et al.
(2020a), and Groueix et al. (2018), in which entanglement
among different attributes is inevitable as they are all represented in one common latent space. Our model combines
the photorealism of style-based GAN architectures with the
generalization capabilities of 3DMMs, which allows for extrapolating beyond the variations present in the datasets. As
a result, our method is able to manipulate faces to new poses,
expressions, and illumination conditions that are not well
represented in the training set. We also couple our 3D face
model with a state-of-the-art 2D hair model (Tan et al. 2020)
to achieve a complete portrait image manipulation pipeline,
allowing for joint face and hair processing. The contributions of this work include:

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We present a novel face image manipulation method, 3D
MOrphable STyleGAN (MOST-GAN), which by design

Recent advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs)
have led to remarkable achievements in face image synthesis.
While methods that use style-based GANs can generate strikingly photorealistic face images, it is often difficult to control
the characteristics of the generated faces in a meaningful and
disentangled way. Prior approaches aim to achieve such semantic control and disentanglement within the latent space of
a previously trained GAN. In contrast, we propose a framework that a priori models physical attributes of the face such
as 3D shape, albedo, pose, and lighting explicitly, thus providing disentanglement by design. Our method, MOST-GAN,
integrates the expressive power and photorealism of stylebased GANs with the physical disentanglement and flexibility
of nonlinear 3D morphable models, which we couple with a
state-of-the-art 2D hair manipulation network. MOST-GAN
achieves photorealistic manipulation of portrait images with
fully disentangled 3D control over their physical attributes,
enabling extreme manipulation of lighting, facial expression,
and pose variations up to full profile view.

Introduction

1962

