The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

When Can the Defender Effectively Deceive Attackers in Security Games?∗
Thanh Nguyen1 and Haifeng Xu2
1

Department of Computer and Information Science , University of Oregon, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, USA
thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu, hx4ad@virginia.edu

Abstract

SeGDCs, the defender can make the attacker observe a different (deceptive) patrolling intensity rather than the true
ones. Concretely, the defender can deceit the attacker’s perception of the protection probability of each target, and the
deceptive probability lies within an interval, containing the
true protection probability. The interval bounds at each target capture the defender’s capability limit in influencing the
attacker’s perception at that target. The defender’s deception
capability at each target is usually determined by the target’s
own characteristics such as terrain features and thus can be
considered to be independent of other targets’. Under this
scenario, we aim to answer the following research question:
How do the complexity and effectiveness of the optimal deception evolve as the attacker becomes increasingly more sophisticated?
We consider three natural types of attack strategies, with increasing sophistication: (i) Ignorant attack strategy — the
attacker is unaware of defender’s deception and simply responds to the deceptive strategy; (ii) Maximin attack strategy
— the attacker is aware of the defender’s deception and addresses it via a robust maximin approach; and (iii) Equilibrium attack strategy — the attacker is aware of and reasons
about the defender’s deception, leading to a sequential equilibrium of the game. Our models of attacker strategies are
motivated by real-world domains such as wildlife protection
in which different types of poachers with different levels of
sophistication exist, ranging from local villagers to professional groups (Van Uhm 2016).
Within these three natural attack models, we provide a
complete set of answers to the aforementioned question. We
show that the optimal equilibrium deception strategy can be
computed in polynomial time whenever the standard SSG
(without deception) can be solved efficiently. This conveys
a clean message that deception against more sophisticated
attackers is “no harder”. Furthermore, we show that the defender deception becomes strictly less powerful, in terms of
securing the defender’s expected utility, as the attacker becomes more sophisticated, until to the point where deception
even leads to a decrease in the defender’s utility. Indeed,
deception may cause the defender to lose her commitment
power (as the attacker cannot observe defender’s underlying true strategy any more due to her deception) and leads
to a harmful outcome when facing a sophisticated attacker.
To our knowledge, this is the first quantitative study on un-

This paper studies defender patrol deception in general Stackelberg security games (SSGs), where a defender attempts to
alter the attacker’s perception of the defender’s patrolling
intensity so as to influence the attacker’s decision making.
We are interested in understanding the complexity and effectiveness of optimal defender deception under different attacker behavior models. Specifically, we consider three different attacker strategies of response (to the defender’s deception) with increasing sophistication, and design efficient
polynomial-time algorithms to compute the equilibrium for
each. Moreover, we prove formal separation for the effectiveness of patrol deception when facing an attacker of increasing
sophistication, until it becomes even harmful to the defender
when facing the most intelligent attacker we consider. Our
results shed light on when and how deception should be used
in SSGs. We conduct extensive experiments to illustrate our
theoretical results in various game settings.

Introduction
SSGs are a well-known class of games which are used in
various real-world security domains (Basilico, Gatti, and
Amigoni 2009; Letchford and Vorobeychik 2011; Tambe
2011). This paper investigates the complexity and effectiveness of a basic patrol deception strategy of the defender in
SSGs, where the defender can conduct patrols in a deceptive
manner to mislead the attacker. In particular, we assume that
the defender can strategically disguise or exaggerate (to a
limited extent) the protection status at each target to fool the
attacker. One of our major motivating domains, among others, is the wildlife conservation where SSG models have been
deployed (Fang et al. 2016) and where deception approaches
have been considered in previous work (Bondi et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2018). For example, rangers can hide themselves
from being seen by poachers (Guo et al. 2017). They can
also hire local villagers or use conservation drones to make
the patrolling appear more intense (Bondi et al. 2020).
Motivated by these practices, we study a new and basic
deception game model, coined Security Games with Deceptive Coverage (SeGDCs), which augments an arbitrary security game with the additional deception component. In
∗

The two authors contribute equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9405

