The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bridging between Cognitive Processing Signals and Linguistic Features via a
Unified Attentional Network
Yuqi Ren, Deyi Xiong∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, 300350
{ryq20, dyxiong}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

processing signals and linguistic features is certainly desirable for cognitively-inspired NLP.
In neurolinguistics, since the early discovery that the brain
is directly involved in sentence comprehension in patients
with brain damage, the process of language comprehension in the brain has been studied for hundreds of years
(Wood 1996). Current studies have investigated the relationship between brain activities and a number of linguistic
features, including basic features (e.g., Word Length, Word
Frequency) (Rayner 1998) and complex features (e.g., Semantic Surprisal, Syntactic or Semantic Ambiguities) (Rogalsky and Hickok 2009). Most studies have conducted specially designed controlled experiments for specific linguistic features, and draw conclusions by analyzing differences
in brain activities (Constable et al. 2004; Friederici 2011).
For instance, in order to locate the region of the brain with
a specific function of syntactic processing in sentence comprehension, researchers have compared and analyzed fMRI
images that are recorded when subjects read sentences vs.
meaningless word lists (Friederici 2011). In such controlled
experiments, reading materials for testing are usually unnatural, lacking lexical and syntactic richness exhibited in
real-world texts. Hence, the recorded cognitive processing
signals are also unnatural. Moreover, the study of each type
of linguistic features requires multiple records of cognitive
processing signals, which is very labor-intensive and timeconsuming. Thus, a unified and effective method to bridge
between cognitive processing signals and linguistic features
is also beneficial to neurolinguistics.
In this paper, we propose an efficient data-driven framework based on attention mechanism to study the relationship
between linguistic features and cognitive processing signals.
Different from neurolinguistic methods, the cognitive processing signals used in our experiments are all from natural reading materials, rather than highly-controlled stimuli.
The results of our model are hence closer to reflect the actual text comprehension process. In order to bridge between
cognitive processing signals and linguistic features, we propose an attentional framework to learn the importance of
cognitive processing signals to linguistic features by feeding
signals as inputs to the model to predict linguistic features.
Compared with traditional feature selection methods (e.g.,
Mutual Information, Random Forests), the proposed attention mechanism can capture dependency between words. To

Cognitive processing signals can be used to improve natural
language processing (NLP) tasks. However, it is not clear how
these signals correlate with linguistic information. Bridging between human language processing and linguistic features has been widely studied in neurolinguistics, usually via
single-variable controlled experiments with highly-controlled
stimuli. Such methods not only compromises the authenticity of natural reading, but also are time-consuming and expensive. In this paper, we propose a data-driven method to
investigate the relationship between cognitive processing signals and linguistic features. Specifically, we present a unified
attentional framework that is composed of embedding, attention, encoding and predicting layers to selectively map cognitive processing signals to linguistic features. We define the
mapping procedure as a bridging task and develop 12 bridging tasks for lexical, syntactic and semantic features. The proposed framework only requires cognitive processing signals
recorded under natural reading as inputs, and can be used to
detect a wide range of linguistic features with a single cognitive dataset. Observations from experiment results resonate
with previous neuroscience findings. In addition to this, our
experiments also reveal a number of interesting findings, such
as the correlation between contextual eye-tracking features
and tense of sentence.

Introduction
Cognitively-inspired NLP which uses cognitive processing
signals to enhance NLP models in a wide range of tasks,
such as sentiment analysis (Barrett et al. 2018), dependency parsing (Strzyz, Vilares, and Gómez-Rodrı́guez 2019),
named entity recognition (Hollenstein and Zhang 2019), part
of speech tagging (Barrett et al. 2016), etc. From a computational perspective, cognitive processing signals can introduce additional information that underlies the ways that human brains comprehend texts (Mathias et al. 2020; Mishra,
Kanojia, and Bhattacharyya 2016; Ren and Xiong 2021).
Such information could be exploited to teach machines to
process texts. However, how these cognitive processing signals resonate with linguistic information that is usually used
by NLP models is not clear yet. Bridging between cognitive
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

49

