The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Neural Piecewise-Constant Delay Differential Equations
Qunxi Zhu,1 * Yifei Shen,2 * Dongsheng Li,3 Wei Lin1,4
1

Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers
Center for Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University
2
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
3
Microsoft Research Asia
4
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Center for Mathematical Sciences, Center for Computational Systems Biology,
and LCNBI, Fudan University
{qxzhu16,wlin}@fudan.edu.cn, yshenaw@connect.ust.hk, dongsheng.li@microsoft.com
Abstract

NODEs model the vector fields of the ODEs through optimizing their parameters with the back-propagation algorithm and the ODE solver based on the training data and
a predefined loss function. In addition, the NODEs contain
a broad range of architectures, including the feed-forward
neural networks and the convolution neural networks.
Owing to the constant memory cost, the continuous dynamical behavior, and the naturally-rooted invertibility of
the NODEs, applications of such a framework to modeling physical systems are growing. Examples abound: data
analytics on the time series with irregular sampling duration (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud 2019; De Brouwer
et al. 2019; Kidger et al. 2020), generations of the continuous normalizing flow (Chen et al. 2018; Grathwohl et al.
2018; Finlay et al. 2020; Deng et al. 2020; Kelly et al.
2020), and representations of the point clouds (Yang et al.
2019; Rempe et al. 2020). It is worthwhile to mention that
the framework of NODEs, in spite of its wide applicability,
is not of a universal approximator. It thus cannot successfully learn representative maps such as the reflections or the
concentric annuli due to the homeomorphism property of
ODEs (Dupont, Doucet, and Teh 2019; Zhang et al. 2020).
To address this problem, several practical schemes (Dupont,
Doucet, and Teh 2019; Massaroli et al. 2020; Zhu, Guo, and
Lin 2021) have been suggested and implemented, among
which the Neural Delay Differential Equations (NDDEs)
show an outstanding efficacy in approximating functionals
based on given data (Zhu, Guo, and Lin 2021). Additionally,
variants of extensions and applications of the NODEs have
been proposed in recent years, including the partial differential equations (Han, Jentzen, and Weinan 2018; Ruthotto
and Haber 2019; Sun, Zhang, and Schaeffer 2020) and the
stochastic differential equations (Liu et al. 2019; Jia and
Benson 2019; Li et al. 2020; Song et al. 2020).
In this article, inspired by a recent framework of NDDEs, as mentioned above, we develop a new framework
of continuous-depth neural networks with different configurations of delay(s). Although the NDDEs not only allow
the trajectories to intersect with each other even in a lowerdimensional phase space but also accurately model representative delayed physical/biological systems, such as the
Mackey-Glass system (Mackey and Glass 1977), they likely
suffer from tremendously high computational cost. Clearly,

Continuous-depth neural networks, such as the Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs), have aroused a great
deal of interest from the communities of machine learning
and data science in recent years, which bridge the connection
between deep neural networks and dynamical systems. In this
article, we introduce a new sort of continuous-depth neural
network, called the Neural Piecewise-Constant Delay Differential Equations (PCDDEs). Here, unlike the recently proposed framework of the Neural Delay Differential Equations
(DDEs), we transform the single delay into the piecewiseconstant delay(s). The Neural PCDDEs with such a transformation, on one hand, inherit the strength of universal approximating capability in Neural DDEs. On the other hand, the
Neural PCDDEs, leveraging the contributions of the information from the multiple previous time steps, further promote
the modeling capability without augmenting the network dimension. With such a promotion, we show that the Neural PCDDEs do outperform the several existing continuousdepth neural frameworks on the one-dimensional piecewiseconstant delay population dynamics and real-world datasets,
including MNIST, CIFAR10, and SVHN.

Introduction
Recently, many frameworks have been established, connecting dynamical systems tightly with neural networks and promoting the network performances significantly (E 2017; Li
et al. 2017; Haber and Ruthotto 2017; Chang et al. 2017;
Pathak et al. 2018; Fang, Lin, and Luo 2018; Li and Hao
2018; Lu et al. 2018; E, Han, and Li 2019; Chang et al. 2019;
Ruthotto and Haber 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Zhu, Ma, and
Lin 2019; Tang et al. 2020). One framework of milestone is
the Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODEs), also
regarded as continuous-depth neural networks (Chen et al.
2018). The framework non-trivially extends the traditional
residual neural networks (ResNets) (He et al. 2016) to parametric ordinary differential equations (ODEs), where the
time in NODEs is treated as the “depth” of the ResNets.
Actually, different from the traditional neural networks, the
* This work was done when the first two authors were interns at
Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9242

