The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

FactorVAE: A Probabilistic Dynamic Factor Model Based on Variational
Autoencoder for Predicting Cross-Sectional Stock Returns
Yitong Duan, Lei Wang, Qizhong Zhang, Jian Li
Tsinghua University
{dyt19, wanglei20, zhangqz18, lijian83}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Historical data

Future data

As an asset pricing model in economics and finance, factor model has been widely used in quantitative investment.
Towards building more effective factor models, recent years
have witnessed the paradigm shift from linear models to
more flexible nonlinear data-driven machine learning models. However, due to low signal-to-noise ratio of the financial
data, it is quite challenging to learn effective factor models.
In this paper, we propose a novel factor model, FactorVAE,
as a probabilistic model with inherent randomness for noise
modeling. Essentially, our model integrates the dynamic factor model (DFM) with the variational autoencoder (VAE) in
machine learning, and we propose a prior-posterior learning
method based on VAE, which can effectively guide the learning of model by approximating an optimal posterior factor
model with future information. Particularly, considering that
risk modeling is important for the noisy stock data, FactorVAE can estimate the variances from the distribution over the
latent space of VAE, in addition to predicting returns. The
experiments on the real stock market data demonstrate the effectiveness of FactorVAE, which outperforms various baseline methods.

Predictor

Encoder

Predicted
factors

Approximate

Optimal
factors

Decoder

Predicted returns

Reconstructed returns

Figure 1: Brief illustration of FactorVAE

and dynamic models, and recent research (Fama and French
2020) indicates that dynamic models with time-varying factor exposure achieve better asset pricing performance than
static methods, so dynamic models become increasingly
popular. However, the traditional dynamic models adopt the
factors designed by practical experience (for example, the
momentum factor is designed based on the observation that
the stocks with higher returns in the past will also perform
better in the future), which may introduce model bias because of the inconsistency between prior knowledge and real
market.
The recent advancement of machine learning (ML) offers a new data-driven perspective to dynamic factor models (Karolyi and Van Nieuwerburgh 2020). Due to the superior capacity to capture complex patterns from the market
data, some ML solutions (Kelly, Pruitt, and Su 2019; Uddin and Yu 2020; Gu, Kelly, and Xiu 2021) can automatically extract latent factors from the market data, which are
more effective and practical than traditional methods in the
real market. Nonetheless, existing ML solutions may suffer
from a vital issue, i.e., the low signal-to-noise ratio of stock
data. The largely noisy data will interfere with the learning
of ML-based models, and result in poor effectiveness of latent factors extracted by models. Such an issue indeed places
a barrier for obtaining an effective factor model for predicting cross-sectional returns.
To break this barrier, we propose a novel probabilistic dynamic factor model based on variational autoencoder (VAE),
called FactorVAE, to bridge the gap between the noisy data
and effective factors. Essentially, we regard factors as the
latent random variables in VAE, to model the noise in data
by the distribution over the latent space of VAE, and then

Introduction
Stock investors attempt to predict cross-sectional stock returns to construct their stock portfolios that outperform the
average performance of the market consistently. As a widely
employed cross-section analysis method in economics and
finance, factor model, with a very profound influence in
academia and industry, has shown the capacity to predict
the returns of cross-sectional stocks (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Sun 2020; Fama and French 2021). Hence, establishing an
effective factor model for the real market is of great importance in stock investment.
Factor models explain market phenomena and asset returns by various factors, which can be fundamental, technical, macroeconomic, and so on. Specifically, in factor models, stock returns are described by factors and corresponding exposure to factors (which means the impact of factors
over stocks), and computed by the linear combination of factors. According to whether the factor exposure varies with
time, factor models fall under two categories: static models
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4468

