The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Blockwise Sequential Model Learning for
Partially Observable Reinforcement Learning
Giseung Park, Sungho Choi, Youngchul Sung
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Korea
{gs.park, sungho.choi, ycsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes a new sequential model learning architecture to solve partially observable Markov decision problems. Rather than compressing sequential information at every
timestep as in conventional recurrent neural network-based
methods, the proposed architecture generates a latent variable
in each data block with a length of multiple timesteps and
passes the most relevant information to the next block for policy optimization. The proposed blockwise sequential model
is implemented based on self-attention, making the model
capable of detailed sequential learning in partial observable
settings. The proposed model builds an additional learning
network to efficiently implement gradient estimation by using
self-normalized importance sampling, which does not require
the complex blockwise input data reconstruction in the model
learning. Numerical results show that the proposed method
significantly outperforms previous methods in various partially
observable environments.

Agent

PO Env

Agent

Selfattention

PO Env

Agent

Selfattention

Blockwise
RNN

PO Env

Selfattention

Blockwise
RNN

Figure 1: Overview: self-attention and RNN are used to process each block of sequential data instead of processing at
every timestep in partially observable (PO) environments.

compress observations in a step-by-step sequential order in
time, which may be inefficient when partiality in observation
is high and less effective in extracting contextual information
within a time interval.
We conjecture that observations at specific timesteps in a
given time interval contain more information about decisionmaking. We propose a new architecture to solve partially
observable RL problems by formalizing this intuition into a
mathematical framework. Our contributions are as follows:

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) in partially observable environments is usually formulated as partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDPs). RL solving POMDPs is a
challenging problem since the Markovian assumption on observation is broken. The information from the past should
be extracted and exploited during the learning phase to compensate for the information loss due to partial observability.
Partially observable situations are prevalent in real-world
problems such as control tasks when observations are noisy,
some part of the underlying state information is deleted, or
long-term information needs to be estimated (Han, Doya, and
Tani 2020b; Meng, Gorbet, and Kulic 2021).
Although many RL algorithms have been devised and
state-of-the-art algorithms provide outstanding performance
in fully observable environments, relatively fewer methods
have been proposed to solve POMDPs. Previous POMDP
methods use a recurrent neural network (RNN) either to compress the information from the past in a model-free manner
(Hausknecht and Stone 2015; Zhu, Li, and Poupart 2017;
Goyal et al. 2021) or to estimate the underlying state information and use the estimation result as an input to the RL agent
(Igl et al. 2018; Han, Doya, and Tani 2020b). These methods

• As shown in Fig. 1, we propose a new learning architecture based on a block of sequential input rather than
estimating a latent variable at every timestep by jointly
using self-attention (Vaswani et al. 2017) and RNN and
exploiting the advantage of each structure.
• To learn the proposed architecture, we present a blockwise sequential model learning based on direct gradient
estimation using self-normalized importance sampling
(Bornschein and Bengio 2015; Le et al. 2019), which
does not require input data reconstruction in contrast to
usual variational methods to POMDPs (Chung et al. 2015;
Han, Doya, and Tani 2020b).
• Using the proposed blockwise representations of the proposed model and feeding the learned block variables to
the RL agent, we significantly improved the performance
over existing methods in several POMDP environments.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7941

