The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Constraints Penalized Q-learning for Safe Offline Reinforcement Learning
Haoran Xu1,2,3 , Xianyuan Zhan4 * , Xiangyu Zhu2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
JD iCity, JD Technology, Beijing, China
3
JD Intelligent Cities Research
4
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{ryanxhr, zhanxianyuan, zackxiangyu}@gmail.com
Abstract

on safe exploration (Chow et al. 2017; Achiam et al. 2017;
Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018). However, none of
these algorithms are off-policy and cannot be used in offline
settings. Although one recent study aims towards batch policy
learning under constraints (Le, Voloshin, and Yue 2019), this
method assumes sufficient exploration of the data collection
policy. This requirement usually does not hold in real-world
scenarios, especially in high-dimensional continuous control
tasks.
The key challenge is how to evaluate constraint violations accurately while maximizing reward effectively. Typically, this needs to roll out the policy in the environment
and evaluate constraint values by on-policy samples (Tessler,
Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018). However, it is impossible
in the offline setting, as we only have access to samples in
the offline dataset. Evaluating constraint values from offline
data is non-trivial, it will encounter serious issues when the
evaluated policy lies outside of the dataset distribution. In
value-based RL approaches, this may introduce errors in
the Q-function backup and it is impossible to collect online
data to correct such errors. The problem will be further exacerbated when the offline dataset is generated by multiple
conflicting behavior policies, as the policy may be biased to
be unsafe or sub-optimal.
One can use an extra cost critic (like the reward critic)
to learn the constraint values, and use a divergence penalty
to control the deviation between the learned policy and the
dataset distribution. However, we show that this naïve method
is too conservative and will lead to a sub-optimal solution.
Our primary contribution is presenting a new algorithm, Constraints Penalized Q-Learning (CPQ), to address the above
challenges. The intuition is that besides those original unsafe
actions, we additionally make those actions that are out of the
data distribution unsafe. To accomplish this, we modify the
Bellman update of reward critic to penalize those state action
pairs that are unsafe. CPQ does not use an explicit policy
constraint and will not be restricted by the density of the
dataset distribution, it admits the use of datasets generated by
mixed behavior policies. We also provide a theoretical error
bound analysis of CPQ under mild assumptions. Through
systematic experiments, we show that our algorithm can learn
robustly to maximize rewards while successfully satisfying
safety constraints, outperform all baselines in benchmark
continuous control tasks.

We study the problem of safe offline reinforcement learning
(RL), the goal is to learn a policy that maximizes long-term reward while satisfying safety constraints given only offline data,
without further interaction with the environment. This problem
is more appealing for real world RL applications, in which
data collection is costly or dangerous. Enforcing constraint
satisfaction is non-trivial, especially in offline settings, as there
is a potential large discrepancy between the policy distribution
and the data distribution, causing errors in estimating the value
of safety constraints. We show that naïve approaches that combine techniques from safe RL and offline RL can only learn
sub-optimal solutions. We thus develop a simple yet effective
algorithm, Constraints Penalized Q-Learning (CPQ), to solve
the problem. Our method admits the use of data generated by
mixed behavior policies. We present a theoretical analysis and
demonstrate empirically that our approach can learn robustly
across a variety of benchmark control tasks, outperforming
several baselines.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved great success in
solving complex tasks, including games (Mnih et al. 2013;
Silver et al. 2017), and robotics (Levine et al. 2016). However,
most RL algorithms learn good policies only after millions
of trials and errors in simulation environments. Consider
real-world scenarios (e.g. self-driving cars, industrial control
systems), where we only have a batch of pre-collected data
(non-optimal), including some unsafe attempts (e.g. highspeed collisions in self-driving cars), no further active online
data collection is allowed. The question then arises: how can
we derive an effective policy from these offline data while
satisfying safety constraints?
Safe RL is usually modeled as a Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Altman 1999). There are typically
two kinds of constraints: hard constraints and soft constraints.
Hard constraints require no constraints violation at each time
step of the trajectory, while soft constraints require the policy
to satisfy constraints in expectation throughout the whole trajectory. In this work, we focus on the soft constraints. There
is a branch of related work for safe RL, with the main focus
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8753

