The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reference-Guided Pseudo-Label Generation for Medical Semantic Segmentation
Constantin Marc Seibold,1 Simon Reiß,1 Jens Kleesiek,2 Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, University Medicine Essen, Germany
constantin.seibold@kit.edu, simon.reiss@kit.edu, jens.kleesiek@uk-essen.de, rainer.stiefelhagen@kit.edu

Abstract
Producing densely annotated data is a difficult and tedious
task for medical imaging applications. To address this problem, we propose a novel approach to generate supervision for
semi-supervised semantic segmentation. We argue that visually similar regions between labeled and unlabeled images
likely contain the same semantics and therefore should share
their label. Following this thought, we use a small number of
labeled images as reference material and match pixels in an
unlabeled image to the semantics of the best fitting pixel in
a reference set. This way, we avoid pitfalls such as confirmation bias, common in purely prediction-based pseudo-labeling.
Since our method does not require any architectural changes or
accompanying networks, one can easily insert it into existing
frameworks. We achieve the same performance as a standard
fully supervised model on X-ray anatomy segmentation, albeit
95% fewer labeled images. Aside from an in-depth analysis of different aspects of our proposed method, we further
demonstrate the effectiveness of our reference-guided learning
paradigm by comparing our approach against existing methods
for retinal fluid segmentation with competitive performance
as we improve upon recent work by up to 15% mean IoU.

Figure 1: A conceptual example highlighting different cases
how unannotated samples could be integrated into a networks
feature spaces and decision boundary. Color intensity represents network prediction confidence.

Introduction
The acquisition of detailed annotations for semantic segmentation is a complex and time-consuming process (Cordts
et al. 2016). It becomes increasingly difficult in the medical
domain due to the required expertise (Menze et al. 2014).
When considering a doctor’s obligations in the clinical routine, gathering a large amount of detailed medical annotations
can become almost insurmountable. Thus, these obstacles
make it desirable to perform accurate semantic segmentation
while minimizing the necessary annotated data.
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation solves these tasks
by combining small quantities of labeled data with a lot
of unannotated data for training. In recent years, several
directions have been investigated such as student-teacher
frameworks (Gou et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2020a; Pham et al. 2021), consistency regularization (Ouali,
Hudelot, and Tami 2020; Sohn et al. 2020; Rebuffi et al. 2020)
or pseudo-labels (Lee et al. 2013; Iscen et al. 2019; Rizve
et al. 2021). Most pseudo-label methods typically employ

network predictions for unlabeled data to either save them for
retraining or use them online as targets in the same iteration.
They are often paired with the generation of predictions from
different perturbations, e.g. data-augmentations, on an input
image (Berthelot et al. 2019b,a; Sohn et al. 2020).
However, by enforcing predictions’ pre-existing biases
of the network, incorrect conclusions can have a snowballing negative effect. We run into the issue of confirmation bias (Rizve et al. 2021). Yet, we argue that the positive
properties of these methods can be kept, while reducing the
adverse effects by taking a different path: comparing embeddings between predictions of unlabeled samples and labeled
reference images to instill the supervision. For all pixels in a
given unlabeled image, we find class-wise nearest-neighbors
among the pixels of images in the small labeled reference
set. From this, we compute a class proximities, attribute importance via confidence-based weighting and then infer the
pseudo-label. By taking this detour and not directly using the
class-predictions, but matching them to a known reference set,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2171

