The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Subspace Differential Privacy
Jie Gao1 , Ruobin Gong1 , Fang-Yi Yu2
1

Rutgers University
Harvard University
jg1555@rutgers.edu, rg915@stat.rutgers.edu, fangyiyu@seas.harvard.edu
2

Abstract

levels to specific Census blocks. Due to the Census Bureau’s
constitutional mandate and its responsibilities as the official
statistics agency of the United States, all data products must
be preserved in such a way that certain aspects of their values are exactly as enumerated. These invariants include (and
are not limited to) population totals at the state level, counts
of total housing units, as well as other group quarter facilities at the block level. Straightforward tabulations of the
noisy measurements are most likely inconsistent with the
mandated invariants.

Many data applications have certain invariant constraints due
to practical needs. Data curators who employ differential privacy need to respect such constraints on the sanitized data
product as a primary utility requirement. Invariants challenge
the formulation, implementation and interpretation of privacy
guarantees. We propose subspace differential privacy, to honestly characterize the dependence of the sanitized output on
confidential aspects of the data. We discuss two design frameworks that convert well-known differentially private mechanisms, such as the Gaussian and the Laplace mechanisms, to
subspace differentially private ones that respect the invariants
specified by the curator. For linear queries, we discuss the
design of near optimal mechanisms that minimize the mean
squared error. Subspace differentially private mechanisms rid
the need for post-processing due to invariants, preserve transparency and statistical intelligibility of the output, and can
be suitable for distributed implementation. We showcase the
proposed mechanisms on the 2020 Census Disclosure Avoidance demonstration data, and a spatio-temporal dataset of mobile access point connections on a large university campus.

1

A common method to impose invariants on a differentially private noisy query is via post-processing using distance minimization (Abowd et al. 2019; Ashmead et al.
2019). The resulting query is the solution to an optimization
task, one that minimizes a pre-specified distance between
the unconstrained query and the invariant-compliant space.
There are two major drawbacks to this approach. First, postprocessing may introduce systematic bias into the query output. Particularly troubling is that the source of such bias is
poorly understood (Zhu, Hentenryck, and Fioretto 2020), in
part due to the highly data-dependent nature of the postprocessing procedure, and the lack of a transparent probabilistic description. The TopDown algorithm (Abowd et al.
2019), employed by the Census DAS to impose invariants
on the noisy measurements, exhibits a notable bias that it
tends to associate larger counts with positive errors, whereas
smaller counts with negative errors, when the total count is
held as invariant. Figure 1 illustrates this phenomenon using the November 2020 vintage Census demonstration data
(Van Riper, Kugler, and Schroeder 2020). For all states and
state-level territories with more than five counties (i.e. excluding D.C., Delaware, Hawaii and Rhode Island), a simple regression is performed between the county-level DAS
errors and the log true county population sizes. Of the 48
regressions, 37 result in a negative slope estimate, out of
which 11 are statistically significant at α = 0.01 level (red
circles in the left panel), indicating a systematic negative association between the DAS errors and the true counts. The
bias trend is clearly visible in the right panel among the
DAS errors (red squares) associated with the counties of Illinois, ordered by increasing population size. As Zhu, Hentenryck, and Fioretto (2020) discussed, the bias exhibited in the
demonstration data is attributed to the non-negativity constraints imposed on the privatized counts.

Introduction

Invariants: a challenge for data privacy Data publication
that satisfies differential privacy carries the formal mathematical guarantee that an adversary cannot effectively tell
the difference, in the probabilistic sense, when two databases
differ in only one entry. The extent of privacy protection under differential privacy is quantified by the privacy loss budget parameters, such as in ϵ-differential privacy and (ϵ, δ)differential privacy (Dwork et al. 2006b). While the differential privacy guarantee is rigorously formulated with
the probability language, its construction does not naturally
mingle with hard and truthful constraints, called invariants
(Ashmead et al. 2019), that need to be imposed onto the sanitized data product, often as a primary utility requirement.
An important use case in which the challenge for privacy
arises from invariants is the new Disclosure Avoidance System (DAS) of the 2020 Decennial Census (Abowd 2018).
The new DAS tabulates noise-infused, differentially private
counts into multi-way contingency tables at various geographic resolutions, from the aggregated state and county
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3986

