The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DKPLM: Decomposable Knowledge-Enhanced Pre-trained Language Model for
Natural Language Understanding
Taolin Zhang1,3 * , Chengyu Wang2 * , Nan Hu5 , Minghui Qiu2† , Chengguang Tang2
Xiaofeng He4,5† , Jun Huang2
1

School of Software Engineering, East China Normal University 2 Alibaba Group
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trsustworthy Computing
4
NPPA Key Laboratory of Publishing Integration Development, ECNUP
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
zhangtl0519@gmail.com, hunan.vinny1997@gmail.com, hexf@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
{chengyu.wcy, minghui.qmh, chengguang.tcg, huangjun.hj}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Knowledge-Enhanced Pre-trained Language Models (KEPLMs) are pre-trained models with relation triples injecting
from knowledge graphs to improve language understanding
abilities.Experiments show that our model outperforms other
KEPLMs significantly over zero-shot knowledge probing tasks
and multiple knowledge-aware language understanding tasks.
To guarantee effective knowledge injection, previous studies
integrate models with knowledge encoders for representing
knowledge retrieved from knowledge graphs. The operations
for knowledge retrieval and encoding bring significant computational burdens, restricting the usage of such models in
real-world applications that require high inference speed. In
this paper, we propose a novel KEPLM named DKPLM that
decomposes knowledge injection process of the pre-trained
language models in pre-training, fine-tuning and inference
stages, which facilitates the applications of KEPLMs in realworld scenarios. Specifically, we first detect knowledge-aware
long-tail entities as the target for knowledge injection, enhancing the KEPLMs’ semantic understanding abilities and
avoiding injecting redundant information. The embeddings
of long-tail entities are replaced by “pseudo token representations” formed by relevant knowledge triples. We further
design the relational knowledge decoding task for pre-training
to force the models to truly understand the injected knowledge
by relation triple reconstruction. Experiments show that our
model outperforms other KEPLMs significantly over zeroshot knowledge probing tasks and multiple knowledge-aware
language understanding tasks. We further show that DKPLM
has a higher inference speed than other competing models due
to the decomposing mechanism.

Introduction
Recently, Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) improve various downstream NLP tasks significantly (He et al. 2020; Xu
et al. 2021; Chang et al. 2021). In PLMs, the two-stage strategy (i.e., pre-training and fine-tuning) (Devlin et al. 2019)
inherits the knowledge learned during pre-training and applies it to downstream tasks. Although PLMs have stored a
*

T. Zhang and C. Wang contributed equally to this work.
Co-corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

lot of internal knowledge, it can hardly understand external
background knowledge such as factual and commonsense
knowledge (Colon-Hernandez et al. 2021; Cui et al. 2021).
Hence, the performance of PLMs can be improved by injecting external knowledge triples, which are referred to as
Knowledge-Enhanced PLMs (KEPLMs).
In the literature, the approaches of injecting knowledge
can be divided into two categories, including knowledge
embedding and joint learning. (1) Knowledge embedding
based approaches inject triple representations in Knowledge
Graphs (KGs) trained by knowledge embedding algorithms
(e.g., TransE (Bordes et al. 2013)) into contextual representations via well-designed feature fusion modules, which may
contain a large number of parameters (Zhang et al. 2019;
Peters et al. 2019; Su et al. 2020). As reported in (Wang et al.
2019b), different knowledge representation algorithms significantly impact the performance of PLMs. (2) Joint learning
based approaches learn knowledge embeddings from KGs
jointly during pre-training (Wang et al. 2019b; Sun et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2020), which are two significantly different
tasks. We also observe that there are two potential drawbacks
of previous methods. (1) These models inject knowledge
indiscriminately into all entities in pre-training sentences,
which introduces redundant and irrelevant information to
PLMs (Zhang et al. 2021). (2) Large-scale KGs are required
during both fine-tuning and inference for obtaining outputs
of knowledge encoders. This incurs additional computation
burden that limits their usage for real-world applications that
require high inference speed (Zhang et al. 2020).
To overcome the above problems, we present a novel KEPLM named DKPLM that decomposes knowledge injection
process of three stages for KEPLMs. A comparison between
our model and other models is shown in Figure 1. Clearly,
for DKPLM, knowledge injection is only applied during
pre-training, without using additional knowledge encoders.
Hence, during the fine-tuning and inference stages, our model
can be utilized in the same way as that of BERT (Devlin et al.
2019) and other plain PLMs, which facilitates the applications of our KEPLM in real-world scenarios. Specifically, we
introduce three novel techniques for pre-training DKPLM:
• Knowledge-aware Long-tail Entity Detection: our model

11703

