The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Label-Efficient Hybrid-Supervised Learning for Medical Image Segmentation
Junwen Pan* 1,2 , Qi Bi3 * , Yanzhan Yang1 , Pengfei Zhu2 , Cheng Bian1†
1
Xiaohe Healthcare, ByteDance
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
3
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University
{junwenpan, zhupengfei}@tju.edu.cn, q bi@whu.edu.cn, {yangyanzhan.yyz, biancheng}@bytedance.com
2

Strongly Annotated

Abstract
Due to the lack of expertise for medical image annotation, the
investigation of label-efficient methodology for medical image segmentation becomes a heated topic. Recent progresses
focus on the efficient utilization of weak annotations together
with few strongly-annotated labels so as to achieve comparable segmentation performance in many unprofessional
scenarios. However, these approaches only concentrate on
the supervision inconsistency between strongly- and weaklyannotated instances but ignore the instance inconsistency inside the weakly-annotated instances, which inevitably leads
to performance degradation. To address this problem, we
propose a novel label-efficient hybrid-supervised framework,
which considers each weakly-annotated instance individually and learns its weight guided by the gradient direction
of the strongly-annotated instances, so that the high-quality
prior in the strongly-annotated instances is better exploited
and the weakly-annotated instances are depicted more precisely. Specially, our designed dynamic instance indicator
(DII) realizes the above objectives, and is adapted to our dynamic co-regularization (DCR) framework further to alleviate the erroneous accumulation from distortions of weak annotations. Extensive experiments on two hybrid-supervised
medical segmentation datasets demonstrate that with only
10% strong labels, the proposed framework can leverage the
weak labels efficiently and achieve competitive performance
against the 100% strong-label supervised scenario.

Weakly Annotated

Test Image Ground-truth Ibrahim et al.

Luo et al.

Ours

Figure 1: Top: Strongly and weakly-annotated instances of
endoscopic images and polyp annotations. There are varied
distortion levels in the weak annotations, e.g., fairly good
(col. 2), slightly distorted (col. 3-4), and completely incorrect (col. 5). Bottom: Test instances and probability maps
produced by self-correcting network (Ibrahim et al. 2020),
strong-weak network (Luo and Yang 2020) and our method.

Introduction
Medical image segmentation has always been a fundamental task in various biomedical applications, aiming at identifying critical anatomic or pathological structures for further statistical analysis. Although significant improvements
have been made in recent works (Ronneberger, Fische, and
Brox 2015), the performance of the deep learning models is
strongly impacted by the extensive high-quality annotations,
which are expertise-demanding, labor-intensive, and timeconsuming, thus hindering deep learning technology from
the real-world clinical usages.
Recent studies (Bearman et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2016) on
weakly supervised semantic segmentation demonstrate that

weak annotations (e.g., image-level labels, bounding boxes,
scribbles) also have the competence of extracting the generalized features compared with strong annotations. Thus,
a flurry of techniques (Wei et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2019)
have been explored to utilize only a few pixel-wise strong
labels as guidance to learn fine-grained representations for
segmentation. However, as all the strongly- and weaklyannotated instances are treated equally in such solutions, a
large number of pseudo labels with less precise depiction
capability inevitably dominate the training process, leading
to an inferior and less reliable performance (Luo and Yang
2020).
The key issue responsible for the poor performance of
these solutions is the inherent inconsistency between weak
and strong annotations. Specifically, the weakly-annotated

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: biancheng@bytedance.com.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
2026

