The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Comprehensive Regularization in a Bi-directional
Predictive Network for Video Anomaly Detection
Chengwei Chen1 , Yuan Xie∗1 , Shaohui Lin1 , Angela Yao2 , Guannan Jiang3 , Wei Zhang3 , Yanyun
Qu4 , Ruizhi Qiao5 , Bo Ren5 , Lizhuang Ma* 1
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Limited (CATL), Fujian, China
4
Xiamen University (XMU), Fujian, China
5
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shenzhen, China
52184501028@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {yxie,shlin}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg, {jianggn,zhangwei}@catl.com,
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, {ruizhiqiao,timren}@tencent.com, lzma@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract

Forward sequence

Video anomaly detection aims to automatically identify unusual objects or behaviours by learning from normal videos.
Previous methods tend to use simplistic reconstruction or prediction constraints, which leads to the insufficiency of learned
representations for normal data. As such, we propose a novel
bi-directional architecture with three consistency constraints
to comprehensively regularize the prediction task from pixelwise, cross-modal, and temporal-sequence levels. First, predictive consistency is proposed to consider the symmetry
property of motion and appearance in forwards and backwards time, which ensures the highly realistic appearance and
motion predictions at the pixel-wise level. Second, association consistency considers the relevance between different
modalities and uses one modality to regularize the prediction
of another one. Finally, temporal consistency utilizes the relationship of the video sequence and ensures that the predictive
network generates temporally consistent frames. During inference, the pattern of abnormal frames is unpredictable and
will therefore cause higher prediction errors. Experiments
show that our method outperforms advanced anomaly detectors and achieves state-of-the-art results on UCSD Ped2,
CUHK Avenue, and ShanghaiTech datasets.

Backward sequence

Time
Appearance

Time

Temporal consistency

Embedding space

Motion

Association consistency
Predictive consistency
BPN

Figure 1: Our bi-directional VAD framework predicts missing patches forwards and backwards in time for video
anomaly detection. The multi-granularity consistency constraints regularize the prediction of patches from pixel-wise,
cross-modality, and temporal-sequence levels. High prediction errors suggest the presence of an abnormal event. For
better presentation, we set the number of input sequence
frames to 5 in all figures.

Naturally, the “normal” model must be sufficiently expressive for such an assumption to hold. Learning such a model
for a medium as rich and high-dimensional as video can be
especially challenging. The ability to capture the intrinsic
properties of the video, such as the appearance, dynamic information, and temporal sequencing all play an important
role. In our method, we employ a patch-wise prediction approach to do VAD through the bi-directional architecture.
Some previous VAD works predict entire frames (Liu et al.
2018; Lu et al. 2019); we follow (Yu et al. 2020) and predict only patches associated with video events based on detected objects, which avoids the interference of irrelevant
background. The abnormal event is detected by the prediction error of appearance and optical flow in forward and
backward directions. As shown in Fig. 1, this architecture
enables comprehensive consistency constraints to regularize the prediction task from pixel-wise, cross-modal, and
temporal-sequence levels.
In contrast to the simple reconstruction or prediction con-

Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) is critical for video surveillance systems. A key challenge in developing machine learning methods for VAD is that very few or even no samples
of abnormal data are available for learning. This makes it
a one-class classification problem (Perera and Patel 2019),
in which one must learn a distribution based only on normal distances. VAD methods learn the normal distribution
implicitly within a model; anomalies are then detected by
the model’s inability to either reconstruct (Zhou et al. 2019;
Gong et al. 2019; Nguyen and Meunier 2019) or predict (Liu
et al. 2018; Lu et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2019b) some data
samples. During inference, normal samples are assumed to
have low reconstruction or prediction errors, while samples
with high reconstruction or prediction errors are anomalies.
* corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

230

