The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Gradient Based Activations for Accurate Bias-Free Learning
Vinod K. Kurmi,* 1 Rishabh Sharma,* 2 Yash Vardhan Sharma,* 2 Vinay P Namboodiri3
1

KU Leuven, Belgium† , 2 IIT Roorkee, India 3 University of Bath, UK
vinod.kurmi@kuleuven.be, {rsharma1, ysharma}@me.iitr.ac.in, vpn22@bath.ac.uk

Abstract

One class of approaches used to solve this problem is to
use an adversarial learning technique (Louppe, Kagan, and
Cranmer 2017; Madras et al. 2018) where we use a discriminator to distinguish the particular attributes such as race,
gender or age that we are concerned about. This discriminator is trained in an adversarial learning framework in a manner reminiscent of the domain adaptation approach (Ganin
and Lempitsky 2015). That is, the loss from the discriminator is reversed while training the ‘feature extractor’. This is
achieved by taking a set of deep learning layers to form a
feature extractor and branching from this to two networks
a classifier and a discriminator. The classifier thus receives
features through which at the end of training, a discriminator is not able to distinguish a bias attribute in question
(race/gender). The idea is appealing and can be effective
in mitigating bias. However, a drawback that is introduced
through this framework is that it directly introduces a tradeoff with accuracy. This is particularly the case when there
is high skew in terms of the particular attributes, i.e. gender
or race, then the accuracy suffers significantly. In our work,
we use a simple method to ensure that we obtain both objectives, that is, the bias is minimized and accuracy is high.
The crux of our idea is to ensure explicit de-correlation between the adversarial discriminator and classifier. This is because, when there is substantial skew in the data, for instance
very few images of a specific attribute (gender or race for
instance) then the discriminator has very few samples to distinguish the set of ‘bias’ attributes (the set of attributes we
are concerned should not be discriminated against). As a result, the discriminator learns more through the set of features
that are related to the classifier’s set of labels i.e. in the output space of the classifier. For instance, if we consider we
are distinguishing digits between 0 to 9 and almost all the
samples are grey samples and very few samples are colored
samples, (for instance samples of 4 and 6 only) then the discriminator tries to identify the class label in an effort to distinguish whether the sample is colored or not. Thus, in the
example knowing whether the sample is 4 or 6 would help
the discriminator in predicting whether the digits are colored or not. This is particularly the case as we are using the
discriminators loss adversarially and ensuring that the discriminator has a hard time ensuring whether the digits are
colored or not. In this paper, we propose to use a biased discriminator to improve the accuracy of adversarial methods

Bias mitigation in machine learning models is imperative, yet
challenging. While several approaches have been proposed,
one view towards mitigating bias is through adversarial learning. A discriminator is used to identify the bias attributes such
as gender, age or race in question. This discriminator is used
adversarially to ensure that it cannot distinguish the bias attributes. The main drawback in such a model is that it directly
introduces a trade-off with accuracy as the features that the
discriminator deems to be sensitive for discrimination of bias
could be correlated with classification. In this work we solve
the problem. We show that a biased discriminator can actually be used to improve this bias-accuracy tradeoff. Specifically, this is achieved by using a feature masking approach using the discriminator’s gradients. We ensure that the features
favoured for the bias discrimination are de-emphasized and
the unbiased features are enhanced during classification. We
show that this simple approach works well to reduce bias as
well as improve accuracy significantly. We evaluate the proposed model on standard benchmarks. We improve the accuracy of the adversarial methods while maintaining or even
improving the unbiasness and also outperform several other
recent methods.

Introduction
The issue of bias in computer vision has been widely studied
where the bias could be in terms of under-represented class
samples (Li and Vasconcelos 2019), gender (Wang et al.
2019), demographics (Lahoti et al. 2020) or other cases. The
use of computer vision has a variety of practical applications ranging from autonomous driving to medicine. Particularly the use of vision systems in applications such as face
recognition (Robinson et al. 2020) and image generation
(Ramaswamy, Kim, and Russakovsky 2020) are widespread.
The bias in such systems may unduly affect these systems.
Practical instances have been observed as that of image
super-resolution (Menon et al. 2020) resulting in generating white race images for down-sampled images from other
races.
In this paper, we are particularly concerned by such bias
in computer vision and would like to address this.
* Equal contributions.
†

Work done at IIT Kanpur
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7255

