The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Individual Representation in Approval-Based Committee Voting
Markus Brill,1 Jonas Israel,1 Evi Micha,2 Jannik Peters1
1
Research Group Efficient Algorithms, TU Berlin, Germany
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada
brill@tu-berlin.de, j.israel@tu-berlin.de, emicha@cs.toronto.edu, jannik.peters@tu-berlin.de
2

Abstract

Indeed, the literature has defined a number of different
concepts aiming to capture proportional representation.
Most (if not all) of these approval-based proportionality notions focus on the representation of groups of agents.
Specifically, it is usually required that each sufficiently large
group of agents is “represented” in the committee,1 where
the interpretation of “representation” differs across different notions. For example, extended justified representation
(Aziz et al. 2017) prescribes that there exists at least one
agent in the group approving a certain number of committee members, whereas proportional justified representation
(Sánchez-Fernández et al. 2017) demands that there are
sufficiently many committee members that are each approved by at least one agent in the group. Notably, neither
definition comprises any representation requirements for
individual agents in a group. Thus, a group may count as
“represented” even though some agents in the group do not
approve a single committee member.
In this paper, we adopt an individualistic point of view:
our goal is to provide all members of a voter group equal
guarantees. Intuitively, when a population consists of n
agents and a committee of k representatives is elected, we
expect every cohesive voter group of size ` · n/k to be
represented by ` representatives in the committee; thus,
each individual group member might reasonably hope that
at least ` candidates represent her in the committee. This
notion, which we call individual representation, is aligned
with the notion of “individual fairness” that was recently
introduced in clustering (and in particular in facility location problems) by Jung, Kannan, and Lutz (2020): there,
each individual expects to be served by a facility in distance
proportional to the radius of the ball that captures its n/k
closest neighbors, where n is the number of individuals and
k is the number of facilities.
Individual representation, as defined in this paper, is a
strengthening of a notion called semi-strong justified representation by Aziz et al. (2017). The latter property requires
that all members of a group are represented in the committee at least once, given that the group is large and cohesive

When selecting multiple candidates based on approval preferences of agents, the proportional representation of agents’
opinions is an important and well-studied desideratum. Existing criteria for evaluating the representativeness of outcomes
focus on groups of agents and demand that sufficiently large
and cohesive groups are “represented” in the sense that
candidates approved by some group members are selected.
Crucially, these criteria say nothing about the representation
of individual agents, even if these agents are members of
groups that deserve representation. In this paper, we formalize the concept of individual representation (IR) and explore
to which extent, and under which circumstances, it can be
achieved. We show that checking whether an IR outcome
exists is computationally intractable, and we verify that all
common approval-based voting rules may fail to provide
IR even in cases where this is possible. We then focus on
domain restrictions and establish an interesting contrast between “voter interval” and “candidate interval” preferences.
This contrast can also be observed in our experimental results, where we analyze the attainability of IR for realistic
preference profiles.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of selecting a fixed-size subset
of candidates (a so-called committee) based on the approval preferences of agents. This problem has been extensively studied in recent years (Lackner and Skowron
2021) and has a wide variety of applications, including
political elections (Brill et al. 2020), recommender systems
(Skowron et al. 2017), medical diagnostic decision-making
(Gangl et al. 2019), and participatory budgeting (Peters,
Pierczyński, and Skowron 2021).
A central concern in committee voting is the principle of
proportional representation, which states that the agents’
interests and opinions should be reflected proportionately
in the committee. While proportional representation is intuitive to understand in scenarios such as apportioning parliamentary seats based on vote shares (Balinski and Young
1982; Pukelsheim 2014), it is less straightforward to formalize in the context of approval-based committee elections.

1
Often, there is also a condition on the “cohesiveness” of the
group, stating that the approval preferences of group members
need to be sufficiently aligned.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4892

