The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Edge-Aware Guidance Fusion Network for RGB–Thermal Scene Parsing
Wujie Zhou*, Shaohua Dong, Caie Xu, Yaguan Qian
School of Information and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University of Science & Technology, Hangzhou, China.
wujiezhou@163.com, shaohuadong2021@126.com, caiexu@163.com, qianyaguan@zust.edu.cn

Abstract

Scene parsing is a fundamental technique in computer vision that aims to assign category labels to each of the pixels in a natural image. Hence, scene parsing has enhanced
many applications in computer vision, such as autonomous
driving (Wang, Ma, and You 2020; Zhou et al. 2021c) and
robot sensing (Zhang et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018, 2019). In
recent years, deep learning has become a promising solution
to scene parsing. Existing methods based on fully convolutional networks have achieved noteworthy results (Lee, Tai,
and Kim 2016; Chen et al. 2017b; Luo et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2017; Hou et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2021a). However,
accurate scene parsing remains a challenge under poor light
conditions. Some recent studies have noted this problem
and proposed more robust methods via RGB–thermal scene

parsing (Ha et al. 2017; Sun, Zuo, and Liu 2019; Shivakumar et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2021b). These methods use the complementary rich
information and semantic information provided by the thermal images to RGB images under poor lighting conditions,
thereby achieving high parsing performance.
Despite the abovementioned developments, some problems of RGB–thermal scene parsing remain to be solved.
Owing to the lack of specific guidance on extracting boundaries, boundary preservation needs to be further improved.
Existing methods based on fully convolutional networks reduce feature resolution, leading to loss of spatial details and
distortion of object boundaries. In addition, existing methods use simple fusion strategies, such as elementwise addition or multiplication, thus failing to fully integrate multimodal information and undermining scene parsing performance. Moreover, most methods do not fully use high-level
features with their rich semantic information. Therefore, a
method to suitably extract and use high-level semantic information is desired.
To address these scene parsing problems, we propose an
edge-aware guidance fusion network (EGFNet) for scene
parsing based on an encoder–decoder architecture. The
proposed EGFNet achieves remarkable performance for
RGB–thermal scene parsing. We first introduce a method of
embedding prior edge maps into the boundary features to
enhance boundary information. To extract more information
from the RGB and thermal features, we propose a multimodal fusion module (MFM) that integrates the multimodal
features using efficient strategies. Unlike simple methods,
such as fusion based on addition or concatenation, the MFM
uses a complex fusion strategy to fully combine the information from the RGB and thermal modalities. In addition, a
global information module (GIM) and a semantic information module (SIM) are proposed to extract high-level semantic information efficiently. Finally, we adopt multitask deep
supervision to improve the segmentation performance. In
general, the proposed EGFNet shows superior performance
compared with state-of-the-art (SOTA) RGB–thermal scene
parsing methods.
The main contributions of the proposed EGFNet can thus
be summarized as follows:

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• The EGFNet is one of the pilot methods to use prior
edge information for enhancing boundary extraction for

RGB–thermal scene parsing has recently attracted increasing research interest in the field of computer vision. However, most existing methods fail to perform good boundary
extraction for prediction maps and cannot fully use high-level
features. In addition, these methods simply fuse the features
from RGB and thermal modalities but are unable to obtain
comprehensive fused features. To address these problems, we
propose an edge-aware guidance fusion network (EGFNet)
for RGB–thermal scene parsing. First, we introduce a prior
edge map generated using the RGB and thermal images to
capture detailed information in the prediction map and then
embed the prior edge information in the feature maps. To effectively fuse the RGB and thermal information, we propose
a multimodal fusion module that guarantees adequate crossmodal fusion. Considering the importance of high-level semantic information, we propose a global information module and a semantic information module to extract rich semantic information from the high-level features. For decoding, we use simple elementwise addition for cascaded feature fusion. Finally, to improve the parsing accuracy, we apply multitask deep supervision to the semantic and boundary maps. Extensive experiments were performed on benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed EGFNet and its superior performance compared with
state-of-the-art methods. The code and results can be found
at https://github.com/ShaohuaDong2021/EGFNet.

Introduction

3571

