The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Truthful Cake Sharing
Xiaohui Bei,1 Xinhang Lu,2 Warut Suksompong3
1

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

it easy for agents to participate in, as they do not have to
act strategically and reason about beneficial manipulations;
it also simplifies the job of the mechanism designer when
reasoning about the possible behavior of the agents. Note
that truthfulness by itself is easy to obtain, for example by
ignoring the agents’ reports completely and allocating a prespecified subset of the cake. However, this is a patently unfair mechanism, as it leaves any agent who has no value for
that subset empty-handed. Is there a mechanism that is truthful and at the same time satisfies a certain degree of fairness
for all agents?
Two mechanisms that have been used in various resource
allocation settings and often shown to exhibit attractive fairness properties are the maximum Nash welfare (MNW) solution and the leximin solution. The MNW solution chooses
an allocation that maximizes the product of the agents’ utilities among all feasible allocations. The leximin solution considers all feasible allocations that maximize the minimum
among the agents’ utilities; among all such allocations, it
considers those maximizing the second smallest utility, and
so on. Due to their optimization nature, both solutions fulfill
an important economic efficiency criterion of Pareto optimality: there is no other feasible outcome that makes some
agent better off and no agent worse off compared to the chosen outcome. Indeed, any such improved outcome would
also be an improvement with respect to the corresponding
optimization objective. Given the broad appeal of the two
mechanisms, are they appropriate choices for our cake sharing setting, especially from the truthfulness perspective?

The classic cake cutting problem concerns the fair allocation
of a heterogeneous resource among interested agents. In this
paper, we study a public goods variant of the problem, where
instead of competing with one another for the cake, the agents
all share the same subset of the cake which must be chosen
subject to a length constraint. We focus on the design of truthful and fair mechanisms in the presence of strategic agents
who have piecewise uniform utilities over the cake. On the
one hand, we show that the leximin solution is truthful and
moreover maximizes an egalitarian welfare measure among
all truthful and position oblivious mechanisms. On the other
hand, we demonstrate that the maximum Nash welfare solution is truthful for two agents but not in general. Our results
assume that mechanisms can block each agent from accessing parts that the agent does not claim to desire; we provide
an impossibility result when blocking is not allowed.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in social choice theory is the fair allocation of scarce resources among multiple agents. When
the resource is heterogeneous and divisible, this problem is
commonly known as cake cutting, with the cake serving as a
metaphor for the heterogeneous resource. Cake cutting has
been extensively studied for over half a century in mathematics and economics, and more recently in computer science (Brams and Taylor 1996; Robertson and Webb 1998;
Procaccia 2016).
In this paper, we consider a variant of the classic cake
cutting problem where instead of competing with one another for the cake, the agents all share the same subset of the
cake, which must be chosen subject to a length constraint.
We refer to this setting as cake sharing. The cake sharing
problem captures many real-world scenarios, such as when
a group of agents need to decide the time periods for which
they should reserve a sports facility or a conference room for
collective use given their limited budget, or when a group of
users seek to agree upon the files to store in a shared cache
memory. Our goal is to design cake sharing mechanisms that
are both truthful and fair. Truthfulness requires that it should
be in every agent’s best interest to report her true underlying
preferences to the mechanism. A truthful mechanism makes

1.1

Our Results

As is standard in the cake cutting literature, we model the
cake as an interval [0, 1]; for a given parameter α ∈ [0, 1], a
subset of length at most α of the cake can be collectively allocated to the agents. We assume that the agents have piecewise uniform utilities, meaning that each agent has a desired
subset of the cake which she values uniformly. Except in
Section 6, we also assume that once a mechanism chooses a
subset of the cake, it can “block” each agent from accessing
certain parts of the cake, usually those that the agent does not
desire according to her report. We remark here that blocking can be easily implemented in the aforementioned applications of cake sharing, for example by disallowing agents
from accessing part of the cache memory that they do not de-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4809

