The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GeomGCL: Geometric Graph Contrastive Learning for
Molecular Property Prediction
Shuangli Li1, 2 * , Jingbo Zhou2† , Tong Xu1 , Dejing Dou2† , Hui Xiong3†
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
3
Artificial Intelligence Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
lsl1997@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhoujingbo, doudejing}@baidu.com, tongxu@ustc.edu.cn, xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract

With the remarkable success of graph neural networks
(GNNs) in various graph-related tasks in recent years (Wu
et al. 2020), a number of efforts have been made from different directions to design GNN models for molecular property prediction like (Yang et al. 2019; Danel et al. 2020;
Maziarka et al. 2020; Song et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021).
The fundamental idea is to regard the topology of atoms and
bonds as a graph, and translate each molecule to a representation vector with powerful GNN encoders, followed by the
prediction model for the specific property.
Along the other line of development for GNNs, graph
contrastive learning (GCL) methods (Wu et al. 2021) have
shown promising performance in many applications when
there is a lack of sufficient labeled data. The scarcity of labeled data is one of the major obstacles to hinder the prediction performance of GNN models (as well as other deep
learning models) for molecular property prediction. For example, it usually requires a high cost to collect the labeled
data for certain computational drug discovery task.
More special attention should be paid to developing GCL
for molecular property prediction. Existing GCL methods
usually adopt different data augmentation schemes for the
graph, which may change the semantics of graphs across
domains. Most of the current GCL methods on molecular
graphs are still based on such data augmentation paradigm
which could inevitably alter the natural structure of a
molecule. For example, You et al. (2020) proposes to drop
atoms, perturb edges and mask attributes to augment the
data. However, since each of atoms has an effect on the
molecular property, such random dropping and perturbation
of atoms could destroy the structure of a molecule. Though
some other methods like MoCL (Sun et al. 2021) adopt predefined sub-structures of the molecule to alleviate the problem of random corruption, such substitution rules still have
a probability to violate the chemical principle.
Our insight is to design a new GCL method for molecular
property prediction from different geometric views without
corrupting the molecular structure. As shown in Figure 1, the
molecules can be represented as two-dimensional (2D) and
three-dimensional (3D) structural graphs. Although there
are emerging geometric GNN models which can make use
of multiple factors from the 2D chemical graph or 3D
spatial graph (Maziarka et al. 2020; Klicpera, Groß, and

Recently many efforts have been devoted to applying graph
neural networks (GNNs) to molecular property prediction
which is a fundamental task for computational drug and material discovery. One of major obstacles to hinder the successful
prediction of molecular property by GNNs is the scarcity of
labeled data. Though graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods have achieved extraordinary performance with insufficient labeled data, most focused on designing data augmentation schemes for general graphs. However, the fundamental
property of a molecule could be altered with the augmentation method (like random perturbation) on molecular graphs.
Whereas, the critical geometric information of molecules remains rarely explored under the current GNN and GCL architectures. To this end, we propose a novel graph contrastive
learning method utilizing the geometry of the molecule across
2D and 3D views, which is named GeomGCL. Specifically,
we first devise a dual-view geometric message passing network (GeomMPNN) to adaptively leverage the rich information of both 2D and 3D graphs of a molecule. The incorporation of geometric properties at different levels can greatly
facilitate the molecular representation learning. Then a novel
geometric graph contrastive scheme is designed to make both
geometric views collaboratively supervise each other to improve the generalization ability of GeomMPNN. We evaluate
GeomGCL on various downstream property prediction tasks
via a finetune process. Experimental results on seven real-life
molecular datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed GeomGCL against state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
The prediction of molecular property has been widely considered as one of the most significant tasks in computational
drug and material discovery (Goh, Hodas, and Vishnu 2017;
Wu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018). Accurately predicting
the property can help to evaluate and select the appropriate chemical molecules with desired characteristics for many
downstream applications (Xiong et al. 2019; Yang et al.
2019; Song et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2021).
* This work was done when the first author was an intern in

Baidu Research under the supervision of Jingbo Zhou.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4541

