The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Little Charity Guarantees Fair Connected Graph Partitioning
Ioannis Caragiannis,1 Evi Micha,2 Nisarg Shah2
1

Aarhus University
University of Toronto
iannis@cs.au.dk, {emicha, nisarg}@cs.toronto.edu
2

Abstract

agents. Nonetheless, “up to one good”-style relaxations can
be guaranteed (Budish 2011; Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah
2017; Caragiannis et al. 2019), which converge to providing
exact proportionality or envy-freeness when each individual
good is negligible compared to the set of all goods.
The situation becomes more dire when we impose another
common constraint: connectedness. Bouveret et al. (2017)
introduced a model where the indivisible goods are nodes
of a graph and the goal is to allocate to each agent a subset of goods that forms a connected subgraph. Examples of
real-world applications where connectedness is desirable include allocation of offices to research groups in an academic
building, land division (Devulapalli 2014), congressional redistricting1 , power grid islanding (Soltan, Yannakakis, and
Zussman 2020), and metadata partitioning in large-scale distributed storage systems (Wu, Liu, and Chung 2010).
While many of these applications have identical goods
(meaning that all agents have the same value for each good),
it is easy to see that even in this special case, no reasonable
relaxation of proportionality or envy-freeness can be guaranteed, even if each individual good is negligible compared to
the set of all goods. For example, consider m  n identical
goods connected via a star graph with a hub node connected
to m − 1 leaf nodes. Any way of partitioning the nodes into
n connected bundles will produce a highly imbalanced partition in which one very large bundle has at least m − n + 1
nodes while every other bundle has at most a single node.
This, in essence, is the fair graph partitioning problem that
we study in this work. Formally, we are given an undirected
graph G = (V, E), where V is a set of m nodes and we want
to partition it into (V1 , . . . , Vn ) such that each Vi forms a
connected subgraph. Borrowing from the fair division literature, we call this partition α-proportional if mini α · |Vi | ⩾
m/n, and α-balanced if maxi |Vi | ⩽ α · mini |Vi |. It is easy
to see that α-balancedness implies α-proportionality.2 Balancedness and similar cardinality constraints have been investigated previously in various fair division contexts (Leroux and Leroux 2004; Biswas and Barman 2018; Bei et al.
2021b; Halpern and Shah 2021); in our case, note that 1-

Motivated by fair division applications, we study a fair connected graph partitioning problem, in which an undirected
graph with m nodes must be divided between n agents such
that each agent receives a connected subgraph and the partition is fair. We study approximate versions of two fairness
criteria: α-proportionality requires that each agent receives a
subgraph with at least 1/α · m/n nodes, and α-balancedness
requires that the ratio between the sizes of the largest and
smallest subgraphs be at most α. Unfortunately, there exist
simple examples in which no partition is reasonably proportional or balanced. To circumvent this, we introduce the idea
of charity. We show that by “donating” just n − 1 nodes, we
can guarantee the existence of 2-proportional and almost 2balanced partitions (and find them in polynomial time), and
that this result is almost tight. More generally, we chart the
tradeoff between the size of charity and the approximation of
proportionality or balancedness we can guarantee.

1

Introduction

The problem of fair division concerns the allocation of a set
of goods (or chores) fairly between a set of agents. Perhaps the most canonical model is cake-cutting, in which
a heterogeneous divisible good, called cake, is divided between n agents. Under minimal assumptions, this model allows providing compelling fairness guarantees. For example, one can ensure proportionality (Steinhaus 1948), which
demands that each agent’s value for her allocation be at least
1/n-th of her value for the entire cake, or the stronger notion of envy-freeness (Gamow and Stern 1958; Dubins and
Spanier 1961), which demands that no agent strictly prefers
another agent’s allocation to her own.
However, many real-world applications pose additional
constraints, which often make such strong fairness notions
impossible to guarantee. A common constraint, which has
received increasing attention recently, is indivisibility. Here,
one assumes that the goods cannot be split, i.e., each good
must be allocated entirely to a single agent. For example,
when dividing an inheritance between heirs, goods such as a
house or a piece of jewelry are indivisible. In this case, one
can no longer guarantee proportionality or envy-freeness;
think of allocating a single indivisible good between two

1
This is the process of re-drawing electoral district boundaries.
Formally, a graph of electoral precincts is divided into a fixed number of connected subgraphs (districts) with approximately equal
populations (Williams Jr 1995).
2
Actually, it implies (α − (α − 1)/n)-proportionality.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4908

