The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

L O R E N: Logic-Regularized Reasoning for Interpretable Fact Verification
Jiangjie Chen1,2 * , Qiaoben Bao1 , Changzhi Sun2 , Xinbo Zhang2 ,
Jiaze Chen2 , Hao Zhou2 , Yanghua Xiao1,4† , Lei Li3†‡
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
ByteDance AI Lab 3 University of California, Santa Barbara
4
Fudan-Aishu Cognitive Intelligence Joint Research Center
{jjchen19, qbbao19, shawyh}@fudan.edu.cn, lilei@cs.ucsb.edu,
{sunchangzhi, zhangxinbo.freya, chenjiaze, zhouhao.nlp}@bytedance.com
Culprit!

Abstract

Claim: c Donald Trump won the 2020 election.

Given a natural language statement, how to verify its veracity against a large-scale textual knowledge source like
Wikipedia? Most existing neural models make predictions
without giving clues about which part of a false claim goes
wrong. In this paper, we propose L O R E N, an approach for
interpretable fact verification. We decompose the verification
of the whole claim at phrase-level, where the veracity of the
phrases serves as explanations and can be aggregated into the
final verdict according to logical rules. The key insight of
L O R E N is to represent claim phrase veracity as three-valued
latent variables, which are regularized by aggregation logical rules. The final claim verification is based on all latent
variables. Thus, L O R E N enjoys the additional benefit of interpretability — it is easy to explain how it reaches certain
results with claim phrase veracity. Experiments on a public
fact verification benchmark show that L O R E N is competitive
against previous approaches while enjoying the merit of faithful and accurate interpretability. The resources of L O R E N are
available at: https://github.com/jiangjiechen/LOREN.

1

Evidence
Retrieval

w2

w1

w3

q2: Donald Trump [MASK] the 2020 election.

Local Premises
Construction

w′1￼: Donald Trump c′1￼: Donald Trump won the 2020 election.
Evidence: E

c′2￼: Donald Trump lost the 2020 election.
w′2￼: lost
w′3￼: the 2020 pre- c′3￼: Donald Trump won the 2020

presidential election.

sidential election

Veracity
Prediction

c
E

x

c′1￼
c′2￼
c′3￼

z1:
z2:
z3:

SUPPORTS
REFUTES
SUPPORTS

y: REFUTES

Phrase
Veracity

Claim Veracity

Figure 1: An example of how our proposed fact verification
framework L O R E N works. Texts highlighted denote the data
flow for three phrases extracted from the claim. L O R E N not
only makes the final verification but also finds the culprit
phrase (w2 ) that causes the claim’s falsity.

Introduction

The rapid growth of mobile platforms has facilitated creating
and spreading of information. However, there are many dubious statements appearing on social media platforms. For
example, during the 2020 U.S. presidential election, there
are many false claims about Donald Trump winning the election, as shown in Figure 1. Verifying these statements is in
critical need. How to verify the validity of a textual statement? We attempt to predict whether a statement is supported, refuted or unverifiable with an additional large textual knowledge source such as Wikipedia. Notice that it is
computationally expensive to compute the input statement
with every sentence in Wikipedia.
This work focuses on interpretable fact verification — it
aims to provide decomposable justifications in addition to
an overall veracity prediction. We are motivated by a simple

intuition: the veracity of a claim depends on the truthfulness
of its composing phrases, e.g., subject, verb, object phrases.
A false claim can be attributed to one or more unsupported
phrases, which we refer to as the culprit. The claim is valid
if all phrases are supported by certain evidence sentences in
Wikipedia. For example, one culprit in Figure 1 would be
the phrase “won”. Therefore, faithful predictions of phrase
veracity would explain why a verification model draws such
a verdict. In addition, through phrasal veracity prediction,
identifying the culprit also alleviates the burden of correcting an untrustworthy claim, as we can easily alter “won” to
“lost” to make it right.
Most current studies focus on designing specialized neural network architectures, with the hope of exploiting the semantics from sentences (Nie, Chen, and Bansal 2019; Zhou
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020b; Zhong et al. 2020; Si et al. 2021;
Jiang, Pradeep, and Lin 2021). However, these methods are
limited in interpretability, as they usually only give an overall verdict. This puts forth trust issues for humans, as a deci-

* Work is done during internship at ByteDance AI Lab.
†

Corresponding authors.
Work is done while at ByteDance AI Lab.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

10482

