The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Certified Robustness of Nearest Neighbors against Data
Poisoning and Backdoor Attacks
Jinyuan Jia, Yupei Liu, Xiaoyu Cao, Neil Zhenqiang Gong
Duke University
{jinyuan.jia, yupei.liu, xiaoyu.cao, neil.gong}@duke.edu

Abstract

Jia, Cao, and Gong 2021) against data poisoning attacks and
backdoor attacks were recently developed. A learning algorithm is certifiably robust against data poisoning attacks
and backdoor attacks if it can learn a classifier on a training
dataset that achieves a certified accuracy on a testing dataset
when the number of poisoned training examples is no more
than a threshold (called poisoning size). The certified accuracy of a learning algorithm is a lower bound of the accuracy
of its learnt classifier no matter how an attacker poisons the
training examples with the given poisoning size.
The key idea of state-of-the-art certifiably robust learning
algorithms (Jia, Cao, and Gong 2021; Levine and Feizi 2021)
is to create a majority vote mechanism to predict the label of
a testing example. In particular, each voter votes a label for a
testing example and the final predicted label is the majority
vote among multiple voters. For instance, Bagging (Jia, Cao,
and Gong 2021) learns multiple base classifiers (i.e., voters),
where each of them is learnt on a random subsample of the
training dataset. Deep Partition Aggregation (DPA) (Levine
and Feizi 2021) divides the training dataset into disjoint partitions and learns a base classifier (i.e., a voter) on each
partition. We denote by a and b the labels with the largest
and second largest number of votes, respectively. Moreover,
sa and sb respectively are the number of votes for labels
a and b when there are no corrupted voters. The corrupted
voters change their votes from a to b in the worst-case scenario. Therefore, the majority vote result (i.e., the predicted
label for a testing example) remains to be a when the number
b
of corrupted voters is no larger than ⌈ sa −s
2 ⌉ − 1. In other
words, the number of corrupted voters that a majority vote
mechanism can tolerate depends on the gap sa − sb between
the largest and the second largest number of votes.
However, state-of-the-art certifiably robust learning algorithms achieve suboptimal certified accuracies due to two
key limitations. First, each poisoned training example leads
to multiple corrupted voters in the worst-case scenarios. In
particular, modifying a training example corrupts the voters
whose training subsamples include the modified training example in bagging (Jia, Cao, and Gong 2021) and corrupts two
voters (i.e., two base classifiers) in DPA (Levine and Feizi
2021). Therefore, given the same gap sa − sb between the
largest and the second largest number of votes, the majority vote result is robust against a small number of poisoned
training examples. Second, they can only certify robustness

Data poisoning attacks and backdoor attacks aim to corrupt
a machine learning classifier via modifying, adding, and/or
removing some carefully selected training examples, such
that the corrupted classifier makes incorrect predictions as the
attacker desires. The key idea of state-of-the-art certified defenses against data poisoning attacks and backdoor attacks is to
create a majority vote mechanism to predict the label of a testing example. Moreover, each voter is a base classifier trained
on a subset of the training dataset. Classical simple learning algorithms such as k nearest neighbors (kNN) and radius
nearest neighbors (rNN) have intrinsic majority vote mechanisms. In this work, we show that the intrinsic majority vote
mechanisms in kNN and rNN already provide certified robustness guarantees against data poisoning attacks and backdoor
attacks. Moreover, our evaluation results on MNIST and CIFAR10 show that the intrinsic certified robustness guarantees
of kNN and rNN outperform those provided by state-of-the-art
certified defenses. Our results serve as standard baselines for
future certified defenses against data poisoning attacks and
backdoor attacks.

Introduction
Data poisoning attacks and backdoor attacks (Barreno et al.
2006; Nelson et al. 2008; Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012;
Biggio, Fumera, and Roli 2013; Xiao et al. 2015b; Steinhardt,
Koh, and Liang 2017; Gu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2017; Liu
et al. 2018; Shafahi et al. 2018) aim to corrupt the training
phase of a machine learning system via carefully poisoning its training dataset including modifying, adding, and/or
removing some training examples. Specifically, in data poisoning attacks, the corrupted downstream classifier makes
incorrect predictions for clean testing inputs; and in backdoor
attacks, the corrupted downstream classifier makes incorrect
predictions for testing inputs embedded with a certain trigger. Data poisoning attacks and backdoor attacks pose severe
security concerns to machine learning in critical application
domains such as autonomous driving (Gu et al. 2019), cybersecurity (Rubinstein et al. 2009; Suciu et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2017), and healthcare analytics (Mozaffari-Kermani
et al. 2014).
Multiple certifiably robust learning algorithms (Ma, Zhu,
and Hsu 2019; Rosenfeld et al. 2020; Levine and Feizi 2021;
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9575

