The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Novel Approach to Solving Goal-Achieving Problems for Board Games
Chung-Chin Shih1,2 * , Ti-Rong Wu1 * , Ting Han Wei3 , and I-Chen Wu1,2†
1

Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
2
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
3
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
{rockmanray,kds285}@aigames.nctu.edu.tw, tinghan@ualberta.ca, icwu@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract

problems using computer programs involves finding a solution tree (Stockman 1979; Pijls and de Bruin 2001) that
represents a full strategy of answering moves. As a computational problem, one of the main challenges is that the large
branching factor in Go tends to lead to a prohibitively large
solution tree. To cut down on the search size, Kishimoto and
Müller (2003; 2005a; 2005b) manually designated a specific
search space to prevent searching irrelevant spaces.
An elegant way to reduce the branching factor is to take
advantage of threats (Allis 1994), which are moves that force
the opponent to respond in a specific way. When threats are
involved, not all opponent moves need to be explored to ensure correctness when solving L&D problems, especially
moves that do not answer the threat. In this vein, Thomsen (2000) proposed a threat-based search algorithm named
lambda search, by trying null moves first (usually by passing), then deriving a so-called relevance zone (RZ), outside
of which the opponent does not need to search.
This paper proposes a novel approach called RZ-Based
Search (RZS) to solving L&D problems. We illustrate the
basic concepts of RZS with examples in Go and Hex. RZS itself is then described in detail with Go examples. With RZS,
moves are searched first, before they are determined to be
null moves post-hoc. This allows our approach to be seamlessly incorporated into most search algorithms. Specifically
for this paper, we applied RZS into an AlphaZero-like program (Silver et al. 2018), well-known for playing at superhuman levels.
A straightforward way of leveraging AlphaZero methods
for goal-achieving problems is to use it in the construction
of solution trees, by adding Boolean AND-OR tree logic for
wins and losses into the AlphaZero MCTS procedure. However, AlphaZero is fundamentally trained for the task of winning the game, rather than proving it exhaustively. This leads
to a discrepancy in behaviour between a strong player and a
solver. Namely, AlphaZero picks any winning move, rather
than the move that leads to the shortest distance to win, as
also mentioned in (Agostinelli et al. 2019).
In order to reduce the solution tree size (with shorter paths
to prove), we also propose a new AlphaZero-like training
method called Faster to Life (FTL), by modifying the goal
of the AlphaZero algorithm so that it prefers winning in
fewer moves. In our experiments, among a collection of
20 7x7 L&D problems, all are solved with RZS integrated

Goal-achieving problems are puzzles that set up a specific
situation with a clear objective. An example that is wellstudied is the category of life-and-death (L&D) problems for
Go, which helps players hone their skill of identifying region
safety. Many previous methods like lambda search try null
moves first, then derive so-called relevance zones (RZs), outside of which the opponent does not need to search. This paper first proposes a novel RZ-based approach, called the RZBased Search (RZS), to solving L&D problems for Go. RZS
tries moves before determining whether they are null moves
post-hoc. This means we do not need to rely on null move
heuristics, resulting in a more elegant algorithm, so that it
can also be seamlessly incorporated into AlphaZero’s superhuman level play in our solver. To repurpose AlphaZero for
solving, we also propose a new training method called Faster
to Life (FTL), which modifies AlphaZero to entice it to win
more quickly. We use RZS and FTL to solve L&D problems on Go, namely solving 68 among 106 problems from a
professional L&D book while a previous state-of-the-art program TSUMEGO-EXPLORER solves 11 only. Finally, we
discuss that the approach is generic in the sense that RZS is
applicable to solving many other goal-achieving problems for
board games.

Introduction
Traditional board games such as Go and Hex have played an
important role in the development of artificial intelligence.
Goal-achieving problems are puzzles that challenge players
to achieve specific goals under given board configurations.
Life-and-death (L&D) problems in Go is a typical goalachieving problem. In Go, where the goal for both players
is to hold more territory on the game board than their opponent, a critical skill is to identify safety for stone groups.
A safe (live) stone group holds territory on the board indefinitely, thereby giving an advantage to the player that owns
it. To build this skill, Go players have been creating and
solving L&D problems, also called tsumego, for centuries.
Many of these problems are challenging even for professional players. A straightforward method of solving L&D
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10362

