The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Debiased Batch Normalization via Gaussian Process for Generalizable
Person Re-identification
Jiawei Liu1 * , Zhipeng Huang1 * , Liang Li2 , Kecheng Zheng1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hzp1104,zkcys001}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {jwliu6,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Re-ID methods have been proposed and achieved promising
performances in a fully supervised manner.
However, when applying these trained models to previously unseen domains, supervised approaches suffer from
significant performance degradation due to style discrepancies across domains. To this end, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been introduced in person Re-ID. UDA
approaches employ unlabeled samples from target domain
to adapt the pre-trained model on the labeled source domain
to target domain (Bak, Carr, and Lalonde 2018). Although
UDA approaches are more practical than the full supervised
approaches, they still require data collection and model update for the target domain, resulting in additional computational cost. Moreover, samples from a target domain are
usually not unavailable in advance.
Compared to UDA, domain generalization (DG) is a
promising solution for real-world applications. Domain generalization aims at learning models that are generalizable to
unseen target domain, without requiring access to the data
and annotations from target domain as well as model updating, i.e., fine-tune or adaptation. Most existing DG methods (Chattopadhyay, Balaji, and Hoffman 2020; Huang et al.
2020) assume that the source and target domains share the
same label space with a fixed of classes, which are designed
for a classification task. In contrast, domain generalization
for person Re-ID is an open-set retrieval task, having different and variable number of identities between source and
target domains. Therefore, it is difficult to achieve satisfying
generalization capability when the existing DG approaches
are directly applied to person Re-ID.
Existing generalizable person Re-ID approaches can be
divided into two categories: single model methods (Zhao
et al. 2021; Choi et al. 2021; Song et al. 2019) and ensemble learning based methods (Dai et al. 2021; Seo et al. 2020;
Zhuang et al. 2020; Mancini et al. 2018). The former collects all source domain data and trains a single model on
them to extract the shared domain-invariant representations.
They mainly design customized loss functions (e.g., Maximum Mean Discrepancy regularization to align the distributions among different domain), specific architectures (e.g.
integrating Batch Normalization and Instance Normalization in the models to alleviate the domain discrepancy due
to appearance style variations), or ad-hoc training policies
(e.g., model-agnostic meta learning to mimic real train-test

Generalizable person re-identification aims to learn a model
with only several labeled source domains that can perform
well on unseen domains. Without access to the unseen domain, the feature statistics of the batch normalization (BN)
layer learned from a limited number of source domains is
doubtlessly biased for unseen domain. This would mislead
the feature representation learning for unseen domain and deteriorate the generalizaiton ability of the model. In this paper,
we propose a novel Debiased Batch Normalization via Gaussian Process approach (GDNorm) for generalizable person reidentification, which models the feature statistic estimation
from BN layers as a dynamically self-refining Gaussian process to alleviate the bias to unseen domain for improving the
generalization. Specifically, we establish a lightweight model
with multiple set of domain-specific BN layers to capture the
discriminability of individual source domain, and learn the
corresponding parameters of the domain-specific BN layers.
These parameters of different source domains are employed
to deduce a Gaussian process. We randomly sample several
paths from this Gaussian process served as the BN estimations of potential new domains outside of existing source domains, which can further optimize these learned parameters
from source domains, and estimate more accurate Gaussian
process by them in return, tending to real data distribution.
Even without a large number of source domains, GDNorm
can still provide debiased BN estimation by using the mean
path of the Gaussian process, while maintaining low computational cost during testing. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our GDNorm effectively improves the generalization ability of the model on unseen domain.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) (Ye et al. 2021; Luo et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2016, 2019) aims to identify a person-ofinterest across non-overlapping camera networks under different times and locations. It has drawn extensive research
attention in recent years, due to its significant role in various
practice scenarios, such as object tracking, activity analysis
and smart retail etc (Wang 2013; Caba Heilbron et al. 2015;
Martini, Paolanti, and Frontoni 2020). Along with the success of deep learning, large amount of sophisticated person
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1729

