The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Verification of Neural-Network Control Systems
by Integrating Taylor Models and Zonotopes
Christian Schilling,1 Marcelo Forets,2 Sebastián Guadalupe2
1

Aalborg University, Denmark
Universidad de la República, Uruguay
christianms@cs.aau.dk, mforets@gmail.com, sebastianguadalupe00@gmail.com
2

switch to the other tool, a conversion between set representations is required because the tools use different techniques.
Thus some of the dependency information encoded in the
sets is lost when the tools are treated as black boxes. This
incurs an approximation error that quickly accumulates over
time, also known as the wrapping effect (Neumaier 1993).
Reachability algorithms at a sweet spot between precision and performance in the literature are based on Taylor
models for ODEs (Makino and Berz 2003; Chen, Ábrahám,
and Sankaranarayanan 2012) and on set propagation via abstract interpretation (Cousot and Cousot 1977) for neural
networks, particularly using zonotopes (Gehr et al. 2018;
Singh et al. 2018). In this work we propose a new reachability algorithm for NNCS that combines Taylor models and
zonotopes. In general, Taylor models and zonotopes are incomparable and cannot be converted exactly. We describe
how to tame the approximation error when converting between these two set representations with two main insights.
First, we identify a special structured zonotope, which can
be exactly converted to a Taylor model by encoding the additional structure in the so-called remainder. Second, the structure of the Taylor model from the previous cycle can be retained by only updating the control inputs, which allows to
preserve the dependencies encoded in the Taylor model.
Our approach only acts at the set interface and does not
require access to the internals of the reachability tools. They
only need to expose the complete set information, which is
only a minor modification of the black-box algorithms. Thus
our approach makes no assumptions about the ODE or the
neural network, as long as there are sound algorithms for
their (almost black-box) reachability analysis available. This
makes the approach a universal tool. While our approach is
conceptually simple, we demonstrate in our evaluation that
it is effective and scalable in practice. We successfully analyzed all benchmark problems from an annual NNCS competition (Johnson et al. 2021) for the first time.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:

Abstract
We study the verification problem for closed-loop dynamical systems with neural-network controllers (NNCS). This
problem is commonly reduced to computing the set of reachable states. When considering dynamical systems and neural
networks in isolation, there exist precise approaches for that
task based on set representations respectively called Taylor
models and zonotopes. However, the combination of these
approaches to NNCS is non-trivial because, when converting between the set representations, dependency information
gets lost in each control cycle and the accumulated approximation error quickly renders the result useless. We present
an algorithm to chain approaches based on Taylor models
and zonotopes, yielding a precise reachability algorithm for
NNCS. Because the algorithm only acts at the interface of
the isolated approaches, it is applicable to general dynamical systems and neural networks and can benefit from future
advances in these areas. Our implementation delivers stateof-the-art performance and is the first to successfully analyze
all benchmark problems of an annual reachability competition for NNCS.

Introduction
In this work we consider controlled dynamical systems
where the plant model is given as a nonlinear ordinary differential equation (ODE) and the controller is implemented
by a neural network. We call such systems neural-network
control systems (NNCS). We are interested in reachability
properties of NNCS: guaranteed reachability of target states
or non-reachability of error states. These questions can be
verified by computing a set that overapproximates the reachable states, which is the subject of reachability analysis, with
a large body of works for ODEs (Althoff, Frehse, and Girard
2021) and neural networks (Liu et al. 2021).
In principle, reachability analysis for NNCS can be implemented by chaining two off-the-shelf tools for analyzing
the ODE and the neural network. The output set of one tool
is the input set to the other, and this process is repeated for
each control cycle. This idea is indeed applied by several
approaches (Tran et al. 2020b; Clavière et al. 2021). While
correct, such an approach often yields sets that are too conservative to be useful in practice. The reason is that with each

• We propose structured zonotopes and show how to
soundly convert them to Taylor models and back.
• We design a sound reachability algorithm for NNCS
based on Taylor models and zonotopes.
• We demonstrate the precision and scalability of the algorithm on benchmarks from a reachability competition.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
8169

