The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

HarmoFL: Harmonizing Local and Global Drifts in
Federated Learning on Heterogeneous Medical Images
Meirui Jiang1 * , Zirui Wang2 * , Qi Dou1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University

w/o
Harmonization

Abstract

Local + Global
Harmonization (HarmoFL)

Client 2

Client 1

Multiple medical institutions collaboratively training a model
using federated learning (FL) has become a promising solution for maximizing the potential of data-driven models,
yet the non-independent and identically distributed (non-iid)
data in medical images is still an outstanding challenge in
real-world practice. The feature heterogeneity caused by diverse scanners or protocols introduces a drift in the learning process, in both local (client) and global (server) optimizations, which harms the convergence as well as model
performance. Many previous works have attempted to address the non-iid issue by tackling the drift locally or globally, but how to jointly solve the two essentially coupled
drifts is still unclear. In this work, we concentrate on handling both local and global drifts and introduce a new harmonizing framework called HarmoFL. First, we propose to
mitigate the local update drift by normalizing amplitudes
of images transformed into the frequency domain to mimic
a unified imaging setting, in order to generate a harmonized feature space across local clients. Second, based on
harmonized features, we design a client weight perturbation
guiding each local model to reach a flat optimum, where a
neighborhood area of the local optimal solution has a uniformly low loss. Without any extra communication cost, the
perturbation assists the global model to optimize towards
a converged optimal solution by aggregating several local
flat optima. We have theoretically analyzed the proposed
method and empirically conducted extensive experiments on
three medical image classification and segmentation tasks,
showing that HarmoFL outperforms a set of recent stateof-the-art methods with promising convergence behavior.
Code is available at: https://github.com/med-air/HarmoFL

Local
Harmonization

Global solution F*

Local solution F*
i

Figure 1: Loss landscape visualization of two clients without
harmonization (left), with only local harmonization (middle)
and our complete method of HarmoFL (right). The vertical
axis shows the loss (denoting the solution for global objective as F ∗ and each local objective as Fi∗ ), and the horizontal plane represents a parameter space centered at the global
model weight. (See Introduction for detailed explanation.)

can jointly train a model without actual data sharing, i.e.,
training client models locally and aggregating them globally
(McMahan et al. 2017; Kaissis et al. 2020).
Despite the recent promising progress achieved by FL in
medical image analysis (Dou et al. 2021; Rieke et al. 2020;
Sheller et al. 2020; Roth et al. 2020; Ju et al. 2020), the
non-independent and identically distributed (non-iid) data is
still an outstanding challenge in real-world practice (Kairouz
et al. 2019; Hsieh et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021). Non-iid issue
typically happens, and the device vendors or data acquisition
protocols are responsible for heterogeneity in the feature distributions (Aubreville et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020). For example, the appearance of histology images varies due to different staining situations, and MRI data of different hospitals
suffer from feature distribution shifts associated with various scanners or imaging protocols.
Previous literature has demonstrated, both empirically
and theoretically, that such data heterogeneity across clients
introduces drift in both local (client) and global (server) optimizations, making the convergence slow and unstable (Zhao
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019; Karimireddy et al. 2020). Specif-

Introduction
Multi-site collaborative training of deep networks is increasingly important for maximizing the potential of datadriven models in medical image analysis (Shilo, Rossman,
and Segal 2020; Peiffer-Smadja et al. 2020; Dhruva et al.
2020), however, the data sharing is still restricted by some
legal and ethical issues for protecting patient data. Federated learning recently allows a promising decentralized
privacy-preserving solution, in which different institutions
* Equal contribution. Corresponding: mrjiang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1087

