The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

KATG: Keyword-Bias-Aware Adversarial Text Generation for Text Classification
Lingfeng Shen1 Shoushan Li2 Ying Chen3 *
1

College of Science, China Agricultural University, China
Natural Language Processing Lab, Soochow University, China
3
College of Information and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural University, China
2

Abstract

Introduction

Recent work has shown that current text classification models
are vulnerable to a small adversarial perturbation on inputs,
and adversarial training that re-trains the models with the support of adversarial examples is the most popular way to alleviate the impact of the perturbation. However, current adversarial training methods have two principal problems: a drop
in model’s generalization and ineffective defending against
other text attacks. In this paper, we propose a Keywordbias-aware Adversarial Text Generation model (KATG) that
implicitly generates adversarial sentences using a generatordiscriminator structure. Instead of using a benign sentence to
generate an adversarial sentence, the KATG model utilizes
extra multiple benign sentences (namely prior sentences) to
guide adversarial sentence generation. Furthermore, to cover
more perturbations used in existing attacks, a keyword-biasbased sampling is proposed to select sentences containing biased words as prior sentences. Besides, to effectively utilize
prior sentences, a generative flow mechanism is proposed to
construct a latent semantic space for learning a latent representation of the prior sentences. Experiments demonstrate
that adversarial sentences generated by our KATG model can
strengthen the generalization and the robustness of text classification models.

The significant progress of deep learning has achieved great
success in text classification, a fundamental research topic in
the field of Natural Language Processing (Hashimoto et al.
2018; Li et al. 2018; Fan, Feng, and Zhao 2018; Qin et al.
2020). However, recent studies have pointed that deep neural
networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to an adversarial sentence
which is generated through adding an imperceptible perturbation to a benign sentence (Biggio et al. 2013; Szegedy
et al. 2014; Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015). Although
such a perturbation is discernible to humans, it can fool
DNNs to give false predictions. The attack in text classification may lead to severe consequences. For instance, the
adversary can post hate speech by using the trigger to predict these negative tweets or reviews as positive ones. Therefore, significant concerns about methods that improve the robustness of DNN-based text classification models have been
raised.
Adversarial training that re-trains a classifier with the help
of adversarial sentences (Le, Wang, and Lee 2020; Han et al.
2020; Garg and Ramakrishnan 2020) is the most popular
method to enhance model’s robustness, but there are remaining several unsolved research problems for these enhanced
classifiers. One problem lies in their drop in model’s generalization. Most existing adversarial training methods generate an adversarial sentence based on only a benign sentence,
either through applying heuristic operations (e.g., insertion,
removal, and substitution) or by adopting a language generation model. Thus, it is likely that a perturbation is not
well-controlled and might even change the ground-truth label of the benign sentence, which leads to a generalization
drop (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018). Another problem
is their ineffective defending against other text attacks. In
other words, an enhanced classifier that is trained with adversarial sentences generated by attack A is robust towards
A, but it is still vulnerable towards other attacks (e.g., attack
B). The ineffective defending ability can be attributed to that
the approach (e.g., attack A) to generate perturbations is not
general enough to cover perturbations generated by other attacks (e.g., attack B).
To address the two issues, in this paper, we propose a
keyword-bias-aware Adversarial Text Generation (KATG)
model, which implicitly generates an adversarial sentence
with class i based on a benign sentence with class i and

Benign Sentence

Sixthreezero is good, I’ve used it for a
long time, only changed because I
got tired of the same old bike. (Pos)

Prior Sentences

S1: Blackberry may work on the systems,
but I’m not willing to take that chance
on a new expensive phone. (Neg)
S2: Iphone4s is in ok previously used
condition as stated. But I was
disappointed I couldn’t activate the
phone upon arrival. (Neg)

Adv. Sentence

Amazing Iphone4s, used it for so long
, only changed because I got tired of
the old expensive Blackberry. (Pos)

Table 1: Benign sentence, prior sentences and adversarial
sentence used in our KATG model.
* the corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11294

