The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MoCaNet: Motion Retargeting In-the-Wild via Canonicalization Networks
Wentao Zhu* 1,2 , Zhuoqian Yang* 3 , Ziang Di4 , Wayne Wu2,3† , Yizhou Wang1 , Chen Change Loy5
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 SenseTime Research
4
Southeast University 5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
wtzhu@pku.edu.cn, yangzhuoqian@sensetime.com,
213180794@seu.edu.cn, wuwenyan0503@gmail.com,
yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

We present a novel framework that brings the 3D motion
retargeting task from controlled environments to in-the-wild
scenarios. In particular, our method is capable of retargeting
body motion from a character in a 2D monocular video to a
3D character without using any motion capture system or 3D
reconstruction procedure. It is designed to leverage massive
online videos for unsupervised training, requiring neither 3D
annotations nor motion-body pairing information. The proposed method is built upon two novel canonicalization operations, structure canonicalization and view canonicalization.
Trained with the canonicalization operations and the derived
regularizations, our method learns to factorize a skeleton sequence into three independent semantic subspaces, i.e., motion, structure, and view angle. The disentangled representation enables motion retargeting from 2D to 3D with high
precision. Our method achieves superior performance on motion transfer benchmarks with large body variations and challenging actions. Notably, the canonicalized skeleton sequence
could serve as a disentangled and interpretable representation
of human motion that benefits action analysis and motion retrieval.

Figure 1: 3D Motion Retargeting in the Wild. Motion is
extracted from the video clip and retargeted to the virtual
avatar. Our method extracts 2D skeleton sequences rather
than 3D sequences from in-the-wild videos.
noisy), from which 3D motion needs to be inferred. The
common practice is to estimate 3D pose first, then perform
3D-to-3D retargeting through Inverse Kinematics (IK). Nevertheless, the results of current 3D pose estimation (Ci et al.
2019; Pavllo et al. 2019; Moon, Chang, and Lee 2019; Yang
et al. 2018) and model-based mesh reconstruction (Liu et al.
2019; Kocabas, Athanasiou, and Black 2020; Choi, Moon,
and Lee 2020) methods deteriorate severely under occlusions, large body variations and uncommon actions from unconstrained real-world videos, as discussed in (Dong et al.
2020; Chen et al. 2019b; Duan et al. 2021). The errors originated from 3D pose estimation can easily propagate to the
IK stage and degrade the quality of retargeted motion.
In this work, we argue that the conventional way of performing IK after 3D estimation is not sufficiently robust and
reliable for in-the-wild motion retargeting. To this end, we
propose an end-to-end learnable model, Canonicalization
Networks, which allows us to bypass the error-prone direct
3D pose estimation and use an off-the-shelf 2D pose estimator to extract geometrical information that is more robust and
reliable. Our method then takes the 2D skeleton sequences
and generates 3D retargeted skeleton sequences, as shown
in Fig. 1. However, retargeting motion from 2D skeleton sequences is not a trivial task. Arbitrarily captured real-world
videos contain large structural variations and diverse camera
views. The same action, e.g., standing up, may appear dramatically different in 2D under different views given different body structures. It is therefore meaningful and challenging to extract the unmixed motion in a high-level semantic
modality.
We tackle the challenge through the novel notion of

Introduction
3D motion retargeting aims at transferring one character’s
motion to a virtual 3D avatar. It is an important and challenging task in computer vision and computer graphics with
a wide spectrum of applications in human-computer interaction (Hoshyari et al. 2019; Kim and Lee 2020) and augmented reality (Kang et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2016). Traditional approaches rely on motion capture (MoCap) systems (Ott, Lee, and Nakamura 2008; Koenemann, Burget,
and Bennewitz 2014), which are capable of capturing precise 3D motion but are limited to sophisticated environments
only available to film and game studios. This kind of setup is
inaccessible for everyday users with in-the-wild usage scenarios, e.g., on-device augmented reality.
The challenge of in-the-wild motion retargeting lies in
that videos recorded on mobile devices or downloaded from
the Internet only provide 2D visual information (usually
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3617

