The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Span-Based Semantic Role Labeling
with Argument Pruning and Second-Order Inference
Zixia jia* 1,2,3,4 , Zhaohui Yan* 1,2,3,4 , Haoyi Wu1 , Kewei Tu†1,2
1

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiazx, yanzhh, wuhy1, tukw}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
2

Abstract
We study graph-based approaches to span-based semantic role
labeling. This task is difficult due to the need to enumerate all
possible predicate-argument pairs and the high degree of imbalance between positive and negative samples. Based on these
difficulties, high-order inference that considers interactions
between multiple arguments and predicates is often deemed
beneficial but has rarely been used in span-based semantic
role labeling. Because even for second-order inference, there
are already O(n5 ) parts for a sentence of length n, and exact
high-order inference is intractable. In this paper, we propose a
framework consisting of two networks: a predicate-agnostic argument pruning network that reduces the number of candidate
arguments to O(n), and a semantic role labeling network with
an optional second-order decoder that is unfolded from an approximate inference algorithm. Our experiments show that our
framework achieves significant and consistent improvement
over previous approaches.

Introduction
The task of semantic role labeling (SRL) aims to recognize
the predicate-argument structure of each predicate in a sentence. Lots of previous work shows that the shallow semantic
structures found by SRL are beneficial to many downstream
natural language processing tasks, especially those involving
text understanding, such as machine reading comprehension
(Wang et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2020), question answering
(Eckert and Neves 2018; Khashabi et al. 2018) and machine
translation (Marcheggiani, Bastings, and Titov 2018).
There are two annotation types of SRL, namely
dependency-based SRL where each argument is a single
token and span-based SRL where each argument is a span
that consists of one or more words. Span-based SRL is more
difficult than dependency-based SRL because it needs to not
only label semantic roles but also detect argument boundaries.
In this paper, we focus on span-based SRL.
Two main classes of approaches to span-based SRL are
sequence labeling approaches (Yang and Mitchell 2017; He
et al. 2017; Tan et al. 2018; Strubell et al. 2018) and graphbased approaches (He et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019; Ouchi,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10822

Shindo, and Matsumoto 2018; Marcheggiani and Titov 2020).
Sequence labeling approaches often employ the BIO tagging
scheme and predict a BIO tag for each word in the input
sentence. In comparison, graph-based approaches directly
predict predicate-argument pairs, which can better leverage
span-level features. Besides, graph-based approaches can handle multiple predicates in the same sentence, while sequence
labeling approaches cannot.
There are two major challenges faced by graph-based approaches. The first is that we need to enumerate all possible predicate-argument pairs, resulting in O(n3 ) complexity,
which is too computationally expensive. The second is that
a sentence typically contains only a few predicate-argument
pairs among O(n3 ) word-span pairs, leading to a severe data
imbalance problem in training and low recall in prediction.
These two challenges can be addressed with argument pruning, which tries to remove unlikely arguments and produce a
much smaller and more balanced candidate argument set for
subsequent SRL prediction. Previous work trains the argument pruner jointly with the SRL predictor (He et al. 2018;
Li et al. 2019). However, joint training is problematic in that
the SRL training loss is defined over candidate arguments
produced by the pruner and hence when the pruner changes
during training, so does the SRL training loss, leading to a
moving target for training. In this paper, we propose to train
argument pruning independently from SRL prediction, leading to more stable training and better SRL performance. We
also propose a new argument pruning model that empirically
outperforms previous methods.
Utilizing high-order information has been proved beneficial on many tasks such as dependency parsing (Wang,
Huang, and Tu 2019; Wang and Tu 2020; Zhang, Li, and
Zhang 2020) and dependency-based SRL (Lyu, Cohen, and
Titov 2019; Chen, Lyu, and Titov 2019; Li et al. 2020b). It
is often deemed beneficial to SRL prediction. For example,
in the sentence “We watch the musician who is respected by
many people playing violin on TV”, “musician” is far from
“playing” while “people” is adjacent to “playing”, which may
confuse an SRL model, but if we know “violin” is the argument (of role Arg1) of predicate “play”, then “musician”
becomes a more likely argument (of role Arg0) of “play”
than “people”. However, high-order inference on span-based
SRL is extremely difficult because of two challenges. First,

