The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Admissible Policy Teaching through Reward Design
Kiarash Banihashem, Adish Singla, Jiarui Gan, Goran Radanovic
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
{kbanihas, adishs, jrgan, gradanovic}@mpi-sws.org

in safe RL to penalize the agent whenever it violates safety
constraints (Tessler, Mankowitz, and Mannor 2018). Similarly, reward penalties can be used in offline RL for ensuring
robustness against model uncertainty (Yu et al. 2020), while
exploration bonuses can be used as intrinsic motivation for
an RL agent to reduce uncertainty (Bellemare et al. 2016).
In this paper, we consider a different perspective on reward
design, and study it in the context of (targeted) policy teaching and closely related (targeted) reward poisoning attacks.
In this line of work (Zhang and Parkes 2008; Zhang, Parkes,
and Chen 2009; Ma et al. 2019; Rakhsha et al. 2020b,a), the
reward designer perturbs the original reward function to influence the choice of policy adopted by an optimal agent. For
instance, (Zhang and Parkes 2008; Zhang, Parkes, and Chen
2009) studied policy teaching from a principal’s perspective
who provides incentives to an agent to influence its policy.
In reward poisoning attacks (Ma et al. 2019; Rakhsha et al.
2020b,a), an attacker modifies the reward function with the
goal of forcing a specific target policy of interest. Importantly,
the reward modifications do not come for free, and the goal
in this line of work is to alter the original reward function in
a cost-efficient manner. The associated cost can, e.g., model
the objective of minimizing additional incentives provided
by the principal or ensuring the stealthiness of the attack.
The focus of this paper is on a dual problem to reward
poisoning attacks. Instead of forcing a specific target policy,
the reward designer’s goal is to incentivize an agent to avoid
taking actions that are inadmissible in certain states, while ensuring that the agent performs well under the original reward
function. As in reward poisoning attacks, the reward designer
cares about the cost of modifying the original reward function. Interestingly and perhaps surprisingly, the novel reward
design problem leads to a considerably different characterization results, as we show in this paper. We call this problem
admissible policy teaching since the reward designer aims to
maximize the agent’s utility w.r.t. the original reward function, but under constraints on admissibility of state-action
pairs. These constraints could encode additional knowledge
that the reward designer has about the safety and security of
executing certain actions. A comparison of our framework
with targeted policy teaching can be seen in Figure 1. Our
key contributions are:
• We develop a novel optimization framework based on
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) for finding a minimal

Abstract
We study reward design strategies for incentivizing a reinforcement learning agent to adopt a policy from a set of admissible
policies. The goal of the reward designer is to modify the
underlying reward function cost-efficiently while ensuring that
any approximately optimal deterministic policy under the new
reward function is admissible and performs well under the
original reward function. This problem can be viewed as a dual
to the problem of optimal reward poisoning attacks: instead
of forcing an agent to adopt a specific policy, the reward
designer incentivizes an agent to avoid taking actions that
are inadmissible in certain states. Perhaps surprisingly, and in
contrast to the problem of optimal reward poisoning attacks,
we first show that the reward design problem for admissible
policy teaching is computationally challenging, and it is
NP-hard to find an approximately optimal reward modification.
We then proceed by formulating a surrogate problem whose
optimal solution approximates the optimal solution to the
reward design problem in our setting, but is more amenable
to optimization techniques and analysis. For this surrogate
problem, we present characterization results that provide
bounds on the value of the optimal solution. Finally, we
design a local search algorithm to solve the surrogate problem
and showcase its utility using simulation-based experiments.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 2018) is a
framework for deriving an agent’s policy that maximizes its
utility in sequential decision making tasks. In the standard formulation, the utility of an agent is defined via its reward function, which determines the decision making task of interest.
Reward design plays a critical role in providing sound specifications of the task goals and supporting the agent’s learning
process (Singh, Lewis, and Barto 2009; Amodei et al. 2016).
There are different perspectives on reward design, which
differ in the studied objectives. A notable example of reward
design is reward shaping (Mataric 1994; Dorigo and Colombetti 1994; Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999) which modifies
the reward function in order to accelerate the learning process
of an agent. Reward transformations that are similar to or
are based on reward shaping are not only used for accelerating learning. For example, reward penalties are often used
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6037

