The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

BScNets: Block Simplicial Complex Neural Networks
Yuzhou Chen,1 Yulia R. Gel,2 H. Vincent Poor1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University
2
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas
{yc0774, poor}@princeton.edu, ygl@utdallas.edu

Abstract

individuals but also among multiple criminal groups. Such
higher-order graph interactions beyond the node space and
multi-node structures may be naturally modelled using simplicial complexes.
Simplicial neural networks (SNN) is the newly emerging
direction in graph learning which extends convolutional operation to data that live on simplicial complexes. SNNs have
recently been successfully applied to graph classification
and trajectory forecasting (Ebli, Defferrard, and Spreemann
2020; Bunch et al. 2020; Roddenberry, Glaze, and Segarra
2021; Bodnar et al. 2021). The key engine behind SNNs
is the Hodge–de Rham theory that generalizes the standard
graph Laplacian which describes node-to-node interactions
via edges to Hodge-Laplacian which allows us to model diffusion from edges to edges via nodes, edges to edges via
triangles, triangles to triangles via edges, etc (Lim 2020;
Schaub et al. 2020). Furthermore, Hodge-Laplacian establishes a natural connection between higher-order properties of discrete representations, e.g., graphs, and continuous
representations, e.g., manifolds. As such, Hodge-Laplacianbased analytics opens multiple new perspectives for geometric representations at the interface of shape analysis,
graph theory, and geometric deep learning (GDL) (Wang
and Solomon 2019; Hajij, Istvan, and Zamzmi 2020).
In this paper we make the first step toward bridging SNNs
with link prediction on graphs. We propose a new Block
Simplicial Complex Neural Networks (BScNets) model, by
building upon the connection between convolution operation
and block Hodge-style representation. In contrast to other
SNNs which tend to focus only on edge-to-edge information flows, or Hodge 1-Laplacian, BScNets allows us to simultaneously incorporate salient interactions among multiple simplicial complexes on graphs. Specifically, our BScNets scheme is composed of two components: the Adaptive Hodge Laplacian Based Block (AHLB) which describes
multi-level structures and adaptively learns hidden dependencies among geometric representations of higher-order
structures, and the Hodge-Style Adaptive Block Convolution (H-ABC) Module which automatically infers relations
among multi-dimensional simplices. Our results indicate
that this novel integration of information flows across not
one but multiple higher-order structures via the Block Hodge
Laplacian analytics yields the highest performance in link
prediction tasks.

Simplicial neural networks (SNN) have recently emerged as
the newest direction in graph learning which expands the idea
of convolutional architectures from node space to simplicial
complexes on graphs. Instead of pre-dominantly assessing
pairwise relations among nodes as in the current practice,
simplicial complexes allow us to describe higher-order interactions and multi-node graph structures. By building upon
connection between the convolution operation and the new
block Hodge-Laplacian, we propose the first SNN for link
prediction. Our new Block Simplicial Complex Neural Networks (BScNets) model generalizes the existing graph convolutional network (GCN) frameworks by systematically incorporating salient interactions among multiple higher-order
graph structures of different dimensions. We discuss theoretical foundations behind BScNets and illustrate its utility for
link prediction on eight real-world and synthetic datasets. Our
experiments indicate that BScNets outperforms the state-ofthe-art models by a significant margin while maintaining low
computation costs. Finally, we show utility of BScNets as the
new promising alternative for tracking spread of infectious
diseases such as COVID-19 and measuring the effectiveness
of the healthcare risk mitigation strategies.

Introduction
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) is a powerful machinery for graph learning, allowing for efficient exploration
of various pairwise interactions among graph nodes. However, most GCN-based approaches tend to be limited in
their ability to efficiently exploit and propagate information
across higher-order structures (Morris et al. 2019; Xiao and
Deng 2020). In turn, many recent studies on cyber-physical,
social, and financial networks suggest that relations among
multi-node graph structures, as opposed to pairwise interaction among nodes, may be the key toward understanding hidden mechanisms behind structural organization of complex
network systems. For example, disease transmission might
be influenced not only by one-to-one interactions but also
be largely impacted by various group relations and social
reinforcement induced by each person’s social circle, e.g.,
COVID-19 anti-mask and anti-vaccine views. To enhance
the obfuscation efforts in money laundering schemes, criminals involve complex interactions not only among multiple
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6333

