The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

End-to-End Learning the Partial Permutation Matrix
for Robust 3D Point Cloud Registration
Zhiyuan Zhang1 , Jiadai Sun1 , Yuchao Dai1 * , Dingfu Zhou2 , Xibin Song2 , Mingyi He1
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Baidu Research
{zhangzhiyuan,sunjiadai}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, daiyuchao@gmail.com,
{zhoudingfu,songxibin}@baidu.com, myhe@nwpu.edu.cn
Abstract

born problem, which can be formulated as solving a matching matrix to relate the input two point clouds. And each
entry indicates the point pair is a correspondence or not.
For ideal consistent point clouds, where the inputs are exactly the same except for the pose, i.e. each point can find a
corresponding point in the other point cloud, the correspondences are built by searching a permutation matching matrix, which implements the one-to-one matching principle.
However, in practical applications, input point clouds are
usually not consistent due to the outliers (i.e. the points without corresponding points). To handle the outliers, a widely
adopted strategy is to select reliable correspondences after
the initial matching (Choy, Dong, and Koltun 2020; Probst
et al. 2019; Pais et al. 2020; Deng, Birdal, and Ilic 2018b,a;
Bai et al. 2021). Nonetheless, this remedial operation is
complicated. Alternatively, we propose to handle the outliers in the matching stage synchronously. In this case, the
desired matching matrix is turned to a partial permutation
matrix (notated as PPM) formulated by a binary matrix,
where the sum of row or column corresponding to inlier/outlier is one/zero. PPM embeds two important principles: oneto-one matching and outliers pruning. Unfortunately, existing hard assignment algorithms are not competent to directly
solve this PPM since they cannot distinguish inliers and outliers, and they will solve a full rank permutation matrix assigning corresponding points to outliers incorrectly.
Moreover, PPM is defined in the discrete space, and the
hard assignment algorithm is non-differentiable, which is
fatal for the deep learning pipeline. To address this issue,
soft matching-based methods are proposed. They relax the
discrete matching matrix into a continuous one, where each
entry is either zero or one, and then the virtual points are
achieved by performing weighted average to replace the real
corresponding points. However, since the geometric constraint is ignored, the network does not learn the underlying physics, which results in an inherent ambiguity making
the distribution of the virtual points degenerate seriously.
DCP (Wang and Solomon 2019a) is a typical soft matching
method, which suffers from this drawback as shown in Table 1. RPMNet (Yew and Lee 2020) applies the AugmentedSinkhorn algorithm replying to outliers in the soft matching
process, where the “trash bin” strategy (Sarlin et al. 2020)
is employed. However, the degeneration has not been remitted. To avoid this ambiguity trap, DeepVCP (Lu et al.

Even though considerable progress has been made in deep
learning-based 3D point cloud processing, how to obtain
accurate correspondences for robust registration remains a
major challenge because existing hard assignment methods
cannot deal with outliers naturally. Alternatively, the soft
matching-based methods have been proposed to learn the
matching probability rather than hard assignment. However,
in this paper, we prove that these methods have an inherent
ambiguity causing many deceptive correspondences. To address the above challenges, we propose to learn a partial permutation matching matrix, which does not assign corresponding points to outliers, and implements hard assignment to prevent ambiguity. However, this proposal poses two new problems, i.e. existing hard assignment algorithms can only solve
a full rank permutation matrix rather than a partial permutation matrix, and this desired matrix is defined in the discrete
space, which is non-differentiable. In response, we design a
dedicated soft-to-hard (S2H) matching procedure within the
registration pipeline consisting of two steps: solving the soft
matching matrix (S-step) and projecting this soft matrix to
the partial permutation matrix (H-step). Specifically, we augment the profit matrix before the hard assignment to solve an
augmented permutation matrix, which is cropped to achieve
the final partial permutation matrix. Moreover, to guarantee
end-to-end learning, we supervise the learned partial permutation matrix but propagate the gradient to the soft matrix instead. Our S2H matching procedure can be easily integrated
with existing registration frameworks, which has been verified in representative frameworks including DCP, RPMNet,
and DGR. Extensive experiments have validated our method,
which creates a new state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
3D point cloud registration is a well-known task in 3D vision with wide applications including object pose estimation
(Wong et al. 2017), 3D reconstruction (Deschaud 2018), simultaneous localization and mapping (Shiratori et al. 2015;
Ding and Feng 2019), etc. Although the increasingly prosperous deep learning technique has achieved great success in
point cloud registration (Lu et al. 2019), how to obtain accurate correspondences for robust registration remains a stub* Yuchao Dai is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3399

