The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bayesian Persuasion in Sequential Decision-Making
Jiarui Gan, Rupak Majumdar, Goran Radanovic, Adish Singla
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
{jrgan,rupak,gradanovic,adishs}@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

we extend this setting to include interaction in an infinitehorizon Markov decision process (MDP), where rewards incurred depend on the state of the environment, the action
performed, as well as an external parameter sampled from
a known prior distribution at each step. The principal, who
cannot directly influence the state, observes the realization
of this external parameter and signals the agent about their
observation. The agent chooses to perform an action based
on the state and the signal, and the action updates the state
according to a stochastic transition function. Both the principal and the agent aim to optimize their own rewards received
in the course of the play.
If the objectives of the principal and the agent are completely aligned, the principal should reveal true information
about the external parameter, so the more interesting case is
when they are misaligned. For example, a user of an navigation app only wants to optimize their commute times but
the app may want to incentivize the user to upgrade to a better service, or to increase traffic throughput when the app is
provided by a social planner. We consider two major types of
agents—myopic and far-sighted—and investigate the problem of optimal signaling strategy design against them. A
myopic agent optimizes their payoff locally: in each step,
they take an action that will give them the highest immediate reward. It can model a large number of “short-lived”
agents each appearing instantly in a system (e.g., users of a
ride-sharing app or an E-commerce website). A far-sighted
agent, on the other hand, optimizes their long-run cumulative reward and considers future information disclosure.
We show that, in the myopic setting, an optimal signaling strategy for the principal can be computed in polynomial time through a reduction to linear programming. On
the other hand, in the case of a far-sighted agent, optimal signaling strategy design becomes computationally intractable: if P6=NP, there exists no polynomial time approximation scheme. Our proof of computational intractability is
quite general, and extends to showing the hardness of similar
principal-agent problems in dynamic settings.
To work around the computational barrier, we focus on
a special type of far-sighted agents who are advice-myopic.
An advice-myopic agent optimizes their cumulative reward
over time based on the history of information disclosures,
but does not assume that the principal will continue to provide information in the future. We expect such behavior to

We study a dynamic model of Bayesian persuasion in sequential decision-making settings. An informed principal observes
an external parameter of the world and advises an uninformed
agent about actions to take over time. The agent takes actions
in each time step based on the current state, the principal’s
advice/signal, and beliefs about the external parameter. The
action of the agent updates the state according to a stochastic process. The model arises naturally in many applications,
e.g., an app (the principal) can advice the user (the agent)
on possible choices between actions based on additional realtime information the app has. We study the problem of designing a signaling strategy from the principal’s point of view.
We show that the principal has an optimal strategy against a
myopic agent, who only optimizes their rewards locally, and
the optimal strategy can be computed in polynomial time.
In contrast, it is NP-hard to approximate an optimal policy
against a far-sighted agent. Further, if the principal has the
power to threaten the agent by not providing future signals,
then we can efficiently compute a threat-based strategy. This
strategy guarantees the principal’s payoff as if playing against
an agent who is far-sighted but myopic to future signals.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty is prevalent in models of sequential decision
making. Usually, an agent relies on prior knowledge and
Bayesian updates as a basic approach to dealing with uncertainties. In many scenarios, a knowledgeable principal
has direct access to external information and can reveal it
to influence the agent’s behavior. For example, a navigation app (the principal) normally knows about the global
traffic conditions and can inform a user (the agent), who
then decides a particular route based on the app’s advice.
The additional information can help improve the quality of
the agent’s decision-making. Meanwhile, by strategically revealing the external information, the principal can also persuade the agent to act in a way beneficial to the principal.
We study the related persuasion problem in a dynamic
environment. In a static setting, the interaction between the
principal and the agent is modeled by Bayesian persuasion
(Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011), where the principal uses
their information advantage to influence the agent’s strategy in a one-shot game, by way of signaling. In this paper,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5025

