The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Creativity of AI: Automatic Symbolic Option Discovery for
Facilitating Deep Reinforcement Learning
Mu Jin1 , Zhihao Ma1 , Kebing Jin1 , Hankz Hankui Zhuo1 * , Chen Chen2 , Chao Yu1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{jinm6, mazhh7, jinkb}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {zhuohank, yuchao3}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, chenchen9@huawei.com

Abstract
Despite of achieving great success in real life, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is still suffering from three critical
issues, which are data efficiency, lack of the interpretability
and transferability. Recent research shows that embedding
symbolic knowledge into DRL is promising in addressing
those challenges. Inspired by this, we introduce a novel deep
reinforcement learning framework with symbolic options. This
framework features a loop training procedure, which enables
guiding the improvement of policy by planning with action
models and symbolic options learned from interactive trajectories automatically. The learned symbolic options alleviate the
dense requirement of expert domain knowledge and provide inherent interpretability of policies. Moreover, the transferability
and data efficiency can be further improved by planning with
the action models. To validate the effectiveness of this framework, we conduct experiments on two domains, Montezuma’s
Revenge and Office World, respectively. The results demonstrate the comparable performance, improved data efficiency,
interpretability and transferability.

Figure 1: State Mapping Function in Montezuma’s Revenge

To alleviate those issues, researchers have investigated the
combination of HRL and symbolic planning to improve transferability, interpretability, and data efficiency (Ryan 2002;
Leonetti, Iocchi, and Stone 2016; Yang et al. 2018; Lyu et al.
2019; Illanes et al. 2020; Sarathy et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021).
In those works, the original MDP is divided into two levels.
The higher level utilizes a symbolic planner with a given
action model to generate plans for selecting options, while
the lower level interacts with the environment to accomplish
the selected options (Illanes et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021). The
two-level structure helps alleviating the sparse reward issue,
and improves sampling efficiency with the help of generated
plans. In those works, they all assume the action models have
been provided by domain experts. In many real-world applications, however, it is often difficult to create action models
by hand, especially when the environment is complicated. A
more realistic idea is to automatically learn action models
from training data (Zhuo and Kambhampati 2017; Yang, Wu,
and Jiang 2007; Ng and Petrick 2019; Martínez et al. 2016;
James, Rosman, and Konidaris 2020) and exploit the learnt
action models to generate plans for guiding the exploration of
options. Although there is indeed an approach (Sarathy et al.
2020) proposed to learn action models automatically, they
still need to manually define major parts of action models in
advance. Besides, the planning goal in this approach is kept
unchanged while in our framework it is dynamically adapted
to maximize the external reward.
In this work, we propose a novel framework, namely SORL,
which stands for Symbolic Options for Reinforcement
Learning, to learn action models to help the exploration of
actions in reinforcement learning. We assume that there exists

Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has achieved tremendous success in complex and high dimensional environments
such as Go (Silver et al. 2016, 2017) and Atari Games (Mnih
et al. 2015). It interacts with environments and improves its
policy with the collected experience, by maximizing the long
term reward. Recent criticism on DRL mostly focuses on
the lack of transferability, interpretability, and data efficiency.
The policy learnt from an environment often fails in another
unseen environment. Due to the use of black-box neural networks for function approximation, the intrinsic lack of interpretability issue naturally raises in DRL, which disables the
agent to explain its actions in a human-understandable way
and earn people’s trust in critical areas such as autonomous
driving (Aradi 2020) and chemical engineering (Zhou, Li,
and Zare 2017). Besides, DRL often requires a large amount
of data to learn a satisfying policy in complex environments.
The process of collecting experiences for learning is timeconsuming and the sample efficiency is low.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7042

