The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bandit Limited Discrepancy Search and Application to Machine Learning Pipeline
Optimization
Akihiro Kishimoto1 , Djallel Bouneffouf1 , Radu Marinescu1 , Parikshit Ram1 , Ambrish Rawat1 ,
Martin Wistuba2 * , Paulito Palmes1 , Adi Botea3 *
1
IBM Research
Amazon Research
3
Eaton
Akihiro.Kishimoto@ibm.com, Djallel.Bouneffouf@ibm.com, radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com, parikshit.ram@ibm.com,
Ambrish.Rawat@ie.ibm.com, marwistu@amazon.com, paulpalmes@ie.ibm.com, adi.botea@eaton.com
2

Abstract
Optimizing a machine learning (ML) pipeline has been an important topic of AI and ML. Despite recent progress, pipeline
optimization remains a challenging problem, due to potentially many combinations to consider as well as slow training
and validation. We present the BLDS algorithm for optimized
algorithm selection in a fixed ML pipeline structure. BLDS
performs multi-fidelity optimization for selecting ML algorithms trained with smaller computational overhead, while
controlling its pipeline search based on multi-armed bandit
and limited discrepancy search. Our experiments on classification benchmarks show that BLDS is superior to competing
algorithms. We also combine BLDS with hyperparameter optimization, empirically showing the advantage of BLDS.

Introduction
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) seeks to automatically compose and parameterize ML algorithms to maximize a given metric such as predictive accuracy on a given
dataset. The task has received increased attention over the
past decades especially in light of the recent explosion in
ML applications. AutoML has gradually extended from hyperparameter optimization (HPO) for the best configuration
of a single ML algorithm (Bergstra et al. 2011) to tackling
the optimization of the entire ML pipeline from data preparation to model learning (Feurer et al. 2015a). This effort has
spurred the development of a wide variety of efficient AutoML systems, e.g., (Kotthoff et al. 2017; Olson et al. 2016;
Feurer et al. 2015a; Mohr, Wever, and Hullermeier 2018;
Rakotoarison, Schoenauer, and Sebag 2019; Liu et al. 2020).
A typical ML pipeline often consists of a fixed sequence
of successive stages such as pre-processing, feature selection,
transformation and estimation. The AutoML problem known
as the combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter
optimization (CASH) selects the ML algorithm for each stage
and the hyperparameters of these algorithms such that a given
black-box objective function is optimized. The fixed structure
of the pipeline implies an optimization problem with a fixed
number of decision variables where, for example, we have
one variable for a preprocessing algorithm, one variable for
*Work performed while at IBM Research.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10228

a learning algorithm, and one variable for each parameter
of each algorithm. This in turn leads to a complex solution
space involving both discrete and continuous variables.
It has been shown recently that CASH is solved more efficiently by splitting the algorithm selection and the HPO
into two simpler subproblems which are subsequently solved
separately (Mohr, Wever, and Hullermeier 2018; Rakotoarison, Schoenauer, and Sebag 2019; Liu et al. 2020). However,
the algorithm selection problem raises two challenges: (1)
the black-box nature of the objective function prevents the
algorithm selection from leveraging any of the objective function’s characteristics in search for a better pipeline configuration; (2) there are many possible combinations of algorithms
in a multi-stage pipeline structure and training every single
pipeline configuration is very expensive, especially when
dealing with large input datasets. In practice, this overhead
is a major bottleneck because each evaluation of the blackbox objective function to determine the value of the current
pipeline configuration involves the entire training data.
We focus on the algorithm selection problem in AutoML
and introduce Bandit Limited Discrepancy Search (BLDS),
which combines ideas behind algorithms for the multi-armed
bandit (MAB) problem, e.g., (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002), limited discrepancy search (LDS) (Harvey and
Ginsberg 1995) and multi-fidelity optimization (Sabharwal,
Samulowitz, and Tesauro 2016).
Specifically, BLDS assumes that a better solution tends
to exist in a set of pipelines similar to the current best one
and uses the notion of discrepancy to reduce the search space
examined. However, a series of BLDS’ local search may
lead to an optimized pipeline that is very different from the
initial one. In addition, we design BLDS to reduce the computational overhead associated with training the pipelines on
large datasets. Our BLDS algorithm is the first multi-fidelity
optimization method designed specifically to address the algorithm selection subproblem. The algorithm starts with a
small subset of training data and it gradually increases this
subset if the corresponding pipeline is promising. BLDS
involves a procedure to compare pipelines trained with different subsets of data. Unlike existing multi-fidelity optimization approaches such as the Data Allocation Upper Bound
(DAUB) algorithm (Sabharwal, Samulowitz, and Tesauro
2016), BLDS calculates the upper and lower confidence

