The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

InsCLR: Improving Instance Retrieval with Self-Supervision
Zelu Deng1 * , Yujie Zhong2 * , Sheng Guo3 , Weilin Huang4†
1
Dmall
Meituan Inc.
3
MY Bank, Ant Group
4
Alibaba Group
zelu.deng@dmall.com, jaszhong@hotmail.com, {guosheng.guosheng, weilin.hwl}@alibaba-inc.com
2

ImageNet

Abstract
This work aims at improving instance retrieval with selfsupervision. We find that fine-tuning using the recently developed self-supervised learning (SSL) methods, such as SimCLR and MoCo, fails to improve the performance of instance retrieval. In this work, we identify that the learnt
representations for instance retrieval should be invariant to
large variations in viewpoint and background etc., whereas
self-augmented positives applied by the current SSL methods can not provide strong enough signals for learning robust instance-level representations. To overcome this problem, we propose InsCLR, a new SSL method that builds
on the instance-level contrast, to learn the intra-class invariance by dynamically mining meaningful pseudo positive
samples from both mini-batches and a memory bank during training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that InsCLR
achieves similar or even better performance than the state-ofthe-art SSL methods on instance retrieval. Code is available
at https://github.com/zeludeng/insclr.

Google Landmarks Dataset v2

fully-sup

self-sup

Introduction
Large-scale instance-level image retrieval (also known as
particular object retrieval) has been studied for over two
decades. Given an image with a query object, the goal is
to retrieve all the images containing the query object in a
large corpus of images. A key challenge is to design or learn
image-level descriptors for the accurate search. Recently,
several works show that fine-tuning the pretrained network
on large-scale instance-retrieval datasets can significantly
improve the performance (Gordo et al. 2016; Noh et al.
2017; Weyand et al. 2020). However, annotating large-scale
data is time-consuming and requires huge human labour. Alternatively, image labels can be generated by using the reconstructed 3D models obtained from a traditional retrieval
system (Radenović, Tolias, and Chum 2016, 2018), and the
advanced Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipeline (Schonberger and Frahm 2016). It can be considered as training
networks without human annotation, but using supervision
information generated from other computer vision systems
which are also expensive to implement.

Figure 1: Top: example images from ImageNet and Google
Landmarks Dataset v2 (GLDv2). In GLDv2, images of the
same class (i.e. those in the same row) have much larger
variations in viewpoint and background. Bottom: the performance of instance retrieval on ROxf (medium protocol), with a number of self-supervised learning methods, including SimCLR, MoCov2, PCL, SwAV and our InsCLR.
ResNet-101 pretrained on ImageNet is used for all methods,
and then self-supervised learning is performed on GLDv2.

In this work, we aim to explore a more generic setting:
can we improve the retrieval quality by using images only,
without human annotations or other computer vision systems? Formally, the goal is to close the performance gap
between a network trained on a general-purpose dataset (i.e.
ImageNet) and a network fine-tuned with full-supervision on
instance-retrieval datasets, by using unlabeled images only.
Notably, this work focus on the fine-tuning stage instead of

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

516

