The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MINIMAL: Mining Models for Universal Adversarial Triggers
Yaman Kumar Singla* 1,2,3 , Somesh Singh∗2 , Swapnil Parekh∗4 ,
Balaji Krishnamurthy1 , Rajiv Ratn Shah2 , Changyou Chen3
1

Adobe Media Data Science Research, 2 IIIT-Delhi,
3
SUNY at Buffalo, 4 New York University

Abstract

and requires deep learning expertise for generation and testing. Lately, several research studies have shown the existence of input-agnostic universal adversarial trigger (UATs)
(Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017; Wallace et al. 2019). These
are a sequence of tokens, which, when added to any example, cause a targeted change in the prediction of a neural network. The existence of such word sequences poses a considerable security challenge since the word sequences can be
easily distributed and can cause a model to predict incorrectly for all of its inputs. Moreover, unlike input-dependent
adversarial examples, no model access is required at the run
time for generating UATs. At the same time, the analysis of
universal adversaries is interesting from the point of view of
model, dataset analysis and interpretability (§5). They tell
us about the global model behaviour and the general inputoutput patterns learnt by a model (Wallace et al. 2019).
Existing approaches to generate UATs assume that an attacker can obtain the training data on which a targeted model
is trained (Wallace et al. 2019; Behjati et al. 2019). While
generating an adversarial trigger, an attacker firstly trains
a proxy model on the training data and then generates adversarial examples by using gradient information. Table 1
presents the data requirements during training for the current
approaches. For instance, to find universal adversaries on the
natural language inference task, one needs 9000 training examples. Also, the adversarial ability of a perturbation has
been shown to depend on the amount of data available (Mopuri, Garg, and Radhakrishnan 2017; Mopuri, Ganeshan, and
Babu 2018). However, in practice, an attacker rarely has access to the training data. Training data are usually private
and hidden inside a company’s data storage facility, while
only the trained model is publicly accessible. For instance,
Google Cloud Natural Language (GCNL) API only outputs
the scores for the sentiment classes (Google 2021) while the
data on which the GCNL model was trained is kept private.
In this real-world setting, most of the adversarial attacks fail.
In this paper, we present a novel data-free approach
for crafting universal adversarial triggers to address the
above issues. Our method is to mine a trained model (but
not data) for perturbations that can fool the target model
without any knowledge about the data distribution (e.g.,
type of data, length and vocabulary of samples, etc.). We
only need access to the embedding layer and model outputs. Our method achieves this by solving first-order Tay-

It is well known that natural language models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which are mostly input-specific
in nature. Recently, it has been shown that there also exist
input-agnostic attacks in NLP models, special text sequences
called universal adversarial triggers. However, existing methods to craft universal triggers are data intensive. They require large amounts of data samples to generate adversarial
triggers, which are typically inaccessible by attackers. For
instance, previous works take 3000 data samples per class
for the SNLI dataset to generate adversarial triggers. In this
paper, we present a novel data-free approach, MINIMAL, to
mine input-agnostic adversarial triggers from models. Using
the triggers produced with our data-free algorithm, we reduce
the accuracy of Stanford Sentiment Treebank’s positive class
from 93.6% to 9.6%. Similarly, for the Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI), our single-word trigger reduces the
accuracy of the entailment class from 90.95% to less than
0.6%. Despite being completely data-free, we get equivalent
accuracy drops as data-dependent methods.

1

Introduction

In the past two decades, deep learning models have shown
impressive performance over many natural language tasks,
including sentiment analysis (Zhang, Wang, and Liu 2018),
natural language inference (Parikh et al. 2016), automatic
essay scoring (Kumar et al. 2019), question-answering
(Xiong, Zhong, and Socher 2017), keyphrase extraction
(Meng et al. 2017), etc. At the same time, it has also been
shown that these models are highly vulnerable to adversarial
perturbations (Behjati et al. 2019). The adversaries change
the inputs to cause the models to make errors. Adversarial
examples pose a significant challenge to the rising deployment of deep learning based systems1 .
Commonly, adversarial examples are found on a persample basis, i.e., a separate optimization needs to be performed for each sample to generate an adversarially perturbed sample. Since the optimization needs to be performed for each sample, it is computationally expensive
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code and reproducibility steps are given in https://github.
com/midas-research/data-free-uats

11330

