The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Virtual View Selection for 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Jian Cheng1,2 * , Yanguang Wan1,2 * , Dexin Zuo1,2 , Cuixia Ma1 , Jian Gu3 ,
Ping Tan3,4 , Hongan Wang1 , Xiaoming Deng1† , Yinda Zhang5†
1

Beijing Key Lab of HCI, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba
4
Simon Fraser University
5
Google
{chengjian19, wanyanguang17}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {xiaoming, cuixia, hongan}@iscas.ac.cn, yindaz@google.com
𝛽

Abstract

𝜋
3

3D hand pose estimation from single depth is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and has wide applications.
However, the existing methods still can not achieve satisfactory hand pose estimation results due to view variation and
occlusion of human hand. In this paper, we propose a new
virtual view selection and fusion module for 3D hand pose
estimation from single depth. We propose to automatically select multiple virtual viewpoints for pose estimation and fuse
the results of all and find this empirically delivers accurate
and robust pose estimation. In order to select most effective
virtual views for pose fusion, we evaluate the virtual views
based on the confidence of virtual views using a light-weight
network via network distillation. Experiments on three main
benchmark datasets including NYU, ICVL and Hands2019
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-arts
on NYU and ICVL, and achieves very competitive performance on Hands2019-Task1, and our proposed virtual view
selection and fusion module is both effective for 3D hand
pose estimation.

𝜋
6
0
Select

Render
𝜋
−
6
Depth map

−

𝜋
3
−

𝜋
3

−

𝜋
6

0

𝜋
6

𝜋
3

𝜃

Selected views

Figure 1: Illustration of view selection for 3D hand pose
estimation. The view of the original depth image may not
be suitable for pose estimation. We select suitable views for
pose estimation from the uniformly sampled virtual views. θ
and β represent the azimuth angle and the elevation angle of
candidate virtual views, respectively.

Introduction
Hand pose estimation plays a key role in many applications
to support human computer interaction, such as autonomous
driving, AR/VR, and robotics (Erol et al. 2007). Given an
input image, the goal of hand pose estimation is to estimate
the location of hand skeleton joints. While many works take
color images as input, methods built upon depth images usually exhibit superior performance (Sun et al. 2015). Prior arts
often use depth image and 2D CNN networks to regress 3D
hand joints, or apply point-net based models (Qi et al. 2017;
Ge et al. 2018) on point clouds converted from the depth using camera intrinsic parameters. Although great progress on
hand pose estimation from depth has been made in the past
decade, the existing methods still can not achieve satisfactory hand pose estimation results due to the severe viewpoint
variations and occlusions caused by articulated hand pose.
To address the occlusion and viewpoint variation challenges, existing methods often rely on data alignment that

transforms the input depth input into a canonical space.
However, this process is either done in 2D space (Sun et al.
2015; Ye, Yuan, and Kim 2016) that do not fully respect
the 3D nature of the depth image, or in hand-crafted canonical space, e.g. via PCA (Ge et al. 2018) or axis-aligned
bounding box (Ge et al. 2016), that are not engaged in a
joint optimization with the full model and thus the performance may not be at its best. In contrast, learning based
data alignment is more optimal as demonstrated in many
previous work (Jaderberg et al. 2015), and back to the domain of pose estimation, this is mostly achieved in automated best viewpoint selection in multiple camera system
(Pirinen, Gärtner, and Sminchisescu 2019; Gärtner, Pirinen,
and Sminchisescu 2020) via reinforcement learning. However, in the scenario when only one single depth is available,
reinforcement learning does not typically perform well due
to the limited inputs, and there is limited research study if
viewpoint selection is necessary and possible with a single
input depth.
We claim that viewpoint selection is very important for

* These authors contributed equally.
†

indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

419

