The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Can Machines Read Coding Manuals Yet? – A Benchmark for Building Better
Language Models for Code Understanding
Ibrahim Abdelaziz1 , Julian Dolby1 , Jamie McCusker2 , Kavitha Srinivas1
1

IBM Research, T.J. Watson Research Center
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
ibrahim.abdelaziz1@ibm.com, dolby@us.ibm.com, mccusj2@rpi.edu, kavitha.srinivas@ibm.com

Abstract

models are an obvious choice, but we currently do not know
how applicable they are to text about code, given the specialized language of the programming domain. We need a set of
code-related downstream tasks to evaluate these models, just
as GLUE (Wang et al. 2018) and SuperGLUE (Wang et al.
2019) have been used extensively to further language model
development in the natural language understanding domain.
CodeXGLUE (Lu et al. 2021) provides a suite of tasks but
only a single task in it is related to textual code artifacts; it
is translation of documentation about code from one natural
language to another. To our knowledge, we know of no other
tasks that focus on relations between textual artifacts about
code. This paper attempts to fill this gap.
We have three goals in this paper: (a) design a suite of
tasks we refer to as BLANCA (Benchmarks for LANguage
models on Coding Artifacts) that can be used to train language models about the semantics of code, (b) evaluate
whether existing models, fine-tuned for different aspects of
natural language processing or different code oriented corpora, can perform well on these tasks, and (c) establish
whether these tasks can be used to build better models for
code understanding.
To construct these tasks, we relied on existing annotations
in large public repositories such as GitHub (for code), StackOverflow, StackExchange and code documentation (for text
about code). We exploited an integration of these sources in
an open source dataset (Abdelaziz et al. 2021) to define the
following five tasks focused on text about code:

Code understanding is an increasingly important application
of Artificial Intelligence. A fundamental aspect of understanding code is understanding text about code, e.g., documentation and forum discussions. Pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT) are a popular approach for various NLP
tasks, and there are now a variety of benchmarks, such as
GLUE, to help improve the development of such models
for natural language understanding. However, little is known
about how well such models work on textual artifacts about
code, and we are unaware of any systematic set of downstream tasks for such an evaluation. In this paper, we derive a
set of benchmarks (BLANCA - Benchmarks for LANguage
models on Coding Artifacts) that assess code understanding
based on tasks such as predicting the best answer to a question in a forum post, finding related forum posts, or predicting classes related in a hierarchy from class documentation.
We evaluate performance of current state-of-the-art language
models on these tasks and show that there is significant improvement on each task from fine tuning. We also show that
multi-task training over BLANCA tasks help build better language models for code understanding.

Introduction
Code understanding is an increasingly important application
of AI, with over 100 papers targeting the area in the last
year alone1 . Most research in this area has focused on understanding code from abstract representations of the program such as Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) and program
flow. However, there has been little emphasis in utilizing important semantics about code buried in textual artifacts, such
as documentation or forum discussions. Extracting such information can significantly enrich code representations. For
example, Figure 1 shows a program where the classes GLM
and SGDClassifier are being used. If one could enrich the
representation of the two classes with their key features from
text, we would understand that both represent linear models,
and hence both code snippets perform similar functions.
To enrich code with textual information, we need to be
able to summarize textual information about classes and
functions into vector representations. Pre-trained language

• Forum Answer Ranking (R). Some answers on forums
have many votes or are selected as the best relative to
others. Can language models predict the best answers?
• Forum Link Prediction (L). Users of forum posts often
point to other similar posts, which reflect semantically
related posts compared to random pairs. Can language
models predict links?
• Forum to Class Prediction (F). Key features of classes
or functions often get discussed in forum posts. Do language models discriminate related posts and class documentation from unrelated ones?
• Class Hierarchy Distance Prediction (H). Code is often
organized into class hierarchies. Do embedding distances
from language models reflect distances in the hierarchy?
• Class Usage Prediction (U). Similar code is often used

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://ml4code.github.io/papers.html

4415

