The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Nested Bi-level Optimization Framework for Robust Few Shot Learning
Krishnateja Killamsetty* , Changbin Li* , Chen Zhao, Feng Chen, Rishabh Iyer
The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA
{krishnateja.killamsetty, changbin.li, chen.zhao, feng.chen, rishabh.iyer}@utdallas.edu

Meta-Training Tasks

Abstract

Support Set

Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML), a popular gradientbased meta-learning framework, assumes that the contribution of each task or instance to the meta-learner is equal.
Hence, it fails to address the domain shift between base and
novel classes in few-shot learning. In this work, we propose a
novel robust meta-learning algorithm, N ESTED MAML, which
learns to assign weights to training tasks or instances. We consider weights as hyper-parameters and iteratively optimize
them using a small set of validation tasks set in a nested
bi-level optimization approach (in contrast to the standard
bi-level optimization in MAML). We then apply N ESTED MAML in the meta-training stage, which involves (1) several
tasks sampled from a distribution different from the meta-test
task distribution, or (2) some data samples with noisy labels.
Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate that N ESTED MAML efficiently mitigates the effects of ”unwanted” tasks or instances, leading to significant
improvement over the state-of-the-art robust meta-learning
methods.

Query Set

dog

T1

T1

T2

T2

T3

T3

OOD task

a) OOD Task Level

Support Set

Query Set

rock beauty

jellyfish

dog noisy sample with

corrupted label

b) Noisy Instance Level

Figure 1: We consider corrupted training set for few-shot
learning in this work: a) OOD task level and b) noisy instance level. T2 in a) is an OOD task that is sampled from a
different distribution. b) contains some noisy samples which
are mislabeled. For example, the actual label of the first sample in T1 should be “Arctic fox” which is labeled as “dog”;
The labels of two noisy samples in T3 are flipped wrongly.
The first one should be “rock beauty,” and the other one
should be “jellyfish.”

Introduction
Meta-learning (Schmidhuber 1987; Naik and Mammone
1992; Santoro et al. 2016; Vinyals et al. 2016; Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017) can achieve quick adaption for UNSEEN
tasks by identifying common structures among various SEEN
tasks, enabling faster learning of a new task with as little data
as possible. However, existing meta-learning techniques (e.g.,
MAML (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017)) often fail to generalize well when the test tasks belong to a different distribution
from the training tasks distribution (Chen et al. 2019). For
example, MAML assumes equal weights to all samples and
tasks during meta-training. This task homogeneity assumption of MAML often limits its ability to work in real-world
applications (Wei and Kehtarnavaz 2020).
We motivate the importance of robust meta-learning when
meta-training tasks have OOD tasks using the following examples. For example, consider the task of detecting vehicles
at night under different weather conditions. In this case, the
meta-test tasks only consist of images of vehicles at night.
Since the procurement vehicles driving data at night, covering all critical scenarios is difficult, we need a model that can

quickly adapt to rare driving conditions. Hence, we consider
meta-training tasks to consist of images of the vehicles in
multiple lighting scenarios. In this case, some of the tasks in
meta-training may degrade the meta-test performance. So, it
is vital to have a meta-learning model that is robust to OODs.
In the examples given above, meta-test tasks belong to
specialized slices where the data availability is meager compared to meta-training tasks. The meta-training task distribution is biased compared to that in the meta-test. To keep
the whole meta-training tasks for generalization and reduce
the adverse impact of the biased distribution in meta-training,
we propose a novel robust few-shot learning algorithm in the
presence of outliers in meta-training time, which is similar
to the corruptions in training time in the traditional robust
learning (Schneider et al. 2020). This is different from the
existing robust few-shot learning papers (Yin et al. 2018;
Lu et al. 2020; Goldblum, Fowl, and Goldstein 2020) which
consider the corruption only happens in meta-test time.
To simulate the corruptions in meta-training, two levels
of outliers (Figure 1) are considered: a) Out-Of-Distribution
(OOD) task, where the meta-training has tasks that are out of

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7176

