The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SplitFed: When Federated Learning Meets Split Learning
Chandra Thapa1 * , Pathum Chamikara Mahawaga Arachchige1 , Seyit Camtepe1 , Lichao Sun2 *
1

CSIRO Data61, Sydney, Australia
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA
{chandra.thapa, chamikara.arachchige, seyit.camtepe}@data61.csiro.au, lis221@lehigh.edu
2

Abstract

server. The main advantage of FL is that it allows parallel,
hence efficient, ML model training across many clients.
Computational requirement at the client-side and
model privacy during ML training in FL. The main disadvantage of FL is that each client needs to run the full ML
model, and resource-constrained clients, such as available in
the Internet of Things, could not afford to run the full model.
This case is prevalent if the ML models are deep learning
models. Besides, there is a privacy concern from the model’s
privacy perspective during training because the server and
clients have full access to the local and global models.
To address these concerns, split learning (SL) was introduced. SL splits the full ML model into multiple smaller
network portions and train them separately on a server, and
distributed clients with their local data. Assigning only a part
of the network to train at the client-side reduces processing
load (compared to that of running a complete network as in
FL), which is significant in ML computation on resourceconstrained devices (Vepakomma et al. 2018). Besides, a
client has no access to the server-side model and vice-versa.
Training time overhead in SL. Despite the advantages
of SL, there is a primary issue. The relay-based training in
SL makes the clients’ resources idle because only one client
engages with the server at one instance; causing a significant
increase in the training overhead with many clients.
To address these issues in FL and SL, this paper proposes
a novel architecture called splitfed learning (SFL). SFL considers the advantages of FL and SL, while emphasizing on
data privacy, and robustness of the model. Refer to Table 1
for its abstract comparison with FL and SL. Our contributions are mainly two-fold: Firstly, we are the first to propose
SFL. Data privacy and model’s robustness are enhanced at
the architectural level in SFL by the differential privacybased measures (Abadi et al. 2016) and PixelDP (Lecuyer
et al. 2019). Secondly, to demonstrate the feasibility of SFL,
we present comparative performance measurements of FL,
SL, and SFL by considering four standard datasets and four
popular models. Based on our analyses and empirical results, SFL provides an excellent solution that offers better
model privacy than FL, and it is faster than SL with a similar performance to SL in model accuracy and communication efficiency.
Overall, SFL is beneficial for resource-constrained environments where full model training and deployment are not

Federated learning (FL) and split learning (SL) are two popular distributed machine learning approaches. Both follow a
model-to-data scenario; clients train and test machine learning models without sharing raw data. SL provides better
model privacy than FL due to the machine learning model architecture split between clients and the server. Moreover, the
split model makes SL a better option for resource-constrained
environments. However, SL performs slower than FL due to
the relay-based training across multiple clients. In this regard, this paper presents a novel approach, named splitfed
learning (SFL), that amalgamates the two approaches eliminating their inherent drawbacks, along with a refined architectural configuration incorporating differential privacy and
PixelDP to enhance data privacy and model robustness. Our
analysis and empirical results demonstrate that (pure) SFL
provides similar test accuracy and communication efficiency
as SL while significantly decreasing its computation time per
global epoch than in SL for multiple clients. Furthermore, as
in SL, its communication efficiency over FL improves with
the number of clients. Besides, the performance of SFL with
privacy and robustness measures is further evaluated under
extended experimental settings.

Introduction
Distributed Collaborative Machine Learning (DCML) is
popular due to its default data privacy benefits (Kairouz,
McMahan, and et al. 2019). Unlike the conventional approach, where the data is centrally pooled and accessed,
DCML enables machine learning without having to transfer
data from data custodians to any untrusted party. Moreover,
analysts have no access to raw data; instead, the machine
learning (ML) model is transferred to the data curator for
processing. Besides, it enables computation on multiple systems or servers and distributed devices.
The most popular DCML approaches are federated learning (Konecný, McMahan, and Ramage 2015; McMahan
et al. 2017) and split learning (Gupta and Raskar 2018).
Federated learning (FL) trains a full ML model on the distributed clients with their local data and later aggregates the
locally trained full ML models to form a global model in a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8485

