The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Answering Queries with Negation over Existential Rules
Stefan Ellmauthaler, Markus Krötzsch, Stephan Mennicke
Knowledge-Based Systems Group, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany
stefan.ellmauthaler@tu-dresden.de, markus.kroetzsch@tu-dresden.de, stephan.mennicke@tu-dresden.de

Abstract

BNCQ

Ontology-based query answering with existential rules is well
understood and implemented for positive queries, in particular conjunctive queries. For queries with negation, however,
there is no agreed-upon semantics or standard implementation. This problem is unknown for simpler rule languages,
such as Datalog, where it is intuitive and practical to evaluate
negative queries over the least model. This fails for existential rules, which instead of a single least model have multiple
universal models that may not lead to the same results for
negative queries. We therefore propose universal core models as a basis for a meaningful (non-monotonic) semantics
for queries with negation. Since cores are hard to compute,
we identify syntactic conditions (on rules and queries) under
which our core-based semantics can equivalently be obtained
for other universal models, such as those produced by practical chase algorithms. Finally, we use our findings to propose a
semantics for a broad class of existential rules with negation.

⊇

Thm. 1

Core
Models

(Effectively)
Affection-Safe
⊇
Core-Safe BNCQ
BNCQ
Thm. 3 (Thm. 4)

v

Restricted
Chases

⊆

⊇

BCQ

Thm. 2

Chases

⊆

Universal
Models

Figure 1: Summary of Results

the unique least model. This can be further generalised by
considering stratified negation in rule bodies, which yields
an intuitive and implementable non-monotonic semantics
(Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1994). But even this basic form
of negation is not safe to use with existential rules.
What makes this problem challenging is that we are looking for a non-monotonic form of negation, where the absence of positive evidence is sufficient to entail negative information. Indeed, under the classical first-order semantics
of negation, no negated queries are ever entailed by a set
of existential rules. However, it is not immediate when a
non-monotonic semantics should allow for additional, nonclassical consequences, and several distinct approaches have
been proposed for existential rules (Magka, Krötzsch, and
Horrocks 2013; Baget et al. 2014; Gottlob et al. 2014; Alviano, Morak, and Pieris 2017; Krötzsch 2020). Our goal
for this paper is to provide a semantics that agrees with
the widely used and generally accepted semantics of Datalog with stratified negation for rules without existentials,
but which also respects the classical reading of existential
quantifiers as mere statements of existence of certain elements without any commitment to their identity (in contrast
to logic programming approaches that use function terms for
referring to distinguished objects).
We therefore propose to evaluate negations with respect to
universal models that are cores, an algebraic property that,
intuitively speaking, ensures that they contain no redundant
structures. Many good practical and theoretical results have
been obtained for core models (Fagin, Kolaitis, and Popa
2005; Deutsch, Nash, and Remmel 2008; Carral et al. 2018;
Krötzsch 2020), but computing cores from arbitrary structures is expensive (Hell and Nešetřil 1992).
We therefore ask if our core-based semantics for negation
can also be computed using other kinds of universal models, which are easier to compute in practice. It turns out

Introduction
Existential rules are a prominent approach in knowledge
representation, due to theoretical and practical advances in
ontology-based query answering (Baget et al. 2009; Calı̀,
Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2009), but also because of applications in many other domains, such as data exchange
and integration (Fagin et al. 2005). Answering conjunctive
queries (CQs) over sets of existential rules is often the main
goal, where a CQ is entailed if it is satisfied by all models
of the given rules. This is often implemented using universal models, which is a class of models each representing all
positive query answers, such that one such model suffices to
answer CQs (Deutsch, Nash, and Remmel 2008).
However, for queries that ask for the absence of facts (i.e.,
queries incorporating negated atoms), universal models cannot be used because different universal models may yield
different query answers. This is a major problem, since negation is an important feature in real-world queries, and a semantic prerequisite for supporting negation in rule bodies,
which can be viewed as a recursive generalisation of negative queries. The severity of this limitation is further aggravated by the fact that no such problems exist for Datalog, where negative queries can safely be evaluated over
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5626

