The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

What about Inputting Policy in Value Function: Policy Representation and
Policy-Extended Value Function Approximator
Hongyao Tang,1 Zhaopeng Meng,1 Jianye Hao,1 * Chen Chen,2 Daniel Graves,2 Dong Li,2
Changmin Yu,3 Hangyu Mao,2 Wulong Liu,2 Yaodong Yang,1 Wenyuan Tao,1 Li Wang1
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
3
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London
Abstract

approximate the true values of current policy (i.e., policy evaluation), regarding which the policy is further improved (i.e.,
policy improvement). The value function approximation error hinders the effectiveness of policy improvement and then
the overall optimality of GPI (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996;
Scherrer et al. 2015). Unfortunately, such errors are inevitable
under function approximation. A large number of samples
are usually required to ensure high-quality value estimates,
resulting in the sample-inefficiency of deep RL algorithms.
Therefore, this raises an urgent need for more efficient value
approximation methods (v. Hasselt 2010; Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017; Fujimoto, v. Hoof, and Meger 2018;
Kuznetsov et al. 2020).
An intuitive idea to improve the efficiency value approximation is to leverage the knowledge on the values of previous encountered policies. However, a conventional VFA
usually approximates the values of one policy and values
learned from old policies are over-written gradually during
the learning process. This means that the previously learned
knowledge cannot be preserved and utilized with one conventional VFA. Thus, such limitations prevent the potentials
to leverage the previous knowledge for future learning. In
this paper, we study Policy-extended Value Function Approximator (PeVFA), which additionally takes an explicit
policy representation as input in contrast to conventional
VFA. Thanks to the policy representation input, PeVFA is
able to approximate values for multiple policies and induces
value generalization among policies. We formally analyze
the generalization of approximate values among policies in
a general form. From both theoretical and empirical lens,
we show that the generalized value estimates can be closer
to the true values of the successive policy, which can be
beneficial to consecutive value approximation along the policy improvement path, called local generalization. Based on
above clues, we introduce a new form of GPI with PeVFA
(the right of Fig.1) that leverages the local generalization to
improve the efficiency of consecutive value approximation
along the policy improvement path.
One key point of GPI with PeVFA is the representation
of policy since it determines how PeVFA generalizes the
values. For this, we propose a framework to learn effective
low-dimensional embedding of RL policy. We use network
parameters or state-action pairs as policy data and encode
them into low-dimensional embeddings; then the embeddings

We study Policy-extended Value Function Approximator
(PeVFA) in Reinforcement Learning (RL), which extends conventional value function approximator (VFA) to take as input
not only the state (and action) but also an explicit policy representation. Such an extension enables PeVFA to preserve values
of multiple policies at the same time and brings an appealing
characteristic, i.e., value generalization among policies. We
formally analyze the value generalization under Generalized
Policy Iteration (GPI). From theoretical and empirical lens,
we show that generalized value estimates offered by PeVFA
may have lower initial approximation error to true values of
successive policies, which is expected to improve consecutive value approximation during GPI. Based on above clues,
we introduce a new form of GPI with PeVFA which leverages the value generalization along policy improvement path.
Moreover, we propose a representation learning framework
for RL policy, providing several approaches to learn effective
policy embeddings from policy network parameters or stateaction pairs. In our experiments, we evaluate the efficacy of
value generalization offered by PeVFA and policy representation learning in several OpenAI Gym continuous control
tasks. For a representative instance of algorithm implementation, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) re-implemented
under the paradigm of GPI with PeVFA achieves about 40%
performance improvement on its vanilla counterpart in most
environments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been widely considered as
a promising way to learn optimal policies in many decisionmaking problems (Mnih et al. 2015; Lillicrap et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016; You et al. 2018; Schreck, Coley, and Bishop
2019; Vinyals et al. 2019; Hafner et al. 2020). One fundamental element of RL is value function which defines the
long-term evaluation of a policy. With function approximation (e.g., deep neural networks), a value function approximator (VFA) is able to approximate the values of a policy
under large and continuous state spaces. As commonly recognized, most RL algorithms can be described as Generalized
Policy Iteration (GPI) (Sutton and Barto 1998). As illustrated
on the left of Fig.1, at each iteration the VFA is trained to
* Corresponding author: Jianye Hao (jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8441

