The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stackelberg Actor-Critic: Game-Theoretic Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Liyuan Zheng1 , Tanner Fiez1 , Zane Alumbaugh2 , Benjamin Chasnov1 , Lillian J. Ratliff1
1

University of Washington 2 University of California, Santa Cruz
{liyuanz8,fiezt,bchasnov,ratliffl}@uw.edu, zanedma@gmail.com

Abstract

by the ability to act before the follower. As a result of this
structure, the leader optimizes its objective accounting for
the anticipated response of the follower, while the follower
selects a best response to the leader’s action to optimize its
own objective. The interaction between the actor and critic
in reinforcement learning has an intrinsic hierarchical structure reminiscent of a Stackelberg game, which motivates our
work to contribute a novel game-theoretic modeling framework along with theoretical and empirical results.
Modeling Contributions. We explicitly cast the interaction between the actor and critic as a two-player generalsum Stackelberg game toward solving reinforcement learning problems. Notably, this perspective deviates from the
majority of work on actor-critic reinforcement learning algorithms, which implicitly neglect the interaction structure by
independently optimizing the actor and critic objectives using individual gradient dynamics. In order to solve the game
iteratively in a manner that reflects the interaction structure,
we study learning dynamics in which the player deemed the
leader updates its parameters using the total derivative of its
objective defined using the implicit function theorem and the
player deemed the follower updates using the typical individual gradient dynamics. We refer to this gradient-based
learning method as the Stackelberg gradient dynamics. The
designations of leader and follower between the actor and
critic can result in distinct game-theoretic outcomes and we
explore both choices and explain how the proper roles depend
on the respective objective functions.
Theoretical Contributions. The Stackelberg gradient dynamics were previously studied in general nonconvex games
and enjoy a number of theoretical guarantees (Fiez, Chasnov,
and Ratliff 2020). In this paper we tailor the analysis of this
learning dynamic to the reinforcement learning problem. To
do this, we begin by developing a policy gradient theorem for
the total derivative update (Theorem 1). Then, building off
of this result, we develop a meta-framework of Stackelberg
actor-critic algorithms. Specifically, this framework adapts
the standard actor-critic, deep deterministic policy gradient,
and soft-actor critic algorithms to be optimized using the
Stackelberg gradient dynamics in place of the usual individual gradient dynamics. For the Stackelberg actor-critic
algorithms this meta-framework admits, we prove local convergence (Theorem 2) to local Stackelberg equilibrium.
Experimental Contributions. From an empirical stand-

The hierarchical interaction between the actor and critic in
actor-critic based reinforcement learning algorithms naturally
lends itself to a game-theoretic interpretation. We adopt this
viewpoint and model the actor and critic interaction as a twoplayer general-sum game with a leader-follower structure
known as a Stackelberg game. Given this abstraction, we propose a meta-framework for Stackelberg actor-critic algorithms
where the leader player follows the total derivative of its objective instead of the usual individual gradient. From a theoretical
standpoint, we develop a policy gradient theorem for the refined update and provide a local convergence guarantee for
the Stackelberg actor-critic algorithms to a local Stackelberg
equilibrium. From an empirical standpoint, we demonstrate
via simple examples that the learning dynamics we study mitigate cycling and accelerate convergence compared to the usual
gradient dynamics given cost structures induced by actor-critic
formulations. Finally, experiments on OpenAI gym environments show that Stackelberg actor-critic algorithms always
perform at least as well and often significantly outperform the
standard actor-critic algorithm counterparts.

1

Introduction

The algorithmic techniques for reinforcement learning can
be classified into policy-based, value-based, and actor-critic
methods (Sutton and Barto 2018). Policy-based methods
directly optimize a parameterized policy to maximize the
expected return, while value-based methods estimate the
expected return and then infer an optimal policy from the
value-function by selecting the maximizing actions. Actorcritic methods bridge policy-based and value-based methods
by learning the parameterized policy (actor) and the valuefunction (critic) together. In particular, actor-critic methods
learn a critic that approximates the expected return of the
actor while concurrently learning an actor to optimize the
expected return based on the critic’s estimation.
In this paper, we adopt a game-theoretic perspective of
actor-critic reinforcement learning algorithms. To provide
some relevant background from game theory, recall that
Stackelberg games are a class of games that describe interactions between a leader and a follower (Başar and Olsder
1998). In a Stackelberg game, the leader is distinguished
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9217

