The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stationary Diffusion State Neural Estimation for Multiview Clustering
Chenghua Liu, Zhuolin Liao, Yixuan Ma, Kun Zhan?
School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University
{liuchh20,liaozhl20,mayx2021,kzhan}@lzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although many graph-based clustering methods attempt to
model the stationary diffusion state in their objectives, their
performance limits to using a predefined graph. We argue
that the estimation of the stationary diffusion state can be
achieved by gradient descent over neural networks. We specifically design the Stationary Diffusion State Neural Estimation
(SDSNE) to exploit multiview structural graph information
for co-supervised learning. We explore how to design a graph
neural network specially for unsupervised multiview learning and integrate multiple graphs into a unified consensus
graph by a shared self-attentional module. The view-shared
self-attentional module utilizes the graph structure to learn
a view-consistent global graph. Meanwhile, instead of using auto-encoder in most unsupervised learning graph neural
networks, SDSNE uses a co-supervised strategy with structure information to supervise the model learning. The cosupervised strategy as the loss function guides SDSNE in
achieving the stationary state. With the help of the loss and
the self-attentional module, we learn to obtain a graph in
which nodes in each connected component fully connect by
the same weight. Experiments on several multiview datasets
demonstrate effectiveness of SDSNE in terms of six clustering
evaluation metrics.

1

diffusing

Figure 1: A diffusion example. A cup denotes a node in the
graph and the color of cups denotes the class label. Cups have
different initial water volumes. After a long time, connected
cups with the same color have the same amount of water,
which is stationary. All of the different stationary states can
be categorized into three cases, i.e., case 1 is that four cups
have water as shown; case 2 is blue cups have water while
no water in oranges; and case 3 is no water in blues while
oranges have water, so we show three cases for example. If
all of the different stationary states are orthonormalized to a
stationary matrix Π, then Π has the semantic meaning to the
indicator matrix T . Then, we argue that the estimation of Π
can be achieved by gradient descent over neural networks.

Introduction

Feature diversity is ubiquitous and we live in a world composed of a large amount of multiview content. Multiple views
refer to different features of the same instance (Blum and
Mitchell 1998). Since multiview features are highly relevant,
more and more artificial intelligence tasks involve the processing of multiview data. Our goal is to leverage multiview
data to derive clustering algorithms.
Multiview clustering carries out joint feature learning and
co-view relationship modeling, aiming to exploit the correlation of different views effectively. Since the essential consensus structure coexists in multiview features, using the structured graphs of different views for unsupervised multiview
feature learning is able to optimize clustering performance.
Combining structural information from different views can
achieve better efficient performance than clustering of any
single view.

Since discriminative modeling is mostly used when exploring the internal structure of data, the structural relationship
between data points is usually expressed in the form of a
graph. With predefined graphs, co-learning spectral clustering algorithms are applied firstly to unsupervised multiview
learning (Kumar and Daumé 2011; Kumar, Rai, and Daume
2011) due to the well-defined mathematical framework of
spectral clustering (SC) (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002). Later,
a series of SC or subspace learning-based methods are applied
to multiview clustering by exploiting graph information (Xia
et al. 2014; Li et al. 2015; Gao et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018;
Pan and Kang 2021). Although these graph-based multiview
clustering methods have made great progress by integrating
information from different views, their unified consensus representation is usually obtained by a simple weighted-sum
approach. We design a neural estimator that synergistically
uses multiple graphs to obtain the consensus graph by explor-

?

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7542

