The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Show Your Faith: Cross-Modal Confidence-Aware Network
for Image-Text Matching
Huatian Zhang1 , Zhendong Mao1 * , Kun Zhang1 , Yongdong Zhang1, 2
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
{huatianzhang, kkzhang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-text matching bridges vision and language, which is
a crucial task in the field of multi-modal intelligence. The
key challenge lies in how to measure image-text relevance
accurately as matching evidence. Most existing works aggregate the local semantic similarities of matched region-word
pairs as the overall relevance, and they typically assume that
the matched pairs are equally reliable. However, although
a region-word pair is locally matched across modalities, it
may be inconsistent/unreliable from the global perspective
of image-text, resulting in inaccurate relevance measurement.
In this paper, we propose a novel Cross-Modal ConfidenceAware Network to infer the matching confidence that indicates the reliability of matched region-word pairs, which is
combined with the local semantic similarities to refine the
relevance measurement. Specifically, we first calculate the
matching confidence via the relevance between the semantic
of image regions and the complete described semantic in the
image, with the text as a bridge. Further, to richly express the
region semantics, we extend the region to its visual context
in the image. Then, local semantic similarities are weighted
with the inferred confidence to filter out unreliable matched
pairs in aggregating. Comprehensive experiments show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on benchmarks Flickr30K and MSCOCO.

Figure 1: Illustration of the necessity of matching confidence. (a) Existing methods typically measure the overall
image-text relevance with aggregating local semantic similarities, assuming all matched region-word pairs are reliable.
The word “man” in text will align to all man regions, even
s2 , s3 , s4 are not really referred to. (b) Our method further
infers the matching confidence to distinguish the reliability
of each matched region-word pair from the global perspective, and filters out the unreliable matched pairs (e.g., regions
with red box) to achieve more accurate semantic alignment.

Introduction
Image-text matching, which refers to image searching given
descriptions or text retrieval given image queries, is beneficial to many multi-modal tasks (Anderson et al. 2018)(Xu
et al. 2018)(Xu et al. 2019)(Yu et al. 2020) such as image captioning, text-to-image synthesis, visual question answering. The matching aims to bridge vision and language
so as to reduce the visual-semantic discrepancy between
these two heterogeneous modalities. Despite the remarkable
progress in recent years, image-text matching remains the
challenge that how to measure image-text relevance accurately as matching evidence.
To explore efficacious approaches to capture cross-modal
semantic interplays for image-text relevance measuring,
plenty of researches have been done. The common paradigm
is to first align vision and language semantically, and then

measure cross-modal semantic similarity as relevance based
on resulting alignments. There are two main strategies:
global aligning based and local aligning based. Global aligning based methods (Wang, Li, and Lazebnik 2016)(Liu
et al. 2017) (Gu et al. 2018) (Huang et al. 2018)(Shi et al.
2019)(Li et al. 2019) infer cross-modal semantic similarity
directly from the global alignment between the whole image
and full text in a common embedding space. Local aligning based methods aggregate the overall relevance from local semantic alignments between detected salient image regions and text words. Recent works mainly probe into local
aligning to discover fine-grained visual-semantic similarity
at region-word level. (Lee et al. 2018) proposes a stacked

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3262

