The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sparse Structure Learning via Graph Neural Networks
for Inductive Document Classification
Yinhua Piao1 , Sangseon Lee2 , Dohoon Lee3 , Sun Kim1,3,4,5
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Institute of Computer Technology, Seoul National University
3
Bioinformatics Institute, Seoul National University
4
AIGENDRUG Co., Ltd.
5
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{2018-27910, sangseon486, apap7, sunkim.bioinfo}@snu.ac.kr
Abstract

word co-occurrence information. With rapid adoption of
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017),
GNNs can be designed to capture non-consecutive word dependencies in the document. Therefore, GNNs have recently
been used for document classification. TextGCN (Yao, Mao,
and Luo 2019) first applies GNNs on one corpus graph for
node-level document classification task. Huang et al. (Huang
et al. 2019) transform TextGCN to graph-level prediction
to reduce the memory consumption during training. To improve generalization performance for new documents, there
are also works for inductive document classification. TextING (Zhang et al. 2020) constructs an individual graph
for each document where local word interactions can be
learned. HyperGAT (Ding et al. 2020) improves expressive
power of inductive model by exploiting high-order relations
in document-level hypergraphs. These methods, with satisfying results, can empirically prove that graph-based models can indeed capture long-range word dependencies which
benefits the model performance.

Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely
used for document classification. However, most existing
methods are based on static word co-occurrence graphs
without sentence-level information, which poses three challenges:(1) word ambiguity, (2) word synonymity, and (3) dynamic contextual dependency. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel GNN-based sparse structure learning
model for inductive document classification. Specifically, a
document-level graph is initially generated by a disjoint union
of sentence-level word co-occurrence graphs. Our model collects a set of trainable edges connecting disjoint words between sentences, and employs structure learning to sparsely
select edges with dynamic contextual dependencies. Graphs
with sparse structures can jointly exploit local and global contextual information in documents through GNNs. For inductive learning, the refined document graph is further fed into
a general readout function for graph-level classification and
optimization in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments
on several real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed
model outperforms most state-of-the-art results, and reveal
the necessity to learn sparse structures for each document.

Nevertheless, almost all graph-based methods are designed to construct static word co-occurrence graph for the
whole document without considering sentence-level information. Each unique word in the graph is mapped to only
one representation in the latent space, which may bring three
potential challenges: (1) Word ambiguity. In the real world,
most words may have multiple meanings, and in different
contexts, a single word may have completely different meanings depending on the context. In the static graph, an anchor word with multiple completely different meanings is
connected to all adjacent words as 1-hop neighbors, which
can misguide GNNs to blindly combine global information and confuse syntactic information, as well as degrade
local information. (2) Word synonymity. Non-consecutive
words in the static graph can be mapped to similar positions
in the latent space, in many cases owing to their proximity to the same anchor word. However, most words have
their synonyms, and words adjacent to synonyms should
be mapped similarly. Therefore, some long-range information between synonyms may still not be captured in a static
word co-occurrence graph. Last, (3) Dynamic contextual dependency. Most GNN-based approaches consider nodes and
their neighbors to be homogeneous in the static document
graph, allowing simultaneous layer-by-layer message pass-

Introduction
Document classification, a task of using algorithms to automatically classify the input document to one or multiple
categories, is one of the most fundamental tasks in the field
of Natural Language Processing (NLP). The essential part
of document classification is to extract features that can represent the documents. Conventional approaches use handcrafted features, e.g., bag-of-words, term frequency-inverse
document frequency. With the advent of deep learning technologies, related works such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al.
2013), utilize contextual information to learn word representations. Considering the word order in a sequence, many
models adopt sequence-based models including recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) (Mikolov et al. 2010; Tai, Socher,
and Manning 2015; Liu, Qiu, and Huang 2016), and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Kim 2014; Zhang, Zhao,
and LeCun 2015). Although these methods can capture the
local contextual information in the document, sequencebased models still have difficulty in capturing long-range
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11165

