The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Differential Assessment of Black-Box AI Agents
Rashmeet Kaur Nayyar* , Pulkit Verma* , and Siddharth Srivastava
Autonomous Agents and Intelligent Robots Lab,
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, AZ, USA
{rmnayyar, verma.pulkit, siddharths}@asu.edu

1

Model learning from scratch
(expensive)

Much of the research on learning symbolic models of AI
agents focuses on agents with stationary models. This assumption fails to hold in settings where the agent’s capabilities may change as a result of learning, adaptation, or
other post-deployment modifications. Efficient assessment of
agents in such settings is critical for learning the true capabilities of an AI system and for ensuring its safe usage. In this
work, we propose a novel approach to differentially assess
black-box AI agents that have drifted from their previously
known models. As a starting point, we consider the fully observable and deterministic setting. We leverage sparse observations of the drifted agent’s current behavior and knowledge of its initial model to generate an active querying policy that selectively queries the agent and computes an updated model of its functionality. Empirical evaluation shows
that our approach is much more efficient than re-learning the
agent model from scratch. We also show that the cost of differential assessment using our method is proportional to the
amount of drift in the agent’s functionality.

Sparse observations
(collected once)

Query

Response

Differential Assessment of
AI System (DAAISy)

Model learning from scratch
not needed

Agent update
events

Abstract

X
Initially known model of

Learned model of

Figure 1: The Differential Assessment of AI System
(DAAISy) takes as input the initially known model of the
agent prior to model drift, available observations of the updated agent’s behavior, and performs a selective dialog with
the black-box AI agent to output its updated model through
efficient model learning.

Introduction

With increasingly greater autonomy in AI systems in recent
years, a major problem still persists and has largely been
overlooked: how do we accurately predict the behavior of a
black-box AI agent that is evolving and adapting to changes
in the environment it is operating in? And how do we ensure
its reliable and safe usage? Numerous factors could cause
unpredictable changes in agent behaviors: sensors and actuators may fail due to physical damage, the agent may adapt
to a dynamic environment, users may change deployment
and use-case scenarios, etc. Most prior work on the topic
presumes that the functionalities and the capabilities of AI
agents are static, while some works start with a tabula-rasa
and learn the entire model from scratch. However, in many
real-world scenarios, the agent model is transient and only
parts of its functionality change at a time.
Bryce, Benton, and Boldt (2016) address a related problem where the system learns the updated mental model of a
user using particle filtering given prior knowledge about the
user’s mental model. However, they assume that the entity

being modeled can tell the learning system about flaws in
the learned model if needed. This assumption does not hold
in settings where the entity being modeled is a black-box
AI system: most such systems are either implemented using
inscrutable representations or otherwise lack the ability to
automatically generate a model of their functionality (what
they can do and when) in terms the user can understand.
The problem of efficiently assessing, in human-interpretable
terms, the functionality of such a non-stationary AI system
has received little research attention.
The primary contribution of this paper is an algorithm for
differential assessment of black-box AI systems (Fig. 1).
This algorithm utilizes an initially known interpretable
model of the agent as it was in the past, and a small set of
observations of agent execution. It uses these observations to
develop an incremental querying strategy that avoids the full
cost of assessment from scratch and outputs a revised model
of the agent’s new functionality. One of the challenges in
learning agent models from observational data is that reductions in agent functionality often do not correspond to specific “evidence” in behavioral observations, as the agent may
not visit states where certain useful actions are no longer ap-

* Equal contribution. Alphabetical order.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9868

