The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Synthesis from Satisficing and Temporal Goals
Suguman Bansal,1 Lydia Kavraki, 2 Moshe Y. Vardi, 2 Andrew Wells 2,3
1

University of Pennsylvania
2
Rice University
3
Tesla

Abstract
Reactive synthesis from high-level specifications that combine hard constraints expressed in Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL) with soft constraints expressed by discounted-sum
(DS) rewards has applications in planning and reinforcement
learning. An existing approach combines techniques from
LTL synthesis with optimization for the DS rewards but has
failed to yield a sound algorithm. An alternative approach
combining LTL synthesis with satisficing DS rewards (rewards that achieve a threshold) is sound and complete for integer discount factors, but, in practice, a fractional discount
factor is desired. This work extends the existing satisficing
approach, presenting the first sound algorithm for synthesis
from LTL and DS rewards with fractional discount factors.
The utility of our algorithm is demonstrated on robotic planning domains.

1

Figure 1: Example scenario: The (controlled) robot must retrieve objects and avoid the (uncontrolled) human in a grocery store. The robot’s hard constraint is to retrieve objects
from its grocery list without colliding with the walls (in
grey) or human. Its soft constraint is to socially (Manhattan)
distance itself from the human. A fractional discount factor
makes the robot less “greedy.”

This work investigates the problem of reactive synthesis from specifications that combine hard qualitative constraints expressed by LTL with soft quantitative constraints
expressed by discounted-sum rewards. Discounted-sum rewards are well-suited for infinite-horizon executions because the discounted-sum is guaranteed to converge on
infinite-sequence of costs whereas other aggregation functions such as limit-average may not. Discounted-sum encodes diminishing returns. As a result, the combination of
LTL with discounted-sum rewards frequently appears in the
automated construction of systems using planning and reinforcement learning (Bozkurt et al. 2020; Camacho et al.
2017, 2019; Hasanbeig et al. 2019; Kalagarla, Jain, and
Nuzzo 2021; Kwiatkowska, Parker, and Wiltsche 2017).
Note, however, these works only deal with a single player
case (controllable system agent) while reactive synthesis
also assumes the presence of an uncontrollable environment.
Broadly speaking, there are two approaches to reactive
synthesis from LTL and discounted-sum rewards. The first
approach is based on optimization of the discounted-sum
reward. A strategy that optimizes the discounted-sum reward alone is guaranteed to exist in deterministic, turnbased settings (Shapley 1953). This existence guarantee,
however, is lost upon combination with LTL constraints.
For example, consider a two-state game where state s0
gives negative reward and state s1 positive. Each state
can transition to all other states. Our LTL objective is
(Globally Eventually s0 ). Clearly, there exists no strategy
that simultaneously maximizes the discounted-sum reward
and satisfies the LTL objective (Chatterjee et al. 2017). To

Introduction

Reactive synthesis is the automated construction, from a
high-level description of its desired behavior, of a reactive
system that continuously interacts with an uncontrollable external environment (Church 1957).
Recent applications of reactive synthesis have emerged in
AI for planning and robotics tasks (Camacho, Bienvenu, and
McIlraith 2019; He et al. 2019; Kress-Gazit, Lahijanian, and
Raman 2018). These applications can be formulated as a
deterministic turn-based interaction between a controllable
system player and an uncontrollable environment player.
Given a specification, the synthesis task is to generate a system strategy such that all resulting interactions with the environment satisfy the specification. A large focus in this line
of work has been on synthesis from Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL) specifications (Pnueli 1977; Pnueli and Rosner 1989).
Yet, several desired specifications either cannot be expressed using LTL or doing is cumbersome. Examples include specifications about the quantitative properties of systems, such as rewards, costs, degrees of satisfaction, and so
on. In fact, the combination of LTL with quantitative properties is used to express more nuanced and complex specifications (see Figure 1). Subsequently, synthesis algorithms
from combination specifications have followed (Ding et al.
2014; He et al. 2017; Lahijanian et al. 2015).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9679

