The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SiamTrans: Zero-Shot Multi-Frame Image Restoration
with Pre-trained Siamese Transformers
Lin Liu1 , Shanxin Yuan2 * , Jianzhuang Liu2 , Xin Guo1 , Youliang Yan2 , Qi Tian3
1

EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Huawei Cloud BU
{ll0825,willing}mail.ustc.edu.cn {shanxin.yuan, liu.jianzhuang, yanyouliang, tian.qi1}@huawei.com
Abstract
We propose a novel zero-shot multi-frame image restoration
method for removing unwanted obstruction elements (such
as rains, snow, and moiré patterns) that vary in successive
frames. It has three stages: transformer pre-training, zero-shot
restoration, and hard patch refinement. Using the pre-trained
transformers, our model is able to tell the motion difference
between the true image information and the obstructing elements. For zero-shot image restoration, we design a novel
model, termed SiamTrans, which is constructed by Siamese
transformers, encoders, and decoders. Each transformer has
a temporal attention layer and several self-attention layers,
to capture both temporal and spatial information of multiple frames. Only pre-trained (self-supervised) on the denoising task, SiamTrans is tested on three different low-level
vision tasks (deraining, demoiréing, and desnowing). Compared with related methods, ours achieves the best performances, even outperforming those with supervised learning.

(a) Deraining

(b) Demoireing

(c) Desnowing

Figure 1: Example results of our zero-shot method for multiframe deraining (top), demoiréing (middle), and desnowing (bottom). Pre-trained on denoising only, our SiamTrans
model removes unwanted elements while retaining the image details on multiple restoration tasks.

Introduction
Taking clean photographs under bad weather (e.g., snow and
rain) or recovering clean images from occluding elements
(e.g., moiré patterns), is challenging as the scene information
is corrupted by these occluding elements in the captured images. These occluding elements can change quickly in a very
short time (e.g., snow and rain) or due to the small movement
of the camera (e.g., moiré patterns), making it difficult to do
multi-frame image restoration.
Recovering the underlying clean image from a single degraded image is an ill-posed problem due to occlusions.
Most of existing single image restoration methods that focus on dealing with these types of problem often mine highlevel semantic information of the scene or the properties of
degrading elements (e.g., noise and rain streak). But these
single image restoration methods have difficulty in handling challenging and complex cases. To tackle these problems, multi-frame-based approaches, which use several images as input, are proposed to exploit additional information
from supporting frames to the reference frame. Task-specific
multi-frame-based methods include denoising (Liang et al.

2020; Mildenhall et al. 2018; Godard, Matzen, and Uyttendaele 2018), demosaicing (Ehret et al. 2019; Kokkinos and
Lefkimmiatis 2019), super-resolution (Farsiu et al. 2014;
El Mourabit et al. 2017; Wronski et al. 2019; Isobe et al.
2020), reflection removal (Li and Brown 2013; Guo, Cao,
and Ma 2014), HDR imaging (Dai et al. 2021; Yan et al.
2019), etc. In addition, a few general frameworks have been
proposed for multiple low-level vision tasks (Xue et al.
2015; Alayrac 2019; Liu et al. 2020d; Fan et al. 2020). The
work in (Alayrac 2019) proposes a generic 3D CNN to estimate the foreground layer and (Liu et al. 2020d) estimates
the optical flows of obstruction elements. Both methods cannot obtain satisfactory results because it is hard to estimate
either obstruction elements or their optical flows that vary
dramatically in successive frames. These supervised methods require a large amount of annotated training data and
often have problems when applied to new tasks.
The pre-training and fine-tuning strategy is effective to
obtain the natural image prior and adapt to new tasks. This
strategy is often used on high-level vision tasks (Chen et al.
2020b; Grill et al. 2020; He et al. 2020b) showing great per-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1747

