The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ProgressiveMotionSeg: Mutually Reinforced Framework for Event-Based Motion
Segmentation
Jinze Chen* 1 , Yang Wang* 1 , Yang Cao†1,2 , Feng Wu1 , Zheng-Jun Zha†1
1

2

University of Science and Technology of China,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
chjz@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {ywang120,forrest,fengwu,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) can asynchronously output
the events reflecting apparent motion of objects with microsecond resolution, and shows great application potential
in monitoring and other fields. However, the output event
stream of existing DVS inevitably contains background activity noise (BA noise) due to dark current and junction leakage
current, which will affect the temporal correlation of objects,
resulting in deteriorated motion estimation performance. Particularly, the existing filter-based denoising methods cannot
be directly applied to suppress the noise in event stream,
since there is no spatial correlation. To address this issue,
this paper presents a novel progressive framework, in which
a Motion Estimation (ME) module and an Event Denoising
(ED) module are jointly optimized in a mutually reinforced
manner. Specifically, based on the maximum sharpness criterion, ME module divides the input event into several segments by adaptive clustering in a motion compensating warp
field, and captures the temporal correlation of event stream
according to the clustered motion parameters. Taking temporal correlation as guidance, ED module calculates the confidence that each event belongs to real activity events, and
transmits it to ME module to update energy function of motion segmentation for noise suppression. The two steps are
iteratively updated until stable motion segmentation results
are obtained. Extensive experimental results on both synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
approaches against the State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) methods.

(a) The Frame

(b) The Events

Figure 1: The noise is unavoidable in the output of DVS, as
shown in the orange and blue box area. Besides, the noise
level is affected by the brightness level, the lower the brightness, the greater the noise level, as shown in the blue box.

Given the events as input, there are mainly two strategies
to perform motion segmentation. One way transforms the
events into intensity frames and then conducts the motion
segmentation on them as in traditional frame-based cameras
(Kepple et al. 2020; Mitrokhin et al. 2019). Another feasible strategy directly performs the motion segmentation in
event space, which requires firstly clustering all the events
into different groups and then calculating the respective motions (Stoffregen et al. 2019). However, none of these methods consider the effect of Background Activity (BA) noise
produced by dark current and junction leakage current even
if there is no change in light intensity (Nozaki and Delbruck 2017). The BA noise appears sparser and randomly
distributed, as shown in Fig.1, which will destroy the temporal correlation of real activity events, resulting in the motion segmentation performance degradation. Worse still, the
BA noise level is coupled with the brightness level due to
the logarithmic compression in the front-end photoreceptor
(Patrick, Posch, and Delbruck 2008). The lower the brightness level is, the higher the BA noise level is, as shown in
the orange and blue box area of Fig.1 (b), which will further
increase the difficulty of motion segmentation.
In practice, one straightforward solution for this problem
is to first filter out BA noise using denoising methods (Khodamoradi and Kastner 2018; Feng et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020) and then perform motion segmentation on remaining
events. However, the events lack spatial correlation due to
the sparsity, so we cannot directly use traditional image de-

Introduction
The Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS) are novel bio-inspired
vision sensors that record the intensity changes asynchronously in microsecond resolution and output a series
of positive or negative binary spikes (called events) representing the relative motion cues between the camera and objects (Gallego et al. 2020). Benefited to its high-sensitivity
to intensity changes, DVS is well suited for conducting motion segmentation that requires high temporal resolution,
e.g., high-speed aerial vehicles tracking and detection (Kim,
Leutenegger, and Davison 2016; Vidal et al. 2018).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

303

