The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

How Private Is Your RL Policy? An Inverse RL Based Analysis Framework
Kritika Prakash, Fiza Husain, Praveen Paruchuri, Sujit Gujar
Machine Learning Lab, IIIT Hyderabad
kritika.prakash@research.iiit.ac.in, fiza.husain@students.iiit.ac.in, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in, sujit.gujar@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

environments is often sensitive, as it is built on people’s private information. RL agents trained in such environments
should not expose the private information of individuals. We
therefore, need to use privacy-preserving methods to protect
the rewards from being memorized in the agent’s policy in
such a manner that the agent’s utility is not compromised.
Recent works use Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.
2006) to make the agent’s policy quantifiably private and to
get a rigorous privacy guarantee. Like many other areas in
AI, RL has also started adopting DP to establish a mathematical way of guaranteeing data privacy in RL environments. However, an important question is: does the privacy
guarantee offered by the private policies translate well into
protecting the reward function? If not, how can we understand the gap in achieving meaningful privacy? Does the
type of reward function, algorithms (both training and DP algorithms), and environment play a role? In other words, does
privacy in policy translate well to privacy in reward? To investigate this, we first build an autonomous agent whose aim
is to learn a private policy using existing privacy techniques
with the intent of reaching a goal state that helps to maximize its expected reward in discrete finite-state environments. We then investigate the true level of reward privacy
offered by the existing state-of-the-art privacy techniques for
RL algorithms.
We evaluate the private policies by estimating an adversary’s ability to reconstruct the original reward function
from the agent’s learned policy. The field of inverse RL (Ng,
Russell et al. 2000), arose to solve this exact problem of extracting a reward function given the observed, optimal behaviour. Given the “reverse engineering” nature of inverse
RL, the reconstructed reward can be used as an adversarial
attack on environments with protected rewards. Building on
this key intuition, we propose the PRIL analysis framework
that first performs the reward reconstruction attack, and then
computes its similarity to the original private reward via various distance metrics. We apply this framework over a set of
privacy preserving techniques:
1. Bellman update DP
2. Rényi-DP in deep learning (DL)
3. Functional noise DP
These are applied to a set of RL algorithms:
1. Deep Q Network (DQN)

Reinforcement Learning (RL) enables agents to learn how
to perform various tasks from scratch. In domains like autonomous driving, recommendation systems and more, optimal RL policies learned could cause a privacy breach if the
policies memorize any part of the private reward. We study
the set of existing differentially-private RL policies derived
from various RL algorithms such as Value Iteration, DeepQ Networks, and Vanilla Proximal Policy Optimization. We
propose a new Privacy-Aware Inverse RL analysis framework
(PRIL), that involves performing reward reconstruction as
an adversarial attack on private policies that the agents may
deploy. For this, we introduce the reward reconstruction attack, wherein we seek to reconstruct the original reward from
a privacy-preserving policy using the Inverse RL algorithm.
An adversary must do poorly at reconstructing the original
reward function if the agent uses a tightly private policy. Using this framework, we empirically test the effectiveness of
the privacy guarantee offered by the private algorithms on instances of the FrozenLake domain of varying complexities.
Based on the analysis performed, we infer a gap between the
current standard of privacy offered and the standard of privacy needed to protect reward functions in RL. We do so by
quantifying the extent to which each private policy protects
the reward function by measuring distances between the original and reconstructed rewards.

Introduction
Recent advancements in reinforcement learning (RL) have
found widespread application in many real-world domains.
Often, these domains are built from rich data sources or realworld environments, which could contain sensitive information of many individuals. This is evident in domains such as
autonomous driving, recommendation systems, trading, industrial assembly, and domestic service robots. For example,
a recommendation system agent for an online shopping platform not only tracks the purchases made, but also how long
the user hovers over an item that he/she did not purchase.
Another example is when an autonomous driving agent not
only learns the dynamics behind driving, but also identifies
people and predicts their behaviours on the streets, and how
to respond to such situations. The reward function in these
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8009

