The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Fusion-Denoising Attack on InstaHide with Data Augmentation
Xinjian Luo, Xiaokui Xiao, Yuncheng Wu, Juncheng Liu, Beng Chin Ooi
National University of Singapore
{xinjluo, xiaoxk, wuyc, juncheng, ooibc}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

thus eliminating the threats caused by inversion attacks (Hitaj,
Ateniese, and Perez-Cruz 2017; Zhu and Han 2020).
Recently, however, (Carlini et al. 2020) propose an attack
that can approximately recover the private images encrypted
by InstaHide. The main idea of (Carlini et al. 2020) is to
first cluster the encrypted images based on a similarity metric, and then restore one private image from one cluster of
encryptions by factoring out the useless components. Although this attack works well against the InstaHide Challenge
dataset (ins 2020a), there are three main limitations. First,
(Carlini et al. 2020) is specially designed for the InstaHide
Challenge, where each private image is directly mixed into
T = 50 encryptions. But in applications that T is set to a
small number (e.g., 10), the performance of (Carlini et al.
2020) is greatly degraded (as pointed out by one author of
InstaHide (Arora 2020)). Second, the private images could
be pre-processed by data augmentation before mixing with
other images (this case is included in the source code of
InstaHide (ins 2020b) instead of the challenge dataset (ins
2020a)), and (Carlini et al. 2020) can barely restore distinguishable images. Third, (Carlini et al. 2020) can not precisely restore the original color profiles of the private images,
which would degrade the visual features of the restored images and lead to indistinguishable results. In this paper, we
investigate a more restricted but more practical problem: how
to precisely restore the visual structures and color profiles of
a private image from a small number of encryptions generated by InstaHide with data augmentation?
To address this problem, the general idea is first to determine a set of encryptions that contain the same private
image (called homogeneous encryptions), then restore the
private image based on these homogeneous encryptions. In
particular, we view the component produced by irrelevant
mixed images in an encryption as noise. Although the noise
pattern is hard to be mathematically formulated because of
the randomly nonlinear variations on the mixed pixels introduced by InstaHide, it can be learned effectively by a deep
neural network. In this way, we can use a trained network
to remove the noise component and accurately restore the
color profiles and structures of the private image from a small
number ( 50) of encryptions.
Implementing such a neural network is not trivial. Without
careful design, the restored images could be meaningless,
as shown in (Huang et al. 2020). The main difficulty is that

InstaHide is a state-of-the-art mechanism for protecting private training images, by mixing multiple private images and
modifying them such that their visual features are indistinguishable to the naked eye. In recent work, however, Carlini et
al. show that it is possible to reconstruct private images from
the encrypted dataset generated by InstaHide. Nevertheless,
we demonstrate that Carlini et al.’s attack can be easily defeated by incorporating data augmentation into InstaHide. This
leads to a natural question: is InstaHide with data augmentation secure? In this paper, we provide a negative answer to this
question, by devising an attack for recovering private images
from the outputs of InstaHide even when data augmentation
is present. The basic idea is to use a comparative network
to identify encrypted images that are likely to correspond to
the same private image, and then employ a fusion-denoising
network for restoring the private image from the encrypted
ones, taking into account the effects of data augmentation.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed attack in comparison to Carlini et al.’s attack.

Introduction
Collaborative learning (Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020; Wu
et al. 2020) is an increasingly popular learning paradigm
as it enables multiple data providers to jointly train models
without disclosing their private data. However, recent studies
on model inversion attacks (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart
2015; Hitaj, Ateniese, and Perez-Cruz 2017; Zhu and Han
2020; Luo et al. 2021) demonstrate that the training data
can be precisely recovered based on the gradients or model
parameters shared during collaborative learning. This leads
to concerns on the security of existing collaborative learning
methods (Huang et al. 2020; Kairouz et al. 2019). To mitigate
the above concerns, (Huang et al. 2020) propose a practical
scheme, InstaHide, which generates the training datasets by
mixing multiple private images into one image (Zhang et al.
2017). The training images produced by InstaHide are called
encryptions in (Huang et al. 2020). Intuitively, InstaHide
aims to corrupt the visual features of the private images (as
shown in Fig. 1) such that the encrypted training images fed
into the models are hardly distinguishable by the naked eye,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1899

