The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PageRank for Edges: Axiomatic Characterization
Natalia Kucharczuk, Tomasz W ˛
as, Oskar Skibski
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
nk406686@students.mimuw.edu.pl, t.was@mimuw.edu.pl, o.skibski@mimuw.edu.pl

Abstract

specific application. In result, more than often a measure to
use is selected based on its intuitive understanding or popularity rather than its suitability and desirable features. That
is why, in recent years, efforts at organizing the space of
centrality measures intensified (Schoch and Brandes 2015;
Bloch, Jackson, and Tebaldi 2016).
The axiomatic approach is one of the most convenient
methods for this goal as it highlights similarities and differences between various concepts. In this approach, simple and desirable properties are identified that capture specific features of centrality measures. Choosing a carefully
designed set of axioms allows to create a unique characterization of the measure that is more intuitive and easier to
relate to the considered application.
To date, plenty of node centrality measures have been axiomatized (Boldi and Vigna 2014). Notably, much research
focused on feedback centralities (Altman and Tennenholtz 2005; Dequiedt and Zenou 2014), although distancebased centralities (Garg 2009) and game-theoretic centralities (Skibski et al. 2019) have also received considerable
attention. However, to the best of our knowledge, so far no
paper has considered edge centrality measures.
With this paper, we initiate the discussion on the axiomatic properties of edge centrality measures. We do it by
proposing an axiomatic characterization of Edge PageRank.
Edge PageRank, analogically to standard PageRank, can be
defined as the unique solution to the system of recursive
equations that ties centralities of incident edges. Our characterization is the first characterization of any edge centrality.
We base our work on a recent characterization of (node)
PageRank (W ˛
as and Skibski 2020) and ask: is it possible to
adapt such a characterization of the node centrality for the
edge centrality measure? We answer positively to this question. Specifically, we define six axioms that correspond to
axioms proposed for PageRank and show that Edge PageRank is the only measure that satisfies all of them.
The main technical challenge comes from the fact that
edge centrality measures consider pairs of nodes, which adds
a new dimension to the complexity of the problem. In result,
analyzing edge centralities cannot be reduced to the analysis
of node centralities. We discuss this on the example of line
graph approach. Moreover, this means that also the expressive power of axioms can vary. For these reasons, our proof
is essentially different from the proof for (node) PageRank.

Edge centrality measures are functions that evaluate the importance of edges in a network. They can be used to assess
the role of a backlink for the popularity of a website as well
as the importance of a flight in virus spreading. Various node
centralities have been translated to apply for edges, including
Edge Betweenness, Eigenedge (edge version of Eigenvector
centrality), and Edge PageRank. With this paper, we initiate
the discussion on the axiomatic properties of edge centrality
measures. We do it by proposing an axiomatic characterization of Edge PageRank. Our characterization is the first characterization of any edge centrality measure in the literature.

Introduction
Centrality measures that evaluate the importance of nodes
and edges in a network constitute one of the fundamental
tools of network analysis (Brandes and Erlebach 2005; Jackson 2005). In complex networks that describe the surrounding world, they enable us to indicate the most significant
genes (Özgür et al. 2008), key terrorists (Krebs 2002) and
important pages in the World Wide Web (Page et al. 1999).
Historically, centrality analysis was developed in social
networks literature. Hence, the vast majority of work concentrates on nodes which represent people in such networks.
However, in many types of networks, edges represent entities that we want to assess. In particular, edge evaluation
may indicate which backlink to our website is the most
profitable in Search Engine Optimization (Ledford 2015)
or which flight should be canceled in order to delay virus
spreading (Marcelino and Kaiser 2012). Edge centralities
have also been used to identify edges that connect different
communities in clustering algorithms (Newman 2004).
Various node centralities have been translated to apply
for edges, including Edge Betweenness (Girvan and Newman 2002), Eigenedge (edge version of Eigenvector centrality) (Huang and Huang 2019), and Edge PageRank (Chapela
et al. 2015). However, other measures not related to any node
concepts have also been proposed in the literature, such as
Spanning Edge Betweenness defined as the fraction of spanning trees that contain a specific edge (Teixeira et al. 2013).
Multiplicity of centrality measures constitute a problem of
its own, as it is becoming harder to choose one measure for a
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5108

