The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Transformer with Memory Replay
Rui Liu, Barzan Mozafari
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ruixliu, mozafari}@umich.edu

Abstract

2018; Clark et al. 2020). To make transformers more sample efficient, Clark et al. (2020) proposed a new transformer
model, called ELECTRA, that consists of two modules:
generator and discriminator. Both generator and discriminator are transformers, although generator is usually smaller
in size. The discriminator is trained to predict whether each
token in the corrupted input was replaced by the generator. They showed that their model substantially outperforms
previous models, such as BERT and XLNet given the same
amount of data.
In this paper, we go one step further by integrating the
memory replay mechanism into ELECTRA, which we
show can further improve the sample efficiency. Memory
replay works by maintaining a fixed-size memory buffer
that holds the most recent examples. It greatly improves the
sample efficiency by enabling examples to be reused multiple times for training, rather than throwing away examples
immediately after one-time usage. By controlling the strategy on how examples are managed in the memory buffer
(e.g., how to assign weights to examples), memory replay
can be customized according to specific needs. Memory replay mechanism has been successfully used in reinforcement
learning 1 and GANs, because of its improvement on sample
efficiency (i.e., requires less amount of samples to achieve
the same accuracy) (Schaul et al. 2015; Fedus et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2018).

Transformers achieve state-of-the-art performance for natural language processing tasks by pre-training on large-scale
text corpora. They are extremely compute-intensive and have
very high sample complexity. Memory replay is a mechanism
that remembers and reuses past examples by saving to and replaying from a memory buffer. It has been successfully used
in reinforcement learning and GANs due to better sample efficiency. In this paper, we propose Transformer with Memory
Replay (TMR), which integrates memory replay with transformer, making transformer more sample-efficient. Experiments on GLUE and SQuAD benchmark datasets show that
Transformer with Memory Replay achieves at least 1% point
increase compared to the baseline transformer model when
pretrained with the same number of examples. Further, by
adopting a careful design that reduces the wall-clock time
overhead of memory replay, we also empirically achieve a
better runtime efficiency.

Introduction
Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance on
various natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as
sentimental anaylysis, paraphrase detection, machine reading comprehension, text summarization, question answering
and so on (Devlin et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019b; Dai et al.
2019; Brown et al. 2020). The training of tranformers typically consists of two stages: pre-training and fine-tuning.
Pre-training is the stage of training a generic model on an
enormous corpus, such as Wikipedia to learn the representation inherent in understanding the natural language. Finetuning is the stage of training a task-specific model that is
initialized with pre-trained parameters on the dataset for the
specific downstream task for just a few epochs. Each downstream task has a separate fine-tuned model, even though it is
initialized with the same pre-trained parameters. To get good
generic representation, transformers are usually very large
models with a huge number of parameters. For example,
OpenAI recently released GPT-3, which contains 175 billion
parameters (Brown et al. 2020). Training these large-scale
models is extremely compute-intensive and has very high
sample complexity for the pre-training stage (Devlin et al.

Figure 1: The architecture diagram of our Transformer with
Memory Replay (TMR). The generator produces corrupted
examples, which are being saved to the fixed-size memory
buffer. The discriminator samples examples from the memory buffer for training. High-quality examples are reused by
the discriminator, thus making it more sample efficient to
train the discriminator.
1
The same concept is typically called experience replay in reinforcement learning literature.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7567

