The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Stability Verification in Stochastic Control Systems via Neural Network
Supermartingales
Mathias Lechner* , Ðord̄e Žikelić* , Krishnendu Chatterjee, Thomas A. Henzinger
IST Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
{mathias.lechner, djordje.zikelic, krishnendu.chatterjee, tah}@ist.ac.at

Abstract

up driving outside its lane, a safe control policy needs to be
able to stabilize the car back within the lane. Stability analysis is concerned with providing formal guarantees that the
system can, with probability 1, recover back to this safe region from any system state and stay there indefinitely.
Formal verification of stability in deterministic control
problems is well-studied. In particular, Lyapunov functions
are an established method for stability analysis of deterministic systems (Khalil 2002). A more recent line of research
focuses on automatically learning a Lyapunov function in
the form of a neural network (see Related Work). While
there are several theoretical results on extending Lyapunov
functions to stochastic systems (Kushner 1965, 2014), only a
few works consider the problem of automated stability analysis for control problems where the stochasticity originates
from the environment (Crespo and Sun 2003; Vaidya 2015).
Moreover, these works rely on restrictive assumptions on
the system, making them inapplicable to learning algorithms
with neural network policies, and they only verify strictly
weaker notions of stability. Since uncertainty is a crucial
component of RL systems, through exploration and to bridge
the simulation-to-real gap (Tobin et al. 2017; James, Davison, and Johns 2017), methods for stability verification in
stochastic control problems are needed. These methods need
to support neural network policies and truly certify stability.
In this work, we present a method for formally verifying stability in discrete-time stochastic control problems.
Our method is based on ranking supermartingales (RSMs),
which were originally introduced in the programming languages literature for termination analysis of probabilistic
programs (Chakarov and Sankaranarayanan 2013). Intuitively, RSMs are nonnegative functions that decrease in expectation by at least ϵ > 0 after every one-step evolution of
the system and in each state that is not in the target region.
We prove, for the first time, that RSMs can also be used to
define stability certificates for stochastic control problems.
There are two key advantages of using RSMs instead of
existing stochastic extensions of Lyapunov functions. First,
we show that the defining properties of RSMs are much easier to encode within a learning framework. Second, we show
that RSMs provide the first method to obtain bounds on the
stabilization time, which stochastic Lyapunov functions do
not. Ensuring that stabilization happens within some tolerable time limit is another practical concern about system

We consider the problem of formally verifying almost-sure
(a.s.) asymptotic stability in discrete-time nonlinear stochastic control systems. While verifying stability in deterministic
control systems is extensively studied in the literature, verifying stability in stochastic control systems is an open problem. The few existing works on this topic either consider only
specialized forms of stochasticity or make restrictive assumptions on the system, rendering them inapplicable to learning algorithms with neural network policies. In this work,
we present an approach for general nonlinear stochastic control problems with two novel aspects: (a) instead of classical
stochastic extensions of Lyapunov functions, we use ranking supermartingales (RSMs) to certify a.s. asymptotic stability, and (b) we present a method for learning neural network
RSMs. We prove that our approach guarantees a.s. asymptotic stability of the system and provides the first method to
obtain bounds on the stabilization time, which stochastic Lyapunov functions do not. Finally, we validate our approach experimentally on a set of nonlinear stochastic reinforcement
learning environments with neural network policies.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) presents a promising approach
to learning high-performing control policies in nonlinear
control problems. However, most RL algorithms focus on
learning a policy that maximizes the expected reward (Sutton and Barto 2018), and do not take safety constraints
into account. This raises concerns about their suitability for
safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles or
healthcare. Thus, a fundamental challenge for the deployment of policies learned via RL algorithms in safety-critical
applications is certifying their safety (Amodei et al. 2016).
Stability is one of the most important properties that a
control policy needs to ensure for the system to be safe (Lyapunov 1992). In their training phase, RL algorithms explore
unknown environments through randomized actions while
optimizing the learned policy’s expected reward. Without a
control mechanism to ensure that the system safely recovers
from such exploratory actions and goes back to some known
safe region, this might lead to catastrophic events. For example (Berkenkamp et al. 2017), if a self-driving car ends
* Equal Contribution.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7326

