The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Knowledge Assimilation for Expert-Layman Text Style Transfer
Wenda Xu, Michael Saxon, Misha Sra, William Yang Wang
University of California, Santa Barbara
Department of Computer Science
Santa Barbara, California, USA
{wendaxu,saxon}@ucsb.edu {sra,william}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Expert-layman text style transfer technologies have the potential to improve communication between members of scientific
communities and the general public. High-quality information produced by experts is often filled with difficult jargon
laypeople struggle to understand. This is a particularly notable
issue in the medical domain, where layman are often confused
by medical text online. At present, two bottlenecks interfere
with the goal of building high-quality medical expert-layman
style transfer systems: a dearth of pretrained medical-domain
language models spanning both expert and layman terminologies and a lack of parallel corpora for training the transfer task
itself. To mitigate the first issue, we propose a novel language
model (LM) pretraining task, Knowledge Base Assimilation,
to synthesize pretraining data from the edges of a graph of
expert- and layman-style medical terminology terms into an
LM during self-supervised learning. To mitigate the second
issue, we build a large-scale parallel corpus in the medical
expert-layman domain using a margin-based criterion. Our
experiments show that transformer-based models pretrained
on knowledge base assimilation and other well-established
pretraining tasks fine-tuning on our new parallel corpus leads
to considerable improvement against expert-layman transfer
benchmarks, gaining an average relative improvement of our
human evaluation, the Overall Success Rate (OSR), by 106%.

Introduction
Incompatible knowledge backgrounds between experts and
laymen cause communication difficulties (Jerit 2009). These
difficulties are particularly problematic in the medical domain
when patients attempt to self-diagnose their ailments online
(White and Horvitz 2010). Their search terms might be too
vague, leading them to self-misdiagnose, followed by unnecessary treatment or tests, and potentially worse outcomes (Au
2019). Even if they find high-quality, correct online medical
resources that match their condition, the incomprehensible
medical jargon within can be confusing and frustrating (Benigeri and Pluye 2003). Misunderstandings from online medical information seeking have been shown to lead to increased
health anxiety (White and Horvitz 2009). Expert-layman text
style transfer technologies offer a potential method to resolve
these problems. Accurate layman-to-expert style conversion
of vague searches into precise terminology could improve the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11566

quality of retrieved documents. In turn, high-quality expertto-layman translation of the retrieved documents would lead
to more comfort, better understanding, and hopefully better
overall outcomes.
Text style transfer is the task of transforming a passage
of text from a source style (e.g., expert medical language)
to a target style (e.g., layman language) while preserving
the underlying meaning (Jin et al. 2021). Prior work has
demonstrated impressive style transfer results across a variety of attributes, including sentiment (Li et al. 2018; Dai et al.
2019), formality (Rao and Tetreault 2018), and politeness
(Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016). However, the aforementioned style-transfer tasks are fundamentally surface-level
transformations along fairly content-agnostic dimensions.
Expert-layman style transfer is different in that it requires
domain-specific terminological correspondence knowledge.
For a given domain, the model must contain sets of mappings between specific expert and layman-style expressions
for phenomena (e.g., “renal” and “relating to the kidneys”),
and a system intended for one domain has no guaranteed
applicability to another (e.g., linguistics to medicine).
In this paper, we tackle two core hurdles to building highquality medical expert-layman style transfer systems: a lack
of pretrained sequence-to-sequence language models containing medical domain-specific terminological correspondence
knowledge, and a lack of parallel expert-layman medical
corpora for fine-tuning. For the first hurdle, we introduce
a novel language model (LM) pretraining task, knowledge
base assimilation (KBA) to explicitly provide the LM with
a learning signal across expert-layman phrasal realizations of
concepts. We further augment our KBA training with the previously proposed Mask, Switch, and Delete self-supervised
pretraining tasks (Devlin et al. 2019; Lample et al. 2018;
Lewis et al. 2019) to build a robust medical LM containing
terminological correspondence knowledge. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to investigate self-supervised
representation learning in expert-layman text style transfer.
To tackle the second hurdle, we produce a high-quality parallel extension of the non-parallel MSD medical text dataset
(Cao et al. 2020) containing 11,512 expert- and layman-style
medical sentences using a margin-based data mining criterion
(Schwenk 2018). To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to utilize supervised learning on a large data mined
parallel corpus of expert-laymen sentences. We release our

