The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Conditional Local Convolution for Spatio-Temporal Meteorological Forecasting
Haitao Lin,* 1 3 Zhangyang Gao,* 1 3 Yongjie Xu, 1 3 Lirong Wu, 1 3 Ling Li, 2 Stan Z. Li 1
1

Center of Artificial Intelligence for Research and Innovation, Westlake University
2
Eco-Environmental Research Laboratory, Westlake University
3
Zhejiang University
linhaitao, gaozhangyang, xuyongjie, wulirong, liling, stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

In this work, our research attention is paid to spatio-temporal
meteorological forecasting tasks.
The task is challenging due to two main difficulties. First,
the irregular sampling of meteorological signals usually disables the classical Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
which work well on regular mesh grid signals on Euclidean
domains such as 2-D planar images. Signals are usually acquired from irregularly distributed sensors, and the manifolds from which signals are sampled are usually non-planar.
For example, sensors detecting temperature are located unevenly on land and ocean, which are not fixed on structured
mesh grids, and meteorological data are often spherical signals rather than planar ones. Second, the high temporal and
spatial dependency makes it hard to model the dynamics. For
instance, different landforms show totally distinct wind flow
or temperature transferring patterns in weather forecasting
tasks and extreme climate incidents like El Nino (Broad
2002) often cause non-stationarity for prediction.
GNNs yield effective and efficient performance for irregularly spatio-temporal forecasting, enabling to update node
representations by aggregating messages from their neighbors, the process of which can be analogized to heat or wind
flow from localized areas on the earth surface. As discussed,
the meteorological flow may demonstrate totally variant patterns in different local regions. Inspired by the analogy and
location-characterized patterns, we aim to establish a graph
convolution kernel, which varies in localized regions to approximate and imitate the true local meteorological patterns.
Therefore, we propose our conditional local kernel. We
embed it in a graph-convolution-based recurrent network,
for spatio-temporal meteorological forecasting. The convolution is performed on the local space of each node,
which is constructed considering both distance between
nodes and their relative orientation, with the kernel proposed
mainly based on the assumption: smoothness of locationcharacterized patterns. In summary, our contributions are:

Spatio-temporal forecasting is challenging attributing to the
high nonlinearity in temporal dynamics as well as complex
location-characterized patterns in spatial domains, especially
in fields like weather forecasting. Graph convolutions are usually used for modeling the spatial dependency in meteorology
to handle the irregular distribution of sensors’ spatial location. In this work, a novel graph-based convolution for imitating the meteorological flows is proposed to capture the
local spatial patterns. Based on the assumption of smoothness of location-characterized patterns, we propose conditional local convolution whose shared kernel on nodes’ local space is approximated by feedforward networks, with local representations of coordinate obtained by horizon maps
into cylindrical-tangent space as its input. The established
united standard of local coordinate system preserves the orientation on geography. We further propose the distance and
orientation scaling terms to reduce the impacts of irregular
spatial distribution. The convolution is embedded in a Recurrent Neural Network architecture to model the temporal
dynamics, leading to the Conditional Local Convolution Recurrent Network (CLCRN). Our model is evaluated on realworld weather benchmark datasets, achieving state-of-the-art
performance with obvious improvements. We conduct further
analysis on local pattern visualization, model’s framework
choice, advantages of horizon maps and etc. The source code
is available at https://github.com/BIRD-TAO/CLCRN.

1. Introduction
In classical statistical learning, spatio-temporal forecasting
is usually regarded as a multi-variate time series problem,
and methods such as autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) with its variants are proposed, but the stationary assumption is usually hard to satisfy. Recently, the rise
of deep learning approaches has attracted lots of attention.
For example, in traffic flow forecasting, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are regarded as superior solutions to model
spatial dependency by taking sensors as graph nodes (Yu,
Yin, and Zhu 2018; Li et al. 2018). Compared with great
progress in traffic forecasting, works focusing on meteorology are scarce, while the need for weather forecasting is increasing dramatically (Shi et al. 2015; Sønderby et al. 2020).

• Proposing a location-characterized kernel to capture and
imitate the meteorological local spatial patterns in its
message-passing process;
• Establishing the spatio-temporal model with the proposed graph convolution which achieves state-of-the-art
performance in weather forecasting tasks;

* Equal Contributions.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Conducting further analysis on learned local pattern visu7470

