The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sim2Real Object-Centric Keypoint Detection and Description
Chengliang Zhong* 1,2 , Chao Yang* 2 , Fuchun Sun2 , Jinshan Qi4 ,
Xiaodong Mu1 , Huaping Liu2 , Wenbing Huang3
1
Xi’an Research Institute of High-Tech, Xi’an 710025, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
4
Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590, China
zhongcl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Object CAD Model

Abstract
Keypoint detection and description play a central role in
computer vision. Most existing methods are in the form of
scene-level prediction, without returning the object classes
of different keypoints. In this paper, we propose the objectcentric formulation, which, beyond the conventional setting,
requires further identifying which object each interest point
belongs to. With such fine-grained information, our framework enables more downstream potentials, such as objectlevel matching and pose estimation in a clustered environment. To get around the difficulty of label collection in the
real world, we develop a sim2real contrastive learning mechanism that can generalize the model trained in simulation to
real-world applications. The novelties of our training method
are three-fold: (i) we integrate the uncertainty into the learning framework to improve feature description of hard cases,
e.g., less-textured or symmetric patches; (ii) we decouple
the object descriptor into two output branches, intra-object
salience and inter-object distinctness, resulting in a better
pixel-wise description; (iii) we enforce cross-view semantic
consistency for enhanced robustness in representation learning. Comprehensive experiments on image matching and 6D
pose estimation verify the encouraging generalization ability
of our method from simulation to reality. Particularly for 6D
pose estimation, our method significantly outperforms typical
unsupervised/sim2real methods, achieving a closer gap with
the fully supervised counterpart.

Scene Image

Scene-centric

Object-centric (Ours)

Figure 1: Keypoint matching processing for scene-centric
method, R2D2 (Revaud et al. 2019) and our object-centric
method. Our method accurately matches the keypoints
on different objects, while R2D2 predicts some unwanted
points located in the background.
A variety of works have been done towards keypoint detection and description, ranging from traditional
hand-crafted methods (Lowe 2004; Bay, Tuytelaars, and
Van Gool 2006) to current data-driven approaches (DeTone,
Malisiewicz, and Rabinovich 2018; Revaud et al. 2019;
Tyszkiewicz, Fua, and Trulls 2020). Despite the fruitful
progress, most existing methods are initially targeted on
image-level/scene-centric tasks, making them less sophisticated for other more fine-grained problems, e.g., the objectlevel matching or pose estimation. Object-level tasks are
crucial in many applications. A typical example is in robotic
grasp manipulation, where for planning a better grasp posture, the robot requires to compare the keypoints between
the scene image and the CAD model followed by estimating the pose of the object according to the keypoint correspondence (Sadran, Wurm, and Burschka 2013). If we apply
the previous methods (such as R2D2 (Revaud et al. 2019))
straightly, the detected keypoints from the scene image usually contain not only the desired points on the target object,
but also those unwanted points located in the background

Introduction
Extracting and describing points of interest (keypoints) from
images are fundamental problems for many geometric computer vision tasks such as image matching (Lowe 2004),
camera calibration (Strecha et al. 2008), and visual localization (Piasco et al. 2018). Particularly for image matching,
it requires searching the same and usually sparse keypoints
for a pair of images that record the same scene but under a
different viewpoint.
* These authors contributed equally. Corresponding author:
Fuchun Sun.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5440

