The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Equivalence in Argumentation Frameworks with a Claim-Centric View –
Classical Results with Novel Ingredients
Ringo Baumann1 , Anna Rapberger2 , Markus Ulbricht1,2
1

Leipzig University, Department of Computer Science
2
TU Wien, Institute of Logic and Computation
1
{baumann,mulbricht}@informatik.uni-leipzig.de, 2 arapberg@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

naive implementation would require to iterate over an infinite number of possible H, researchers discovered techniques to decide strong equivalence of two knowledge bases
efficiently, most notably for logic programming (Lifschitz,
Pearce, and Valverde 2001) and argumentation frameworks
(AFs) (Oikarinen and Woltran 2011). The possibility to replace parts of a framework in a semantical neutral way is
particularly important whenever dynamics in argumentation
are considered. The latter topic is rightly one of the most active research areas within the community at the moment (cf.
(Gabbay et al. 2021). In this paper, we extend this line of research to a recent extension of AFs, called claim-augmented
argumentation frameworks (CAFs).
Dung boosted the research in abstract argumentation
frameworks (Dung 1995) which can by now be considered
a classical area in knowledge representation and reasoning.
AFs have been thoroughly investigated since then and various extensions have been proposed; e.g., the addition of supports (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2005), recursive (Baroni et al. 2011) and collective (Nielsen and Parsons 2006)
attacks, or probabilities (Thimm 2012) to mention a few.
In recent years, the focus on conclusion-oriented reasoning
(Baroni and Riveret 2019; Dvorák and Woltran 2020) became increasingly popular. While traditional argumentation
formalisms focus on the identification of acceptable arguments, the emphasis in claim-focused argumentation lies on
the argument’s conclusions (claims). Building on the observation that a claim can be supported by different arguments,
it becomes evident that the traditional argument-focused perspective is often insufficient to capture claim-based reasoning. Claim-augmented argumentation frameworks as introduced by (Dvorák and Woltran 2020) address this issue
by extending AFs with a function that assigns a claim to
each argument. They are in particular well-suited to analyze
instantiation-based approaches, e.g., instantiations of logic
programs (Caminada et al. 2015b), rule-based formalisms,
e.g., ABA (Bondarenko, Toni, and Kowalski 1993; Caminada et al. 2015a), or logic-based instantiations (Besnard
and Hunter 2001; Gorogiannis and Hunter 2011), where the
focus lies on the claims of the constructed arguments.
The goal of this paper is to investigate equivalence notions for reasoning with a claim-centered point of view. Due
to their generality, CAFs form an ideal basis to obtain a comprehensive study of this matter. Our main contributions are:

A common feature of non-monotonic logics is that the classical notion of equivalence does not preserve the intended
meaning in light of additional information. Consequently,
the term strong equivalence was coined in the literature and
thoroughly investigated. In the present paper, the knowledge representation formalism under consideration is claimaugmented argumentation frameworks (CAFs) which provide
a formal basis to analyze conclusion-oriented problems in argumentation by adapting a claim-focused perspective. CAFs
extend Dung AFs by associating a claim to each argument
representing its conclusion. In this paper, we investigate both
ordinary and strong equivalence in CAFs. Thereby, we take
the fact into account that one might either be interested in the
actual arguments or their claims only. The former point of
view naturally yields an extension of strong equivalence for
AFs to the claim-based setting while the latter gives rise to
a novel equivalence notion which is genuine for CAFs. We
tailor, examine and compare these notions and obtain a comprehensive study of this matter for CAFs. We conclude by investigating the computational complexity of naturally arising
decision problems.

Introduction
Equivalence is an important subject of research in knowledge representation and reasoning. Given a knowledge base
K, finding an equivalent one, say K0 , helps to obtain a better
understanding or more concise representation of K. From
a computational point of view, equivalence is particularly
interesting whenever a certain subset of a collection of information can be replaced without changing the intended
meaning. In propositional logics, for example, replacing a
subformula φ of Φ with an equivalent one, say φ0 , yields a
formula Φ[φ/φ0 ] equivalent to Φ. That is, we may view φ as
an independent module of Φ. Within the KR community it is
folklore that this is usually not the case for non-monotonic
logics (apart from folklore, we refer the reader to (Baumann
and Strass 2016) for a rigorous study of this matter).
Motivated by this observation, the notion of strong equivalence was introduced in the literature. In a nutshell, strong
equivalence requires the aforementioned property by design:
K and K0 are strongly equivalent if for any H, the knowledge bases K ∪ H and K0 ∪ H are equivalent. Although a
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5479

