The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GoTube: Scalable Statistical Verification of Continuous-Depth Models
Sophie A. Gruenbacher,1 * Mathias Lechner,2 Ramin Hasani,3 Daniela Rus,3 Thomas A.
Henzinger,2 Scott A. Smolka,4 Radu Grosu,1
1

TU Wien
IST Austria
3
CSAIL MIT
4
Stony Brook University
sophie.gruenbacher@tuwien.ac.at
2

Abstract

LRT-NG
GoTube (ours)
Sample traces

We introduce a new statistical verification algorithm that
formally quantifies the behavioral robustness of any timecontinuous process formulated as a continuous-depth model.
Our algorithm solves a set of global optimization (Go) problems over a given time horizon to construct a tight enclosure
(Tube) of the set of all process executions starting from a
ball of initial states. We call our algorithm GoTube. Through
its construction, GoTube ensures that the bounding tube is
conservative up to a desired probability and up to a desired
tightness. GoTube is implemented in JAX and optimized to
scale to complex continuous-depth neural network models.
Compared to advanced reachability analysis tools for timecontinuous neural networks, GoTube does not accumulate
overapproximation errors between time steps and avoids the
infamous wrapping effect inherent in symbolic techniques.
We show that GoTube substantially outperforms state-of-theart verification tools in terms of the size of the initial ball,
speed, time-horizon, task completion, and scalability on a
large set of experiments. GoTube is stable and sets the stateof-the-art in terms of its ability to scale to time horizons well
beyond what has been previously possible.

10
8
4
2
0

0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50

x2

Time (s)

6

1.0

0.5

0.0

x1

0.5

1.0

0.75

Figure 1: Reachtubes of LRT-NG (Gruenbacher et al. 2020)
and GoTube for a CT-RNN controlling CartPole-v1 environment. CAPD (Kapela et al. 2020) and Flow* (Chen,
Ábrahám, and Sankaranarayanan 2013) failed.

Introduction
The use of deep-learning systems powered by continuous-depth models continues to grow, especially due to the
revival of neural ordinary differential equations (Neural
ODEs) (Chen et al. 2018). These models parametrize the
derivative of the hidden states by a neural network. The resulting system of differential equations can perform strong
function approximation and generative modeling. Ensuring
their safety and robustness in any of these fronts is a major imperative, particularly in high-stakes decision-making
applications such as medicine, automation, and finance.
A particularly appealing approach is to construct a tight
overapproximation of the set of states reached over time according to the neural network’s dynamics (a bounding tube)
and provide deterministic or stochastic guarantees for the
conservativeness of the tube’s bounds.
Since all these networks represent nonlinear systems of
ordinary differential equations, it is impossible, that is, undecidable, to exactly predict their behavior, as they do not

have a closed-form solution. One is able to calculate the solution for different initial states, but one does not know what
happens in between of these already calculated traces. The
main goal in the reachability analysis of nonlinear ODEs, is
to overapproximate the reachable states of the ODEs, starting from a set of initial states, such as, an interval, a ball, or
an ellipsoid, in a way that one can guarantee that all traces
are inside the overapproximation. We call such an overapproximation a bounding tube.
Deterministic verification approaches ensure conservative bounds (Chen, Ábrahám, and Sankaranarayanan 2013;
Gowal et al. 2018; Mirman, Gehr, and Vechev 2018; Bunel
et al. 2020a; Kapela et al. 2020; Gruenbacher et al. 2020),
but often sacrifice speed and accuracy (Ehlers 2017), and
thus scalability; see CAPD, Flow*, and LRT-NG in Fig. 1
and Fig. 3. Statistical methods, on the other hand, only ensure a weaker notion of conservativeness in the form of
confidence intervals (statistical bounds). This, however, allows them to achieve much more accurate and faster verification algorithms that scale up to much larger dynamical
system (Shmarov and Zuliani 2015b; Bortolussi and San-

* Code / Appendix: https://github.com/DatenVorsprung/GoTube
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6755

