The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

State Deviation Correction for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Hongchang Zhang1 , Jianzhun Shao1 , Yuhang Jiang1 ,
Shuncheng He1 , Guanwen Zhang2 , Xiangyang Ji1 *
1

2

Tsinghua University,
Northwestern Polytechnical University
hc-zhang19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

in this case, the agent can get rid of risky behaviors during the training process. Additionally, experiences from a
variety of sources such as video websites and published
datasets(Gulcehre et al. 2020) could be employed to train the
agent. By exploiting large-scale datasets, offline reinforcement learning is also a solution to high sample complexity.
Nevertheless, most commonly used reinforcement learning methods easily fail to learn satisfactory strategies when
they are applied in offline settings. The cause is that these
algorithms suffer from the gap between the trained policy and the offline policy (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019), which is referred as the extrapolation error. Due to
the extrapolation error, these methods tend to opt for the
out-of-distribution target actions when running the Bellman
backup, and are bound to overestimate the Q-value function,
thus undermining their efficacies.
In the principle of reducing the extrapolation error, most
previous works attempt to constrain the trained policy to the
offline dataset’s action space (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup
2019; Kumar et al. 2019; Wu, Tucker, and Nachum 2019;
Kumar et al. 2020). We now refer to these methods as policyconstrained algorithms. Although these offline variants gain
considerable success in the offline setting, they neglect the
scenario where the dataset cannot cover the state space completely. In this setting, the trained policy is likely to fail to
generalize well in the state space. This issue is not severe
when presented with large-scale datasets. It comes into effect when offered a dataset with a modest number of samples since the dataset is incapable of reflecting the actual
state space and the dynamics. Without the loss of generality, we assume that an agent’s initial position during the
test time is slightly different from the dataset. The aforementioned policy-constrained offline methods concern little
about whether the state at the next time step is close to the
dataset. When the agent follows these methods, it stands a
chance to encounter a new state that it never observes before.
If the agent insists on selecting the ‘correct’ action later, the
state deviation will inevitably accumulate over time.
We show in Figure 1 that state deviation could undermine
the policy’s performance. The majority of the actions in the
dataset are ’right’. The offline policy tends to choose the
’up’ action when the agent runs into the wall. If the agent
is initialized at the purple point close to the static dataset
and complies with the default policy during the test time, it

Offline reinforcement learning aims to maximize the expected cumulative rewards with a fixed collection of data.
The basic principle of current offline reinforcement learning
methods is to restrict the policy to the offline dataset action
space. However, they ignore the case where the dataset’s trajectories fail to cover the state space completely. Especially,
when the dataset’s size is limited, it is likely that the agent
would encounter unseen states during test time. Prior policyconstrained methods are incapable of correcting the state deviation, and may lead the agent to its unexpected regions further. In this paper, we propose the state deviation correction
(SDC) method to constrain the policy’s induced state distribution by penalizing the out-of-distribution states which might
appear during the test period. We first perturb the states sampled from the logged dataset, then simulate noisy next states
on the basis of a dynamics model and the policy. We then train
the policy to minimize the distances between the noisy next
states and the offline dataset. In this manner, we allow the
trained policy to guide the agent to its familiar regions. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method is
competitive with the state-of-the-art methods in a GridWorld
setup, offline Mujoco control suite, and a modified offline
Mujoco dataset with a finite number of valuable samples.

Introduction
In recent years, reinforcement learning has progressed in
substantial leaps in areas ranging from video games (Mnih
et al. 2015) to simulated robotic tasks (Schulman et al. 2015;
Haarnoja et al. 2018). However, the applicability of reinforcement learning in real-world domains is hampered by
several challenges. On the one hand, the online data collection – reinforcement learning’s innate characteristic – threatens to introduce risks in safety-critical settings (Berkenkamp
et al. 2017). On the other hand, the high sample complexity
of reinforcement learning poses a significant challenge for
industry practitioners with limited resources.
Offline reinforcement learning seemingly holds the
promise of tackling the above difficulties (Levine et al.
2020). The interactive data generation process is eliminated,
and a fixed collection of data is offered. It turns out that
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9022

