The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Conditional Loss and Deep Euler Scheme for Time Series Generation
Carl Remlinger1,2,3,∗ , Joseph Mikael2,3 , Romuald Elie1
1

Université Gustave Eiffel, 2 EDF Lab, 3 FiME (Laboratoire de Finance des Marchés de l’Energie)
∗
carl.rlgr@pm.me

Abstract

generative methods for time series is very promising (Lyu
et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018). However, due to the complex
and possibly non-stationary underlying temporal structure of
some time series, these generative methods, especially GANs,
are unsatisfactory applied as is (Yoon, Jarrett, and Van der
Schaar 2019). Efficient generation of time series requires
a proper learning of time-marginals as well as a faithfully
representation of the underlying temporal dynamic.
In this paper, time series are represented as a discretized
Euler approximation of continuous-time Itô processes. The
three proposed generators rely on deep learning approximation of the deterministic drift and volatility functions. This
representation benefits from a theoretically grounded temporal dynamic and provides a meaningful structure that avoids
complex neural network architectures. Moreover, the considered Euler generators allow tractable, at least controllable,
outputs, which can be difficult with deep embedding such
as Yoon, Jarrett, and Van der Schaar (2019). This feature is
a key component in industrial applications, especially for
decision-making-process.
By combining deep Euler representation with Wasserstein
distance (Villani 2008), we introduce the Euler Wasserstein
GAN (EWGAN), inspired by (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). Our second GAN-based-model, called Euler Dual
Discriminator (EDGAN) is an adaptation of the DVDGAN
presented in Clark, Donahue, and Simonyan (2019). A spatial discriminator focuses on the accuracy of time-marginal
distributions, while a temporal one focuses on the full sequence. Nevertheless, all these GAN approaches still have
difficulties to capture a proper temporal dynamic.We remedy to this problem by introducing the Conditional Euler
Generator (CEGEN) which optimizes a distance between the
transition probability distributions at each time step. On the
(large) class of Itô processes, we prove that minimizing this
metric provides an accurate estimation of both the drift and
volatility parameters.
A numerical study compares the three approaches with
state-of-the-art GANs on synthetic and real data sets. We
first verify that our methods can learn to replicate Monte
Carlo simulations of classical stochastic processes. Synthetic
models give access to more reliable metrics (including
theoretical), and allow to make connections between
model-based and model-free approaches. EWGAN and
EDGAN show a similar accuracy as state-of-the-art GANs

We introduce three new generative models for time series
that are based on Euler discretization of Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) and Wasserstein metrics. Two of these
methods rely on the adaptation of generative adversarial networks (GANs) to time series. The third algorithm, called Conditional Euler Generator (CEGEN), minimizes a dedicated
distance between the transition probability distributions over
all time steps. In the context of Itô processes, we provide
theoretical guarantees that minimizing this criterion implies
accurate estimations of the drift and volatility parameters. Empirically, CEGEN outperforms state-of-the-art and GANs on
both marginal and temporal dynamic metrics. Besides, correlation structures are accurately identified in high dimension.
When few real data points are available, we verify the effectiveness of CEGEN when combined with transfer learning
methods on model-based simulations. Finally, we illustrate the
robustness of our methods on various real-world data sets.

Introduction
Time series Monte Carlo simulations are widely used for
multiple industrial applications such as investment decisions
(Kelliher and Mahoney 2000), stochastic control (Pham 2009)
or weather forecasts (Mullen and Baumhefner 1994). They
are notably considered in the financial sector, for market
stress tests (Sorge 2004), risk management and deep hedging (Buehler et al. 2019; Fecamp, Mikael, and Warin 2020),
or for measuring risk indicators such as Value at Risks (Jorion 2000) among others. Providing Monte Carlo simulations
representative of the time series of interest is a difficult and
mostly manual task, which requires underlying modeling assumptions about the time dependence of the variables. Hence,
it is difficult to update these models when a new type of data
is observed, such as negative interest rates, negative electricity prices or unusual weather conditions. This naturally calls
for the development of reliable model-free data generators
for time series.
Generative methods such as Variational Auto Encoders
(Kingma and Welling 2013) or Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) provide state-of-theart accuracy for the generation of realistic images (Xu et al.
2018) or text (Zhang et al. 2017). The development of similar
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8098

