The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Structure Learning-Based Task Decomposition for Reinforcement Learning in
Non-stationary Environments
Honguk Woo* † , Gwangpyo Yoo* , Minjong Yoo*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
hwoo, necrocathy, mjyoo2@skku.edu

Abstract

Bhatnagar 2020). Recently, the task embedding technique
using recurrent neural networks has been explored to infer
changes in a non-stationary environment (Lee et al. 2019).
That technique is notably effective, but often leads to suboptimal convergence when its target environment is complex
(Igl et al. 2018).
In this paper, to address the learning difficulty issue
in non-stationary, complex environments, we take an integrated approach of structural learning and continual learning. Specifically, we employ the task decomposition embedding (TDE) that enables the high-quality inference on
hidden parameters by decomposing time-variant and timeinvariant tasks from a non-stationary environment. In TDE,
CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017) is used to represent common
time-invariant tasks of multiple MDPs, so it makes inferences on time-variant tasks through the complements of the
common time-invariant tasks. Furthermore, to mitigate the
adverse effect caused by the inherent estimation errors on
hidden parameters, we adapt the orthogonal gradient descent
(OGD) (Farajtabar et al. 2020) with a sliding window. In
continual learning, this preserves prior learned knowledge
effectively by transforming the current gradient in a way of
minimizing the interference.
In simulation experiments, our model shows a higher performance of up to 46.4% compared to a state-of-the-art nonstationary MDP method. Furthermore, the model achieves
robust performance in complex non-stationary environments
similar to real-world situations, e.g., showing 67.4% improvement over compared methods in the Airsim-based
drone flying simulation where highly dynamic weather conditions are configured.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows.

Reinforcement learning (RL) agents empowered by deep neural networks have been considered a feasible solution to automate control functions in a cyber-physical system. In this
work, we consider an RL-based agent and address the issue of learning via continual interaction with a time-varying
dynamic system modeled as a non-stationary Markov decision process (MDP). We view such a non-stationary MDP
as a time series of conventional MDPs that can be parameterized by hidden variables. To infer the hidden parameters, we present a task decomposition method that exploits
CycleGAN-based structure learning. This method enables the
separation of time-variant tasks from a non-stationary MDP,
establishing the task decomposition embedding specific to
time-varying information. To mitigate the adverse effect due
to inherent noises of task embedding, we also leverage continual learning on sequential tasks by adapting the orthogonal
gradient descent scheme with a sliding window. Through various experiments, we demonstrate that our approach renders
the RL agent adaptable to time-varying dynamic environment
conditions, outperforming other methods including state-ofthe-art non-stationary MDP algorithms.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) shows its applicability in autonomous control systems where learning via continual interaction can be formulated as solving a Markov decision
process (MDP). Although an MDP provides a strong mathematical model for RL, a learned agent on an MDP often
has limitations in ensuring optimal performance when the
agent is deployed in a real-world environment with timevarying dynamic conditions. For instance, time-varying road
conditions are not fully observable for an autonomous vehicle; the tire-road friction might vary continuously due to its
environment-dependent nature. This situation causes challenging problems modeled as a non-stationary MDP. Several
studies on non-stationary MDPs have been introduced, e.g.,
model-based environments (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010,
Gajane, Ortner, and Auer 2019) and context detection methods (Da Silva et al. 2006, Padakandla, Prabuchandran, and

• We present a novel RL solution to non-stationary MDPs,
in which CycleGAN-based structural learning and OGDbased continual learning are used together.
• We devise the task embedding scheme specific to the decomposition of time-variant and time-invariant task information.
• We demonstrate the performance benefits of our approach in various non-stationary environment conditions,
and show a case study with Airsim-based drone flying
scenarios.

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8657

