The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dimensionality and Coordination in Voting: The Distortion of STV
Ioannis Anagnostides,1 Dimitris Fotakis,2 Panagiotis Patsilinakos2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
National Technical University of Athens
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu, fotakis@cs.ntua.gr, patsilinak@corelab.ntua.gr
2

Abstract

are being determined based on the proximity in the underlying metric (see Section 2 for a formal definition). Importantly, this framework offers a quantitative “benchmark”
for comparing different voting rules commonly employed in
practice. Indeed, one of the primary considerations of our
work lies in characterizing the performance of the single
transferable vote1 mechanism (henceforth STV).
STV is a widely-popular iterative voting system employed in the national elections of several countries, including Australia, Ireland, and India, as well as in many other
preference aggregation tasks; e.g., in the Academy Awards.
To be more precise, STV proceeds in an iterative fashion: In
each round, agents vote for their most preferred candidate—
among the active ones, while the candidate who enjoyed the
least amount of support in the current round gets eliminated.
This process is repeated for m − 1 rounds, where m represents the number of (initial) alternatives, and the last surviving candidate is declared the winner of STV. As an aside,
notice that this process is generally non-deterministic due to
the need for a tie-breaking mechanism; as in (Skowron and
Elkind 2017), we will work with the parallel universe model
of Conitzer, Rognlie, and Xia (2009), wherein a candidate is
said to be an STV winner if it survives under some sequence
of eliminations.
In this context, Skowron and Elkind (2017) were the first
to analyze the distortion of STV under metric preferences.
Specifically, they showed that the distortion of STV in general metric spaces is always O(log m), while they √
also gave
a nearly-matching lower bound in the form of Ω( log m).
Interestingly, a careful examination of their lower bound reveals the existence of a high-dimensional submetric, as depicted in Figure 1, and it is a well-known fact in the theory
of metric embeddings that such objects cannot be isometrically embedded into low-dimensional2 Euclidean spaces
(Matoušek 2002). As a result, Skowron and Elkind (2017)
left open the following intriguing question:

We study the performance of voting mechanisms from a utilitarian standpoint, under the recently introduced framework of
metric-distortion, offering new insights along two main lines.
First, if d represents the doubling dimension of the metric
space, we show that the distortion of STV is O(d log log m),
where m represents the number of candidates. For doubling
metrics this implies an exponential improvement over the
lower bound for general metrics, and as a special case it
effectively answers a question left open by Skowron and
Elkind (AAAI ‘17) regarding the distortion of STV under
low-dimensional Euclidean spaces. More broadly, this constitutes the first nexus between the performance of any voting
rule and the “intrinsic dimensionality” of the underlying metric space. We also establish a nearly-matching lower bound,
refining the construction of Skowron and Elkind. Moreover,
motivated by the efficiency of STV, we investigate whether
natural learning rules can lead to low-distortion outcomes.
Specifically, we introduce simple, deterministic and decentralized exploration/exploitation dynamics, and we show that
they converge to a candidate with O(1) distortion.

1

Introduction

Aggregating the preferences of individual entities into a collective decision lies at the foundations of voting theory, and
has recently found a myriad of applications in areas such as
information retrieval, recommender systems, and machine
learning (Lu and Boutilier 2014). A common hypothesis in
the literature of social choice asserts that agents only provide an order of preferences over a (finite) set of alternatives, without indicating a precise measure of each preference. However, this assertion might seem misaligned with
many classical models in economic theory (von Neumann
and Morgenstern 1944) which espouse a utilitarian framework to represent agents’ preferences. This raises the following concern: What is the loss in utilitarian efficiency of
a mechanism eliciting only ordinal information?
This question was raised by Procaccia and Rosenschein
(2006), introducing the concept of distortion, and has since
led to a substantial body of work. In this paper we focus on
the refined notion of metric distortion (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015), wherein agents and candidates are associated with points in some metric space, and preferences

Question 1. What is the distortion of STV under lowdimensional Euclidean spaces?
1
For consistency with prior work STV will represent throughout this paper the single-winner variant of the system, which is
sometimes referred to as instant-runoff voting (IRV).
2
We say that a Euclidean space is low-dimensional if its dimension d is bounded by a “small” universal constant, i.e. d = O(1).

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4776

