The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CEM: Commonsense-Aware Empathetic Response Generation
Sahand Sabour, Chujie Zheng, Minlie Huang*
The CoAI Group, DCST, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
sahandfer@gmail.com, chujiezhengchn@gmail.com, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
A key trait of daily conversations between individuals is
the ability to express empathy towards others, and exploring ways to implement empathy is a crucial step towards
human-like dialogue systems. Previous approaches on this
topic mainly focus on detecting and utilizing the user’s emotion for generating empathetic responses. However, since empathy includes both aspects of affection and cognition, we argue that in addition to identifying the user’s emotion, cognitive understanding of the user’s situation should also be considered. To this end, we propose a novel approach for empathetic response generation, which leverages commonsense
to draw more information about the user’s situation and uses
this additional information to further enhance the empathy
expression in generated responses. We evaluate our approach
on E MPATHETIC D IALOGUES, which is a widely-used benchmark dataset for empathetic response generation. Empirical
results demonstrate that our approach outperforms the baseline models in both automatic and human evaluations and
can generate more informative and empathetic responses. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Sahandfer/CEM.

Introduction
Empathy is a desirable trait of human daily conversations
that enables individuals to understand, perceive, and respond
appropriately to the situation and feelings of others (Keskin
2014). Previous research has demonstrated that empathetic
dialogue systems can improve user experience and satisfaction in multiple domains (Fitzpatrick, Darcy, and Vierhile
2017; Liu et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021). Hence, it is important to discover ways that allow us to equip open-domain
dialogue systems with empathy. Recent work (Rashkin et al.
2019; Lin et al. 2019; Majumder et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020a)
has proposed various methods of generating empathetic responses that mainly rely on detecting the user’s emotion.
However, empathy is a broad construct that includes aspects of affection and cognition (Davis 1983). The affective
aspect is concerned with the emotional simulation in reaction to the user’s experiences (Cuff et al. 2016) while the
cognitive aspect aims to understand the user’s situation and

Figure 1: Examples from the E MPATHETIC D IALOGUES
dataset in which commonsense is used to gain additional
information about the user’s emotion and situation before
responding empathetically.
the implied feelings (Elliott et al. 2018). Hence, though emotion is one of the important factors of empathy, it is not the
only determining factor. This is demonstrated in Figure 1,
where both affective and cognitive empathy are used to form
empathetic responses. For instance, in the first case, the user
shares information about their emotion (I felt pretty good) as
well as their experience (hit a new pr on the overhead press).
Accordingly, we can assume that the user is Proud of their
achievement and must have worked hard to reach this level.
Since these assumptions are not explicitly mentioned by the
user, we as humans tend to rely on our own knowledge and
commonsense reasoning to draw these implications. Therefore, we believe that providing dialogue systems with this
external knowledge could play a critical role in understand-

* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11229

