The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Subset Approximation of Pareto Regions with Bi-objective A*
Nicolás Rivera1 , Jorge A. Baier2,3 , Carlos Hernández4
1
Instituto de Ingenierı́a Matemática, Universidad de Valparaı́so, Valparaı́so, Chile
Departamento de Ciencia de la Computación, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
3
Instituto Milenio Fundamentos de los Datos, Santiago, Chile
4
Facultad de Ingenierı́a y Tecnologı́a, Universidad San Sebastián, Bellavista 7, 84205254, Santiago, Chile
n.a.rivera.aburto@gmail.com, jabaier@ing.puc.cl, carlos.hernandez@uss.cl,
2

Abstract

and cost (e.g., fare) are minimized (e.g., Pallottino and
Scutella 1998; Bronfman et al. 2015; Müller-Hannemann
and Weihe 2006), or when time and risk are minimized
for cycling (Ehrgott et al. 2012). Recently, it has also been
used in AI problems like robot planning (Davoodi 2017) and
multi-agent path finding (Ren, Rathinam, and Choset 2021).
An important hurdle to bi-objective search is the size of
the solution set, which can be exponential on the size of the
graph (Hansen 1980). As a consequence, bi-objective search
algorithms may only compute a handful of solutions before
running out of time. Worse even, because of the exhaustive
nature of their search, such solutions may not represent the
diversity of the solution set. To address this problem, approaches to approximating the solution set have been proposed. One line of work proposes algorithms that reduce
high runtimes by computing a solution set with approximate solutions whose suboptimality is bounded (e.g., Warburton 1987; Perny and Spanjaard 2008; Goldin and Salzman 2021). Another less explored line of work computes
subset approximations (e.g., Cohon 1978; Henig 1986), in
which a subset of the solution set is computed. A limitation
of the former approach is that even though approximate solutions may be faster to compute still a large number of solutions may have to be computed. The main limitation of the
latter approach is that the maximum number of computable
solutions is fixed and task-dependent. This does not allow
returning more solutions if more search time is available.
In this paper we present a new approach to bi-objective
subset approximation. Our approach transforms the original
bi-objective search instance into another (target) bi-objective
instance such that each solution to the target problem is a solution to the original problem. If a heuristic h is available for
the original task our simple transformation is also applicable
to the heuristic of the original problem, which allows solving the target task with existing bi-objective heuristic search
algorithms. We prove that implicit to the target instance is a
stricter dominance relation in the sense that a path π in the
target instance may dominate a path π 0 in the target instance
while the converse is not necessarily true. To generate the
transformed instance we use two real parameters, α and β in
(0, 1]. By varying these parameters we obtain different subset approximations. When both parameters are equal to 1,
we recover the original solution set.
While the target problem can be solved with any bi-

In bi-objective search, we are given a graph in which each directed arc is associated with a pair of non-negative weights,
and the objective is to find the Pareto-optimal solution set.
Unfortunately, in many practical settings, this set is too large,
and therefore its computation is very time-consuming. In addition, even though bi-objective search algorithms generate
the Pareto set incrementally, they do so exhaustively. This
means that early during search the solution set covered is not
diverse, being concentrated in a small region. To address this
issue, we present a new approach to subset approximation of
the solution set, that can be used as the basis for an anytime
bi-objective search algorithm. Our approach transforms the
given task into a target bi-objective search task using two real
parameters. For each particular parameter setting, the solutions to the target task is a subset of the solution set of the
original task. Depending on the parameters used, the solution set of the target task may be computed very quickly. This
allows us to obtain, in challenging road map benchmarks, a
rich variety of solutions in times that may be orders of magnitude smaller than the time needed to compute the solution
set. We show that by running the algorithm with an appropriate sequence of parameters, we obtain a growing sequence
of solutions that converges to the full solution set. We prove
that our approach is correct and that Bi-Objective A* prunes
at least as many nodes when run over the target task.

1

Introduction

In bi-objective search we are given a graph G in which each
arc, and thus each path, is associated with a pair of nonnegative costs, which represent meaningful objective functions. For example, in transportation, one function could refer to the time required to traverse an edge while the other
could refer to fuel consumption. To compare two paths, a
dominance relation is used. Path π1 dominates path π2 if
both components of the cost of π1 are less than or equal to
the respective components of the cost of π2 and their costs
are not equal. Given a start vertex and a goal vertex in G,
the problem consists of finding a Pareto-optimal solution set
which contains all paths from start to goal which are not
dominated by another path from start to goal.
Bi-objective search is required for several real-world applications; notably in transportation and logistics when time
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
10345

