The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Gaussian Process Bandits with Aggregated Feedback
Mengyan Zhang1,2 , Russell Tsuchida2 , Cheng Soon Ong1,2
1

The Australian National University 2 Data61, CSIRO
mengyan.zhang@anu.edu.au, russell.tsuchida@data61.csiro.au, chengsoon.ong@anu.edu.au

Abstract

case for the combinatorial bandits under full-bandit feedback. Other related settings are discussed in § 6. We consider
one important gap in the literature, best arm(s) identification
for continuum-armed bandits with average rewards under a
fixed budget.
Our goal is to recommend a local area with best average reward feedback. We propose aggregated regret (Definition 2) to reflect this objective, devise an algorithm in § 3,
and show upper bound of the aggregated regret under our
algorithm in § 4. In § 5, we compare our algorithm with
related algorithms in a simulated environment 1 . Our algorithm shows the best empirical performance in terms of aggregated regret.
Our contributions are (i) a new continuum-armed bandits setting under the aggregated feedback and corresponding new simple regret notion, (ii) the first fixed budget best
arms identification algorithm (GPOO) for continuum-armed
bandit with noisy average feedback, (iii) theoretical analysis
for the proposed algorithm, and (iv) empirical illustrations
of the proposed algorithm.

We consider the continuum-armed bandits problem, under a
novel setting of recommending the best arms within a fixed
budget under aggregated feedback. This is motivated by applications where the precise rewards are impossible or expensive to obtain, while an aggregated reward or feedback,
such as the average over a subset, is available. We constrain
the set of reward functions by assuming that they are from
a Gaussian Process and propose the Gaussian Process Optimistic Optimisation (GPOO) algorithm. We adaptively construct a tree with nodes as subsets of the arm space, where
the feedback is the aggregated reward of representatives of a
node. We propose a new simple regret notion with respect to
aggregated feedback on the recommended arms. We provide
theoretical analysis for the proposed algorithm, and recover
single point feedback as a special case. We illustrate GPOO
and compare it with related algorithms on simulated data.

1

Introduction

In the continuum-armed bandit problem with a fixed budget,
an agent adaptively chooses a sequence of N options from a
continuous set (arm space) in order to minimise some objective given an oracle that provides noisy observations of the
objective evaluated at the options (Agrawal 1995; Bubeck,
Munos, and Stoltz 2011). The objective may measure the total cost, for example the cumulative regret, or may give an
indication of the quality of the final choice, for example the
simple regret. The simple regret setting may be viewed as
black-box, zeroth order optimisation of the objective under
noisy observations. In practical settings, it is possible that
one cannot observe the objective directly. This motivates a
more flexible notion of an oracle. In this work we consider
an oracle that provides noisy average evaluations of the objective over some grid (defined in a precise sense in (1)).
For the problem of black-box optimisation of a function
f under single point stochastic feedback, Munos (2014) proposed a continuum-armed bandit algorithm called Stochastic Optimistic Optimisation (StoOO) with adaptive hierarchical partitioning of arm space, under the optimism in the
face of uncertainty principle. For bandits with aggregated
feedback, Rejwan and Mansour (2020) studied finite-armed

2

Formulation and Preliminaries

Motivation
Two unique properties of the setting we consider are (i)
the reward signal is aggregated, and (ii) the aggregation occurs on hierarchically partitioned continuous space. Gaussian Process Optimistic Optimisation (GPOO) makes use of
both of these properties, as illustrated in Figure 1 and described in Algorithm 1.
Aggregated Feedback. Quantitative observations of the
real-world are often made through smooth rather than instantaneous measurements. Average observations may arise
from physical, hardware, privacy constraints. We provide
three potential applications to motivate our setting: 1) Radio
telescope. Arm cells are the spatial-frequency (orientation
and angular resolution) coordinates of objects in the sky. The
average radio wave energy (reward) can be inferred from the
radio telescope for the queried area. Only the aggregated reward is observable due to frequency binning in hardware and
spatial averaging. The goal is to design a policy so that one
1
Source code and Appendix are available at https://github.com/
Mengyanz/GPOO

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9074

