The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Coarse-to-Fine Embedded PatchMatch and Multi-Scale Dynamic Aggregation for
Reference-Based Super-resolution
Bin Xia1 , Yapeng Tian2 , Yucheng Hang1 , Wenming Yang1 * , Qingmin Liao1 , Jie Zhou3
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School / Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
University of Rochester
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
xiab20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yapengtian@rochester.edu, hangyc20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
yang.wenming@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, liaoqm@tsinghua.edu.cn, jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Reference-based super-resolution (RefSR) has made significant progress in producing realistic textures using an external reference (Ref) image. However, existing RefSR methods obtain high-quality correspondence matchings consuming quadratic computation resources with respect to the input size, limiting its application. Moreover, these approaches
usually suffer from scale misalignments between the lowresolution (LR) image and Ref image. In this paper, we
propose an Accelerated Multi-Scale Aggregation network
(AMSA) for Reference-based Super-Resolution, including
Coarse-to-Fine Embedded PatchMatch (CFE-PatchMatch)
and Multi-Scale Dynamic Aggregation (MSDA) module. To
improve matching efficiency, we design a novel Embedded PatchMacth scheme with random samples propagation,
which involves end-to-end training with asymptotic linear
computational cost to the input size. To further reduce computational cost and speed up convergence, we apply the coarseto-fine strategy on Embedded PatchMacth constituting CFEPatchMatch. To fully leverage reference information across
multiple scales and enhance robustness to scale misalignment, we develop the MSDA module consisting of Dynamic
Aggregation and Multi-Scale Aggregation. The Dynamic Aggregation corrects minor scale misalignment by dynamically
aggregating features, and the Multi-Scale Aggregation brings
robustness to large scale misalignment by fusing multi-scale
information. Experimental results show that the proposed
AMSA achieves superior performance over state-of-the-art
approaches on both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

LR input image

AMSA (ours) result

HR reference image

࡯૛ -Matching result

Figure 1: Visual comparison of 4× SR results. The correspondences matched by our AMSA are marked in red, and
the correspondences matched by the leading RefSR method,
C 2 -Matching (Jiang et al. 2021), are marked in yellow.
Compared with C 2 -Matching, our approach can effectively
match and leverage reference information from the HR reference image to reconstruct a visually appealing HR image
with more accurate structures and fewer artifacts.

The essential step in texture transfer for RefSR is to find
correspondences between the input image and the reference
image. However, existing RefSR methods (Yang et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2019b) enumerate all possible patch pairs and
select the best-matched patches for aggregation, the computational complexity of which is quadratic to image size.
Although MASA (Lu et al. 2021) matches correspondences
in coarser resolution, yet consumes computation resources
quadratic to spatial size. Besides, since the convolution operation is sensitive to the input scale (Zeiler and Fergus 2014),
RefSR may miss the best patch for reconstruction while
matching and aggregating relevant feature patches at different scales. To alleviate the resolution gap, C 2 -Matching
(Jiang et al. 2021) recently applied knowledge distillation
to force correspondences relevant in feature space. Nevertheless, with the increase of scale misalignment, the performance of C 2 -Matching decreases rapidly.
To address the challenges mentioned above, we develop an Accelerated Multi-Scale Aggregation network
(AMSA) for Reference-based Super-Resolution. The design

Introduction
Reference-based Super-resolution (RefSR) aims to reconstruct a photo-realistic high-resolution (HR) image from
the low-resolution (LR) counterpart with the guidance of
an additional HR reference (Ref) image. The reference image contains rich and diverse structures and textures, which
could be relevant to the content in the target HR image.
By transferring relevant information between the LR image
and HR reference, recent RefSR methods (Yang et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2019b; Lu et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021) have
shown promising results.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2768

