The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

MSML: Enhancing Occlusion-Robustness by Multi-Scale Segmentation-Based
Mask Learning for Face Recognition
Ge Yuan, Huicheng Zheng* , Jiayu Dong
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
zhenghch@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
In unconstrained scenarios, face recognition remains challenging, particularly when faces are occluded. Existing methods generalize poorly due to the distribution distortion induced by unpredictable occlusions. To tackle this problem,
we propose a hierarchical segmentation-based mask learning
strategy for face recognition, enhancing occlusion-robustness
by integrating segmentation representations of occlusion into
face recognition in the latent space. We present a novel multiscale segmentation-based mask learning (MSML) network,
which consists of a face recognition branch (FRB), an occlusion segmentation branch (OSB), and hierarchical elaborate
feature masking (FM) operators. With the guidance of hierarchical segmentation representations of occlusion learned by
the OSB, the FM operators can generate multi-scale latent
masks to eliminate mistaken responses introduced by occlusions and purify the contaminated facial features at multiple
layers. In this way, the proposed MSML network can effectively identify and remove the occlusions from feature representations at multiple levels and aggregate features from
visible facial areas. Experiments on face verification and
recognition under synthetic or realistic occlusions demonstrate the effectiveness of our method compared to state-ofthe-art methods.

Figure 1: Occlusion-robust face representations through
multi-scale segmentation-based mask learning. Column 1 &
6: Input faces with various possible occlusions. Column 2 &
5: Occlusions detected by the proposed occlusion segmentation branch (OSB) in our method. Column 3 & 4: Occlusionrobust face representations learned by our MSML network.
MSML can handle various occlusion cases, i.e. none occlusion, geometric shapes, synthetically added objects, realistic
face masks. (Best viewed in color.)

Introduction
Deep convolutional networks have achieved great success
in extracting discriminative features for face recognition.
Many related architectures (Parkhi, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2015; Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015; Li
et al. 2020; Ding et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020), loss functions (Wang et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2019; Wen et al. 2016),
and datasets (Martı́nez and Benavente 1998; Huang et al.
2007; Yi et al. 2014; Kemelmacher-Shlizerman et al. 2016;
Liu et al. 2015; Ding et al. 2020; Geng et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2020) have been proposed. However, in realistic unconstrained scenarios where faces could be occluded, most
existing deep models are not sufficiently robust.
Previously, straightforward solutions have been proposed
in (Liu et al. 2016; Trigueros, Meng, and Hartnett 2018;
Zhong et al. 2020) to train deep models with occluded images to improve the robustness. Osherov et al. (Osherov and

Lindenbaum 2017) proposed to constrain the filter support
of deep networks to improve robustness. Although these solutions can recover some performance on occluded samples,
the discriminative ability of deep models on non-occluded
samples is suffered. In essence, these methods did not appropriately handle the distribution distortion between occluded
and non-occluded samples in the embedding space.
Distribution distortion comprises missing responses and
mistaken responses. Missing responses mean that feature
extractors cannot capture valid facial parts from occluded
faces. Mistaken responses mean that unexpected responses
induced by occlusions occur in the output space. These two
error responses increase intra-class distance and decrease
inter-class distance. To tackle the missing response prob-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3197

