The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dynamic Manifold Learning for Land Deformation Forecasting
Fan Zhou1 , Rongfan Li1 , Qiang Gao2 , Goce Trajcevski3 , Kunpeng Zhang4 , Ting Zhong1 *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
3
Iowa State University
4
University of Maryland, College park
fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn, rongfanli1998@gmail.com, qianggao@swufe.edu.cn, gocet25@iastate.edu, kpzhang@umd.edu,
zhongting@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

Related work: Earlier works on landslide risk assessment
largely relied on influential factors such as climate, rock stability, and slope gradient, as well as expert opinions from
domain scientists (e.g., geologists and meteorologists) (Dai,
Lee, and Ngai 2002; Wan, Lei, and Chou 2012; Thiery,
Maquaire, and Fressard 2014; Zhu et al. 2014). These approaches require specific domain knowledge and are usually
limited to post hoc explanations, and therefore is difficult to
be generalized to places with different environmental conditions. More recent studies (Dong et al. 2019; Gan, Yang, and
Zhou 2019; Carlà et al. 2019) have turned to modeling and
prediction of landslides with machine learning (ML) techniques through leveraging the rich measurements of weather,
surface, vegetation, and geology. Various ML models have
been exploited in the literature, including analytical hierarchy process (AHP) (Kayastha, Dhital, and De Smedt 2013),
Bayesian networks (Shirzadi et al. 2017), logistic regression (Kalantar et al. 2018), ensemble learning (Chen et al.
2017), and statistical learning (Hong et al. 2016).
The advances of neural networks have inspired several
deep learning-based landslide prediction models. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are widely used for landslide susceptibility mapping (Lei et al. 2019; Hajimoradlou, Roberti, and Poole 2020), which generally rely on inventory mapping from the InSAR data to outline the landslide boundaries and deformation features. For example,
LACNN (Hajimoradlou, Roberti, and Poole 2020) is a locally aligned CNN model that takes the orientation of each
pixel at multiple scales to capture hidden features, and assess the landslide susceptibility at a specific point. SAGNN (Zhou et al. 2021) embeds the 3D surface into a
2D graph with locally linear embedding (Roweis and Saul
2000), while preserving the relative positions and slopes
of adjacent points on the surface. It then uses a SpatialTemporal Graph Neural Network (ST-GNN) to capture the
characteristics of neighboring points and predict the terrain
deformations.
Challenges: Despite achieved promising results, existing
land deformation models still confront several challenges.
First, they either exploit 2D CNNs to extract the feature
maps (Hajimoradlou, Roberti, and Poole 2020) or project
the surface into a plain graph (Zhou et al. 2021) – inevitably
introducing errors and, most importantly, ignoring vital information (e.g., azimuth, orientations, slopes) for assessing

Landslides refer to occurrences of massive ground movements due to geological (and meteorological) factors, and can
have disastrous impact on property, economy, and even lead
to loss of life. The advances of remote sensing provide accurate and continuous terrain monitoring, enabling the study
and analysis of land deformation which, in turn, can be used
for possible landslides forecast. Prior studies either rely on independent observations for displacement prediction or model
static land characteristics without considering the subtle interactions between different locations and the dynamic changes
of the surface conditions. We present DyLand – Dynamic
Manifold Learning with Normalizing Flows for Land deformation prediction – a novel framework for learning dynamic
structures of terrain surface and improving the performance
of land deformation prediction. DyLand models the spatial
connections of InSAR measurements and estimates conditional distributions of deformations on the terrain manifold
with a novel normalizing flow-based method. Instead of modeling the stable terrains, it incorporates surface permutations
and captures the innate dynamics of the land surface while allowing for tractable likelihood estimates on the manifold. Our
extensive evaluations on curated InSAR datasets from continuous monitoring of slopes prone to landslides show that
DyLand outperforms existing bechmarking models.

Introduction
Landslides are among the most common catastrophic hazards occurring in various areas, resulting in fatalities and
significant economic damages every year. They occur due
to the gravity and/or elevation, and deformations of the terrain surface caused by numerous factors, such as water infiltration, glacier melting, aquifer exploitation, rock erosion,
earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions (de Blasio 2020). The
advanced geodetic techniques in remote sensing such as Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) and Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) enable accurate monitoring of slope deformations and forecasting the possibility
of landslides, which have recently been studied (Carlà et al.
2019; Dong et al. 2019; Hajimoradlou, Roberti, and Poole
2020; Zhou et al. 2021).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4725

