The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Reinforcement Learning Augmented Asymptotically Optimal Index Policy for
Finite-Horizon Restless Bandits
Guojun Xiong1 , Jian Li1 and Rahul Singh2
1

SUNY-Binghamton University
2
Indian Institute of Science
gxiong1@binghamton.edu, lij@binghamton.edu, rahulsingh@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

The RMAB problem is a general model for a variety
of sequential decision making problems ranging from job
allocation (Niño-Mora 2007; Jacko 2010; Bertsimas and
Niño-Mora 2000), wireless communication (Dai et al. 2011;
Sheng, Liu, and Saigal 2014), sensor management (Mahajan and Teneketzis 2008; Ahmad et al. 2009) and healthcare (Deo et al. 2013; Lee, Lavieri, and Volk 2019; Mate,
Perrault, and Tambe 2021; Killian, Perrault, and Tambe
2021). However, the RMAB is notoriously intractable (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1994) and the optimal policy for
an RMAB is rarely an index policy. To that end, Whittle proposed a heuristic called the Whittle index for the
infinite-horizon RMAB. However, the Whittle index is welldefined only when the so-called indexability condition is satisfied. Furthermore, even when an arm is indexable, finding its Whittle index can still be intractable, especially when
the corresponding controlled Markov process is convoluted
(Niño-Mora 2007). Finally, Whittle index policy is only
guaranteed to be asymptotically optimal (Weber and Weiss
1990) under a difficult-to-verify condition that the fluid approximation has a globally asymptotically stable attractor.
Inspired by Whittle, many studies focus on finding the index policy for restless bandit problems, e.g., (Nino-Mora
2001; Verloop 2016; Hu and Frazier 2017; Zayas-Cabán,
Jasin, and Wang 2019; Brown and Smith 2020). This line
of works is primarily under the assumption that the system
parameters are all already known. Since the true parameters are typically unavailable and possibly time-varying in
many cases, it becomes important to examine RMAB from
a learning perspective, e.g., (Dai et al. 2011; Liu, Liu, and
Zhao 2011; Tekin and Liu 2011; Liu, Liu, and Zhao 2012;
Tekin and Liu 2012; Ortner et al. 2012; Jung and Tewari
2019; Jung, Abeille, and Tewari 2019; Wang, Huang, and
Lui 2020; Xiong, Singh, and Li 2021). However, analyzing a learning algorithm in RMAB is in general hard due to
the learner’s additional uncertainty, and there are still many
open challenges for RMAB from both the policy design perspective and the learning perspective.
First, existing confidence bound based algorithms (Liu,
Liu, and Zhao 2011; Tekin and Liu 2011, 2012; Liu, Liu,
and Zhao 2012) may not perform close to the offline optimum. This is because the baseline policy is often heuristic
without performance guarantee, e.g., only pulling one arm or
a fixed set of arms. This is known to be weak in the RMAB

We study a finite-horizon restless multi-armed bandit problem with multiple actions, dubbed as R(MA)2 B. The state
of each arm evolves according to a controlled Markov decision process (MDP), and the reward of pulling an arm depends on both the current state and action of the corresponding MDP. Since finding the optimal policy is typically intractable, we propose a computationally appealing index policy entitled Occupancy-Measured-Reward Index Policy for
the finite-horizon R(MA)2 B. Our index policy is well-defined
without the requirement of indexability condition and is provably asymptotically optimal. We then adopt a learning perspective where the system parameters are unknown, and propose R(MA)2 B-UCB, a generative model based reinforcement learning augmented algorithm that can fully exploit
the structure of Occupancy-Measured-Reward Index Policy.
Compared to existing algorithms, R(MA)2 B-UCB performs
close to offline optimum, as well as achieves a sub-linear regret and a low computational complexity all at once. Experimental results show that R(MA)2 B-UCB outperforms existing algorithms in both regret and running time.

Introduction
We study the restless multi-armed, multi-action bandit problem, dubbed as R(MA)2 B with a finite horizon. A restless
multi-armed bandit (RMAB) problem (Whittle 1988) involves activating a fixed number of competing “arms” sequentially over time. Each arm is endowed with a state that
evolves independently according to a controlled Markov decision process (MDP). In its original form (i.e., MAB), only
the states of activated arms evolve, and rewards are generated upon the state evolution. The goal is to decide which
arms need be activated at each decision epoch to maximize
the total expected reward. A celebrated Gittins index policy (Gittins 1974) was proposed for MAB, where each arm
is assigned with an index as a function of its current state
and then activates the arm(s) with the largest indices. However, this policy only optimizes the infinite-horizon expected
reward when only one arm can be activated at each decision epoch. Whittle (Whittle 1988) generalized the MAB to
also allow the evolution of non-activated arms (dubbed as “a
changing world setting”), giving rise to the RMAB problem.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8726

