The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CINS: Comprehensive Instruction for Few-Shot Learning in Task-Oriented Dialog
Systems
Fei Mi, 1 Yasheng Wang, 1 Yitong Li 2
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
{mifei2,wangyasheng,liyitong3}@huawei.com
2

Abstract

ods, called Prompting or Prompt Engineering (Schick and
Schütze 2021a,b; Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021; Schick and
Schütze 2020; Liu et al. 2021b), to better exploit the capabilities of PLMs.
In Prompting, the input is modified using a “template” to
form a “prompt” to feed to a PLM. By defining new templates, it unifies the task, objective, and formulation between
downstream tasks and pre-training, and Prompting shows
strong performance in several few-shot or even zero-shot
learning scenarios. However, one limitation of Prompting is
that the “prompts” are often short and concise (Schick and
Schütze 2021b; Gao, Fisch, and Chen 2021). We conjecture
that the massive amount of information stored in large PLMs
might not be adequately exploited with short prompts only.
Therefore, we are going to study: can extra instructions further improves short prompts to exploit the few-shot capability of PLMs for ToD?
To this end, we propose “Comprehensive Instruction
(CI NS)”. Besides a short and concise prompt, we additionally include task-specific Definition and Constraint. Task
Definition provides a high-level natural language definition and nature of the task itself. Task Constraint additionally gives fine-grained task-specific constraint w.r.t output
space (e.g. candidate labels, label descriptions, etc.) generated by the PLM. We formulated the overall schema and
task-specific realization of CI NS for three downstream tasks
(intent classification, dialog state tracking, and natural language generation) in ToD. Furthermore, we adopt a Seq2Seq
PLM (T5) as a unified framework to solve these three tasks.
In our experiments, we adopt a “realistic few-shot learning”
setting that only uses small validation data with the same
size as the few-shot training data. We contend that this is a
more reasonable few-shot setting compared to existing fewshot ToD studies (Mi et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2020b; Kale and
Rastogi 2020a; Lin et al. 2021) that use full-size validation
data.
The main contribution of this paper is three-fold:
• This is the first attempt to systematically study the effect of add extra task-specific instructions to better exploit pre-trained models for ToD.
• We propose “Comprehensive Instruction (CI NS)” with a
unified schema and task-specific realizations for different
ToD tasks. CI NS serves as a complement of Prompting to
better guide the behavior of powerful PLMs.

As the labeling cost for different modules in task-oriented
dialog (ToD) systems is high, a major challenge is to learn
different tasks with the least amount of labeled data. Recently, pre-trained language models (PLMs) have shown
promising results for few-shot learning in ToD. To better utilize the power of PLMs, this paper proposes Comprehensive Instruction (CI NS) that exploits PLMs with extra taskspecific instructions. We design a schema (definition, constraint, prompt) of instructions and their customized realizations for three important downstream tasks in ToD, ie. intent classification, dialog state tracking, and natural language
generation. A sequence-to-sequence model (T5) is adopted to
solve these three tasks in a unified framework. Extensive experiments are conducted on these ToD tasks in realistic fewshot learning scenarios with small validation data. Empirical
results demonstrate that the proposed CI NS approach consistently improves techniques that finetune PLMs with raw input
or short prompt.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs), such as
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), UniLM (Dong et al. 2019), GPT2 (Radford et al. 2019), T5 (Raffel et al. 2020) and GPT-3
(Brown et al. 2020), have shown tremendous success in various NLP applications, especially in few-shot or zero-shot
learning scenarios. In task-oriented dialog (ToD) systems,
the labeling cost is very high such that the size of welllabeled data is often small. Therefore, few-shot learning in
ToD is especially important and valuable in many practical
applications.
Many attempts have been proposed to leverage PLMs
to improve few-shot learning in ToD. For example, Chen,
Zhuo, and Wang (2019); Chao and Lane (2019); Kale and
Rastogi (2020b) directly finetune a PLM on downstream
ToD tasks. However, the general objectives and tasks during
the model pre-training phase are often very different from
the formulation of specific downstream ToD tasks. To bridge
this gap, Kale and Rastogi (2020a); Lin et al. (2021) propose to slightly transform the input of downstream ToD tasks
to better-matched tasks that PLMs have seen during pretraining. Such perspective is similar to a recent line of methCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11076

