The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Is There a Strongest Die in a Set of Dice with the Same Mean Pips?
Shang Lu, Shuji Kijima
Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University
744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan
lu.shang.811@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp, kijima@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

less strategy, meaning that at least one strategy takes probability zero in any mixed Nash equilibrium (Komatsu and
Ono 2015).

Jan-ken, a.k.a. rock-paper-scissors, is a cerebrated example
of a non-transitive game with three (pure) strategies, rock,
paper and scissors. Interestingly, any Jan-ken generalized to
four strategies contains at least one useless strategy unless it
allows a tie between distinct pure strategies. Non-transitive
dice could be a stochastic analogue of Jan-ken: the stochastic
transitivity does not hold on some sets of dice, e.g., Efron’s
dice. Including the non-transitive dice, this paper is involved
in dice sets which do not contain some useless dice.
In particular, we are concerned with the existence of a
strongest (or weakest, symmetrically) die in a dice set under
the two conditions that (1) any number appears on at most
one die and at most one side, i.e., no tie break between two
distinct dice, and (2) the mean pips of dice are the same.
We firstly prove that a strongest die never exist if a set of
n dice of m-sided is given as a partition of the set of numbers
{1, . . . , mn}. Next, we show some sufficient conditions that
the strongest die exists in a dice set which is not a partition
of a set of numbers. We also give some algorithms to find the
strongest die in a dice set which includes given dice.

Non-transitive dice While the win-lose relation is deterministic in Jan-ken, win-lose relations appearing in real life
are often stochastic. Considering it, a dice set may provide a
simple model of stochastic win-lose relation, as a stochastic
counter part of Jan-ken. In fact, it is known that the transitivity does not hold on some dice set, such as Efron’s dice.
For a pair of dice D and D0 , let a pair of random variables XD and XD0 denote independent roles of them, respectively. Then, we say the die D is stronger than D0 (resp.
D is strictly stronger than D0 ) if Pr[XD > XD0 ] ≥ 1/2
(resp. Pr[XD > XD0 ] > 1/2) holds, and write it by D < D0
(resp. D  D0 ).
Efron’s dice is a set of dice A = (0, 0, 4, 4, 4, 4),
B = (3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3), C = (2, 2, 2, 2, 6, 6) and D =
(5, 5, 5, 1, 1, 1)1 . Let XA , XB , XC and XD be independent
roles of dice A, B, C and D, respectively. Then, Pr[XA ≥
XB ] = Pr[XB ≥ XC ] = Pr[XC ≥ XD ] = Pr[XD ≥
XA ] = 2/3 holds, meaning that A  B  C  D  A
holds. In other words,  on the dice set {A, B, C, D} is
NOT transitive. Such a dice set is called non-transitive dice.

Introduction
Jan-ken: a model of deterministic win-lose relations
Jan-ken, a.k.a. rock-paper-scissors, is a simple model of a
deterministic win-lose relation. Jan-ken is a symmetric game
consisting of three (pure) strategies, rock, paper and scissors: rock beats scissors, scissors beats paper and paper beats
rock. Thus, the win-lose relation is non-transitive, and the
unique Nash equilibrium is completely mixed, i.e., rational
players choose every strategy uniformly at random.
Interestingly, any Jan-ken generalized to four strategies
contains at least one useless strategy unless it allows a tie
between distinct strategies (Ito 2012). For example, suppose
we introduce the fourth strategy “well” which beats both
rock and scissor and is beaten by paper. Then, rock is useless; because both well and rock beat scissors and are beaten
by paper, but well beats rock, thus a rational player uses well
instead of rock. Komatsu and Ono gave an game theoretical
analysis on a generalized Jan-ken, and proved that any Janken with even number of strategies without ties between distinct strategies contains at least one game-theoretically use-

Related works Research on non-transitive dice have been
developed in the context of applied probabilities. Nontransitive relations of stochastic events were studied in the
community voting problem (Black 1958). Upper bounds of
each other’s winning probabilities in some non-transitive
cases were given in (Usiskin 1964). Gardner linked nontransitivity to Efron’s dice, and began the research of nontransitive dice (Gardner 1970).
Concerning non-transitive dice, Buhler et al. showed that
a magnitude relationship consisting of repetitive dice could
cover all tournament graphs (Buhler, Graham, and Hales
2018). Then, a dice set given by a regular partition (see Section , appearing later) was introduced in (Savage 1994), and
it was used in (Schaefer and Schweig 2017) and (Schaefer
2017) which showed for an arbitrarily given tournament that
there exists a corresponding regular partition dice set. Conrey et al. used statistical methods to generate a large number
1

The notation of dice here is different from the following sections because Efron’s dice allow the same number appears on different faces.

Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5133

