The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Graph-Based Point Tracker for 3D Object Tracking in Point Clouds
Minseong Park, Hongje Seong, Wonje Jang, Euntai Kim*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{msp922, hjseong, jangwj1256, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

et al. 2019). However, RGB-D has a drawback; that the maximum range of the sensor is relatively short and visual information is sensitive to illumination changes, preventing them
from being used in outdoor applications.
LiDAR is also being used widely in outdoor applications
such as autonomous driving. LiDAR outputs a point cloud
that captures the contour of the nearby environment and is
robust to illumination changes. However, when using LiDAR, it is difficult to train the features from the unstructured
point cloud using CNNs, because of the sparsity and disorder of the point cloud. In this paper, we will focus on 3D
object tracking in point clouds from LiDAR.
3D tracking in the point cloud was initially motivated
by the success of Siamese network in 2D object trackers (Bertinetto et al. 2016; Guo et al. 2017; He et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018a). As a pioneering work, Giancola, Zarzar, and Ghanem (Giancola, Zarzar, and Ghanem
2019) proposed a 3D Siamese tracker that encodes model
and candidate shapes into a latent representation regularized by shape completion. Based on this 3D Siamese tracker
baseline, Zarzar, Giancola, and Ghanem (Zarzar, Giancola,
and Ghanem 2020) and F-Siamese tracker (Zou et al. 2020)
which take double Siamese networks were proposed. They
first generate proposals and then refine the proposals. More
specifically, Zarzar, Giancola, and Ghanem generate a small
number of proposals from bird eye view (BEV) Siamese network using BEV representation of point clouds. F-Siamese
tracker generates frustum based proposals from the result of
2D Siamese tracker using images. They improved the performance of the 3D Siamese tracker baseline with an efficient
region proposal network, but they still suffer from the loss
of geometric details due to the one-dimensional representation of each proposal. Recently, P2B (Qi et al. 2020), a new
method based on the transfer of information from the template to the search area, was proposed as an alternative to the
Siamese approach. P2B augments the features by transferring the target clue from the template to the search area and
localizes the 3D target bounding box using the augmented
feature in the search area. P2B demonstrated excellent performance compared to the previous 3D Siamese tracker. Despite its success in 3D object tracking, we believe that there
are still some inefficiencies in the feature augmentation in
P2B. Specifically, (1) the similarity used in P2B is not sufficient to capture the details of the one-to-one relationship

In this paper, a new deep learning network named as graphbased point tracker (GPT) is proposed for 3D object tracking
in point clouds. GPT is not based on Siamese network applied
to template and search area, but it is based on the transfer of
target clue from the template to the search area. GPT is endto-end trainable. GPT has two new modules: graph feature
augmentation (GFA) and improved target clue (ITC) module. The key idea of GFA is to exploit one-to-many relationship between template and search area points using a bipartite graph. In GFA, edge features of the bipartite graph are
generated by transferring the target clues of template points
to search area points through edge convolution. It captures
the relationship between template and search area points effectively from the perspective of geometry and shape of two
point clouds. The second module is ITC. The key idea of ITC
is to embed the information of the center of the target into
the edges of the bipartite graph via Hough voting, strengthening the discriminative power of GFA. Both modules significantly contribute to the improvement of GPT by transferring
geometric and shape information including target center from
target template to search area effectively. Experiments on the
KITTI tracking dataset show that GPT achieves state-of-theart performance and can run in real-time.

Introduction
The goal of 3D object tracking is to estimate the 3D bounding box of a target within the search area of the current frame
when the 3D bounding box of the target in the template of
the previous frame is given. 3D object tracking is attracting
considerable attention within the society of computer vision
and robotics since it is used in various applications ranging
from autonomous driving to mobile robotics. To realize 3D
object tracking, we need a sensor or a combination of multiple sensors. Among the various sensors or their combinations, the two most popular sensors for 3D object tracking
are RGB-D sensor and LiDAR.
RGB-D sensor can provide visual as well as geometric information about the target, and it has been widely used for
3D object tracking in indoor applications (Song and Xiao
2013; Held et al. 2016; Bibi, Zhang, and Ghanem 2016;
Kart, Kamarainen, and Matas 2018; Xiao et al. 2018; Kart
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2053

