The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sample-Efficient Iterative Lower Bound Optimization of
Deep Reactive Policies for Planning in Continuous MDPs
Siow Meng Low1 , Akshat Kumar1 , Scott Sanner2
1

School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
2
Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada
smlow.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg, ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract

domain instantiations of these relational models (Groshev
et al. 2018; Toyer et al. 2018; Bajpai, Garg, and Mausam
2018; Garg, Bajpai, and Mausam 2019, 2020; Toyer et al.
2020). Other recent work has investigated planning by discrete and mixed integer optimization in learned discrete neural network models of planning domains (Say and Sanner
2018; Say et al. 2020). Further afield, policy learning has
been applied for planning in discrete models through the
use of policy gradient methods (Buffet and Aberdeen 2009,
2007; Aberdeen 2005), although it is critical to remark that
these methods focused on model-free reinforcement learning approaches and do not directly exploit optimization over
the known model dynamics that we explore in this work.
There has been considerably less research focus in the
challenging area of planning in nonlinear continuous MDP
models that we focus on in this paper. However, a recent direction of significant influence on the present work is the use
of automatic differentiation in an end-to-end model-based
gradient descent framework to leverage recent advances in
non-convex optimization from DL. The majority of work in
this direction has focused on deterministic continuous planning models — both known (Wu, Say, and Sanner 2017;
Scaroni et al. 2020) and learned (Wu, Say, and Sanner 2020;
Say 2021). However, in this work we are specifically concerned with learning deep reactive policies (DRPs) for fast
decision-making in general continuous state-action MDPs
(CSA-MDPs). While there has been work on planning in
CSA-MDPs with piecewise linear dynamics via symbolic
methods (Zamani, Sanner, and Fang 2012) or mixed integer
linear programming (Raghavan et al. 2017), these methods
suffer from scalability limitations and do not learn reusable
DRPs for general nonlinear dynamics or reward. The stateof-the-art solution for DRP learning in such nonlinear CSAMDPs is provided by tfmdp (Bueno et al. 2019), which optimizes DRPs end-to-end by leveraging gradients backpropagated through the model dynamics and policy.
While tfmdp made significant advances in solving nonlinear CSA-MDPs, it requires a large number of sampled
trajectories to learn effectively and can suffer from high variance in solution quality. In this work, we revisit the overall model-based DRP objective and instead take a fundamentally different approach to its optimization. Specifically,
we make the following contributions: First, for CSA-MDPs
with stochastic transitions, we develop a lower bound for the

Recent advances in deep learning have enabled optimization
of deep reactive policies (DRPs) for continuous MDP planning by encoding a parametric policy as a deep neural network and exploiting automatic differentiation in an end-toend model-based gradient descent framework. This approach
has proven effective for optimizing DRPs in nonlinear continuous MDPs, but it requires a large number of sampled trajectories to learn effectively and can suffer from high variance in solution quality. In this work, we revisit the overall
model-based DRP objective and instead take a minorizationmaximization perspective to iteratively optimize the DRP
w.r.t. a locally tight lower-bounded objective. This novel formulation of DRP learning as iterative lower bound optimization (ILBO) is particularly appealing because (i) each step
is structurally easier to optimize than the overall objective,
(ii) it guarantees a monotonically improving objective under
certain theoretical conditions, and (iii) it reuses samples between iterations thus lowering sample complexity. Empirical
evaluation confirms that ILBO is significantly more sampleefficient than the state-of-the-art DRP planner and consistently produces better solution quality with lower variance.
We additionally demonstrate that ILBO generalizes well to
new problem instances (i.e., different initial states) without
requiring retraining.

Introduction
In the past decade, deep learning (DL) methods have demonstrated remarkable success in a variety of complex applications in computer vision, natural language, and signal processing (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017; Hinton
et al. 2012; Bengio, Lecun, and Hinton 2021). More recently, a variety of work has sought to leverage DL tools
for planning and policy learning in a large variety of deterministic and stochastic decision-making domains (Wu, Say,
and Sanner 2017; Bueno et al. 2019; Wu, Say, and Sanner
2020; Say et al. 2020; Scaroni et al. 2020; Say 2021; Toyer
et al. 2020; Garg, Bajpai, and Mausam 2020).
A large amount of this work has focused on learning (deep
reactive) policies in discrete planning settings such as exploiting structure in discrete relational planning models (Issakkimuthu, Fern, and Tadepalli 2018) or learning policies
for effective transfer and generalized planning over different
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9840

