The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Policy Optimization with Stochastic Mirror Descent
Long Yang 1, * , Yu Zhang 2, * , Gang Zheng1 , Qian Zheng1,3 , Pengfei Li1 , Jianghang Huang 1 , Gang
Pan 1,†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
Netease Games AI Lab, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,Singapore
1
{yanglong,gang zheng, hzzhangyu,pfl,gpan}@zju.edu.cn 2 zhangyu15@corp.netease.com 3 zhengqian@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract

policy optimization with SMD. The non-stationary sampling
process with the environment will lead to a large variance
on the policy gradient estimator (Papini et al. 2018), which
requires more samples to get a robust policy gradient and
results in poor sample efficiency (Liu et al. 2018).
To address the above challenges, we provide a theory
analysis of the dilemma of applying SMD to policy optimization. Result (18) shows that under the Assumption 1,
deriving the algorithm directly via SMD can not guarantee
the convergence for policy optimization. Furthermore, we
propose a new algorithm MPO that keeps a provable convergence guarantee (see Theorem 2). Designing a new gradient
estimator according to historical information of policy gradient is the key to MPO.
Then, we propose a variance-reduced mirror policy optimization algorithm (VRMPO): an efficient sample method
via constructing a variance reduced policy gradient estimator. Concretely, we design an efficiently computable policy gradient estimator (see Eq.(26)) that utilizes fresh information and yields a more accurate estimation of the policy gradient, which is the key to improve sample efficiency.
Theorem 3 illustrates that VRMPO needs O(−3 ) sample trajectories to achieve an -approximate first-order stationary
point (-FOSP). To our best knowledge, the proposed VRMPO
matches the best sample complexity among the existing literature. Particularly, although SRVR-PG (Xu et al. 2020; Xu
2021) achieves the same sample complexity as VRMPO, our
approach needs less assumptions than Xu et al. (2020); Xu
(2021), and our VRMPO unifies SRVR-PG. Besides, empirical
result shows VRMPO converges faster than SRVR-PG.

Improving sample efficiency has been a longstanding goal
in reinforcement learning. This paper proposes VRMPO algorithm: a sample efficient policy gradient method with stochastic mirror descent. In VRMPO, a novel variance-reduced policy
gradient estimator is presented to improve sample efficiency.
We prove that the proposed VRMPO needs only O(−3 ) sample trajectories to achieve an -approximate first-order stationary point, which matches the best sample complexity for
policy optimization. Extensive empirical results demonstrate
that VRMPO outperforms the state-of-the-art policy gradient
methods in various settings.

Introduction
Policy gradient (Williams 1992; Sutton et al. 2000) is widely
used to search the optimal policy in reinforcement learning
(RL), and it has achieved significant successes in challenging fields such as playing Go (Silver et al. 2016, 2017) or
robotics (Duan et al. 2016). However, policy gradient methods suffer from high sample complexity, since many existing
popular methods require to collect a lot of samples for each
step to update its parameters (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Yang
et al. 2021; Xing et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2022), which partially reduces the effectiveness of the samples. Besides, it
is still very challenging to provide a theoretical analysis of
sample complexity for policy gradient methods instead of
empirically improving sample efficiency.
To improve sample efficiency, this paper addresses how to
design an efficient and convergent algorithm with stochastic
mirror descent (SMD) (Nemirovskij and Yudin 1983). SMD
keeps the advantage of low memory requirement and low
computational complexity (Lei and Tang 2018), which implies SMD needs less samples to learn a model. However,
the significant challenges of applying the existing SMD to
RL are two-fold: 1) The objective of policy-based RL is a
typical non-convex function, Ghadimi et al. (2016) show that
it may cause instability and even divergence when updating
the parameter of a non-convex objective by SMD via a single sample. 2) The large variance of policy gradient estimator is a critical bottleneck of improving sample efficiency for

Background and Stochastic Mirror Descent
Reinforcement learning (RL) is often formulated as Markov
decision processes (MDP) M = (S, A, P, R, ρ0 , γ), where
0
S is state space, A is action space; P (s |s, a) is the prob0
ability of the state transition from s to s under playing a;
R(·, ·) : S × A → [−Rmax , Rmax ] is the reward function,
where Rmax is a certain positive scalar. ρ0 (·) : S → [0, 1] is
the initial state distribution and γ ∈ (0, 1).
Policy πθ (a|s) is a probability distribution on S × A with
τ
a parameter θ ∈ Rp . Let τ = {st , at , rt+1 }H
t=0 be a trajectory, where s0 ∼ ρ0 (s0 ), at ∼ πθ (·|st ), rt+1 = R(st , at ),
st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ), and Hτ is the finite horizon of τ . The

* L.Yang and Y.Zhang share equal contributions.
†

G.Pan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8823

