The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

When AI Difficulty is Easy:
The Explanatory Power of Predicting IRT Difficulty
Fernando Martı́nez-Plumed1,2 , David Castellano2 , Carlos Monserrat-Aranda2 ,
José Hernández-Orallo 2,3
1

2

European Commission, Joint Research Centre
Valencian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence (VRAIN), Universitat Politècnica de València
3
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence, University of Cambridge
fernando.martinez-plumed@ec.europa.eu, dacasfal@upv.es, cmonserr@dsic.upv.es, jorallo@upv.es
Abstract

this property (Smith, Martinez, and Giraud-Carrier 2014)
and cannot explain difficulty based on the instance.
• System-independent. Many uncertainty or confidence estimation metrics are system-specific (Hendrycks and
Gimpel 2016; Jiang et al. 2018; Corbière et al. 2019) or
particular to another encoding model’s latent variables.
• Domain-generic. Applicable to all kinds of tasks and areas in AI (from machine learning to reasoning), and not
only for those areas or tasks where specific instance hardness or difficulty metrics exist.

One of challenges of artificial intelligence as a whole is robustness. Many issues such as adversarial examples, out of
distribution performance, Clever Hans phenomena, and the
wider areas of AI evaluation and explainable AI, have to do
with the following question: Did the system fail because it is
a hard instance or because something else? In this paper we
address this question with a generic method for estimating
IRT-based instance difficulty for a wide range of AI domains
covering several areas, from supervised feature-based classification to automated reasoning. We show how to estimate
difficulty systematically using off-the-shelf machine learning
regression models. We illustrate the usefulness of this estimation for a range of applications.

The populational nature of Eq. 1 is convenient in many areas of AI, since we have a wide range of techniques that are
usually applied before selecting the system we want to deploy. All these discarded suboptimal systems can be reused
for the calculation of difficulty, as we will see in this paper.
However, the use of a population of systems entails some
risks as well. For instance, if the population contains a nonconformant system (failing on the easy instances and succeeding in some of the hard ones), it may lead to very unstable difficulty metrics. This may happen if we just calculate
the average error of a set of systems for each instance as a
proxy for difficulty (Martı́nez-Plumed et al. 2019).
A solution to this problem was introduced several decades
ago, and it is known as item response theory (IRT), where
difficulty is inferred from a matrix of items (instances) and
respondents (systems), giving more relevance to conformant
systems. In addition, IRT gives a scaled metric of difficulty
that follows a normal distribution and can be compared directly against the ability of a system. However, IRT and
other difficulty metrics are derived from previous performance results, but do not depend on the instance space,
so we cannot anticipate the difficulty of new instances. We
present a relatively straightforward solution for this important issue: training regression models with the problem features as input and difficulty as output.
This paper covers a range of problems in AI, derive
their IRT difficulties, and train a regression model for each
domain—a difficulty estimator—, which we evaluate systematically. For many domains, the estimates for IRT difficulty are very good, according to RMSE and Spearman correlation. We illustrate the explanatory power of these difficulty models on a series of applications:

Introduction
As no AI system can be perfect, robustness must be based
on knowing where and why it fails, avoiding highly unexpected failures. One key element in this understanding is instance difficulty. This effect of difficulty on robustness could
be rephrased as follows: is it unexpected that a customary
system fails on this instance? Accordingly, difficulty is defined as a metric ℏ that decreases with the expected performance R for a customary system. A good difficulty metric ℏ
would maximise the following expected probability:
Exi ,xj ,m [ℏ(xi ) < ℏ(xj ) ⇒ R(m, xi ) > R(m, xj )] (1)
with xi , xj being feature vectors sampled from X and m
sampled from M , according to a reference distribution of
instances and systems respectively. Note that the choice of
M is key here. If M is a human population, our notion of
difficulty would be anthropocentric. If M is a collection of
representative AI techniques, our notion of difficulty would
be AI-centric. Difficulty is hence defined as a notion of conformity. If a capable system fails for an easy instance, we
could signal this as non-conformity.
Beyond the above definition, we impose several other
desiderata to a method for calculating difficulty:
• Attribute-based. Applicable to the observable features of
each instance, without the need of comparing it to other
instances. Many instance hardness metrics do not meet
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Explainable AI: understanding what makes instances
7719

