The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Clustering Interval-Censored Time-Series for Disease Phenotyping
Irene Y. Chen1 , Rahul G. Krishnan2 , David Sontag1
1

MIT CSAIL and IMES
University of Toronto
iychen@csail.mit.edu, rahulgk@cs.toronto.edu, dsontag@csail.mit.edu
2

Abstract

veal structure that would otherwise not be found by straightforward application of clustering analysis.
This paper is motivated by disease phenotyping in healthcare. Many diseases are biologically heterogeneous despite a common diagnosis—for example autism (DoshiVelez, Ge, and Kohane 2014), heart failure (Shah et al.
2015), diabetes (Udler et al. 2018), and Parkinson’s disease (Fereshtehnejad et al. 2017). The variation in biomarkers (e.g., glucose or creatinine) across patients can stem from
different patient subtypes that manifest in distinct disease
trajectories. Scientists seek to understand this disease heterogeneity by identifying groups of people whose biomarkers behave similarly. For example, cardiologists use a measurement called ejection fraction as a heuristic to separate
heart failure patients into two categories (Owan et al. 2006),
with at least one of the two subtypes believed to be heterogeneous (Shah et al. 2015). To better understand patient heterogeneity, cardiologists may turn to longitudinal, observational, and often irregularly-measured patient data for disease phenotype discovery.
Interval censoring in healthcare data presents a significant
challenge for disease phenotyping. Left-censorship in clinical datasets can occur when patients have delayed entry,
meaning data are unavailable before a diagnosis or first hospital visit. Factors including geographic proximity to a hospital (Chan, Hart, and Goodman 2006), financial access to
care (Miller and Wherry 2017) or mistrust of the healthcare
system (Brandon, Isaac, and LaVeist 2005) can affect when
a patient seeks medical help and consequently the beginning
of data availability with respect to the underlying progression of their disease. Other datasets align patients by death
time, but right-censorship restricts sample size to patients
who have died. Since many factors affect mortality, other
causes of death may confound results. For heart failure, a
chronic disease that progresses over many years with a large
range of onset ages and survival outcomes, interval censoring can confound attempts to analyse disease heterogeneity
using observational data.
For a simplified illustration of the problem, see Figure 1(a) which depicts the common reality of observational
health data whereas Figure 1(b) depicts the idealized latent
substructure we would like to identify. Existing subtyping
models applied to clinical data assume (potentially erroneously) that patients are aligned at entry into the dataset

Unsupervised learning is often used to uncover clusters in
data. However, different kinds of noise may impede the discovery of useful patterns from real-world time-series data. In
this work, we focus on mitigating the interference of interval censoring in the task of clustering for disease phenotyping. We develop a deep generative, continuous-time model of
time-series data that clusters time-series while correcting for
censorship time. We provide conditions under which clusters
and the amount of delayed entry may be identified from data
under a noiseless model. On synthetic data, we demonstrate
accurate, stable, and interpretable results that outperform several benchmarks. On real-world clinical datasets of heart failure and Parkinson’s disease patients, we study how interval
censoring can adversely affect the task of disease phenotyping. Our model corrects for this source of error and recovers
known clinical subtypes.

Introduction
Cluster analysis of time-series data is a task of interest across
a variety of scientific disciplines including biology (Listgarten et al. 2007), meteorology (Camargo et al. 2007), and
astrophysics (Rebbapragada et al. 2009). Automating the
discovery of latent patterns in real-world data can be challenging due to noise. We focus on mitigating errata in pattern
discovery from interval censoring (Miller Jr 2011).
Interval censoring arises when time-series data are only
observed within a known interval. The difference between
an observed time value and the true time value, known as
left-censorship, and the lack of a common outcome against
which to align, known as right-censorship, can lead common
techniques for clustering to erroneous conclusions about the
underlying patterns. To address this, practitioners must often manually align data to a meaningful start time in order to
find non-trivial groups via unsupervised clustering—a process whose difficulty can range from expensive and timeconsuming in some problems to infeasible in others. In this
work, we develop a machine learning algorithm that clusters
time-series data while simultaneously correcting for interval censoring. In doing so, we automate the time-consuming
process of manual data alignment and use our method to reCopyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6211

