The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Algorithmic Bayesian Persuasion with Combinatorial Actions
Kaito Fujii1 , Shinsaku Sakaue2
1

National Insititute of Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-8430, Japan,
2
The Univeristy of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
fujiik@nii.ac.jp, sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

suasion: when can we efficiently compute (approximately)
optimal signaling schemes?

Bayesian persuasion is a model for understanding strategic
information revelation: an agent with an informational advantage, called a sender, strategically discloses information by
sending signals to another agent, called a receiver. In algorithmic Bayesian persuasion, we are interested in efficiently designing the sender’s signaling schemes that lead the receiver
to take action in favor of the sender. This paper studies algorithmic Bayesian-persuasion settings where the receiver’s
feasible actions are specified by combinatorial constraints,
e.g., matroids or paths in graphs. We first show that constantfactor approximation is NP-hard even in some special cases of
matroids or paths. We then propose a polynomial-time algorithm for general matroids by assuming the number of states
of nature to be a constant. We finally consider a relaxed notion
of persuasiveness, called CCE-persuasiveness, and present a
sufficient condition for polynomial-time approximability.

In many practical scenarios, the receiver’s actions are
specified by some combinatorial constraints. For example,
a receiver’s action may be a path in a network or a portfolio of a limited number of stocks. In such cases, lists of the
receiver’s actions can be prohibitively large, making standard methods for computing the sender’s signaling schemes
impractical. To reveal when we can efficiently compute optimal signaling schemes in the presence of such combinatorial actions is an important question, but it remains unexplored as mentioned in (Dughmi 2017, Open Question 2.8).
This paper addresses this open question and elucidates several classes of problems for which we can/cannot efficiently
compute (approximately) optimal signaling schemes.
To motivate our work, we below give concrete situations
where the receiver’s actions are combinatorial. An important
application of Bayesian persuasion is financial advice. Suppose the sender and the receiver to be a financial adviser and
an investor, respectively. The sender knows accurate predictions on stock returns, which are unknown to the receiver.
Since the sender’s returns are not always aligned with those
of the receiver, the sender strategically reveals information
to increase her returns. After receiving a signal (advice) from
the sender, the receiver decides which stocks to buy. In practice, there are a huge number of stocks, and it is unrealistic
to assume that the receiver can hold a portfolio of arbitrarily
many stocks. Thus, a cardinality constraint is often imposed
when optimizing portfolios (Ito et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020).
In this situation, each receiver’s action is a combination of a
limited number of stocks.

Introduction
Information asymmetry is ubiquitous. For example, a seller
has more information about a product than a customer, and
a client sometimes knows more about a delegated task than
a worker. Such an agent with an informational advantage
often strategically discloses information to influence the receiver’s decisions. A fundamental question in information
economics asks how much influence an informational advantage has or what kind of information disclosure strategy
the sender should use.
Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011) is a
model for understanding strategic information disclosure. In
the standard setting, there are two agents called the sender
and the receiver. The sender, who has an informational advantage, strategically reveals information by sending a signal to the receiver. Then, according to the revealed information, the receiver selects an action that maximizes his expected utility. The receiver’s action also affects the sender’s
utility, which is usually different from the receiver’s utility.
The sender’s goal is to design a strategy for information disclosure, called a signaling scheme, to lead the receiver to
select an action that is favorable for the sender. In this paper,
we are interested in the algorithmic aspect of Bayesian per-

More complicated combinatorial constraints can appear in
other applications. For example, let us imagine that a boss
(sender) asks a subordinate (receiver) to create a committee
by choosing a representative for each of several groups. An
action of the receiver is a set of people that contains a single
person from each group. In another example, the receiver is
a company that constructs an electrical grid connecting all
electricity consumers, and the sender is a government that
requests the construction. An action of the receiver is a tree
in a network that covers all electricity consumers.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5016

