The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Convergence and Optimality of Policy Gradient Methods in Weakly Smooth
Settings
Matthew S. Zhang1,3 , Murat A. Erdogdu1,2,3 , Animesh Garg1,3
1

Department of Computer Science at the University of Toronto,
Department of Statistical Sciences at the University of Toronto,
3
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
matthew.zhang@mail.utoronto.ca, erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu, garg@cs.toronto.edu
2

Abstract

occurs without boundedness or smoothness preconditions on
the function approximator.
Consequently, in this paper, we analyse two key questions:
(i) how can we relax existing conditions on MDPs while retaining guarantees for convergence, (ii) how can we bound the
performance of the policies under these conditions. Arguably,
the convergence of gradient algorithms needs to rely on some
constraints of the function class. Prior work has relied on assumptions of (a) smoothness and (b) absolute boundedness of
the gradient. However, these conditions are overly restrictive
and exclude many useful function approximators.
Summary of Contributions. We make contributions with
respect to each of these assumptions: (a) strong smoothness is
relaxed to weak smoothness (Hölder conditions); (b) absolute
boundedness of the gradient is relaxed to L2 integrability
under the visitation distribution. While this is an important
theoretical development, it also expands the scope of practical
convergence results. We include many practical examples of
MDPs and policies that satisfy our criteria, with applications
to exploration and safety in reinforcement learning. To the
best of our knowledge, ours is the first study to consider this
setting.
Under these assumptions, we find (Corollary 1) that
with an appropriate
learning
rate, the gradients satisfy
h
i
PT
2
1
≤ ϵ for both the standard and
t=1 E ∥∇J(θt−1 )∥
T
natural policy gradient for large enough T, B, where T is
the number of iterations and B is the batch size. We also
show (Corollary 2) that natural policy gradient satisfies the
following bound:
√

EΠ
J(θ∗ ) − E [J(θt )] ≤ ϵ + O
,
(1)
min
t=0,1,...T −1
1−γ

Policy gradient methods have been frequently applied to problems in control and reinforcement learning with great success,
yet existing convergence analysis still relies on non-intuitive,
impractical and often opaque conditions. In particular, existing
rates are achieved in limited settings, under strict regularity
conditions. In this work, we establish explicit convergence
rates of policy gradient methods, extending the convergence
regime to weakly smooth policy classes with L2 integrable
gradient. We provide intuitive examples to illustrate the insight
behind these new conditions. Notably, our analysis also shows
that convergence rates are achievable for both the standard policy gradient and the natural policy gradient algorithms under
these assumptions. Lastly we provide performance guarantees
for the converged policies.

Introduction
Modern Reinforcement Learning (RL) has solved challenges
in diverse fields such as finance, healthcare, and robotics
(Deng et al. 2016; Yu, Liu, and Nemati 2019; Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013). Nonetheless, the theory behind these
methods remains poorly understood, with convergence results being limited to narrow classes of problems. Classical
approaches to RL theory focus on tabular problems where discrete techniques can be applied (see Agarwal et al. (2020b);
Sidford et al. (2018)). However, most practical problems exist
in continuous, high-dimensional domains (Doya 2000), and
may even be infinite-dimensional or non-compact.
Theoretical results in continuous domains do not effectively characterize practical algorithms. Value-based estimators have obtained strong results in some regimes such as
linear MDPs, both in on- and off-line settings (Cai et al. 2019;
Yang and Wang 2019). In contrast to value-based methods,
direct policy estimators possess numerous advantages, in
that they are theoretically insensitive to perturbations in the
problem parameters, and typically satisfy better smoothness
assumptions. Nonetheless, bounds for direct parameterizations of the policy have been less successful. They either
restrict the cardinality or size of the space (Agarwal et al.
2020b), or apply strong assumptions on the policy and MDP
(Liu et al. 2019; Xu, Wang, and Liang 2020; Liu et al. 2020).
This conflicts with practical results, where convergence often

for large enough T, B, where EΠ can be tuned by choosing an appropriately regular policy class and θ∗ is the maximizer of J. EΠ is formally defined in §5. Under a strong
additional assumption, standard policy gradient also satisfies
mint=0,1...T −1 J(θ∗ ) − E [J(θt )] ≤ ϵ for large enough T, B.
In the strictly smooth limit these results have previously been
discovered (Agarwal et al. 2020a; Xu, Wang, and Liang 2020;
Zou, Xu, and Liang 2019), although our results hold for a
wider range of functions and MDPs.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in
§2 we cover the mathematical formulation of MDPs; in §3

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9066

