The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Visual Semantics Allow for Textual Reasoning Better in Scene Text Recognition
Yue He1 , Chen Chen2 , Jing Zhang2 , Juhua Liu3 * , Fengxiang He4 , Chaoyue Wang2 , Bo Du1 *
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer
Science and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
3
School of Printing and Packaging, and Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University, China
4
JD Explore Academy, China
{yuehe.cs, liujuhua, dubo}@whu.edu.cn, cche9000@uni.sydney.edu.au, {jing.zhang1, chaoyue.wang}@sydney.edu.au,
hefengxiang@jd.com
Abstract

(a)

Base Model

VR

Existing Scene Text Recognition (STR) methods typically
use a language model to optimize the joint probability of the
1D character sequence predicted by a visual recognition (VR)
model, which ignore the 2D spatial context of visual semantics within and between character instances, making them not
generalize well to arbitrary shape scene text. To address this
issue, we make the first attempt to perform textual reasoning
based on visual semantics in this paper. Technically, given the
character segmentation maps predicted by a VR model, we
construct a subgraph for each instance, where nodes represent
the pixels in it and edges are added between nodes based on
their spatial similarity. Then, these subgraphs are sequentially
connected by their root nodes and merged into a complete
graph. Based on this graph, we devise a graph convolutional
network for textual reasoning (GTR) by supervising it with a
cross-entropy loss. GTR can be easily plugged in representative STR models to improve their performance owing to better textual reasoning. Specifically, we construct our model,
namely S-GTR, by paralleling GTR to the language model in
a segmentation-based STR baseline,which can effectively exploit the visual-linguistic complementarity via mutual learning. S-GTR sets new state-of-the-art on six challenging STR
benchmarks and generalizes well to multi-linguistic datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/adeline-cs/GTR.

Textual Reasoning
Raw Prediction

(b)

VR

LM

VR

LM

croos
Linguistic
Context

cross

(c)

GTR

crocs
Spatial
Context

Figure 1: Diagram of different STR pipelines. (a) The VR
model. (b) The VR model with an LM. (c) The proposed
pipeline by adding GTR in parallel with LM. GTR performs
textual reasoning based on the visual semantics generated by
VR to address the irregular and blurry text. The ground truth
label is “crocs” and wrong predictions are marked in red.
2020a). Although these methods obtain reasonable performance on identifying individual characters, they ignore vital
global textual representations, making it extremely hard to
give robust recognition outcomes in real-world scenarios.
For global textual modeling, existing efforts (Qiao et al.
2020; Yu et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2021) have been made to
leverage a language model (LM) (Jaderberg et al. 2014a)
to optimize the joint probability of the character sequence
predicted by the VR model. Though this strategy can correct mistaken predictions with linguistic context, it is hard to
generalize to arbitrary texts and ambiguous cases. As shown
in Fig. 1(b), for the irregular and blurry text, even LM could
not make correct predictions. Other than linguistic cues, spatial context could also contribute to global textual modeling
of character sequences but few methods explore in this direction. Hence, existing models have difficulty in producing satisfactory results on irregular texts in diverse fonts and
shapes as well as with blur and occlusions.
In this paper, we fill this gap with a novel Graph-based
Textual Reasoning (GTR) model for introducing spatial
context into the text reasoning stage. Given the character
instances recognized by the VR model as well as the derived order relations between them, we first set up a twolevel graph to establish the local-to-global dependency. In

Introduction
Scene Text Recognition (STR) remains a fundamental and
active research topic in computer vision for its wide applications (Zhang and Tao 2020). However, this task remains
challenging in real-world deployment, since the recognition
results are highly influenced by various factors, such as complex background, irregular shapes, diverse textures.
Existing methods mainly treat STR as a visual recognition (VR) task and perform character-level recognition
on input images, including visual-text sequence translationbased methods (Yang et al. 2017; Shi et al. 2018; Baek
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Litman et al. 2020) and semantic segmentation-based methods (Liao et al. 2019; Wan et al.
* Corresponding author. This work was done during Yue He’s
internship at JD Explore Academy.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

888

