The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Divide and Conquer Algorithm for Predict+Optimize with Non-convex
Problems
Ali Ugur Guler1 , Emir Demirović2 , Jeffrey Chan3 , James Bailey1 , Christopher Leckie1 , Peter J.
Stuckey4
1

University of Melbourne,
2
TU Delft,
3
RMIT University,
4
Monash University
aguler@student.unimelb.edu.au, E.Demirovic@tudelft.nl, jeffrey.chan@rmit.edu.au, baileyj@unimelb.edu.au,
caleckie@unimelb.edu.au, peter.stuckey@monash.edu
Abstract

Motivation: Traditionally, predictions are the end goal of
ML models. A regression model aims to minimize prediction errors. If the model makes perfect predictions, it also
leads to the optimal decision. However all models are prone
to errors. When there are errors in predictions, MSE does
not necessarily represent the performance of the decisions
(Ifrim, O’Sullivan, and Simonis 2012). A PPO framework
trains parameters with the optimization objective, and can
model the underlying problem better. Although PPO can
improve decision making, it requires learning through hard,
usually non differentiable and discrete functions.
Specialized frameworks called semi-direct methods can
be used to approximate and minimize the optimization loss
for specific problems. These frameworks depend on assumptions of the constraint configurations, and are hard to modify
for different constraint sets and problems. We aim to build a
general framework, a direct method, to understand and reason over an arbitrary optimization problem. Direct methods
are not trivial for combinatorial problems. One way to differentiate through combinatorial problems is to use surrogates
or relaxations. However, current surrogate models implicitly assume that the relaxed underlying problem will show
convex behaviour. For a combinatorial problem this is not
guaranteed and in cases where the underlying problem is not
convex, gradient descent methods with the relaxed function
will induce an approximation error to the optimization objective (Thapper and Živnỳ 2018).
Reasoning over a non convex function is challenging to do
in polynomial time and requires more resources than a typical optimization problem. Demirovic et al. (2020) proposed
a linear model to directly reason over the exact optimization loss of combinatorial problems defined by dynamic programming (DP). It makes use of the DP solution to find the
transition points where small changes in predictions result
in different optimal solutions and thus maps the piecewiselinear function (PWLF) of the combinatorial space. Linear
models are widely used in machine learning and their simple structure is suitable for explainable AI applications and
helps training the models faster. However state of the art
combinatorial solvers are usually faster than the DP solution and in many cases where it is not feasible to scale a
DP solution, a dedicated solver scales better. Moreover for

The predict+optimize problem combines machine learning
and combinatorial optimization by predicting the problem coefficients first and then using these coefficients to solve the
optimization problem. While this problem can be solved in
two separate stages, recent research shows end to end models can achieve better results. This requires differentiating
through a discrete combinatorial function. Models that use
differentiable surrogates are prone to approximation errors,
while existing exact models are limited to dynamic programming, or they do not generalize well with scarce data. In
this work we propose a novel divide and conquer algorithm
based on transition points to reason over exact optimization
problems and predict the coefficients using the optimization
loss. Moreover, our model is not limited to dynamic programming problems. We also introduce a greedy version, which
achieves similar results with less computation. In comparison with other predict+optimize frameworks, we show our
method outperforms existing exact frameworks and can reason over hard combinatorial problems better than surrogate
methods.

Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) models are usually trained to make
accurate predictions by minimizing errors, such as mean
squared error (MSE). These predictions can then be used
as coefficients in other decision making processes, such as
a combinatorial optimization problem. The performance of
these predictions is evaluated by their ability to lead to
the correct decisions. Such evidence based decision making
arises in many fields like transportation, healthcare, security
and education (Horvitz and Mitchell 2010). Consequently,
there has been growing interest in ML models for use in optimization problems. These models try to predict coefficients
of the optimization problem in such a way that even if the
predictions are less accurate, they lead to better decisions.
This paradigm is called predict then optimize (Elmachtoub
and Grigas 2017) or predict+optimize (PPO) (Demirovic
et al. 2020). In this paper we propose a new framework for
PPO to learn coefficients by directly reasoning over discrete
combinatorial problems.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3749

