The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Losses for Strategic Classification
Tosca Lechner1 , Ruth Urner2
1

2

University of Waterloo, Cheriton School of Computer Science, Waterloo, Canada
York University, Lassonde School of Engineering, EECS Department, Toronto, Canada
tlechner@uwaterloo.ca, ruth@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract

between an institution that publishes a decision rule and a
population of best responding agents to be classified. Given
the classifier, these agents may change their feature representations in order to obtain a more favorable classification
outcome. To prevent the induced additional classification
error the institution will publish a modified predictor, not
transparently reflecting the underlying intent and potentially
causing additional harm to sub-populations that may be less
equipped to perform the required changes to their representations (Hu, Immorlica, and Vaughan 2019).
In this work, we propose a learning theoretic take on
this scenario. In machine learning, it is common to model
desiderata for a learning outcome in form of a loss function. The goal of the learning process is then to identify a
predictor that minimizes this loss in expectation over a datagenerating distribution. Thus, we here define a novel loss
function for learning under strategic manipulations. The aim
of this loss is to induce a combination of two (potentially
competing) requirements: achieving low classification error
taking into account that individuals being classified may manipulate their features, and discouraging such feature manipulations overall. Prior work has shown that these may
be conflicting requirements (Zhang and Conitzer 2021). Our
proposed loss function thus aims to induce a balanced combination of these requirements rather than strictly enforcing
one, and then only observing the effect on the other (as is
implied by frameworks that aim to minimize classification
error under best-responding agents (Hardt et al. 2016; Milli
et al. 2019) or enforcing incentive-compatibility (Zhang and
Conitzer 2021)).
To define our strategic manipulation loss we employ an
abstraction of the plausible feature manipulations in form of
a manipulation graph (Zhang and Conitzer 2021). An edge
x → x′ in this graph indicates that an individual with feature vector x may change their features to present as x′ if
this leads to a positive classification, for example since the
utility of this change in classification exceeds the cost of the
change between these vectors. We define our strategic loss
in dependence of this graph and carefully motivate the proposed loss in terms of requirements and effects from previous literature. We then analyze the sample complexity of
learning with this loss function. We identify sufficient conditions for proper learnability that take into account the interplay between a hypothesis class and an underlying ma-

Strategic classification, i.e. classification under possible
strategic manipulations of features, has received a lot of attention from both the machine learning and the game theory
community. Most works focus on analysing properties of the
optimal decision rule under such manipulations. In our work
we take a learning theoretic perspective, focusing on the sample complexity needed to learn a good decision rule which
is robust to strategic manipulation. We perform this analysis
by introducing a novel loss function, the strategic manipulation loss, which takes into account both the accuracy of the
final decision rule and its vulnerability to manipulation. We
analyse the sample complexity for a known graph of possible manipulations in terms of the complexity of the function
class and the manipulation graph. Additionally, we initialize
the study of learning under unknown manipulation capabilities of the involved agents. Using techniques from transfer
learning theory, we define a similarity measure for manipulation graphs and show that learning outcomes are robust with
respect to small changes in the manipulation graph. Lastly,
we analyse the (sample complexity of) learning of the manipulation capability of agents with respect to this similarity
measure, providing novel guarantees for strategic classification with respect to an unknown manipulation graph.

1

Introduction

In many scenarios where a decision rule is learned from
data, the publication of this decision rule has an effect on
the distribution of the underlying population that may harm
the quality of the rule. For example, applicants for a loan
may change details in their bank account to receive a better score, people may join a gym or sports club without ever
intending to participate, in order to get a better health insurance policy, or students may employ different strategies such
as registering to volunteer, or joining rare clubs (without attending either) to appear better on college applications.
Effects and incentives resulting from strategic behavior
in classification scenarios have received substantial attention
from both machine learning and game-theoretic perspectives
in recent years (Hardt et al. 2016; Milli et al. 2019; Haghtalab et al. 2020; Tsirtsis and Rodriguez 2020; Zhang and
Conitzer 2021). Most works study this as a two-player game
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7337

