The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning from the Dark: Boosting Graph Convolutional Neural Networks with
Diverse Negative Samples
Wei Duan1 , Junyu Xuan1 , Maoying Qiao 2 , Jie Lu1
1

The Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute (AAII), University of Technology Sydney
2
Australian Catholic University
Wei.Duan@student.uts.edu.au, Junyu.Xuan@uts.edu.au, maoying.qiao@acu.edu.au, Jie.Lu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNs) has been generally accepted to be an effective tool for node representations
learning. An interesting way to understand GCNs is to think
of them as a message passing mechanism where each node
updates its representation by accepting information from its
neighbours (also known as positive samples). However, beyond these neighbouring nodes, graphs have a large, dark, allbut forgotten world in which we find the non-neighbouring
nodes (negative samples). In this paper, we show that this
great dark world holds a substantial amount of information
that might be useful for representation learning. Most specifically, it can provide negative information about the node representations. Our overall idea is to select appropriate negative
samples for each node and incorporate the negative information contained in these samples into the representation updates. Moreover, we show that the process of selecting the
negative samples is not trivial. Our theme therefore begins by
describing the criteria for a good negative sample, followed
by a determinantal point process algorithm for efficiently obtaining such samples. A GCN, boosted by diverse negative
samples, then jointly considers the positive and negative information when passing messages. Experimental evaluations
show that this idea not only improves the overall performance
of standard representation learning but also significantly alleviates over-smoothing problems.

Figure 1: Illustration of the motivation of this work, including the dark world (gray shadow), different semantic clusters
(green, yellow, purple, blue nodes), positive samples (nodes
2, 3, 4) and selected diverse negative samples (nodes 6, 11,
and 18) of a given node (node 1).

Graphs are powerful structures for modelling specific kinds
of data such as molecules, social networks, citation networks, traffic networks, etc. (Chakrabarti and Faloutsos
2006). However, the representation power of graphs is not
a free lunch; it brings with it issues of incompatibility with
some of the strongest and most popular deep learning algorithms, as these can often only handle regular data structures
like vectors or arrays. Hence, to lend learning power to these
great tools of representation, graph neural networks (GNNs)
have emerged as a congruent deep learning architecture (Wu
et al. 2020). Such has been their success that, today, there
are many different GNN variants, each adapted for a specific task – for instance, graph sequence neural networks (Li
et al. 2016), graph convolutional neural networks (Kipf and

Welling 2017), and spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018).
Among all the varieties of GNNs, graph convolutional
neural networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) is a simple but representative and salient one, which introduces the
concept of convolution to GNNs that means to share weights
for nodes within a layer. An easy and intuitive way to understand GCNs is to think of them as a message passing mechanism (Geerts, Mazowiecki, and Pérez 2021) where each
node accepts information from its neighbouring nodes to update its representation. The basic idea is that the representations of nodes with edge between them should be positively
correlated. Hence, the neighboring nodes are also named
as positive samples1 . This message-passing mechanism is
highly effective in many scenarios, but it does lead to an annoying over-smoothing problem where the node representations become more and more similar as the number of layers
of the graph neural network increases. This is hardly sur-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Hereafter we refer to neighbouring nodes and positive samples
interchangeably.

Introduction

6550

