The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Complexity of Subelection Isomorphism Problems
Piotr Faliszewski,1 Krzysztof Sornat,1 Stanisław Szufa1,2
1

2

AGH University, Kraków, Poland
Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
{faliszew, sornat, szufa}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract

ilies of problems. In the former, we are given two elections, a
smaller and a larger one, and we ask if it is possible to delete
some candidates and voters from the larger election so that it
becomes isomorphic to the smaller one. Put differently, we
ask if the smaller election occurs as a minor in the larger one.
One reason why this problem is interesting is its connection
to restricted preference domains. For example, both singlepeaked (Black 1958) and single-crossing (Mirrlees 1971;
Roberts 1977) elections are characterized as those that do
not have certain forbidden minors (Ballester and Haeringer
2011; Bredereck, Chen, and Woeginger 2013). We show that
S UBELECTION I SOMORPHISM is NP-complete and W[1]hard for the parameterization by the size of the smaller election, which suggests that there are no fast algorithms for the
problem. Fortunately, the characterizations of single-peaked
and single-crossing elections use minors of constant size
and, such elections can be recognized efficiently; indeed,
there are very fast algorithms for these tasks (Bartholdi and
Trick 1986; Escoffier, Lang, and Öztürk 2008; Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2012). Our results show that characterizations with non-constant minors might lead to NP-hard
recognition problems.
In our second problem, M AXIMUM C OMMON S UBELEC TION , we ask for the largest isomorphic subelections of the
two input ones. Since their size can be used as a (particularly demanding) measure of similarity, our work is related
to those of Faliszewski et al. (2019) and Szufa et al. (2020).
In the former, the authors define the similarity between elections using variants of the swap distance and the Spearman footrule (and find these measures to be intractable),
whereas in the latter the authors propose a polynomial-time
computable measure, based on analyzing the frequency with
which candidates appear on particular positions in the votes.
While we find that many of our problems are NP-hard (and
hard to approximate), we also find polynomial algorithms,
also for practically useful cases.
For both our problems, we consider their “candidate” and
“voter” variants. For example, in C ANDIDATE S UBELEC TION I SOMORPHISM we ask if it is possible to delete candidates from the larger election (but without deleting any
voters) so that it becomes isomorphic with the smaller one.
Similarly, in M AXIMUM C OMMON VOTER -S UBELECTION
we ask if we can ensure isomorphism of the two input elections by only deleting voters (so that at least a given number

We study extensions of the Election Isomorphism problem,
focused on the existence of isomorphic subelections. Specifically, we propose the S UBELECTION I SOMORPHISM and the
M AXIMUM C OMMON S UBELECTION problems and study
their computational complexity and approximability. Using
our problems in experiments, we provide some insights into
the nature of several statistical models of elections.

1

Introduction

We study the computational complexity of several extensions of the E LECTION I SOMORPHISM problem, recently
introduced by Faliszewski et al. (2019) as an analogue of
G RAPH I SOMORPHISM. While in the latter we are given
two graphs and we ask if they can be made identical by renaming the vertices, in the former we are given two ordinal
elections (i.e., elections where each voter ranks the candidates from the most to the least appealing one) and ask if
they can be made identical by renaming the candidates and
reordering the voters. Interestingly, even though the exact
complexity of G RAPH I SOMORPHISM, as well as of many
related problems, remains elusive (Babai et al. 2015), E LEC TION I SOMORPHISM has a simple polynomial-time algorithm (Faliszewski et al. 2019). Yet, in many practical settings perfect isomorphism is too stringent and approximate
variants are necessary. For the case of G RAPH I SOMOR PHISM , researchers considered two types of relaxations: Either they focused on making a small number of modifications to the input graphs that make them isomorphic (see,
e.g., the works of Arvind et al. (2012) and Grohe, Rattan,
and Woeginger (2018)), or they sought (maximum) isomorphic subgraphs of the input ones (see, e.g., the classic paper of Cook (1971) and the textbook of Garey and Johnson
(1979); for an overview focused on applications in cheminformatics we point to the work of Raymond and Willett
(2002)). For the case of elections, the former approach was
already taken by Faliszewski et al. (2019) and several other
researchers (Vayer et al. 2020; Szufa et al. 2020; Boehmer
et al. 2021). Our goal is to explore the latter route.
More specifically, we consider the S UBELECTION I SO MORPHISM and M AXIMUM C OMMON S UBELECTION famCopyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4991

