The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PetsGAN: Rethinking Priors for Single Image Generation
Zicheng Zhang1 , Yinglu Liu2 , Congying Han1 * , Hailin Shi2 , Tiande Guo1 , Bowen Zhou2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
JD AI Research
zhangzicheng19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, liuyinglu1@jd.com, hancy@ucas.ac.cn
shihailin@jd.com, tdguo@ucas.ac.cn, bowen.zhou@jd.com

Abstract
Single image generation (SIG), described as generating diverse samples that have similar visual content with the given
single image, is first introduced by SinGAN which builds a
pyramid of GANs to progressively learn the internal patch
distribution of the single image. It also shows great potentials in a wide range of image manipulation tasks. However,
the paradigm of SinGAN has limitations in terms of generation quality and training time. Firstly, due to the lack of highlevel information, SinGAN cannot handle the object images
well as it does on the scene and texture images. Secondly, the
separate progressive training scheme is time-consuming and
easy to cause artifact accumulation. To tackle these problems,
in this paper, we dig into the SIG problem and improve SinGAN by fully-utilization of internal and external priors. The
main contributions of this paper include: 1) We introduce to
SIG a regularized latent variable model. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first time to give a clear formulation and
optimization goal of SIG, and all the existing methods for SIG
can be regarded as special cases of this model. 2) We design
a novel Prior-based end-to-end training GAN (PetsGAN) to
overcome the problems of SinGAN. For one thing, we inject
external priors obtained by the GAN inversion with PetsGAN
to alleviate the problem of lack of high-level information for
generating natural, reasonable and diverse samples, even for
the object images. For another, we inject the internal priors of
patch distribution correction with PetsGAN to ease and speed
up the patch distribution learning. Moreover, our method gets
rid of the time-consuming progressive training scheme and
can be trained end-to-end. 3) We construct abundant qualitative and quantitative experiments to show the superiority of
our method on both generated image quality, diversity, and
the training speed. Moreover, we apply our method to other
image manipulation tasks (e.g., style transfer, harmonization),
and the results further prove the effectiveness and efficiency
of our method.

Figure 1: Comparing PetsGAN with previous work. The upper part shows the paradigm of two-stage SinGAN, where
the generator G0 is trained on low resolution images first,
then copied to the next stage with fixed weights for high
resolution generation. In contrast, PetsGAN is trained in
one-stage by making full use of external and internal priors,
which embodies significant advantages in both training efficiency and generated image quality and diversity. See more
details in Sec. .

sets (Deng et al. 2009; Yu et al. 2015). It is, however, costly
and difficult to collect training data in some scenarios, e.g.,
medical diagnosis, industrial defects. Generative models,
such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma
and Welling 2013), have been expected to augment the training dataset, but all previous and current state-of-the-art models like DCGAN (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2016), BigGAN (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) and StyleGAN
(Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020), face the
same chicken-and-egg problem, which means that training
generative models also requires a lot of data. As a new
research direction that fully exploits the internal statistics
of natural signals by deep learning, deep internal learning

Introduction
The ability of modern deep learning to fulfill computer vision tasks is closely related to the building of large training
* Corresponding author

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was conducted when Zicheng Zhang was doing internship at JD AI Research.

3408

