The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sample Average Approximation for Stochastic Optimization with Dependent
Data: Performance Guarantees and Tractability
Yafei Wang,1 Bo Pan,1 Wei Tu,2 Peng Liu,3 Bei Jiang,1 Chao Gao,4 Wei Lu,5
Shangling Jui,6 Linglong Kong1∗
1

University of Alberta, 2 Queen’s University, 3 University of Kent, 4 Huawei Canada Research Center,
5
Huawei Canada, 6 Huawei Kirin Solution
{yafei2, pan1, bei1, lkong}@ualberta.ca, wei.tu@queensu.ca, p.liu@kent.ac.uk, chao.gao4@huawei.com,
robin.luwei@hisilicon.com, jui.shangling@huawei.com
Abstract

original problem can be approximated by that of the surrogate problem. The main goal of this paper is to study the
properties of sample average approximation (SAA), a powerful approach to stochastic optimization that is considered
statistically and computationally “optimal” in settings where
observations are independent. These claims have the following caveats in non-independent settings.

Sample average approximation (SAA), a popular method for
tractably solving stochastic optimization problems, enjoys
strong asymptotic performance guarantees in settings with independent training samples. However, these guarantees are
not known to hold generally with dependent samples, such as
in online learning with time series data or distributed computing with Markovian training samples. In this paper, we
show that SAA remains tractable when the distribution of
unknown parameters is only observable through dependent
instances and still enjoys asymptotic consistency and finite
sample guarantees. Specifically, we provide a rigorous probability error analysis to derive 1 - beta confidence bounds for
the out-of-sample performance of SAA estimators and show
that these estimators are asymptotically consistent. We then,
using monotone operator theory, study the performance of a
class of stochastic first-order algorithms trained on a dependent source of data. We show that approximation error for
these algorithms is bounded and concentrates around zero,
and establish deviation bounds for iterates when the underlying stochastic process is phi-mixing. The algorithms presented can be used to handle numerically inconvenient loss
functions such as the sum of a smooth and non-smooth function or of non-smooth functions with constraints. To illustrate the usefulness of our results, we present several stochastic versions of popular algorithms such as stochastic proximal gradient descent (S-PGD), stochastic relaxed Peaceman–
Rachford splitting algorithms (S-rPRS), and numerical experiment.

• Most existing statistical guarantees for SAA critically depend on the assumption that training samples are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, the
i.i.d. assumption can be difficult to justify or outright invalid in practice. It is thus important to examine the properties of SAA estimators when samples are known to be
correlated.
• For an optimization scheme to be useful, it should be
solved efficiently. Standard convex optimization techniques, while widely applicable, suffer performancewise in problems that are complex or highly structured,
and trained with non-i.i.d. samples. Consequently, practically useful methods should offer guarantees that remain
valid when the training samples display serial dependencies and be rich enough to handle numerically inconvenient problems.
In this paper, we consider applying SAA to the stochastic
optimization problem


Z
J ∗ = min EP [`(x; ξ)] =
`(x; ξ)P(dξ) ,
(1)
x∈X

Introduction

Ξ

where Ξ is a sample space with a probability distribution P
and X ∈ Rd is a convex, feasible parameter space. We assume throughout that `(x; ξ) is a closed, convex, and proper
function and that ξ ∈ Ξ denotes a sample instance. We let
x∗ denote the optimal solution to problem (1).
In most situations of practical interest, the distribution P
is not known or cannot be efficiently sampled, such as when
Ξ is a high-dimensional or combinational sample space (Johansson, Rabi, and Johansson 2007, 2010). This restriction removes information essential to solving problem (1)
exactly. We instead consider receiving samples {ξk }K
k=1
from a stochastic process P = P k indexed by time k,
where P converges to the stationary distribution P. This
is a natural relaxation of the assumption that training samples are i.i.d. following P. As an example, consider Ξ =

Stochastic optimization, a powerful modeling paradigm in
optimization under uncertainty, is ubiquitous in statistical
machine learning, engineering, and decision-making problems (Franklin 2005; Heyman and Sobel 2004; Fouskakis
and Draper 2002). Specifically, these problems seek to minimize an expected loss taken with respect to the distribution P of a random parameter ξ. However, more often than
not, this probability distribution is unknown and can only
be observed through a finite number of sample points. We
are thus forced to solve a surrogate optimization problem
constructed by the observed data: the optimal value of the
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3859

