The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Light-Weight and Real-Time Line Segment Detection
Geonmo Gu* , Byungsoo Ko* , SeoungHyun Go, Sung-Hyun Lee, Jingeun Lee, Minchul Shin
NAVER/LINE Vision
{korgm403, kobiso62, powflash, shlee.mars, jglee0206, min.stellastra}@gmail.com

Abstract
Previous deep learning-based line segment detection (LSD)
suffers from the immense model size and high computational
cost for line prediction. This constrains them from real-time
inference on computationally restricted environments. In this
paper, we propose a real-time and light-weight line segment
detector for resource-constrained environments named Mobile LSD (M-LSD). We design an extremely efficient LSD
architecture by minimizing the backbone network and removing the typical multi-module process for line prediction
found in previous methods. To maintain competitive performance with a light-weight network, we present novel training schemes: Segments of Line segment (SoL) augmentation,
matching and geometric loss. SoL augmentation splits a line
segment into multiple subparts, which are used to provide
auxiliary line data during the training process. Moreover, the
matching and geometric loss allow a model to capture additional geometric cues. Compared with TP-LSD-Lite, previously the best real-time LSD method, our model (M-LSDtiny) achieves competitive performance with 2.5% of model
size and an increase of 130.5% in inference speed on GPU.
Furthermore, our model runs at 56.8 FPS and 48.6 FPS on
the latest Android and iPhone mobile devices, respectively.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first real-time deep
LSD available on mobile devices.

1

Figure 1: Comparison of M-LSD and existing LSD methods
on Wireframe dataset. Inference speed (FPS) is computed
on Tesla V100 GPU. Size and value of circles indicate the
number of model parameters (Millions). M-LSD achieves
competitive performance with the lightest model size and
the fastest inference speed. Details are in Table 2.
ing the best accuracy and resource-efficiency trade-offs to
achieve real-time inference.
With the advent of deep neural networks, deep learningbased LSD architectures have adopted models to learn various geometric cues of line segments and have proved to
show improvements in performance. As described in Figure 2, we have summarized multiple strategies that use deep
learning models for LSD. The top-down strategy (Xue et al.
2019a) first detects regions of line segment with attraction
field maps and then squeezes these regions into line segments to make predictions. In contrast, the bottom-up strategy first detects junctions, then arranges them into line segments, and lastly verifies the line segments by using an extra
classifier (Zhou, Qi, and Ma 2019; Xue et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2019) or a merging algorithm (Huang and Gao 2019;
Huang et al. 2018). Recently, (Huang et al. 2020) proposes
Tri-Points (TP) representation for a simpler process of line
prediction without the time-consuming steps of line proposal and verification.
Although previous efforts of using deep networks have
made remarkable achievements, real-time inference for LSD
on resource-constraint platforms still remains limited. There
have been attempts to present real-time LSD (Huang et al.

Introduction

Line segments and junctions are crucial visual features in
low-level vision, which provide fundamental information to
the higher level vision tasks, such as pose estimation (Přibyl,
Zemčı́k, and Čadı́k 2017; Xu et al. 2016), structure from
motion (Bartoli and Sturm 2005; Micusik and Wildenauer
2017), 3D reconstruction (Denis, Elder, and Estrada 2008;
Faugeras et al. 1992), image matching (Xue et al. 2017),
wireframe to image translation (Xue, Zhou, and Huang
2019) and image rectification (Xue et al. 2019b). Moreover, the growing demand for performing such vision tasks
on resource constraint platforms, like mobile or embedded
devices, has made real-time line segment detection (LSD)
an essential but challenging task. The difficulty arises from
the limited computational power and model size when find* Authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

726

