The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Semantic Self-Segmentation for Abstractive Summarization of Long Documents in
Low-Resource Regimes
Gianluca Moro 1,2 , Luca Ragazzi 1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Cesena Campus
Via dell’Università 50, I-47522 Cesena, Italy
2
CNIT
{gianluca.moro, l.ragazzi}@unibo.it
Abstract

One of the domains most affected by long documents and
low-resource settings of labeled data is the legal one, where
reading and evaluating legal cases are labor-intensive and
time-consuming tasks for legal experts (Kornilova and Eidelman 2019). Legal texts are generally long with a complex and articulated structure, characterized by longer sentences than other domains that make up long reasonings,
understandable only after reading the entire textual details
(Kanapala, Pal, and Pamula 2019).
Input truncation, unavoidable for long sequences with a
low-memory GPU, ignores valuable information, destroying
the summary semantic, which is a critical problem also in
multi-document summarization (Moro et al. 2022). To address this problem, particularly relevant in the legal domain,
we propose a new approach for long document summarization: Semantic Self-Segmentation (Se3).1 Se3 creates highcorrelated source-target pairs by segmenting long texts into
semantically coherent chunks with lengths modulated to fit
into the GPU memory, and pairing them with the most similar summary part, enabling transformers to process documents without truncation. This approach works as a data
augmentation strategy to cope with the lack of labeled instances, usually addressed with transfer learning methods
(Domeniconi et al. 2014b,c, 2015a). As far as we know, this
is the first study on text summarization with limited GPU
memories and labeled data scarcity.
Given the complexity of summarizing long legal documents, we experiment on two legal datasets of different domain and content sizes, using Se3 combined with BART
(Lewis et al. 2020) and LED (Beltagy, Peters, and Cohan
2020) on a single Titan Xp GPU of 12GB memory. Results
show that Se3 significantly improves the performance of abstractive summarization transformers, even with just a few
dozens of labeled training data. Moreover, to analyze where
the performance gain comes from, we perform ablation studies and prove the importance of each module of Se3. Finally,
we analyze the accuracy of the predicted summaries.
Our contributions are: i) the Se3 method to address long
document summarization in low-resource regimes; ii) the research advancement on abstractive summarization in legal
domains, whose documents are more challenging to analyze,
achieving new state-of-the-art results on two datasets.

The quadratic memory complexity of transformers prevents
long document summarization in low computational resource
scenarios. State-of-the-art models need to apply input truncation, thus discarding and ignoring potential summary-relevant
contents, leading to a performance drop. Furthermore, this
loss is generally destructive for semantic text analytics in
high-impact domains such as the legal one. In this paper,
we propose a novel semantic self-segmentation (Se3) approach for long document summarization to address the critical problems of low-resource regimes, namely to process inputs longer than the GPU memory capacity and produce accurate summaries despite the availability of only a few dozens
of training instances. Se3 segments a long input into semantically coherent chunks, allowing transformers to summarize
very long documents without truncation by summarizing each
chunk and concatenating the results. Experimental outcomes
show the approach significantly improves the performance
of abstractive summarization transformers, even with just a
dozen of labeled data, achieving new state-of-the-art results
on two legal datasets of different domains and contents. Finally, we report ablation studies to evaluate each contribution
of the components of our method to the performance gain.

Introduction
State-of-the-art solutions on abstractive summarization are
built upon the transformer model (Vaswani et al. 2017) with
quadratic time and memory complexities in the input size
(Lewis et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020a; Raffel et al. 2020;
Qi et al. 2020). Such models have been trained with short
inputs, so they struggle to model long sequences accurately
in downstream tasks. Thus, efficient transformers with linear complexity have been proposed to process longer sequences by reducing the attention mechanism calculation
(Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya 2020; Beltagy, Peters, and
Cohan 2020; Zaheer et al. 2020; Huang et al. 2021; Choromanski et al. 2021; Xiong et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2021). However, training large transformers requires high-resource settings (Sharir, Peleg, and Shoham 2020; Ahmed and Wahed
2020), leaving long document summarization an open research problem in low-resource regimes with limited GPU
memories and only dozens of labeled training instances.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11085

Solution website: https://disi-unibo-nlp.github.io/projects/se3

