The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hybrid Autoregressive Inference for Scalable Multi-Hop Explanation
Regeneration
Marco Valentino1,2 , Mokanarangan Thayaparan1,2 ,
Deborah Ferreira1 , André Freitas1,2
1

University of Manchester, United Kingdom
2
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
marco.valentino@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract

edge for the construction of long explanatory reasoning
chains, making multi-hop inference particularly challenging
for existing models (Clark et al. 2018; Khot et al. 2019).
Moreover, since the structure of scientific explanations cannot be derived from the decomposition of the questions,
the task requires the encoding of complex abstraction and
grounding mechanisms for the identification of relevant explanatory knowledge (Valentino, Thayaparan, and Freitas
2021; Thayaparan, Valentino, and Freitas 2021).
To tackle these challenges, existing neural approaches
leverage the power of the self-attention mechanism in Transformers (Devlin et al. 2019; Vaswani et al. 2017), training
sequence classification models (i.e., cross-encoders) on annotated explanations to compose relevant explanatory chains
(Cartuyvels, Spinks, and Moens 2020; Das et al. 2019;
Chia, Witteveen, and Andrews 2019; Banerjee 2019). While
Transformers achieve state-of-the-art performance, crossencoders make multi-hop inference intrinsically inefficient
and not scalable to large corpora. The cross-encoder architecture, in fact, does not allow for the construction of dense
indexes to cache the encoded explanatory sentences, resulting in prohibitively slow inference time for real-world applications (Humeau et al. 2019).
In this work, we are interested in developing new mechanisms to enable scientific explanation regeneration at scale,
optimising, at the same time, quality of the explanations
and inference time. To this end, we focus our attention on
bi-encoders (or siamese networks) (Reimers and Gurevych
2019), which allow for efficient inference via Maximum
Inner Product Search (MIPS) (Johnson, Douze, and Jégou
2019). Given the complexity of multi-hop reasoning in the
scientific domain, bi-encoders are expected to suffer from a
drastic drop in performance since the self-attention mechanism cannot be leveraged to learn meaningful compositions
of explanatory chains. However, we hypothesise that the orchestration of latent and explicit patterns emerging in natural
language explanations can improve the quality of the inference while preserving the scalability intrinsic in bi-encoders.
To validate this hypothesis, we present SCAR (for
Scalable Autoregressive Inference), a hybrid architecture
that combines a Transformer-based bi-encoder with a sparse
model of explanatory power, designed to capture explicit inference patterns in corpora of scientific explanations. Specifically, SCAR integrates sparse and dense encoders to define

Regenerating natural language explanations in the scientific
domain has been proposed as a benchmark to evaluate complex multi-hop and explainable inference. In this context,
large language models can achieve state-of-the-art performance when employed as cross-encoder architectures and
fine-tuned on human-annotated explanations. However, while
much attention has been devoted to the quality of the explanations, the problem of performing inference efficiently
is largely under studied. Cross-encoders, in fact, are intrinsically not scalable, possessing limited applicability to realworld scenarios that require inference on massive facts banks.
To enable complex multi-hop reasoning at scale, this paper
focuses on bi-encoder architectures, investigating the problem of scientific explanation regeneration at the intersection
of dense and sparse models. Specifically, we present SCAR
(for Scalable Autoregressive Inference), a hybrid framework
that iteratively combines a Transformer-based bi-encoder
with a sparse model of explanatory power, designed to leverage explicit inference patterns in the explanations. Our experiments demonstrate that the hybrid framework significantly
outperforms previous sparse models, achieving performance
comparable with that of state-of-the-art cross-encoders while
being ≈ 50 times faster and scalable to corpora of millions of
facts. Further analyses on semantic drift and multi-hop question answering reveal that the proposed hybridisation boosts
the quality of the most challenging explanations, contributing
to improved performance on downstream inference tasks.

Introduction
Explanation regeneration is the task of retrieving and combining two or more facts from an external knowledge source
to reconstruct the evidence supporting a certain natural language hypothesis (Xie et al. 2020; Jansen et al. 2018). As
such, this task represents a crucial intermediate step for
the development and evaluation of explainable Natural Language Inference (NLI) models (Wiegreffe and Marasović
2021; Thayaparan, Valentino, and Freitas 2020). In particular, explanation regeneration on science questions has been
proposed as a benchmark for complex multi-hop and explainable inference (Jansen and Ustalov 2019; Jansen et al.
2016). Scientific explanations, in fact, require the articulation and integration of commonsense and scientific knowlCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11403

