The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Knowledge Bridging for Empathetic Dialogue Generation
Qintong Li1,3 , Piji Li2 * , Zhaochun Ren1 * , Pengjie Ren1 , Zhumin Chen1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
qtleo@outlook.com, {zhaochun.ren, chenzhumin}@sdu.edu.cn, lipiji.pz@gmail.com, jay.ren@outlook.com

Abstract

illness(0.78)

Lack of external knowledge makes empathetic dialogue systems difficult to perceive implicit emotions and learn emotional interactions from limited dialogue history. To address
the above problems, we propose to leverage external knowledge, including commonsense knowledge and emotional lexical knowledge, to explicitly understand and express emotions
in empathetic dialogue generation. We first enrich the dialogue
history by jointly interacting with external knowledge and construct an emotional context graph. Then we learn emotional
context representations from the knowledge-enriched emotional context graph and distill emotional signals, which are
the prerequisites to predicate emotions expressed in responses.
Finally, to generate the empathetic response, we propose an
emotional cross-attention mechanism to learn the emotional
dependencies from the emotional context graph. Extensive
experiments conducted on a benchmark dataset verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method. In addition, we find
the performance of our method can be further improved by
integrating with a pre-trained model that works orthogonally.

Speaker: I stared to cough blood 3 days ago
and I fear it must be cancer.

hospital(0.42)

terrified(0.89) medicine(0.32)
bad(0.69)
hope(0.64) damaging(0.83)

Listener: That’s horrible! It could be other things
instead. I hope you go to the doctor.
Figure 1: An example of empathetic dialogues with external
knowledge from E MPATHETIC D IALOGUES (Rashkin et al.
2019). Emotion-related words in the dialogue are highlighted
in red color, whereas emotion-related concepts are marked
in blue. Numbers in parentheses denote emotional intensity
values.

Introduction
Studies on social psychology suggest that empathy is a crucial
factor towards a more humanized dialogue system (Zech and
Rimé 2005). Although plenty of researchers have attempted
to control the emotional content of response either through
an explicitly assigned emotional label (Zhou and Wang 2018;
Zhou et al. 2018a; Wang and Wan 2018; Song et al. 2019;
Shen and Feng 2020) or through a general term to encourage
higher levels of affect (Asghar et al. 2018), it is still challenging for chatbots to conduct empathetic dialogues without the
explicit emotion labels (empathetic dialogue problem) (Zhou
et al. 2018a; Rashkin et al. 2019). Several recent works have
been proposed to address the empathetic dialogue problem
based on multi-task learning (Rashkin et al. 2018, 2019; Wei
et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020), the mixture of experts (Lin
et al. 2019), emotion mimicry (Majumder et al. 2020), or
multi-resolution user feedback (Li et al. 2020).
However, an unheeded deep concern is that humans usually rely on experience and external knowledge to acknowledge and express implicit emotions (Zhong, Wang, and Miao
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10993

2019b). Figure 1 shows a real-world example of empathetic
dialogues. If we use non-stopwords of speaker’s input as
queries to acquire knowledge via external knowledge, we can
obtain various emotion-related concepts along with their emotional intensity values, which play a crucial role in emotion
understanding for empathetic dialogue systems.
To exploit this phenomenon more concretely, we quantitatively investigate effects of external knowledge in understanding emotions on an empathetic dialogue corpus, i.e.,
E MPATHETIC D IALOGUES (Rashkin et al. 2019). Figure 2(a)
depicts that the response has almost NO non-stopword overlapping (0.5% of dialogue samples) with the dialogue history.
This phenomenon implies that humans need to infer more
external knowledge to conduct empathetic dialogues. By contrast, if we incorporate external knowledge (i.e., emotionrelated concepts) into the system, we observe that for most
dialogue samples (80.1%) chatbots can directly obtain hints
from the knowledge paths started by the non-stop tokens of
the dialogue history (shown in Figure 2(b)). Hence, external
knowledge is essential in acquiring useful emotional knowledge and improving the performance of empathetic dialogue
generation. However, emotion perception and representation
from external knowledge is still problematic for empathetic
dialogue generation.
During the investigations, we observe another phenomenon
that emotional dependency and emotional inertia commonly

