The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Training-Free Uncertainty Estimation for
Dense Regression: Sensitivity as a Surrogate
Lu Mi1 , Hao Wang2 , Yonglong Tian1 , Hao He1 , Nir N Shavit1
1

2

MIT CSAIL
Rutgers University
lumi@mit.edu

Abstract

possible outputs (Ilg et al. 2018; Yang, Hu, and Ramanan
2019). Others utilize the randomness induced during training and inference (e.g., dropout and ensembling) to obtain
an uncertainty estimation (Gal and Ghahramani 2016; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Kendall, Badrinarayanan, and Cipolla 2015).
All methods above require specific designs or a special
training pipeline in order to involve the uncertainty estimation during training. Unfortunately, there are many cases
where such premeditated designs or pipelines cannot be implemented. For example, if one wants to study the uncertainty of trained models released online, retraining is not
always an option, especially when only a black-box model
is provided or the training data is not available. Moreover,
most models are deterministic and do not have stochasticity. A straightforward solution is to add dropout layers into
proper locations and finetune the model (Gal and Ghahramani 2016). However, this is impractical for many stateof-the-art and published models, especially those trained on
large datasets (e.g. ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009)) with a vast
amount of industrial computing resources. In addition, models that have already been distilled, pruned, or binarized fall
short of fitting re-training (Han, Mao, and Dally 2015; Hou,
Yao, and Kwok 2016).
To fill this gap, we identify the problem of training-free
uncertainty estimation: how to obtain an uncertainty estimation of any given model without re-designing, re-training,
or fine-tuning it. We focus on two scenarios: black-box uncertainty estimation (BBUE), where one has access to the
model only as a black box, and gray-box uncertainty estimation (GBUE), where one has access to intermediate-layer
neurons of the model (but not the parameters). Our work is
a systematic exploration of this unrecognized yet important
problem.
We propose a set of simple and scalable training-free
methods to analyze the variance of the output from a trained
network, shown in Fig. 1. Our main idea is to add a tolerable
perturbation into inputs or feature maps during inference and
use the variance of the output as a surrogate for uncertainty
estimation.
The first method, which we call infer-transformation, is
to apply a transformation that exploits the natural characteristics of a CNN – it is variant to input transformation
such as rotation (Cohen and Welling 2016). Transformations

Uncertainty estimation is an essential step in the evaluation
of the robustness for deep learning models in computer vision, especially when applied in risk-sensitive areas. However, most state-of-the-art deep learning models either fail
to obtain uncertainty estimation or need significant modification (e.g., formulating a proper Bayesian treatment) to obtain
it. Most previous methods are not able to take an arbitrary
model off the shelf and generate uncertainty estimation without retraining or redesigning it. To address this gap, we perform a systematic exploration into training-free uncertainty
estimation for dense regression, an unrecognized yet important problem, and provide a theoretical construction justifying such estimations. We propose three simple and scalable
methods to analyze the variance of outputs from a trained
network under tolerable perturbations: infer-transformation,
infer-noise, and infer-dropout. They operate solely during the
inference, without the need to re-train, re-design, or fine-tune
the models, as typically required by state-of-the-art uncertainty estimation methods. Surprisingly, even without involving such perturbations in training, our methods produce comparable or even better uncertainty estimation when compared
to training-required state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/lumi9587/train-free-uncertainty.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable or even
super-human performance in many tasks (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2015; Silver et al.
2016). While most previous work in the field has focused on
improving accuracy in various tasks, in several risk-sensitive
areas such as autonomous driving (Chen et al. 2015) and
healthcare (Zhang et al. 2019), reliability and robustness are
arguably more important and interesting than accuracy.
Recently, several novel approaches have been proposed
to take into account an estimation of uncertainty during
training and inference (Huang et al. 2018). Some use probabilistic formulations for neural networks (Graves 2011;
Hernández-Lobato and Adams 2015; Wang, Shi, and Yeung 2016; Shekhovtsov and Flach 2018) and model the distribution over the parameters (weights) and/or the neurons.
Such formulations naturally produce distributions over the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10042

