The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Experimental Design Approach for Regret Minimization in Logistic Bandits
Blake Mason1 , Kwang-Sung Jun2 , and Lalit Jain3
1
Rice University
University of Arizona
3
University of Washington
bm63@rice.edu, kjun@cs.arizona.edu, lalitj@wu.edu
2

Abstract

Many real-world applications, however, have binary rewards and are not captured by the additive noise setting.
For example, the seminal work by Li et al. (2010) for contextual bandits considers a binary reward of click/no-click,
yet they apply bandit algorithms based on linear models –
this is comparable to applying linear regressions to a binary classification task. For binary rewards, the logistic linear model is natural when rewards are assumed to follow
yt ∼ Bernoulli(µ(x⊺t θ∗ )) where µ(z) = 1/(1 + exp(−z))
is the logistic function. While the link function µ can be
changed, the logistic function is worth more attention for
two reasons: (i) it is extensively used in practice, even in
state-of-the-art deep architectures whose last layer is the
negative log likelihood of the logistic linear model, and (ii) if
we were to use a trained network to compute the input to the
last layer and take it as the feature vector for bandit tasks,
the features are likely optimized to excel with the logistic
model.

In this work we consider the problem of regret minimization
for logistic bandits. The main challenge of logistic bandits is
reducing the dependence on a potentially large problem dependent constant κ that can at worst scale exponentially with
the norm of the unknown parameter θ∗ . Prior works have
applied self-concordance of the logistic function to remove
this worst-case
√ dependence providing regret guarantees like
O(d log2 (κ) µ̇T log(∣X ∣)) where d is the dimensionality,
T is the time horizon, and µ̇ is the variance of the best-arm.
This work improves upon this bound in the fixed arm setting
by employing an experimental
design procedure that achieves
√
a minimax regret of O( dµ̇T log(∣X ∣)). Our regret bound in
fact takes a tighter instance (i.e., gap) dependent regret bound
for the first time in logistic bandits. We also propose a new
warmup sampling algorithm that can dramatically reduce the
lower order term in the regret in general and prove that it can
replace the lower order term dependency on κ to log2 (κ) for
some instances. Finally, we discuss the impact of the bias of
the MLE on the logistic bandit problem, providing an example where d2 lower order regret (cf., it is d for linear bandits)
may not be improved as long as the MLE is used and how
bias-corrected estimators may be used to make it closer to d.

1

The first work on logistic bandits due√to Filippi et al.
(2010) showed a regret bound of Õ(dκ T ) where κ =
max∥x∥2 ≤1 µ̇(x⊺ θ∗ )−1 and Õ ignores polylogarithmic factors for all variables except for κ. Since κ can be exponential in ∥θ∗ ∥2 , the key challenge in developing bandit algorithms in the logistic setting both theoretically and practically is to overcome this worst-case scaling. In the last few
years, there has been a flurry of activity on this problem
that exploits the self-concordance of the logistic loss with
the seminal work of Faury et al. (2020). Recently, Abeille,
Faury, and Calauzènes (2021) proposed a UCB style algorithm called OFULog, establishing
a regret bound with the
√
2
⊺
leading term of Õ(d log (κ) µ̇(x∗ θ∗ )T +κd2 ∧(d2 +∣X− ∣))
where X− ⊂ X is a set of detrimental arms. In the finite
armed contextual bandit setting, Jun et al. (2021) propose
an improved fixed design confidence interval and adapted
a SupLinRel style algorithm (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002) √
called SupLogistic to establish a regret scaling like Õ( dT ). SupLogistic achieves a better dependence on d and κ. However, it has a worse dependence with
µ̇(x⊺∗ θ∗ ) due to the changing arm set setting and makes a
strong assumptions of stochastic contexts and bounded minimum eigenvalues. The regret bound of OFULog is free of
these assumptions, but the leading term is suboptimal. We
discuss key related work throughout the paper and postpone

Introduction

Linear bandits, which have gained popularity since their success in online news recommendation (Li et al. 2010), solve
sequential decision problems under limited feedback when
each action (or arm) to be taken has a known feature vector
deemed to predict the reward. Specifically, at each time step
t, the learner chooses an arm xt ∈ Rd from an available pool
of arms X , and then receives a reward yt = x⊺t θ∗ + ηt , where
θ∗ is unknown and η is usually assumed to be zero-mean
subGaussian noise. The goal of the learner is to maximize
the total cumulative rewards over the time horizon T by judiciously balancing between efficiently learning θ∗ (exploration) and using the learned knowledge on θ∗ to accumulate
large rewards (exploitation). Since the pioneering studies
by Abe and Long (1999) and Auer (2002), there have been
significant developments in both theory (Dani, Hayes, and
Kakade 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori, Pal, and Szepesvari 2011;
Foster and Rakhlin 2020) and applications (Li et al. 2010;
Sawant et al. 2018; Teo et al. 2016).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7736

