The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fortunately, Discourse Markers Can Enhance Language Models for Sentiment
Analysis
Liat Ein-Dor* , Ilya Shnayderman∗ , Artem Spector∗ , Lena Dankin,
Ranit Aharonov† and Noam Slonim
IBM Research
{liate,ilyashn,artems,lenad,noams}@il.ibm.com

Abstract

ing point model for particular tasks of interest. For example,
continuing the pretraining on domain-specific data such as
finance or legal documents have proven beneficial to tasks in
these domains (Araci 2019; Chalkidis et al. 2020; Gururangan et al. 2020). Similarly, additional pretraining of BERT on
dialog data yields better results in target tasks related to dialogue application (Wu et al. 2020), and continual pretraining
of BERT on product reviews with sentiment-aware pretraining tasks led to improved performance in sentiment analysis
in this domain (Zhou et al. 2020). Another, more computationally demanding option is to pretrain the model from
scratch on self-supervised task(s) that aim to better reflect the
nature of the target tasks. For example, the pretraining tasks
of SpanBERT (Joshi et al. 2019) and PEGASUS (Zhang et al.
2020a) are designed to be closer in spirit to span-extraction
tasks as in question answering and to summarization tasks,
respectively, resulting in better performance in these target
tasks.

In recent years, pretrained language models have revolutionized the NLP world, while achieving state-of-the-art
performance in various downstream tasks. However, in
many cases, these models do not perform well when labeled data is scarce and the model is expected to perform
in the zero or few shot setting. Recently, several works
have shown that continual pretraining or performing a
second phase of pretraining (inter-training), which is
better aligned with the downstream task, can lead to improved results, especially in the scarce data setting. Here,
we propose to leverage sentiment-carrying discoursemarkers to generate large-scale weakly-labeled data,
which in turn can be used to adapt general-purpose language models to the task of sentiment classification. In
addition, we propose a new method for adapting sentiment classification models to new domains. This method
is based on automatic identification of domain-specific
sentiment-carrying discourse markers. Extensive experimental results show the value of our approach on various
benchmark datasets. Code, models and data are available
at https://github.com/ibm/tslm-discourse-markers.

Introduction
Large pretrained language models are reshaping the landscape of NLP. These models, recently referred to as foundation models (Bommasani et al. 2021), were originally
proposed with a two-step paradigm in mind. The model is
first pretrained at scale on broad data with a surrogate selfsupervised task; the knowledge gained by this pretraining is
then transferred and adapted via fine-tuning on – typically
small – labeled data, to a specific downstream task. Prominent examples include BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and GPT-3
(Brown et al. 2020). The practical value of this approach
is immense. The self-supervised pretraining requires no labeled data. The resulting model represents a single powerful
starting point that can be swiftly adapted to address a wide
range of target tasks with relatively little annotation effort,
via few-shot or even zero-shot learning (Brown et al. 2020).
Subsequent studies have shown that the original two-step
paradigm can be further refined to yield an even better start*

These authors equally contributed to this work.
Current affiliation: Pangea Therapeutic, ranitah1@gmail.com
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

10608

A related path, which is further explored in this work, is to
add an intermediate training step, referred to as inter-training,
which is somewhat aligned with a specific target task of interest. There are several aspects by which these inter-training
approaches differ. One main aspect is the similarity between
the intermediate task and the target task which ranges from
full alignment using weakly or readily available labeled data
(Meng et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020; Huber et al. 2021) to
transfer learning using labeled data on a similar yet different
task (Pruksachatkun et al. 2020), and further including works
which perform transfer learning with no labeled data, e.g.,
Shnarch et al. (2021) apply unsupervised text clustering and
then inter-train a model to predict the cluster label. Among
the approaches that rely on fully aligned intermediate tasks,
some works leverage weak labels that are inherent to the original text, like the explicit mention of the class name (Meng
et al. 2020) or the presence of the token ’that’ in a sentence
(Levy et al. 2018); while others rely on non-textual signals
like human-added numeric review ratings (Zhou et al. 2020)
or sentiment-bearing emojis (LeCompte and Chen 2017).
Weak labels that are inherent to the text usually have limited coverage and involve bias towards specific keywords or
patterns that define the weak signal. While the non-textual
signals usually do not suffer from these issues, since they are
external to the text, they are often specific to task and domain
and therefore are less directly applicable to new tasks and/or

