The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Team Correlated Equilibria in Zero-Sum Extensive-Form Games
via Tree Decompositions
Brian Hu Zhang,1 Tuomas Sandholm1,2,3,4
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Strategic Machine, Inc.
3
Strategy Robot, Inc.
4
Optimized Markets, Inc.
{bhzhang, sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

two-player zero-sum games with perfect recall—that is, two
players who never forget any information during the game
face off in an adversarial manner. While this model is broad
enough to encompass games such as poker, it breaks in the
setting of team games, in which two teams of players face off
against each other. While members of the team have perfect
recall, the team as a whole may not, because different members of the team may know different pieces of information.
Situations that fall into this category include recreational
games such as contract bridge, Hanabi (in which there is
no adversary), collusion in poker, and all sorts of real-world
scenarios in which communication is limited. In this paper,
we focus on such games.
We will assume that team members can coordinate before
the game begins, including generating randomness that is
shared within the team but hidden from the opposing team;
in other words, they can correlate their strategies. Once the
game begins, they can only exchange information by playing
actions within the game. An alternative way of interpreting
the setting is to consider zero-sum games with imperfect recall (e.g., Kaneko and Kline 1995), that is, games in which
players may forget information that they once knew. In this
interpretation, each team is represented by a single player
whose “memory” is continuously refreshed to that of the acting team member. The two interpretations are equivalent.
In general, computing equilibria in such games is NPhard (Chu and Halpern 2001). However, some subfamilies
of games are efficiently solvable. For example, if both teams
have common external information, also known as A-loss
recall (Kaneko and Kline 1995) (in which all uncommon
knowledge of the team can be attributed to team members
not knowing about actions taken by other team members), or
both teams have at most two players and the interaction between team members is triangle-free (Farina and Sandholm
2020) (which roughly means that the team’s strategy tree
can be re-ordered into a strategically equivalent tree obeying A-loss recall), then each player’s strategy space can be
described as the projection of a polytope with polynomially
many constraints in the size of the game, and hence the game
can be solved in polynomial time.
Practical algorithms for solving medium-sized instances
of these games (Celli and Gatti 2018; Farina et al. 2018;
Zhang, An, and Černỳ 2021; Farina et al. 2021) primarily
focused on the case in which there is a team of players play-

Despite the many recent practical and theoretical breakthroughs in computational game theory, equilibrium finding
in extensive-form team games remains a significant challenge. While NP-hard in the worst case, there are provably
efficient algorithms for certain families of team game. In particular, if the game has common external information, also
known as A-loss recall—informally, actions played by nonteam members (i.e., the opposing team or nature) are either
unknown to the entire team, or common knowledge within
the team—then polynomial-time algorithms exist. In this paper, we devise a completely new algorithm for solving team
games. It uses a tree decomposition of the constraint system
representing each team’s strategy to reduce the number and
degree of constraints required for correctness (tightness of
the mathematical program). Our approach has the bags of the
tree decomposition correspond to team-public states—that is,
minimal sets of nodes (that is, states of the team) such that,
upon reaching the set, it is common knowledge among the
players on the team that the set has been reached. Our algorithm reduces the problem of solving team games to a linear program with at most O(N W w+1 ) nonzero entries in the
constraint matrix, where N is the size of the game tree, w is a
parameter that depends on the amount of uncommon external
information, and W is the treewidth of the tree decomposition. In public-action games, our program size is bounded by
the tighter 2O(nt) N for teams of n players with t types each.
Our algorithm is based on a new way to write a custom, concise tree decomposition, and its fast run time does not assume
that the decomposition has small treewidth. Since our algorithm describes the polytope of correlated strategies directly,
we get equilibrium finding in correlated strategies for free—
instead of, say, having to run a double oracle algorithm. We
show via experiments on a standard suite of games that our
algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on all benchmark game classes except one. We also present, to our knowledge, the first experiments for this setting where both teams
have more than one member.

1

Introduction

Computational game solving in imperfect-information
games has led to many recent superhuman breakthroughs
in AI (e.g., Bowling et al. 2015; Brown and Sandholm
2018, 2019). Most of the literature on this topic focuses on
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5252

