The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SpikeConverter: An Efficient Conversion Framework Zipping the Gap between
Artificial Neural Networks and Spiking Neural Networks
Fangxin Liu1,2 , Wenbo Zhao1,2 * , Yongbiao Chen1 , Zongwu Wang1 , Li Jiang1,2,3†
1. Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2. Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
3. MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liufangxin, zhaowenbo, ljiang cs}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Recently, extensive efforts have been attracted by spiking
neural networks (SNNs) due to their low-power and biologically plausible nature. Different from ANNs, SNNs transmit information with spike trains, which extends in the additional time dimension and contains only sparse binary spike
events. This leads to more power-efficient computation by
substituting expensive multiplication with addition in specialized neuromorphic hardware (Lee et al. 2021).
One way to obtain the parameters in SNN is through
SNN training. Divided by the availability of training labels, SNN training methods can be categorized into unsupervised and supervised training. Unsupervised methods utilize spike-timing-dependent plasticity rule (STDP), but they
are limited to the shallow SNN structure with a few layers and yield much lower accuracy than ANNs on complex
datasets (e.g., only 66.23% on CIFAR-10 (Srinivasan and
Roy 2019)). On the other hand, supervised methods represented by error backpropagation with surrogate functions
can achieve better performance than the unsupervised ones,
but they still can not provide compatible results with ANNs
in large-scale datasets (Liu et al. 2021a).
Another way to obtain parameters is by directly adapting
the parameters of ANNs into SNNs, known as ANN-SNN
conversion methods (Han and Roy 2020; Han, Srinivasan,
and Roy 2020; Woźniak et al. 2020; Deng and Gu 2021; Li,
Zeng, and Zhao 2021). These methods are devoted to finding an equivalent representation between activation values
in ANN and a certain property of the spike trains. Its network structure is usually the same as the source ANN, and
network parameters are transformed from source ANNs by
simple operations such as scaling. The conversion methods
can utilize state-of-the-art methods for training ANN to construct ANN-converted SNNs and achieve competitive accuracy and the widest applicability, even on large datasets such
as ImageNet (Sengupta et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2021).
However, existing ANN-converted SNN methods are still
far from applicable due to the following reasons. 1) Converted SNN still suffers from accuracy drop compared
to the source ANN. ANN-converted SNNs typically exploit the firing rate of the spike train to serve as the equivalence of the activation value. However, the firing rate has far
worse resolution than the activation values in ANN, leading
to accuracy drop. 2) The converted SNNs need an enormous number of time steps for better information rep-

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have recently attracted
enormous research interest since their event-driven and braininspired structure enables low-power computation. In image recognition tasks, the best results achieved by SNN so
far utilize ANN-SNN conversion methods that replace activation functions in artificial neural networks (ANNs) with
integrate-and-fire neurons. Compared to source ANNs, converted SNNs usually suffer from accuracy loss and require
a considerable number of time steps to achieve competitive
accuracy. We find that the performance degradation of converted SNN stems from the fact that the information capacity
of spike trains in transferred networks is smaller than that of
activation values in source ANN, resulting in less information
being passed during SNN inference.
To better correlate ANN and SNN for better performance,
we propose a conversion framework to mitigate the gap between the activation value of source ANN and the generated spike train of target SNN. The conversion framework
originates from exploring an identical relation in the conversion and exploits temporal separation scheme and novel neuron model for the relation to hold. We demonstrate almost
lossless ANN-SNN conversion using SpikeConverter for a
wide variety of networks on challenging datasets including
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. Our results also show
that SpikeConverter achieves the abovementioned accuracy
across different network architectures and datasets using 32X
- 512X fewer inference time-steps than state-of-the-art ANNSNN conversion methods.

Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have achieved phenomenal success in multiple domains (Srinivasan and Roy 2019;
Deng et al. 2020). However, rapid evolution of this field
shows a momentum of dramatic growth in computation.
State-of-the-art ANN models with billions of parameters
consume such a huge amount of computation that renders
performing on-device inference challenging (Brown et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2021b). Such situation stimulates the demand for deploying more power-efficient neural networks
in real-world applications (Rathi et al. 2021).
* Co-primary author
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1692

