The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Action Translator for Meta
Reinforcement Learning on Sparse-Reward Tasks
Yijie Guo1 , Qiucheng Wu1 , Honglak Lee1,2
1

University of Michigan, 2 LG AI Research
guoyijie@umich.edu, wuqiuche@umich.edu

Learned Policy

Meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) aims to learn a policy solving a set of training tasks simultaneously and quickly
adapting to new tasks. It requires massive amounts of data
drawn from training tasks to infer the common structure
shared among tasks. Without heavy reward engineering, the
sparse rewards in long-horizon tasks exacerbate the problem
of sample efficiency in meta-RL. Another challenge in metaRL is the discrepancy of difficulty level among tasks, which
might cause one easy task dominating learning of the shared
policy and thus preclude policy adaptation to new tasks. This
work introduces a novel objective function to learn an action
translator among training tasks. We theoretically verify that
the value of the transferred policy with the action translator
can be close to the value of the source policy and our objective
function (approximately) upper bounds the value difference.
We propose to combine the action translator with contextbased meta-RL algorithms for better data collection and more
efficient exploration during meta-training. Our approach empirically improves the sample efficiency and performance of
meta-RL algorithms on sparse-reward tasks.

1

Select better
Policy

=

Abstract

Source
Policy
Action
Translator

Transferred
Policy
Source Tasks

Target Tasks

Figure 1: Illustration of our policy transfer. Size of arrows
represents avg. episode reward of learned or transferred policy on target tasks. Different colors indicate different tasks.

horizons with sparse rewards. In these tasks, the scarcity of
positive rewards exacerbates the issue of sample efficiency,
which plagues meta-RL algorithms and makes exploration
difficult due to a lack of guidance signals.
Intuitively, we hope that solving one task facilitates learning of other related tasks since the training tasks share a
common structure. However, it is often not the case in practice (Rusu et al. 2015; Parisotto, Ba, and Salakhutdinov
2015). Previous works (Teh et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2020a)
point out that detrimental gradient interference might cause
an imbalance in policy learning on multiple tasks. Policy distillation (Teh et al. 2017) and gradient projection (Yu et al.
2020a) are developed in meta-RL algorithms to alleviate this
issue. However, this issue might become more severe in the
sparse-reward setting because it is hard to explore each task
to obtain meaningful gradient signals for policy updates.
Good performance in one task does not automatically help
exploration on the other tasks since the agent lacks positive
rewards on the other tasks to learn from.
In this work, we aim to fully exploit the highly-rewarding
transitions occasionally discovered by the agent in the exploration. The good experiences in one task should not only
improve the policy on this task but also benefit the policy on
other tasks to drive deeper exploration. Specifically, once the
agent learns from the successful trajectories in one training
task, we transfer the good policy in this task to other tasks to

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods achieved remarkable success in solving complex tasks (Mnih et al.
2015; Silver et al. 2016; Schulman et al. 2017). While
conventional DRL methods learn an individual policy for
each task, meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) algorithms (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Duan et al. 2016;
Mishra et al. 2017) learn the shared structure across a distribution of tasks so that the agent can quickly adapt to unseen related tasks in the test phase. Unlike most of the existing meta-RL approaches working on tasks with dense rewards, we instead focus on the sparse-reward training tasks,
which are more common in real-world scenarios without access to carefully designed reward functions in the environments. Recent works in meta-RL propose off-policy algorithms (Rakelly et al. 2019; Fakoor et al. 2019) and modelbased algorithms (Nagabandi, Finn, and Levine 2018; Nagabandi et al. 2018) to improve the sample efficiency in metatraining procedures. However, it remains challenging to efficiently solve multiple tasks that require reasoning over long
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6792

