The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Amplitude Spectrum Transformation for
Open Compound Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Jogendra Nath Kundu1 * , Akshay R Kulkarni1 * , Suvaansh Bhambri1 * ,
Varun Jampani2 , Venkatesh Babu Radhakrishnan1
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
2
Google Research

Abstract

suitable problem setup, that aims to transfer the knowledge
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
In recent years, several unsupervised DA techniques for
semantic segmentation have emerged. Such as, techniques
inspired from adversarial alignment (Tsai et al. 2018), style
transfer (Hoffman et al. 2018), pseudo-label self-training
(Zou et al. 2019), etc. However, these methods assume the
target domain to be a single distribution. This assumption
is difficult to satisfy in practice, as test images may come
from mixed or continually changing or even unseen conditions. For example, data for self-driving applications may be
collected from different weather conditions (Sakaridis et al.
2018) or different time of day (Sakaridis et al. 2020) or different cities (Chen et al. 2017b). Towards a realistic DA
setting, Liu et al. (2020) introduced Open Compound DA
(OCDA) by incorporating mixed domains (compound) in the
target but without domain labels. Further, open domains are
available only for evaluation, representing unseen domains.
The general trend in OCDA (see Table 1) has been
to break down the complex problem into multiple easier
single-target DA problems and employ variants of existing unimodal DA approaches. To enable such a breakdown,
Chen et al. (2019) rely on unsupervised clustering to obtain
sub-target clusters. Post clustering, both DHA (Park et al.
2020) and MOCDA (Gong et al. 2021) embrace domainspecific learning. DHA employs separate discriminators and
MOCDA uses separate batch-norm parameters (for each
sub-target cluster), followed by complex adversarial alignment training for both. Though such domain-specific learning seems beneficial for compound domains, it hurts the generalization to open domains. To combat this generalization
issue, MOCDA proposes online model update on encountering the open domains. Note that, such extra updates impedes the deployment-friendliness. In this work, our prime
objective is to devise a simple and effective OCDA technique. To this end, we1 aim to eliminate the requirement of
a) adversarial alignment, b) sub-target clustering, c) incorporating domain-specific components, and d) online model
update (refer the last row of Table 1).
To this end, we uncover key insights while exploring
along the lines of disentangling domain-related and taskrelated cues at different layers of the segmentation archi-

Open compound domain adaptation (OCDA) has emerged as
a practical adaptation setting which considers a single labeled
source domain against a compound of multi-modal unlabeled
target data in order to generalize better on novel unseen domains. We hypothesize that an improved disentanglement of
domain-related and task-related factors of dense intermediate
layer features can greatly aid OCDA. Prior-arts attempt this
indirectly by employing adversarial domain discriminators on
the spatial CNN output. However, we find that latent features
derived from the Fourier-based amplitude spectrum of deep
CNN features hold a more tractable mapping with domain
discrimination. Motivated by this, we propose a novel feature space Amplitude Spectrum Transformation (AST). During adaptation, we employ the AST auto-encoder for two purposes. First, carefully mined source-target instance pairs undergo a simulation of cross-domain feature stylization (ASTSim) at a particular layer by altering the AST-latent. Second, AST operating at a later layer is tasked to normalize
(AST-Norm) the domain content by fixing its latent to a mean
prototype. Our simplified adaptation technique is not only
clustering-free but also free from complex adversarial alignment. We achieve leading performance against the prior arts
on the OCDA scene segmentation benchmarks.

Introduction
Deep learning has shown unprecedented success in the challenging semantic segmentation task (Long et al. 2015). In a
fully supervised setting (Chen et al. 2018), most approaches
operate under the assumption that the training and testing
data are drawn from the same input distribution. Though
these approaches work well on several benchmarks like
Cityscapes (Cordts et al. 2016), their poor generalization
to unseen datasets is often argued as the major shortcoming (Hoffman et al. 2016). Upon deployment in real-world
settings, they fail to replicate the benchmark performance.
This is attributed to the discrepancy in input distributions or
domain-shift (Torralba et al. 2011). A naive solution would
be to annotate the target domain samples. However, huge
cost of annotation and variety of distribution shifts that could
be encountered in future render this infeasible. Addressing
this, unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) has emerged as a
* equal contribution
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1220

Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/ast-ocdaseg

