The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sampling-Based Robust Control of Autonomous Systems
with Non-Gaussian Noise
Thom S. Badings1 , Alessandro Abate2 , Nils Jansen1 ,
David Parker3 , Hasan A. Poonawala4 , Marielle Stoelinga1,5
1

Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
3
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom
4
University of Kentucky, Kentucky, USA
5
University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands
thom.badings@ru.nl, aabate@cs.ox.ac.uk, n.jansen@science.ru.nl,
d.a.parker@cs.bham.ac.uk, hasan.poonawala@uky.edu, m.i.a.stoelinga@utwente.nl
2

Abstract

that the state of the UAV progresses safely, without entering
unsafe regions, to its goal (Åström and Murray 2010).
However, factors such as turbulence and wind gusts cause
uncertainty in the outcome of control inputs (Blackmore et al.
2010). We model such uncertainty as process noise, which is
an additive random variable (with possibly infinitely many
outcomes) in the dynamical system that affects the transition
of the state. Controllers for autonomous systems that operate
in safety-critical settings must account for such uncertainty.
A common assumption to achieve computational tractability of the problem is that the process noise follows a Gaussian
distribution (Park, Serpedin, and Qaraqe 2013), for example
in linear-quadratic-Gaussian control (Anderson and Moore
2007). However, in realistic problems, such as the UAV operating under turbulence, this assumption yields a poor approximation of the uncertainty (Blackmore et al. 2010). Distributions may even be unknown, meaning that one cannot derive
a set-bounded or stochastic representation of the noise. In this
case, it is generally hard or even impossible to derive hard
guarantees on the probability that a given controller ensures
a safe progression of the system’s state to the objective.
In this work, we do not require that the process noise
is known. Specifically, we provide probably approximately
correct (PAC) guarantees on the performance of a controller
for the reach-avoid problem, where the distribution of the
noise is unknown. As such, we solve the following problem:

Controllers for autonomous systems that operate in safetycritical settings must account for stochastic disturbances. Such
disturbances are often modeled as process noise, and common
assumptions are that the underlying distributions are known
and/or Gaussian. In practice, however, these assumptions may
be unrealistic and can lead to poor approximations of the true
noise distribution. We present a novel planning method that
does not rely on any explicit representation of the noise distributions. In particular, we address the problem of computing
a controller that provides probabilistic guarantees on safely
reaching a target. First, we abstract the continuous system
into a discrete-state model that captures noise by probabilistic
transitions between states. As a key contribution, we adapt
tools from the scenario approach to compute probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds on these transition probabilities,
based on a finite number of samples of the noise. We capture
these bounds in the transition probability intervals of a socalled interval Markov decision process (iMDP). This iMDP
is robust against uncertainty in the transition probabilities, and
the tightness of the probability intervals can be controlled
through the number of samples. We use state-of-the-art verification techniques to provide guarantees on the iMDP, and
compute a controller for which these guarantees carry over
to the autonomous system. Realistic benchmarks show the
practical applicability of our method, even when the iMDP
has millions of states or transitions.

1

Introduction
Given a linear dynamical system perturbed by additive
noise of unknown distribution, compute a controller under which, with high confidence, the probability to satisfy
a reach-avoid problem is above a given threshold value.

Consider a so-called reach-avoid problem for an unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV), where the goal is to reach a desirable
region within a given time horizon, while avoiding certain unsafe regions (Baier and Katoen 2008; Clarke, Emerson, and
Sistla 1986). A natural formal model for such an autonomous
system is a dynamical system. The state of the system reflects the position and velocity of the UAV, and the control
inputs reflect choices that may change the state over time (Kulakowski, Gardner, and Shearer 2007). The dynamical system
is linear if the state transition is linear in the current state and
control input. Our problem is to compute a controller, such

Finite-state abstraction. The fundamental concept of our
approach is to compute a finite-state abstraction of the dynamical system. We obtain such an abstract model from a
partition of the continuous state space into a set of disjoint
convex regions. Actions in this abstraction correspond to control inputs that induce transitions between these regions. Due
to the process noise, the outcome of an action is stochastic,
and every transition has a certain probability.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9669

