The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CoCoS: Enhancing Semi-supervised Learning on Graphs with Unlabeled Data
via Contrastive Context Sharing
Siyue Xie, Da Sun Handason Tam, Wing Cheong Lau
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xs019, tds019, wclau}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently become a
popular framework for semi-supervised learning on graphstructured data. However, typical GNN models heavily rely on labeled data in the learning process, while ignoring
or paying little attention to the data that are unlabeled but
available. To make full use of available data, we propose a
generic framework, Contrastive Context Sharing (CoCoS), to
enhance the learning capacity of GNNs for semi-supervised
tasks. By sharing the contextual information among nodes estimated to be in the same class, different nodes can be correlated even if they are unlabeled and remote from each other in
the graph. Models can therefore learn different combinations
of contextual patterns, which improves the robustness of node
representations. Additionally, motivated by recent advances
in self-supervised learning, we augment the context sharing
strategy by integrating with contrastive learning, which naturally correlates intra-class and inter-class data. Such operations utilize all available data for training and effectively improve a model’s learning capacity. CoCoS can be easily extended to a wide range of GNN-based models with little computational overheads. Extensive experiments show that CoCoS considerably enhances typical GNN models, especially
when labeled data are sparse in a graph, and achieves stateof-the-art or competitive results in real-world public datasets.

Figure 1: Visualization of the receptive field (in the Citeseer
dataset) of a 2-layer GNN model. Red dots are labeled nodes for training, green dots are nodes in the receptive field
of any labeled nodes, and blue dots are other unobserved nodes in the training stage. For visualization clarity, an edge
is eliminated if one of its end point’s degree is smaller than
10.

Introduction

be captured. Task-related patterns can then be extracted from
the context by supervising the learned representations of labeled nodes.
However, in many real-world cases, labelling is expensive
and labeled nodes are usually sparse in the graph. Nodes located in the receptive field of labeled nodes only account for
a small proportion of a graph. An example in the Citeseer
dataset is shown in Fig. 1. Following the general scheme of
GNNs, data are not well utilized since many unlabeled nodes hardly participate into the learning process. Although
we can build a GNN model with deeper layers to cover more
available nodes, the performance often degrades due to the
over-smoothing problem (Rong et al. 2019). This indicates
that simply stacking multiple GNN layers may not be effective to fully utilize those unlabeled data. On the other hand,
ignoring the unlabeled data may fail to capture some distinct or discriminative patterns of the graph, which results
in limited representation capacity of the model. Such observations inspire us to explore reasonable ways to learn from

As an effective tool for learning graph-related patterns,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely applied
to analyze graph-structured data in recent years. Representations learned through GNN can be used in diverse tasks
across different domains, such as traffic predictions (Li et al.
2017; Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2017), recommendations (Ying et al.
2018; Li et al. 2020), etc., which advances the development
of the corresponding applications.
In general, typical GNNs (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec
2017; Kipf and Welling 2016; Veličković et al. 2017) generate node representations by aggregating information from a
target node’s neighbors in each layer. By stacking multiple
layers, GNNs can extend the receptive field to observe more
nodes. Topological information of a target node’s context,
which refers to an instance’s neighborhood information (including node/ edge attributes and the graph topology), will
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4272

