The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

PMAL: Open Set Recognition via Robust Prototype Mining
Jing Lu1 * , Yunlu Xu1 * , Hao Li1 , Zhanzhan Cheng1,2† , Yi Niu1
1

Hikvision Research Institution, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{lujing6, xuyunlu, lihao50, chengzhanzhan, niuyi}@hikvision.com

Abstract
High quality sample

Open Set Recognition (OSR) has been an emerging topic.
Besides recognizing predefined classes, the system needs to
reject the unknowns. Prototype learning is a potential manner to handle the problem, as its ability to improve intra-class
compactness of representations is much needed in discrimination between the known and the unknowns. In this work,
we propose a novel Prototype Mining And Learning (PMAL)
framework. It has a prototype mining mechanism before the
phase of optimizing embedding space, explicitly considering two crucial properties, namely high-quality and diversity
of the prototype set. Concretely, a set of high-quality candidates are firstly extracted from training samples based on
data uncertainty learning, avoiding the interference from unexpected noise. Considering the multifarious appearance of
objects even in a single category, a diversity-based strategy
for prototype set filtering is proposed. Accordingly, the embedding space can be better optimized to discriminate therein
the predefined classes and between known and unknowns.
Extensive experiments verify the two good characteristics
(i.e., high-quality and diversity) embraced in prototype mining, and show the remarkable performance of the proposed
framework compared to state-of-the-arts.

Undesired
learned
prototypes

Low quality sample

Prototype

Redundancy

Multifarious
Apperance

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Two typical problems on implicitly learned prototypes. (a) Undesired learned prototypes arisen from lowquality samples. (b) Redundancy in similar prototypes and
lacks of diversity. The in-between ellipse shows the feature
distribution of an exemplary class ‘airplane’.

prototypes jointly from the raw data and predicts the categories by finding the nearest prototypes instead of the traditional SoftMax layer. (Chen et al. 2020) advanced the framework (Yang et al. 2020) by adversely using the prototypes
named reciprocal points to represent the outer embedding
space of each known class, and then limiting the embedding space of unknown class. The existing methods all conduct prototype learning and embedding optimization jointly,
regarding the prototypes as parameterized vectors, without
direct constraint on the procedure of obtaining prototypes.
Here we call them implicitly learned prototypes, and oppositely, if imposing direct guidance on the prototypes themselves, we denote the prototypes as explicitly learned ones.
All the above-mentioned methods belong to the former category, i.e., the implicit prototype-based methods. While they
inevitable encounter some problems, especially in complicated situations. Two typical problems are shown in Figure 1: (1) Undesired learned prototypes close to feature
space of low-quality1 samples. As in Figure 1(a), implicitly learned prototypes are mistakenly guided by the low-

Introduction
Classic image classification problem is commonly based on
the assumption of close set, i.e., categories appeared in testing set should all be covered by training set. However, in
real-world applications, samples of unseen classes may appear in testing phase, which will inevitably be misclassified
into the specific known classes. To break the limitations of
close set, Open Set Recognition (OSR) (Scheirer et al. 2013)
was proposed, which has two sub-goals: known class classification and unknown class detection.
Methods based on Prototype Learning (PL) obtained
promising performance (Yang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020)
recently. This group generates clearer boundaries between
the known and unknowns through learning more compact
intra-class feature representations using prototypes (on behalf of the discriminative features of each class). In detail,
(Yang et al. 2018) learns the CNN feature extractor and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Low quality can be caused by various noise, e.g., occlusion,
blur or background interference.

1872

