The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robustification of Online Graph Exploration Methods
Franziska Eberle,1 Alexander Lindermayr,2 Nicole Megow,2 Lukas Nölke,2 Jens Schlöter2
1

Department of Mathematics, London School of Economics
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen
f.eberle@lse.ac.uk, {linderal,nmegow,noelke,jschloet}@uni-bremen.de

2

Abstract

a vertex, all incident edges, as well as their costs, and the
labels of their end points are revealed. This exploration model
is also known as fixed graph scenario (Kalyanasundaram and
Pruhs 1994). In order to explore a vertex v, the searcher may
traverse a path consisting of known edges that starts in the
searcher’s current location and ends in v. When the searcher
traverses an edge e, she pays its cost c(e). The goal is to
minimize the total cost for exploring all vertices.
Due to the lack of information, the searcher cannot expect
to find an optimal tour. We resort to standard competitive
analysis to measure the quality of our search algorithms.
That is, we compare the length of the tour found by the
searcher with the optimal tour that can be found if the graph
is known in advance. If the ratio between the costs of these
two tours is bounded by ρ ≥ 1 for every instance, then we say
that the online algorithm is ρ-competitive. The competitive
ratio of an algorithm is the minimum ρ for which it is ρcompetitive. The offline problem of finding an optimal tour
on a known graph is the well-known Traveling Salesperson
Problem (TSP), which is NP-hard (Lawler et al. 1985).
Indeed, it appears extremely difficult to obtain solutions
of cost within a constant factor of an optimal tour. The best
known competitive ratio for arbitrary graphs is O(log n),
attained by the following two algorithms. The Nearest Neighbor algorithm (NN) (Rosenkrantz, Stearns, and Lewis 1977)
greedily explores the unknown vertex closest to the current
position. While its performance is usually good in practice (Applegate et al. 2006), a matching lower bound of
Ω(log n) holds even for very simple graphs, e.g., unweighted
graphs (Hurkens and Woeginger 2004) or trees (Fritsch 2021).
The second algorithm is the hierarchical Depth First Search
algorithm (H DFS) (Megow, Mehlhorn, and Schweitzer 2012)
that, roughly speaking, executes depth-first searches (DFS)
on subgraphs with low edge costs, thereby limiting its traversal to a minimum spanning tree (MST). Here, a matching
lower bound is attained on a weighted path.
Only for rather special graph classes it is known how to
obtain constant-competitive tours. Notable examples are planar graphs, with a competitive ratio of 16 (Kalyanasundaram
and Pruhs 1994; Megow, Mehlhorn, and Schweitzer 2012),
graphs of bounded genus g with a ratio of 16(1 + 2g) and
graphs with k distinct weights with a ratio of 2k (Megow,
Mehlhorn, and Schweitzer 2012). The latter emerges as somewhat of an exception since the H DFS algorithm achieves a

Exploring unknown environments is a fundamental task in
many domains, e.g., robot navigation, network security, and
internet search. We initiate the study of a learning-augmented
variant of the classical, notoriously hard online graph exploration problem by adding access to machine-learned predictions. We propose an algorithm that naturally integrates predictions into the well-known Nearest Neighbor (NN) algorithm
and significantly outperforms any known online algorithm
if the prediction is of high accuracy while maintaining good
guarantees when the prediction is of poor quality. We provide
theoretical worst-case bounds that gracefully degrade with the
prediction error, and we complement them by computational
experiments that confirm our results. Further, we extend our
concept to a general framework to robustify algorithms. By
interpolating carefully between a given algorithm and NN,
we prove new performance bounds that leverage the individual good performance on particular inputs while establishing
robustness to arbitrary inputs.

Introduction
In online mapping problems, a searcher is tasked to explore
an unknown environment and create a complete map of its
topology. However, the searcher has only access to local
information, e.g., via optical sensors, and must move through
the environment to obtain new data. Such problems emerge
in countless real-life scenarios with a prominent example
being the navigation of mobile robots, be it a search-andrescue robot, an autonomous vacuum cleaner, or a scientific
exploration robot in the deep sea or on Mars. Less obvious but
equally important applications include crawling the Internet
or social networks for information and maintaining security
of large networks (Berman 1996; Rao et al. 1986; Gasieniec
and Radzik 2008).
We investigate the online graph exploration problem on
an undirected connected graph G = (V, E) with n vertices.
Every edge e ∈ E has non-negative cost c(e), and every
vertex v ∈ V has a unique label. Starting in a designated
vertex s ∈ V , the task of the searcher is to find a tour that
visits all vertices of G and returns to s. A priori, the searcher
does not know the graph. Instead, she gains local information
when traversing it: When for the first time visiting (exploring)
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9732

