The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Self-Supervised Audio-and-Text Pre-training with Extremely Low-Resource
Parallel Data
Yu Kang1 , Tianqiao Liu1 , Hang Li1 , Yang Hao1 , Wenbiao Ding1, 2 *
1

TAL Education Group, Beijing, China
2
Tencent, Beijing, China
{kangyu, liutianqiao, lihang4, haoyang2}@tal.com, darwinding@tencent.com

Abstract
Multimodal pre-training for audio-and-text has recently been
proved to be effective and has significantly improved the performance of many downstream speech understanding tasks.
However, these state-of-the-art pre-training audio-text models
work well only when provided with large amount of parallel
audio-and-text data, which brings challenges on many languages that are rich in unimodal corpora but scarce of parallel
cross-modal corpus. In this paper, we investigate whether it is
possible to pre-train an audio-text multimodal model with extremely low-resource parallel data and extra non-parallel unimodal data. Our pre-training framework consists of the following components: (1) Intra-modal Denoising Auto-Encoding
(IDAE), which is able to reconstruct input text (audio) representations from a noisy version of itself. (2) Cross-modal
Denoising Auto-Encoding (CDAE), which is pre-trained to
reconstruct the input text (audio), given both a noisy version
of the input text (audio) and the corresponding translated noisy
audio features (text embeddings). (3) Iterative Denoising Process (IDP), which iteratively translates raw audio (text) and
the corresponding text embeddings (audio features) translated
from previous iteration into the new less-noisy text embeddings (audio features). We adapt a dual cross-modal Transformer as our backbone model which consists of two unimodal
encoders for IDAE and two cross-modal encoders for CDAE
and IDP. Our method achieves comparable performance on
multiple downstream speech understanding tasks compared
with the model pre-trained on fully parallel data, demonstrating the great potential of the proposed method.

Introduction
The recent rise of large-scale unsupervised pre-training models, i.e. BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al.
2019), Wav2Vec (Schneider et al. 2019), Mockingjay (Liu
et al. 2020), etc., in artificial intelligence communities like
natural language processing (NLP) and speech signal processing (SSP) has demonstrated the effectiveness of pretrainingfinetuning framework. Subsequent study like CTAL (Li et al.
2021) successfully extends this framework to the multimodal
field through designing cross-modal self-supervised tasks
on the audio-and-text parallel corpus, and has significantly
improved the performance of many downstream tasks at the
* The corresponding author: Wenbiao Ding. Work done at TAL.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10875

intersection of audio and text which we denote as speech
understanding tasks in the following.
However, different from collecting non-parallel unimodal
corpus, the collection of parallel corpus like LibriSpeech
always inquires additional manual filtering or annotating
works. Due to this fact, the scale of available parallel corpus
is limited comparing to the existing unimodal corpus, which
restricts the benefits of large scale pre-training process.
In this paper, in order to get rid of the dependence of
audio-and-text pre-training on parallelism between text and
audio data, we present a novel multimodal pre-training framework mainly based on non-parallel unimodal corpora, which
incorporates three components: (1) Intra-modal Denoising
Auto-Encoding (IDAE), (2) Cross-modal Denoising AutoEncoding (CDAE) and (3) Iterative Denoising Process (IDP).
IDAE (Artetxe et al. 2018) is an effective algorithm for selfsupervised training, through restoring the corrupted inputs
in a unimodal manner, the model becomes capable to extract
useful intra-modality information. CDAE is an extension of
IDAE, which reconstructs the input text (audio), given both a
noisy version of the input text (audio) and the corresponding
translated noisy audio features (text embeddings). By learning to exploit the complementary information between noisy
cross-modal inputs, this reconstruction process allows the
model to learn inter-modal connections efficiently.
To construct the pseudo-parallel cross-modal inputs for
CDAE, we propose a novel training procedure named IDP,
which is inspired by the back-translation (Sennrich, Haddow,
and Birch 2016; He et al. 2016) in neural machine translation.
Back-translation is one of the most effective ways to leverage monolingual data for translation. Unlike back-translation,
which regenerates pseudo-parallel data in each training round.
IDP only performs one generation at the beginning of training, and applies the current model to eliminate the noise in
the generated data in each subsequent training round to get
pseudo-parallel inputs with less noise. IDP actually applies
the reconstruction capabilities learned during CDAE, then
the new pseudo-parallel data from IDP is used to further
train CDAE at the next iteration, until convergence of the
algorithm.
With the help of these components, our pre-training model
is capable to learn both intra-modality and inter-modality
connections with large-scale non-parallel unimodal corpus.
To demonstrate its effectiveness, we apply our pre-training

