The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Domain Disentangled Generative Adversarial Network for Zero-Shot
Sketch-Based 3D Shape Retrieval
Rui Xu, Zongyan Han, Le Hui, Jianjun Qian, Jin Xie∗
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{xu ray, hanzy, le.hui, csjqian, csjxie}@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

the discrepancy between 2D sketches and 3D shapes, sketchbased 3D shape retrieval is still a challenging problem.
Recently, many efforts have been made in sketch-based
3D retrieval. In the early years, many works improve the
performance of sketch-based 3D retrieval by learning robust
3D shape features (Wang, Kang, and Li 2015; Xie et al.
2017; Zhu, Xie, and Fang 2016a,b; Xu et al. 2020b). (Wang,
Kang, and Li 2015) selected two different views with angles
larger than 45 degrees to characterize 3D shapes. And a
siamese convolutional neural network was used to extract
the features of sketches and projections of 3D shapes. To
further improve 3D shape representations, (Xie et al. 2017)
proposed to learn the Wasserstein barycenters of the multiviews projections. In addition, how to measure the crossdomain similarity between sketches and 3D shapes is also
crucial (Dai et al. 2017; He et al. 2018). In (Dai et al.
2017), the discriminative loss is proposed to increase the
distinction of different categories in each domain, and the
correlation loss is used to minimize the domain discrepancy
between sketch and 3D shape. In sketch-based 3D shape
retrieval, these methods have achieved remarkable results
in categories that are used for both training and evaluation.
Nonetheless, these traditional methods cannot effectively
retrieve the unseen categories that are not used during
training.
In this paper, we propose a novel domain disentangled
generative adversarial network (DD-GAN) to effectively
retrieve the unseen categories in sketch-based 3D shape
retrieval. The key idea of our method is to utilize the
generative adversarial network to generate samples of the
unseen categories. After obtaining these unseen samples,
we can convert the zero-shot learning task into a traditional
supervised learning task. Specifically, in our DD-GAN, we
first use SketchCNN and ShapeCNN to extract features of
sketches and 3D shapes, respectively. We disentangle the
features of each domain by using three fully connected
layers to obtain domain-invariant features (i.e., pure semantic information) and domain-specific features (i.e., contour
style or texture information). Then, we propose the semantic
alignment module to enhance the discrimination of the
domain-invariant features between different categories and
align the domain-invariant features with the corresponding
word embedding of the category. In the semantic alignment
module, we adopt the triplet loss to minimize the intra-class

Sketch-based 3D shape retrieval is a challenging task due
to the large domain discrepancy between sketches and 3D
shapes. Since existing methods are trained and evaluated on
the same categories, they cannot effectively recognize the
categories that have not been used during training. In this
paper, we propose a novel domain disentangled generative
adversarial network (DD-GAN) for zero-shot sketch-based
3D retrieval, which can retrieve the unseen categories that are
not accessed during training. Specifically, we first generate
domain-invariant features and domain-specific features by
disentangling the learned features of sketches and 3D shapes,
where the domain-invariant features are used to align with
the corresponding word embeddings. Then, we develop a
generative adversarial network that combines the domainspecific features of the seen categories with the aligned
domain-invariant features to synthesize samples, where the
synthesized samples of the unseen categories are generated
by using the corresponding word embeddings. Finally, we use
the synthesized samples of the unseen categories combined
with the real samples of the seen categories to train the
network for retrieval, so that the unseen categories can be
recognized. In order to reduce the domain shift problem, we
utilize unlabeled unseen samples to enhance the discrimination ability of the discriminator. With the discriminator
distinguishing the generated samples from the unlabeled
unseen samples, the generator can generate more realistic
unseen samples. Extensive experiments on the SHREC’13
and SHREC’14 datasets show that our method significantly
improves the retrieval performance of the unseen categories.

Introduction
In recent years, with the massive increase of 3D models, 3D
shape retrieval has attracted widespread attention. Existing
methods mainly contain three categories, including shapebased methods (Iyer et al. 2005; Xie et al. 2015; Zhu et al.
2016; Jiang et al. 2019), text-based methods (Min, Kazhdan,
and Funkhouser 2004; Goldfeder and Allen 2008) and
sketch-based methods (Eitz et al. 2012; Furuya and Ohbuchi
2013; Li et al. 2014a; Dai, Xie, and Fang 2018).Compared
with text and 3D shape, sketch is more convenient and easier
to obtain. However, due to the abstraction of sketches and
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2902

