The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pose Guided Image Generation from Misaligned Sources via Residual Flow Based
Correction
Jiawei Lu1 , He Wang2 , Tianjia Shao1 * , Yin Yang3 , Kun Zhou1
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
University of Leeds
3
Clemson University
lujiawei23@gmail.com, h.e.wang@leeds.ac.uk, tjshao@zju.edu.cn, yin5@clemson.edu, kunzhou@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

are not taken by calibrated cameras, leading to severe misalignment. Given the huge size of the camera space (possible camera poses), it is not straightforward to design a general solution. Consequently, strong assumptions have to be
made. If the object is assumed to be rigid, multi-view images can help synthesize novel views (Sun et al. 2018; Zhou
et al. 2016). If deformable objects are involved, certain types
of alignment or transformations need to be assumed, such
as feature averaging can help synthesize new facial expressions (Zakharov et al. 2019), but at the cost of losing the
details of the source images; affine transformation can help
synthesize new human poses (Lathuilière et al. 2020), but
incapable of handling large pose deformation especially for
non-rigid deformation such as clothes.
In this paper, we seek a general framework for controlled
multi-source image generation. The framework takes as input multiple (misaligned) source images and source poses
as well as a target pose, and predicts a new image under
the target pose while keeping the source appearance. One
key challenge is to impose parsimonious assumptions on the
source images, so that they can differ in the camera pose,
the camera-object distance, occlusions/lighting, etc. We aim
to simultaneously deal with view/pose/expression variances
and meanwhile synthesize high quality images with realistic
details. One intuitive solution is to warp the features of each
source image then fuse them for the target pose. However,
two issues appear in such an approach. First, each source
image is only a partial observation of the object, and all
source images are misaligned. As a result, fusing such features inevitably leads to blurring in the target image. Second,
the partial observability essentially dictates that different regions in a source image provides information with different
levels of confidence (i.e. occluded areas having low confidence). Further, source images have different importance,
so do their high/low confidence areas by association. This
hierarchical structure of importance among source images
cannot be captured via simple treatments, e.g. an occlusion
map on a source image (Ren et al. 2020), or attention maps
merely distinguishing the relative importance of different
views (Sun et al. 2018).
To tackle the above challenges, we propose a novel fusion
mechanism. Our framework adopts the state-of-the-art flowbased strategy, which first learns to warp each source feature
to match the target pose at different levels, and then fuses

Generating new images with desired properties (e.g. new
view/poses) from source images has been enthusiastically
pursued recently, due to its wide range of potential applications. One way to ensure high-quality generation is to use
multiple sources with complementary information such as
different views of the same object. However, as source images are often misaligned due to the large disparities among
the camera settings, strong assumptions have been made in
the past with respect to the camera(s) or/and the object in
interest, limiting the application of such techniques. Therefore, we propose a new general approach which models multiple types of variations among sources, such as view angles,
poses, facial expressions, in a unified framework, so that it
can be employed on datasets of vastly different nature. We
verify our approach on a variety of data including humans
bodies, faces, city scenes and 3D objects. Both the qualitative
and quantitative results demonstrate the better performance
of our method than the state of the art.

Introduction
Controlled image generation from source images is capable of generating scenes in unseen views and objects with
pre-defined poses. It has a wide range of applications, e.g
people with new poses (Ma et al. 2017), faces with new expressions (Zakharov et al. 2019) and scenes from different
angles (Sun et al. 2018), and hence has attracted attention.
The key challenge in such research is to recover the hidden
information from sparse view points. One popular setting
is to employ a single source image to generate new images
with new poses/views. Despite recent successes (Ma et al.
2017; Siarohin et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2021), ambiguity
caused by the limited information available in a single image still makes it difficult to synthesize a high-quality image
with large pose differences (e.g. generating the back view
of a person when given only the front view). Consequently,
high-quality generation is still an open challenge.
In theory, employing multiple source images with complementary information should mitigate the problem. However, in practice, this setting unfortunately brings additional
challenges: the source images especially in-the-wild ones
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1863

