The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Consistency Regularization for Adversarial Robustness
Jihoon Tack1 , Sihyun Yu1 , Jongheon Jeong1 , Minseon Kim1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Jinwoo Shin1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
2
AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea
{jihoontack,sihyun.yu,jongheonj,minseonkim,sjhwang82,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) is currently one of the most successful methods to obtain the adversarial robustness of deep neural
networks. However, the phenomenon of robust overfitting, i.e.,
the robustness starts to decrease significantly during AT, has
been problematic, not only making practitioners consider a
bag of tricks for a successful training, e.g., early stopping,
but also incurring a significant generalization gap in the robustness. In this paper, we propose an effective regularization
technique that prevents robust overfitting by optimizing an
auxiliary ‘consistency’ regularization loss during AT. Specifically, we discover that data augmentation is a quite effective
tool to mitigate the overfitting in AT, and develop a regularization that forces the predictive distributions after attacking
from two different augmentations of the same instance to be
similar with each other. Our experimental results demonstrate
that such a simple regularization technique brings significant
improvements in the test robust accuracy of a wide range of
AT methods. More remarkably, we also show that our method
could significantly help the model to generalize its robustness
against unseen adversaries, e.g., other types or larger perturbations compared to those used during training. Code is available
at https://github.com/alinlab/consistency-adversarial.

(a) Conventional CR

(b) Proposed CR

Figure 1: An overview of our consistency regularization (CR)
and conventional approach (Hendrycks et al. 2020; Xie et al.
2020). Our regularization forces the predictive distribution of
attacked augmentations to be consistent. T and δ indicates
the randomly sampled augmentation, and the corresponding
adversarial noise, respectively.

training (AT) is currently one of the most promising ways
to obtain the adversarial robustness of DNNs, i.e., directly
augmenting the training set with adversarial examples (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018). Recent
studies have been actively investigating a better form of AT
(Qin et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020).
One of the major downsides that most AT methods suffer
from, however, is a significant generalization gap of adversarial robustness between the train and test datasets (Yang
et al. 2020), possibly due to an increased sample complexity
induced by the non-convex, minimax nature of AT (Schmidt
et al. 2018). More importantly, it has been observed that such
a gap gradually increases from the middle of training (Rice,
Wong, and Kolter 2020), i.e., overfitting, which makes practitioners to consider several heuristic approaches for a successful optimization e.g., early stopping (Zhang et al. 2019).
Only recently, a few proposed more advanced regularization
techniques, e.g., self-training (Chen et al. 2021)1 and weight
perturbation (Wu, Xia, and Wang 2020), but it is still largely
unknown to the community that why and how only such sophisticated training schemes could be effective to prevent the
robust overfitting of AT.
Contribution. In this paper, we suggest to optimize an

Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in real-world applications (He et al. 2016a; Girshick
2015; Amodei et al. 2016), recent studies have demonstrated
that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e., inputs
crafted by an imperceptible perturbation which confuse the
network prediction (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015). This vulnerability of DNNs raises serious
security concerns about their deployment in the real-world
applications (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Li,
Schmidt, and Kolter 2019), e.g., self-driving cars and secure
authentication system (Chen et al. 2015).
In this respect, there have been significant efforts to design
various defense techniques against the adversarial examples,
including input denoising (Guo et al. 2018; Liao et al. 2018),
detection techniques (Ma et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2018), and
certificating the robustness of a classifier (Cohen, Rosenfeld,
and Kolter 2019; Jeong and Shin 2020). Overall, adversarial

1
We do not consider comparing with the method by Chen et al.
(2021) as they require pre-training additional models.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8414

