The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unpaired Multi-Domain Stain Transfer for Kidney Histopathological Images
Yiyang Lin1 * , Bowei Zeng1 * , Yifeng Wang2 * ,
Yang Chen1 , Zijie Fang1 , Jian Zhang3 , Xiangyang Ji4 , Haoqian Wang1 , Yongbing Zhang2†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{lyy20, zbw20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.com, wangyifeng@stu.hit.edu.cn, ybzhang08@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

tissue cannot show all the information that pathologists
need to diagnose in many diseases. Therefore, after viewing the H&E stained sections of the patient, pathologists
may need other types of staining to obtain more information. For example, in kidney tissue examination, in addition
to H&E staining, other types of staining like MAS staining, PAS staining, and PASM staining are also commonly
used. MAS staining is mainly used to distinguish collagen
fibers and muscle fibers inside the kidney tissue. PAS staining is mainly used to observe glomerular basement membrane, tubular basement membrane, and mesangial matrix
(hereinafter called GTM). PASM staining and PAS staining
show the same components in kidney tissue, while PASM
staining can display the details more clearly (de Haan et al.
2021; Lo et al. 2021). These non-H&E stains are usually
called “special stain”. They can provide additional tissue diagnostic information from different dimensions and are of
great significance for the pathological diagnoses of kidney
diseases.
However, compared with H&E staining, special staining
requires more time and labor costs. In addition, if the pathologists need multiple types of histological staining on the patients’ tissue, it is necessary to sample the tissue numerous
times for different staining. These will undoubtedly increase
the cost of pathological diagnoses and increase the waiting time of patients, making the current popularizing rate
of pathological diagnosis low (de Haan et al. 2021).
Recently, researchers are exploring the correlation between H&E stained images and images stained by special
stains. Rivenson et al. (Rivenson et al. 2019) proposed a
model to virtually generate PAS, MAS, and other types of
special staining from H&E stained images, showing that
there is a correlation between multiple types of stained images. However, this method requires pixel-level paired data,
which is hard to obtain in clinical practice. Lo et al. (Lo et al.
2021) proposed a model to virtually generate PAS, MAS,
and other types of special staining from H&E stained images based on unpaired data (Zhu et al. 2017). But in this
method, a model is required for every two types of staining,
so k(k − 1) models are needed if we have k types of staining, which greatly wastes computing resources. Therefore,
it would be much desirable to devise a model trained over

As an essential step in the pathological diagnosis, histochemical staining can show specific tissue structure information
and, consequently, assist pathologists in making accurate diagnoses. Clinical kidney histopathological analyses usually
employ more than one type of staining: H&E, MAS, PAS,
PASM, etc. However, due to the interference of colors among
multiple stains, it is not easy to perform multiple staining simultaneously on one biological tissue. To address this problem, we propose a network based on unpaired training data to
virtually generate multiple types of staining from one staining. Our method can preserve the content of input images
while transferring them to multiple target styles accurately.
To efficiently control the direction of stain transfer, we propose a style guided normalization (SGN). Furthermore, a
multiple style encoding (MSE) is devised to represent the
relationship among different staining styles dynamically. An
improved one-hot label is also proposed to enhance the generalization ability and extendibility of our method. Vast experiments have demonstrated that our model can achieve superior performance on a tiny dataset. The results exhibit not
only good performance but also great visualization and interpretability. Especially, our method also achieves satisfactory
results over cross-tissue, cross-staining as well as cross-task.
We believe that our method will significantly influence clinical stain transfer and reduce the workload greatly for pathologists. Our code and Supplementary materials are available
at https://github.com/linyiyang98/UMDST.

Introduction
As a vital part of the histopathological analysis, which is
the gold standard for diagnosis, histochemical staining can
make the different components of the tissue appear in different colors, thereby facilitating pathologists to observe the
tissue. The most common type of histochemical staining
is hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining in routine pathological examinations. H&E can highlight the morphological characteristics of tissue, enabling pathologists to make
preliminary diagnoses for patients. However, H&E stained
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author: Yongbing Zhang.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1630

