The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Is Your Data Relevant?: Dynamic Selection of Relevant Data for Federated
Learning
Lokesh Nagalapatti* 1† , Ruhi Sharma Mittal* 2 , Ramasuri Narayanam3 †
1

IIT Bombay
IBM Research AI
3
Adobe Research India
nlokesh@cse.iitb.ac.in, ruhi.sharma@in.ibm.com, rnarayanam@adobe.com
2

Abstract

approach that selects relevant data at each client and thereby
derive meaningful updates for GLM in each iteration of FL.
The topic of selecting relevant data is explored in traditional
machine learning settings (Ghorbani and Zou 2019; Yoon,
Arik, and Pfister 2020) where the assumption is that all the
data is available in one place. In FL settings, given that the
data is distributed across multiple clients and the server can’t
introspect it due to privacy constraints, the traditional solutions to select relevant data are not applicable here.
We call data samples that are favorable to GLM as relevant data and those that are detrimental to GLM as irrelevant data. Irrelevance in data can arise due to a variety of
reasons (Toneva et al. 2018; Wang, Wang, and Li 2019; Tuor
et al. 2021; Zhu and Wu 2004). However, to accurately learn
the GLM , it is worthwhile for each client to derive the updates only using its relevant subset of data. Hence, there is a
need to introduce a mechanism that facilitates the clients to
select relevant data from its local training data. This mechanism should necessarily adhere to the privacy requirements
of the FL framework. In this work, we assume that no clients
participate with adversarial intent; i.e., no client wants to
purposefully corrupt the GLM .
The desired characteristic of a relevant data selection
mechanism is that the relevance of a data sample should
not be the same across multiple communication rounds. The
value of a data point should change according to the state
of GLM that varies across rounds. The updates computed
by a client in communication round t is thus relevant to the
server. Further as the GLM converges to a local optimum,
value of data points also converge. In summary, the relevant
data selection mechanism should be able to adapt to the dynamics of the FL environment that changes over time. We
refer this dependence on time as Dynamic in the term Dynamic Data Selection.
Motivation for Our Work: we conduct an experiment
to motivate the importance of detecting irrelevant/noisy data
samples at each client in FL settings. We partition the Iris
(Dua and Graff 2019) dataset among a server (S) and two
clients (C1 ,C2 ). The server uses its data samples as test data.
We use the FedAvg algorithm mentioned in (McMahan et al.
2017) to train a two-layered neural network (GLM ) at the
server. Then, we apply FedAvg to two cases: (a) After introducing 20% closed-set noise at each client as mentioned in
(Wang et al. 2018) by flipping the labels of data samples; (b)

Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm
in which multiple clients participate to collectively learn a
global machine learning model at the central server. Clients
share updates derived from their local data to the server such
that their privacy is not compromised. The server aggregates
these updates and applies it to the global model. It is plausible that not all the data owned by each client is relevant
to the server’s learning objective. The updates incorporated
from irrelevant data could be detrimental to the global model.
The task of selecting relevant data is explored in traditional
machine learning settings where the assumption is that all
the data is available in one place. In FL settings, the data
is distributed across multiple clients and the server can’t introspect it. This precludes the application of traditional solutions to selecting relevant data here. In this paper, we propose an approach called Federated Learning with Relevant
Data (F LRD), that facilitates clients to derive updates using relevant data. Each client learns a model called Relevant
Data Selector (RDS) that is private to itself to do the selection. This in turn helps in building an effective global model.
We perform experiments with multiple real-world datasets to
demonstrate the efficacy of our solution. The results show (a)
the capability of F LRD to identify relevant data samples at
each client locally and (b) the superiority of the global model
learned by F LRD over other baseline algorithms.

Introduction
The paradigm of Federated learning (FL) is introduced in
(McMahan et al. 2017) where multiple clients collectively
train a global model which we refer to as Globally Learned
Model (GLM ) in this paper. The data needed to train GLM
is available or distributed across a set of clients. The local
data possessed by each client is private to itself and is not
shared with other clients or the server. The client(s) compute updates using their local data and shares it to the server
where they are aggregated and applied to GLM .
It is plausible that not all data owned by each client is relevant to the GLM ’s objective (Toneva et al. 2018). Using
irrelevant data to derive the clients’ updates might be detrimental to the GLM . Hence it is important to develop an
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Work done while at IBM Research AI
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7859

