The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Divide-and-Regroup Clustering for
Domain Adaptive Person Re-identification
Zhengdong Hu1,2 * , Yifan Sun2 , Yi Yang3 , Jianguang Zhou1†
1 Research Center for Analytical Instrumentation, Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, State Key Laboratory of Industrial

Control Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
2 Baidu Research, China
3 ReLER, Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
zhengdonghu@zju.edu.cn, sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn, yi.yang@uts.edu.au, jgzhou@zju.edu.cn
Abstract

ID switch

Samples
𝐺

Baseline

Clustering is important for domain adaptive person reidentification (re-ID). A majority of unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods conduct clustering on the target
domain and then use the generated pseudo labels for adaptive training. Albeit important, the clustering pipeline adopted
by current literature is quite standard and lacks consideration for two characteristics of re-ID, i.e., 1) a single person has various feature distribution in multiple cameras. 2)
a person’s occurrence in the same camera are usually temporally continuous. We argue that the multi-camera distribution hinders clustering because it enlarges the intra-class
distances. In contrast, the temporal continuity prior is beneficial, because it offers clue for distinguishing some lookalike person (who are temporally far away from each other).
These two insights motivate us to propose a novel DivideAnd-Regroup Clustering (DARC) pipeline for re-ID UDA.
Specifically, DARC divides the unlabeled data into multiple
camera-specific groups and conducts local clustering within
each camera. Afterwards, it regroups those local clusters potentially belonging to the same person into a unity. Through
this divide-and-regroup pipeline, DARC avoids directly clustering across multiple cameras and focuses on the feature
distribution within each individual camera. Moreover, during the local clustering, DARC uses the temporal continuity
prior to distinguish some look-alike person and thus reduces
false positive pseudo labels. Consequentially, DARC effectively reduces clustering errors and improves UDA. Importantly, experimental results show that DARC is compatible
to many pseudo-label-based UDA methods and brings general improvements. Based on a recent UDA method, DARC
advances the state of the art (e.g, 85.1% mAP on MSMT-toMarket and 83.1% mAP on PersonX-to-Market).

ID split
Divide-and-Regroup

Divide

cam-1

Regroup

𝐿1

cams

Local clustering

𝑅𝑖

cam-2
𝐿3
ID1 in cam-1

𝐿2

ID1 in cam-2

ID2 in cam-2

Figure 1: The global clustering baseline (in the first row)
is prone to two types of clustering errors. “ID split”: the
multi-camera distribution enlarges the intra-class distances
and sometimes causes a single person split into multiple
clusters. “ID switch”: some inherently look-alike person in
the same camera are merged into a single cluster, resulting
in ID switch. The proposed DARC (in the second row) reduces ID split and ID switch through a two-stage clustering
pipeline. “Divide”: it first divides the features into cameraspecific groups and conducts a respective local clustering
within each group. Local clustering avoids multi-camera
distribution and utilizes the temporal continuity to separate
look-alike (but different) person. “Regroup”: it compares local clusters against each other and regroups those closelydistributed clusters into a single one.

same identity in the database, given a query image of interest. (Luo et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2019a;
Quan et al. 2019) When the training data and the testing data
are collected from different domains, the underlying domain
gap stands out as a prominent challenge. An effective approach to mitigate the domain gap is Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA). UDA adapts the deep model to recognize the unlabeled target domain and thus improves crossdomain re-ID without additional annotations.
A popular family (Fu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019; Zhai
et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2018; Ge, Chen, and Li 2020; Ge et al.
2020; Dai et al. 2021a; Zheng et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2021b) of
the UDA methods is based on pseudo label learning. Using

Introduction
This paper considers unsupervised domain adaptive person
re-identification (re-ID) task, which employs Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) to improve (cross-domain) reID. Basically, re-ID aims to retrieve all the images of the
* Zhengdong Hu makes his part of work during internship in
Baidu Research.
† Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

980

