The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Generation-Focused Table-Based Intermediate Pre-training
for Free-Form Question Answering
Peng Shi1 * , Patrick Ng2 , Feng Nan2 , Henghui Zhu2 , Jun Wang2 , Jiarong Jiang2 ,
Alexander Hanbo Li2 , Rishav Chakravarti2 , Donald Weidner2 , Bing Xiang2 , Zhiguo Wang2
1

University of Waterloo
2
AWS AI Labs
peng.shi@uwaterloo.ca, patricng@amazon.com
Abstract

Question Answering (QA) (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Krishna,
Roy, and Iyyer 2021) is an important natural language processing task that enables the interactions between the users
and large-scale knowledge sources. Based on the different
forms of the knowledge sources, the QA task is categorized
into different sub-tasks, such as Text-based QA that answer
questions based on the unstructured texts, Table-based QA
where semi-structure tables are the knowledge source, and
Semantic Parsing where logic-form is generated to answer
question from structured knowledge graphs and databases.
For Text-based QA and Table-based QA, existing work
primarily focused on extracting relevant portion of the text/table to answer the question, which are usually short-form
facts or entities (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Pasupat and Liang
2015; Iyyer, Yih, and Chang 2017). However, these QA

systems may not meet the needs of the users, who tend
to ask more complex questions1 that require free-form answers (e.g. explanations) rather than short entities.
Efforts have been made in addressing the shortcoming
of the QA systems. For the Text-based QA, Kočiskỳ et al.
(2018); Fan et al. (2019); Krishna, Roy, and Iyyer (2021)
proposed to leveraged sequence-to-sequence architectures
to generate free-form answers based on the retrieved documents. However, the free-form Table-based QA remains
largely unexplored. More recently, Nan et al. (2021) used
pre-trained language model T5 (Raffel et al. 2019) — a
sequence-to-sequence architecture — to generate long form
answers from the table knowledge source.
However, the sequence-to-sequence pre-trained language
models, such as BART (Lewis et al. 2019) or T5 (Raffel
et al. 2019), have weaker encoding ability over table cells
and schema. These language models usually employ long
documents as the training corpus, obtaining impressive encoding ability over unstructured text. On the other hand, tabular data have their own structures to express the semantics,
which are usually not captured by these language models.
Recently, several solutions are proposed for alleviating
aforementioned issue by introducing pre-training or intermediate training strategies for tables. For example, Herzig
et al. (2020) proposed TAPAS that used Masked Language
Model (MLM) as pre-training objective for improving the
contextual representation of BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) over
table inputs. They showed the pre-trained model obtained
state-of-the-art performance for Table-based QA where entities are extracted from the table. They achieved large improvements over the table entailment task. Albeit the improvements, these pre-training models were designed and
evaluated for short-form answer, where the answer is often a
table cell or aggregation of multiple cells. Thus pre-training
strategies to solve complex questions that require long-form
answers remain unexplored.
In this work, we present an intermediate language model
pre-training framework, Generation-focused Table-based
Intermediate Pre-training (G EN TA P), that exploits different
learning strategies, including short-form entities and longform explanations. We demonstrate that our learning strate-

* Work done while at AWS AI Labs.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Complex question in our work refers to the question that requires long-form explanation to answer.

Question answering over semi-structured tables has attracted
significant attention in the NLP community. However, most
of the existing work focus on questions that can be answered
with short-form answer, i.e. the answer is often a table cell
or aggregation of multiple cells. This can mismatch with
the intents of users who want to ask more complex questions that require free-form answers such as explanations.
To bridge the gap, most recently, pre-trained sequence-tosequence language models such as T5 are used for generating free-form answers based on the question and table
inputs. However, these pre-trained language models have
weaker encoding abilities over table cells and schema. To
mitigate this issue, in this work, we present an intermediate pre-training framework, Generation-focused Table-based
Intermediate Pre-training (G EN TA P), that jointly learns representations of natural language questions and tables. G EN TA P learns to generate via two training objectives to enhance
the question understanding and table representation abilities
for complex questions. Based on experimental results, models that leverage G EN TA P framework outperform the existing
baselines on F E TAQA benchmark. The pre-trained models
are not only useful for free-form question answering, but also
for few-shot data-to-text generation task, thus showing good
transfer ability by obtaining new state-of-the-art results.

Introduction

11312

