The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Simultaneously Learning Stochastic and Adversarial Bandits under the
Position-Based Model
Cheng Chen1 , Canzhe Zhao2 , Shuai Li 2 *
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
cheng.chen@ntu.edu.sg, canzhezhao@sjtu.edu.cn, shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

and Takeda 2017), which is in expectation the difference of
the received clicks from the clicks of the best policy. Some
other works in OLTR study the cascade model (Kveton et al.
2015a; Li et al. 2016; Zong et al. 2016) and general click
model (Zoghi et al. 2017; Lattimore et al. 2018; Li, Lattimore, and Szepesvári 2019).
Most existing works in OLTR focus on the stochastic environment where the item attractiveness and position examination probabilities, if any, are assumed to be fixed through
the learning process. However, this usually is a strong assumption in real applications where the item attractiveness
could change dynamically, like the clothes interest of users
might periodically change across seasons. The algorithms
designed in the stochastic environment might fail to converge if the stochastic assumptions do not hold. This motivates the study of adversarial environment where the involved samples are arbitrary on a bounded domain. Usually
the regret guarantee of algorithms
√ designed under adversarial environment can only be O( T ), even in the stochastic
environment whose best algorithm can achieve a much better regret of O(log(T )). It is an interesting topic in online
√
learning if there is an algorithm that can achieve O( T )
regret if run in the adversarial environment and O(log(T ))
regret if run in the stochastic environment. This problem
is also called best-of-both-worlds (BOBW). Some works
study this problem in classical multi-armed bandit problem (MAB) (Bubeck and Slivkins 2012; Seldin and Slivkins
2014; Auer and Chiang 2016; Seldin and Lugosi 2017; Wei
and Luo 2018; Zimmert and Seldin 2019) and combinatorial MAB (CMAB) with semi-bandit feedback (Zimmert,
Luo, and Wei 2019). It is an open question if we can design
BOBW algorithms in OLTR whose adversarial formulation
needs to be well deliberated first. In this work we hope to
answer this question under the commonly adopted PBM.
We propose an algorithm for OLTR under PBM based
on the follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) framework to
simultaneously learn in stochastic and adversarial environments. Though OLTR under PBM can be formulated as a
special case of CMAB by regarding the pair of an item and
a position as a base arm, the direct application of existing
studies does not hold. One of the main challenges is that the
commonly defined suboptimality gap could be negative in
the PBM setting, making it impossible to follow the existing
self-bounding technique in (Zimmert, Luo, and Wei 2019;

Online learning to rank (OLTR) interactively learns to choose
lists of items from a large collection based on certain click
models that describe users’ click behaviors. Most recent
works for this problem focus on the stochastic environment
where the item attractiveness is assumed to be invariant during the learning process. In many real-world scenarios, however, the environment could be dynamic or even arbitrarily changing. This work studies the OLTR problem in both
stochastic and adversarial environments under the positionbased model (PBM). We propose a method based on the
follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) framework with Tsallis entropy and develop a new self-bounding constraint especially designed for PBM. We prove the proposed algorithm
simultaneously achieves
√ O(log T ) regret in the stochastic environment and O(m nT ) regret in the adversarial environment, where T is the number of rounds, n is the number of
items and m is the number
√ of positions. We also provide a
lower bound of order Ω(m nT ) for adversarial PBM, which
matches our upper bound and improves over the state-of-theart lower bound. The experiments show that our algorithm
could simultaneously learn in both stochastic and adversarial
environments and is competitive compared to existing methods that are designed for a single environment.

Introduction
Learning to rank is widely used in online web search and
recommender systems which selects a small group of items
to present in a limited number of positions after a user starts
a search session (Liu et al. 2009). Online learning to rank
(OLTR) is to learn the best ranking policy through user interactions and aims to maximize user satisfaction, e.g. the number of user clicks, during the learning period. To understand
the click signals received from users on given ranked lists of
items, many click models are introduced and studied (Chuklin, Markov, and Rijke 2015). One of the most popular click
models adopted in the industry is the position-based model
(PBM) (Richardson, Dominowska, and Ragno 2007) due to
its simplicity and effectiveness to characterize the click rate
as a product of item attractiveness and position bias. PBM
is studied in OLTR setting with theoretical analysis on regret (Lagrée, Vernade, and Cappé 2016; Komiyama, Honda,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6202

