The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bi-volution: A Static and Dynamic Coupled Filter
Xiwei Hu,1 * Xuanhong Chen,1∗ Bingbing Ni,1† Teng Li,2 Yutian Liu1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Anhui University
{huxiwei, chen19910528, nibingbing, stau7001}@sjtu.edu.cn, tenglwy@gmail.com

Dynamic Filter

Abstract
Dynamic convolution has achieved significant gain in performance and computational complexity, thanks to its powerful
representation capability given limited filter number/layers.
However, SOTA dynamic convolution operators are sensitive
to input noises (e.g., Gaussian noise, shot noise, e.t.c.) and
lack sufficient spatial contextual information in filter generation. To alleviate this inherent weakness, we propose a
lightweight and heterogeneous-structure (i.e., static and dynamic) operator, named Bi-volution. On the one hand, Bivolution is designed as a dual-branch structure to fully leverage complementary properties of static/dynamic convolution,
which endows Bi-volution more robust properties and higher
performance. On the other hand, the Spatial Augmented Kernel Generation module is proposed to improve the dynamic
convolution, realizing the learning of spatial context information with negligible additional computational complexity.
Extensive experiments illustrate that the ResNet-50 equipped
with Bi-volution achieves a highly competitive boost in performance (+2.8% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet classification,
+2.4% box AP and +2.2% mask AP on COCO detection
and instance segmentation) while maintaining extremely low
FLOPs (i.e., ResNet50@2.7 GFLOPs). Furthermore, our Bivolution shows better robustness than dynamic convolution
against various noise and input corruptions. Our code is available at https://github.com/neuralchen/Bivolution.

Static Filter
weights

w/o Spatial
Context

LF
HF

Bi-volution

weights

LF
HF

LF
HF

LF
HF

Dynamic Branch

weights

Lightweight
Spatial Interaction

LF
HF weights

Static Branch

LF
HF

LF
HF

LF
HF
LF Low Frequency
HF High Frequency
Add
Convolution

Figure 1: Static and dynamic coupled filter which
unifies low-frequency/high-frequency semantic and
spatial/channel-wise fusion to boost the accuracy performance and further improve model robustness.
of 1 × 1 convolutions) becomes the de facto standard for
dynamic convolution kernel generation, which excludes the
interaction of spatially contextual information thus leads to
sub-optimal estimation results.
Sensitivity to Noise Pattern. Spatial-anisotropy and
content-adaptiveness are the prominent properties of a standard dynamic convolution. In detail, different filters are applied to each point in an image/feature, and at the same time,
these filters are estimated online based on the input content.
Such a dynamically adaptive design endows dynamic convolution the ability to deal with complex and changeable
input images/features, and enables dynamic convolution to
achieve better performance than static convolution. Unfortunately, it is these dynamic properties that make dynamic
convolution more sensitive to noisy input. Specifically, content adaptability makes dynamic convolution misjudge the
noise mixed in the input as part of the input content, resulting
in the noisy generation of kernels that are mismatched with
the real texture pattern. In addition, our experimental observations have found that dynamic convolution is very sensitive to various types of noise such as Gaussian noise, shot
noise, impulse noise and speckle noise. In practical deployment scenarios (e.g., video surveillance, industrial monitor-

Introduction
Dynamic convolution is a rapidly developing alternative
computing primitive for Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) (Han et al. 2021), which achieves great success in
various tasks, e.g., image classification (Deng et al. 2009),
object detection (Lin et al. 2014), and super-resolution (Xu
et al. 2020) e.t.c.. Contrast to convolution, dynamic convolution exhibits spatial-anisotropy and content-adaptive properties, resulting in better performance and optimal feature
learning. However, these properties also weaken the robustness of dynamic convolution and make it sensitive to input
noises (e.g., Gaussian noise, shot noise, e.t.c.). Furthermore,
subject to rigorous complexity constraints, the squeeze-andexcitation module (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018) (i.e., consisting
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

960

