The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Shape-Adaptive Selection and Measurement for Oriented Object Detection
Liping Hou,1 Ke Lu,1,2 Jian Xue1 * , Yuqiu Li 1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
{houliping17, liyuqiu20}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {luk, xuejian}@ucas.ac.cn

Fixed Strategies

Abstract
The development of detection methods for oriented object detection remains a challenging task. A considerable obstacle
is the wide variation in the shape (e.g., aspect ratio) of objects. Sample selection in general object detection has been
widely studied as it plays a crucial role in the performance of
the detection method and has achieved great progress. However, existing sample selection strategies still overlook some
issues: (1) most of them ignore the object shape information;
(2) they do not make a potential distinction between selected
positive samples; and (3) some of them can only be applied
to either anchor-free or anchor-based methods and cannot
be used for both of them simultaneously. In this paper, we
propose novel flexible shape-adaptive selection (SA-S) and
shape-adaptive measurement (SA-M) strategies for oriented
object detection, which comprise an SA-S strategy for sample selection and SA-M strategy for the quality estimation of
positive samples. Specifically, the SA-S strategy dynamically
selects samples according to the shape information and characteristics distribution of objects. The SA-M strategy measures the localization potential and adds quality information
on the selected positive samples. The experimental results on
both anchor-free and anchor-based baselines and four publicly available oriented datasets (DOTA, HRSC2016, UCASAOD, and ICDAR2015) demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

(a) K-Nearest

(b) MaxIoU

Dynamic Strategies

(c) ATSS

(d) SA-S&SA-M(ours)

Figure 1: Different strategies for the selection and measurement of positive samples. Circles represent the positive samples. (a) K-Nearest uses a static center distribution for sampling. (b) MaxIoU uses a fixed IoU threshold for sampling.
(c) ATSS assigns a dynamic IoU threshold for an object. (d)
The SA-S strategy uses a dynamic IoU threshold, and then
the SA-M strategy adds quality information for selected positive samples, which is indicated by different colors.

As reported in ATSS (Zhang et al. 2020), the selection
of positive and negative samples plays a critical role in detection performance, and is also the essential difference between anchor-based and anchor-free methods. Existing sample selection strategies are mainly divided into fixed and
dynamic strategies. Although the simplicity and intuitiveness of fixed label assignment strategies make them a popular choice, they ignore the actual shape and content of the
intersecting region of objects, particularly for oriented object detection. As shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), anchor-based
methods (e.g., RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2017b)) use the max
intersection over union (IoU) value (MaxIoU, for simplicity) between proposals and objects, and anchor-free method
(e.g., FCOS (Tian et al. 2020)) uses k-nearest distance (KNearest for simplicity) between a point and the object’s center for sample selection. The developers of ATSS proposed
a sample selection strategy using dynamic IoU thresholds,
which is shown in Fig. 1 (c). In other recent works, researchers have proposed dynamic sample selection or anchor learning strategies (Yang et al. 2018a; Kim and Lee
2020; Zhang et al. 2020). Although these strategies are more
efficient than fixed assignment strategies, they have the following problems: (1) the oriented object shape information
(e.g., large aspect ratio) is overlooked; (2) selected positive

Introduction
The detection of arbitrarily oriented objects is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision, and can be applied in a wide range of scenarios, such as remote sensing (RS) images and text scenes. Because using horizontal
bounding boxes (HBBs) cannot accurately calibrate the position of arbitrary-oriented objects and can also easily be affected by non-maximum suppression (NMS), using oriented
bounding boxes (OBBs) has become a popular positioning
approach and has made significant progress. Existing oriented object methods based on a deep convolutional neural
network (CNN) mostly focus on the problems of the huge
scale variations of objects and complex backgrounds but pay
little attention to the large aspect ratio variations of objects.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

923

