K2

K2
Decoder

Online
Learning

As

Extract

At

The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial K
Intelligence Auxiliary
(AAAI-22)
Head
s
n

Ps

Label

Loss

Decoder

P

Concat
KL

P

hs

Calibrate

K nt

ht

Pt

Encoder/Decoder arch
BN

Calibrate

Mc

Mr

KL

ReLU

Calibrate

1×1 Conv

MLC

Multi-Knowledge Aggregation and Transfer for Semantic Segmentation
Online Learning

1

n
step

Yuang Liu, Wei Zhang* , Jun Wang*

step

1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Proxy Online Learning (POL)
{frankliu624, zhangwei.thu2011, wongjun}@gmail.com


n

trainable

fixed



step

Aux

step

1

n

(a) Previous KD methods

Abstract
As a popular deep neural networks (DNN) compression technique, knowledge distillation (KD) has attracted increasing
attentions recently. Existing KD methods usually utilize one
kind of knowledge in an intermediate layer of DNN for classification tasks to transfer useful information from cumbersome teacher networks to compact student networks. However, this paradigm is not very suitable for semantic segmentation, a comprehensive vision task based on both pixel-level
and contextual information, since it cannot provide rich information for distillation. In this paper, we propose a novel
multi-knowledge aggregation and transfer (MKAT) framework
to comprehensively distill knowledge within an intermediate
layer for semantic segmentation. Specifically, the proposed
framework consists of three parts: Independent Transformers and Encoders module (ITE), Auxiliary Prediction Branch
(APB), and Mutual Label Calibration (MLC) mechanism,
which can take advantage of abundant knowledge from intermediate features. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed approach, we conduct extensive experiments on three
segmentation datasets: Pascal VOC, Cityscapes, and CamVid,
showing that MKAT outperforms the other KD methods.

Image

knowledge
transfer

(b) Our KD methods

Label

feature
maps

Image

Label

...

soft
targets

calibrated
targets

knowledge
aggregation

Image

Label

Teacher

Image

Label

Student

Figure 1: Comparison of the (a) conventional KD methods
and (b) our MKAT framework.

the workflow of compressing a cumbersome network to a
compact network is often leveraged.
In this paper, we investigate knowledge distillation (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), a popular model compression way
in classification tasks (Deng et al. 2009) through transferring
knowledge from a cumbersome teacher network to a compact
student network. Thanks to the simplicity of classification,
which aims to distinguish the classes through image-level
features, existing KD methods (Zagoruyko and Komodakis
2017; Yim et al. 2017; Park et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2019;
Chung et al. 2020) could efficiently train the compact student
network depending on certain knowledge. Numerous distillation methods have been developed and various kinds of
knowledge are available. The selection of distillation strategies and knowledge is usually empirical, and nobody could
guarantee which strategy is the best for a specific task without
experiments (Ji and Zhu 2020; Menon et al. 2020). Different
from classification, semantic segmentation is a high-level and
comprehensive vision task, in which not only the extracted
features but also the contextual relationships parameterized
by the networks are critical for pixel prediction in a full image.
Hence, the student learning a single type of knowledge from
a teacher network’s layer is far from enough in segmentation
task. Although there are tiny methods distilling knowledge
from multiple teachers to supervise the student in classification (You et al. 2017; Zhu, Gong et al. 2018; Liu, Zhang,
and Wang 2020), they also only consider a single knowledge

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a crucial and challenging vision
task, which aims to assign a semantic category to each pixel
in an image. With the spectacular advances of deep neural networks, semantic segmentation has achieved significant progress and shown great potential in many practical
applications, such as autonomous driving (Levinson et al.
2011; Huang et al. 2018), scene understanding (Xiao, Sigal, and Jae Lee 2017; Sigurdsson et al. 2020), and image
editing (Morel, Petro, and Sbert 2012). The DNN-based segmentation methods, e.g., FCN (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015), SegNet (Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla 2017),
RefineNet (Lin et al. 2017), DeepLab (Chen et al. 2015,
2017a,b), and PSPNet (Zhao et al. 2017), have achieved
remarkable performance but bear up the problems of cumbersome architectures and expensive computation. This prevents
the segmentation networks from running on mobile or edge
devices, limiting the development of numerous practical applications in the mobile internet era. To tackle the problems,
* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1837

