The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

An Online Learning Approach to Sequential User-Centric Selection Problems
Junpu Chen, Hong Xie
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University
ironman98@sina.cn, xiehong2018@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract

Gai, Krishnamachari, and Jain 2012; Kveton et al. 2014;
Anantharam, Varaiya, and Walrand 1987a; Zhou and Tomlin
2018) and one can refer to related work for more details.
However, the canonical MP-MAB model and its variants
do not provide satisfactory tools for the sequential usercentric selection problems. To illustrate, consider the following user-centric selection problems arise from mobile edge
computing systems and ridesharing applications.

This paper proposes a new variant of multi-play MAB
model, to capture important factors of the sequential usercentric selection problem arising from mobile edge computing, ridesharing applications, etc. In the proposed model, each
arm is associated with discrete units of resources, each play
is associate with movement costs and multiple plays can pull
the same arm simultaneously. To learn the optimal action profile (an action profile prescribes the arm that each play pulls),
there are two challenges: (1) the number of action profiles
is large, i.e., M K , where K and M denote the number of
plays and arms respectively; (2) feedbacks on action profiles
are not available, but instead feedbacks on some model parameters can be observed. To address the first challenge,
we formulate a completed weighted bipartite graph to capture
key factors of the offline decision problem with given model
parameters. We identify the correspondence between action
profiles and a special class of matchings of the graph. We also
identify a dominance structure of this class of matchings. This
correspondence and dominance structure enable us to design
an algorithm named OffOptActPrf to locate the optimal
action efficiently. To address the second challenge, we design an OnLinActPrf algorithm. We design estimators for
model parameters and use these estimators to design a QuasiUCB index for each action profile. The OnLinActPrf uses
OffOptActPrf as a subroutine to select the action profile
with the largest Quasi-UCB index. We conduct extensive experiments to validate the efficiency of OnLinActPrf.

Example 1 (1) Sequential user-centric server selection in
mobile edge computing. There are a finite number of edge
servers and users, which can be modeled as arms and plays
respectively. A user offloading a task to an edge server corresponds a play pulling an arm, and it is associated with a
communication cost. In each time slot, the units of computing resources in an edge server can be modeled as the resource of the arm and it can be stochastic due to resource
scheduling. Multiple users can offload tasks to the same
server and the mobile edge computing platform assigns resource to users according to certain policies. To avoid conflicts and improve cumulative utility of all users, in each time
slot, users can collaborate to select the appropriate edge
servers to offload. (2) Sequential user(driver)-centric location selection in Ridesharing. There are a finite number
of pickup locations and drivers, which can be modeled as
arms and plays respectively. A driver moving to a pickup
location corresponds a play pulling an arm, and it is associated with a cost. The riding requests arrive at each arm
in a time slot can be modeled as the resource and it can be
stochastic due to uncertainty in the arrival. Multiple drivers
can drive to the same location and the platform assigns requests to drivers according to certain policies. To avoid conflicts and improve cumulative rewards of all drivers, drivers
can collaborate to select the location to move.

Introduction
MP-MAB is a sequential decision making model, which was
first studied by Anantharam et al. (Anantharam, Varaiya, and
Walrand 1987a). The canonical MP-MAB model considers
one decision maker, who sequentially makes decisions in a
finite number of time slots. In each time slot, the decision
to make is pulling a subset of arms with a given cardinality and as a result each pulled arm generates a reward according to an unknown probability distribution associated
with it. The objective of the decision maker is to maximize
the cumulative reward. This MP-MAB model has a number
of applications such as web advertising and cognitive radio
(Komiyama, Honda, and Nakagawa 2015). Various variants
of MP-MAB were proposed (Chen, Wang, and Yuan 2013;

Example 1 illustrates three common factors of the sequential user-centric selection problems: (1) each arm is associated with stochastic units of resources; (2) each play is associated with different costs in pulling different arms; (3) multiple plays can pull the same arm. We generalize MP-MAB
to capture those important factors. To illustrate, consider the
following simplified example of our model.
Example 2 Consider one decision maker and M = 2
arms. The decision maker needs to assign K = 2 plays
in each time slot. Here, each arm can be mapped as

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6231

