The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

I-SEA: Importance Sampling and Expected Alignment-Based
Deep Distance Metric Learning for Time Series Analysis and Embedding
Sirisha Rambhatla1 , Zhengping Che2 , Yan Liu3
1

Management Sciences Department, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
2
AI Innovation Center, Midea Group, Beijing, China
3
Computer Science Department, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A.
sirisha.rambhatla@uwaterloo.ca, chezp@midea.com, yanliu.cs@usc.edu
Abstract

lez 2012), meteorology and climate (Lhermitte et al. 2011;
Baranowski et al. 2015).
Measuring distances between data samples is key for faithfully encoding the geometries for embedding. To this end,
time-series are compared based on their similarity under a
certain monotonic and non-decreasing arrangement, or alignment (Sakoe and Chiba 1978). Notwithstanding their success,
popular methods rely on an optimal alignment, which prevents them from constituting a valid distance metric (Müller
2007; Mei et al. 2015; Cuturi and Blondel 2017), an essential
property for reliably capturing the geometry via pair-wise
distances (Cover and Hart 1967; Cox and Cox 2008).
Moreover, time-series metric learning, which learns supervised task-dependent embeddings via linear or non-linear
(deep learning-based) transformations to capture complex
temporal relationships among the features in multi-variate
time-series (Xing et al. 2002; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2007;
Weinberger and Saul 2009; Hoffer and Ailon 2015), also critically relies on effective pair-wise distance comparisons to
learn embeddings such that the distances in the transformed
space reflect the nearest neighbor properties imposed by the
supervision (Shalev-Shwartz, Singer, and Ng 2004). However,
since popular ways to compare time-series do not constitute
a distance metric, the learned representations or embeddings
based on such measures also do not encode the complex relationships between the data samples (Cover and Hart 1967;
Cox and Cox 2008). This situation is further exacerbated by irregular sampling, missing entries and other non-idealities. As
a result, developing reliable distance metrics for time-series
remains a challenging problem.
One way to form a valid distance metric is by averaging
distances over all possible alignment paths (Cuturi et al. 2007;
Che et al. 2017). However, these averages (Expected Alignments) are difficult to compute accurately since the computations involve expectation evaluations w.r.t a high-dimensional
distribution over all alignment paths. This problem is further
compounded by a) the inability to sample from this distribution due to the combinatorial nature of the problem (even
when known), and b) the distribution being over rare events
(since good alignments are rare).
To address these challenges, we propose I-SEA: Importance Sampling and Expected Alignment-based distance
metric for comparing time-series, which leverages a) deep
learning-based representations to capture complex temporal

Learning effective embeddings for potentially irregularly sampled time-series, evolving at different time scales, is fundamental for machine learning tasks such as classification and
clustering. Task-dependent embeddings rely on similarities
between data samples to learn effective geometries. However,
many popular time-series similarity measures are not valid distance metrics, and as a result they do not reliably capture the
intricate relationships between the multi-variate time-series
data samples for learning effective embeddings. One of the
primary ways to formulate an accurate distance metric is by
forming distance estimates via Monte-Carlo-based expectation
evaluations. However, the high-dimensionality of the underlying distribution, and the inability to sample from it, pose
significant challenges. To this end, we develop an Importance
Sampling based distance metric – I-SEA – which enjoys the
properties of a metric while consistently achieving superior
performance for machine learning tasks such as classification
and representation learning. I-SEA leverages Importance Sampling and Non-parametric Density Estimation to adaptively
estimate distances, enabling implicit estimation from the underlying high-dimensional distribution, resulting in improved
accuracy and reduced variance. We theoretically establish the
properties of I-SEA and demonstrate its capabilities via experimental evaluations on real-world healthcare datasets.

1

Introduction

Learning to embed time-series is at the heart of a number
of machine learning tasks such as classification (Hayashi,
Mizuhara, and Suematsu 2005), clustering (Ma et al. 2019),
forecasting (Murray 1993), recommendation, search and retrieval (McFee, Barrington, and Lanckriet 2012; Oord, Dieleman, and Schrauwen 2013). Further, representations which
encode the geometry of the data are also fundamental for
other data mining and information retrieval tasks with applications in healthcare (Yang and Shahabi 2004; Xiong and
Chen 2006; Saigo, Vert, and Akutsu 2006; Yassine, Singh,
and Alamri 2017), music retrieval (McFee, Barrington, and
Lanckriet 2012; Oord, Dieleman, and Schrauwen 2013),
speech processing (Sakoe and Chiba 1978; Myers, Rabiner,
and Rosenberg 1980; Chorowski et al. 2015), human activity
understanding (Tran and Sorokin 2008; Jiang, Jr, and GonzaCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8045

