The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

TS2Vec: Towards Universal Representation of Time Series
Zhihan Yue,1,2 Yujing Wang,1,2 Juanyong Duan,2 Tianmeng Yang,1,2
Congrui Huang,2 Yunhai Tong,1 Bixiong Xu2
1
Peking University, 2 Microsoft
{zhihan.yue,youngtimmy,yhtong}@pku.edu.cn
{yujwang,juanyong.duan,conhua,bix}@microsoft.com

Abstract

whole time series is insufficient to achieve satisfied performance.
Second, few of the existing methods distinguish the multiscale contextual information with different granularities. For
example, TNC (Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg 2021)
discriminates among segments with a constant length. TLoss (Franceschi, Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019) uses random
sub-series from the original time series as positive samples.
However, neither of them featurizes time series at different
scales to capture scale-invariant information, which is essential to the success of time series tasks. Intuitively, multiscale features may provide different levels of semantics and
improve the generalization capability of learned representations.
Third, most existing methods of unsupervised time series representation are inspired by experiences in CV and
NLP domains, which have strong inductive bias such as
transformation-invariance and cropping-invariance. However, those assumptions are not always applicable in modeling time series. For example, cropping is a frequently used
augmentation strategy for images. However, the distributions and semantics of time series may change over time,
and a cropped sub-sequence is likely to have a distinct distribution against the original time series.
To address these issues, this paper proposes a universal
contrastive learning framework called TS2Vec, which enables the representation learning of time series in all semantic levels. It hierarchically discriminates positive and negative samples at instance-wise and temporal dimensions; and
for an arbitrary sub-series, its overall representation can be
obtained by a max pooling over the corresponding timestamps. This enables the model to capture contextual information at multiple resolutions for the temporal data and generate fine-grained representations for any granularity. Moreover, the contrasting objective in TS2Vec is based on augmented context views, that is, representations of the same
sub-series in two augmented contexts should be consistent.
In this way, we obtain a robust contextual representation for
each sub-series without introducing unappreciated inductive
bias like transformation- and cropping-invariance.
We conduct extensive experiments on multiple tasks to
prove the effectiveness of our method. The results of time
series classification, forecasting and anomaly detection tasks
validate that the learned representations of TS2Vec are gen-

This paper presents TS2Vec, a universal framework for learning representations of time series in an arbitrary semantic
level. Unlike existing methods, TS2Vec performs contrastive
learning in a hierarchical way over augmented context views,
which enables a robust contextual representation for each
timestamp. Furthermore, to obtain the representation of an arbitrary sub-sequence in the time series, we can apply a simple
aggregation over the representations of corresponding timestamps. We conduct extensive experiments on time series classification tasks to evaluate the quality of time series representations. As a result, TS2Vec achieves significant improvement
over existing SOTAs of unsupervised time series representation on 125 UCR datasets and 29 UEA datasets. The learned
timestamp-level representations also achieve superior results
in time series forecasting and anomaly detection tasks. A linear regression trained on top of the learned representations
outperforms previous SOTAs of time series forecasting. Furthermore, we present a simple way to apply the learned representations for unsupervised anomaly detection, which establishes SOTA results in the literature. The source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/yuezhihan/ts2vec.

Introduction
Time series plays an important role in various industries
such as financial markets, demand forecasting, and climate
modeling. Learning universal representations for time series is a fundamental but challenging problem. Many studies (Tonekaboni, Eytan, and Goldenberg 2021; Franceschi,
Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019; Wu et al. 2018) focused on
learning instance-level representations, which described the
whole segment of the input time series and have showed
great success in tasks like clustering and classification.
In addition, recent works (Eldele et al. 2021; Franceschi,
Dieuleveut, and Jaggi 2019) employed the contrastive loss
to learn the inherent structure of time series. However, there
are still notable limitations in existing methods.
First, instance-level representations may not be suitable
for tasks that need fine-grained representations, for example,
time series forecasting and anomaly detection. In such kinds
of tasks, one needs to infer the target at a specific timestamp
or sub-series, while a coarse-grained representation of the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8980

