The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Energy-Based Generative Cooperative Saliency Prediction
Jing Zhang1 , Jianwen Xie2 , Zilong Zheng3 , Nick Barnes1
1
The Australian National University
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research
3
University of California, Los Angeles
zjnwpu@gmail.com, {jianwen, zilongzheng0318}@ucla.edu, nick.barnes@anu.edu.au
2

Abstract

Koch, and Niebur 1998) and affected by biological factors
(e.g., contrast sensitivity), contextual factors (e.g., task, experience, and interest), etc. In this way, it is more reasonable to represent visual saliency as a conditional probability
distribution over a saliency map given an input image, and
formulate the saliency prediction as a stochastic sampling
process from the conditional distribution.
Generative models (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Kingma and
Welling 2013; Xie et al. 2016, 2018a) have demonstrated
their abilities to represent conditional distributions of highdimensional data and produce multiple plausible outputs
given the same input (Zhu et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2021b).
In this work, we fit the saliency detection task into a generative framework, where the input image is the condition,
and the goal is to generate multiple saliency maps, representing the “subjective nature” of human visual saliency. Zhang
et al. (2020a, 2021) have used conditional variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013; Sohn, Lee,
and Yan 2015a), which are latent variable models (LVMs),
to implicitly represent distributions of visual saliency. However, VAEs only learn a stochastic mapping from image domain to saliency domain, and lack an intrinsic cost function
to evaluate the visual saliency output and guide the saliency
prediction process. As to a prediction task, a cost function
of solution is more reliable than a mapping function because
the former is more generalizable than the latter.
In contrast, we propose to model the conditional distribution of visual saliency explicitly via an energy-based
model (EBM) (Xie et al. 2016; Nijkamp et al. 2019), where
the energy function defined on both image and saliency
domains serves as a cost function of the saliency prediction. Given an input image, the saliency prediction can be
achieved by performing sampling from the EBM via Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Neal 2012) method, which is
a gradient-based algorithm that searches local minima of the
cost function of the EBM conditioned on the input image.
A typical high-dimensional EBM learns an energy function by MCMC-based maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE), which commonly suffers from convergence difficulty and computational expensiveness of the MCMC process. Inspired by prior success of energy-based generative
cooperative learning (Xie et al. 2018a, 2021b), we propose
the energy-based generative cooperative saliency prediction
framework to tackle the saliency prediction task. Specifi-

Conventional saliency prediction models typically learn a deterministic mapping from an image to its saliency map, and
thus fail to explain the subjective nature of human attention.
In this paper, to model the uncertainty of visual saliency, we
study the saliency prediction problem from the perspective of
generative models by learning a conditional probability distribution over the saliency map given an input image, and
treating the saliency prediction as a sampling process from
the learned distribution. Specifically, we propose a generative
cooperative saliency prediction framework, where a conditional latent variable model (LVM) and a conditional energybased model (EBM) are jointly trained to predict salient objects in a cooperative manner. The LVM serves as a fast but
coarse predictor to efficiently produce an initial saliency map,
which is then refined by the iterative Langevin revision of the
EBM that serves as a slow but fine predictor. Such a coarse-tofine cooperative saliency prediction strategy offers the best of
both worlds. Moreover, we propose a “cooperative learning
while recovering” strategy and apply it to weakly supervised
saliency prediction, where saliency annotations of training
images are partially observed. Lastly, we find that the learned
energy function in the EBM can serve as a refinement module
that can refine the results of other pre-trained saliency prediction models. Experimental results show that our model can
produce a set of diverse and plausible saliency maps of an
image, and obtain state-of-the-art performance in both fully
supervised and weakly supervised saliency prediction tasks.

Introduction
As a class-agnostic segmentation task, salient object detection has attracted a lot of attentions in the computer vision
community for its close relationship to human visual perception. A salient region is a visually distinctive scene region that can be located rapidly and with little human effort.
Salient object detection is commonly treated as a pixel-wise
binary output of a deterministic prediction model in most recent works (Wu, Su, and Huang 2019a; Qin et al. 2019; Wu,
Su, and Huang 2019b; Wei, Wang, and Huang 2020; Wang
et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2021). Despite the success of those recent models, the one-to-one deterministic mapping has prevented them from modeling the uncertainty of human salient
object prediction, which is considered to be subjective (Itti,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3280

