The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

JPV-Net: Joint Point-Voxel Representations for Accurate 3D Object Detection
Nan Song1 , Tianyuan Jiang1 , Jian Yao1,2 *
1

2

School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China
AI Application and Innovation Research Center, The Open University of Guangdong, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.R. China
{nanaoisong, tianyuan, jian.yao}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Voxel and point representations are widely applied in recent
3D object detection tasks from LiDAR point clouds. Voxel
representations contribute to efficiently and rapidly locating objects, whereas point representations are capable of describing intra-object spatial relationship for detection refinement. In this work, we aim to exploit the strengths of both
two representations, and present a novel two-stage detector,
named Joint Point-Voxel Network (JPV-Net). Specifically,
our framework is equipped with a Dual Encoders-Fusion Decoder, which consists of the dual encoders to extract voxel
features of sketchy 3D scenes and point features rich in geometric context, respectively, and the Feature Propagation Fusion (FP-Fusion) decoder to attentively fuse them from coarse
to fine. By making use of the advantages of these features,
the refinement network can effectively eliminate false detection and achieve better accuracy. Besides, to further develop
the perception characteristics of voxel CNN and point backbone, we design two novel intersection-over-union (IoU) estimation modules for proposal generation and refinement, both
of which can alleviate the misalignment between the localization and the classification confidence. Extensive experiments on the KITTI dataset and the ONCE dataset demonstrate that our proposed JPV-Net outperforms other state-ofthe-art methods with remarkable margins.

Figure 1: Illustration of detection results predicted by the
detector without original point representations (bottom left)
and our proposed JPV-Net (bottom right). Our JPV-Net with
geometric context can eliminate the false detection marked
in red, such as pillars and walls (detected as pedestrians and
cars).
clouds into compact forms, like birds-eye-view (BEV) images (Yang, Liang, and Urtasun 2018; Engelcke et al. 2017)
and voxel grids (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018; Lang et al. 2019),
the voxel-based methods apply CNNs to regular 2D images
or 3D voxels and efficiently extract features for detection.
By contrast, the point-based methods (Qi et al. 2018; Yang
et al. 2018) directly take raw point clouds as input and utilize PointNet and its variants (Qi et al. 2017a,b) to abstract
point features. The former methods specialise in regressing
high recall proposals, while the latter ones can avoid the information losses caused by voxelization and learn geometric
features for better object parsing.
Instead of using just one specific representation, there
are recent methods (He et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2020; Bhattacharyya and Czarnecki 2020) exploring to combine both
of them. Despite significant breakthroughs, these methods
still remain several problems restrictive to the representation capacity. Firstly, the point features derive from sketchy
voxel features, which merely sketch 3D scenes and hardly
compensate the lack of geometric information, leading to

Introduction
Object detection is a challenging and meaningful problem
in computer vision, since beneficial to many downstream vision tasks. With the rapid development of CNNs, tremendous success has been made in 2D object detection tasks.
Recently, increasing attention is shifted to 3D object detection from point clouds, which is essential to many practical
applications, such as autonomous driving vehicles, robotics
and AR/VR. Compared with 2D images, raw point clouds
are unordered, sparse and irregular, making it difficult to directly apply 2D detection methods to 3D scenes. Hence, it’s
crucial to explore an effective way to parse point clouds.
Existing LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods can
be generally divided into two categories, i.e., voxel-based
methods and point-based ones. By converting sparse point
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2271

