The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ALP: Data Augmentation Using Lexicalized PCFGs for Few-Shot Text
Classification
Hazel H. Kim1,2 , Daecheol Woo1 , Seong Joon Oh2 , Jeong-Won Cha3 , Yo-Sub Han1
1

Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2
NAVER AI Lab,
3
Changwon National University, Changwon, Republic of Korea
{hazel.kim, dwoo}@yonsei.ac.kr, coallaoh@gmail.com, jcha@changwon.ac.kr, emmous@yonsei.ac.kr
Abstract
Data augmentation has been an important ingredient for
boosting performances of learned models. Prior data augmentation methods for few-shot text classification have led
to great performance boosts. However, they have not been
designed to capture the intricate compositional structure of
natural language. As a result, they fail to generate samples
with plausible and diverse sentence structures. Motivated by
this, we present the data Augmentation using Lexicalized
Probabilistic context-free grammars (ALP) that generates
augmented samples with diverse syntactic structures with
plausible grammar. The lexicalized PCFG parse trees consider both the constituents and dependencies to produce a
syntactic frame that maximizes a variety of word choices in
a syntactically preservable manner without specific domain
experts. Experiments on few-shot text classification tasks
demonstrate that ALP enhances many state-of-the-art classification methods. As a second contribution, we delve into the
train-val splitting methodologies when a data augmentation
method comes into play. We argue empirically that the traditional splitting of training and validation sets is sub-optimal
compared to our novel augmentation-based splitting strategies that further expand the training split with the same number of labeled data. Taken together, our contributions on the
data augmentation strategies yield a strong training recipe for
few-shot text classification tasks.

Figure 1: Augmented samples. ALP generates the most
diverse, syntactically plausible, and label-preserving augmented samples. EDA: Easy Data Augmenatation, BT:
Back-translation, and SSMBA: Self-Supervised Manifold
based Data Augmentation.
The prior augmentation methods have successfully diversified the samples and improved classification performances
with a small number of labeled data. However, we point out
a crucial shortcoming shared by those methods: they do not
take into account the intricate compositional structure in natural language. Replacing words and modifying structures of
a sentence without linguistic rules and guidance are likely
to alter the syntax and semantics. It can be seen in Table 1
that those methods (EDA, BT, and SSMBA) fail to generate
samples with plausible and diverse sentence structures.
These limitations motivate us to design a grammar-based
augmentation method, which generates more plausible augmented data that better respects the syntax. We present ALP:
data Augmentation using Lexicalized Probabilistic contextfree grammars for few-shot text classification. We use lexicalized PCFG (or L-PCFG) parse trees to consider both
constituents and dependencies to capture two very different
views of syntax in text data and produce a syntactic frame
that maximizes a variety of word choices in a syntactically
preservable manner without specific domain experts.
Our approach aims to reach theoretical guarantees of increasing both the amount and the diversity of a given dataset
in a pretty label-preserving manner. As such, ALP is designed to produce augmented samples with diverse sentence
structures, each still respecting the linguistic rules and preserving the corresponding class label. The ALP samples in
Table 1 exemplify such augmented data. We demonstrate the
empirical superiority of ALP augmentation in the few-shot

Introduction
Labeled data are an essential ingredient in training deep
models. A major challenge in practice is the cost for collecting them. Data augmentation has provided a means to
enlarge the training data without resorting to additional labeling cost (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019). Training a text
classifier is not an exception. Researchers have proposed different ways to augment text data to expand the labeled text
data. These methods focus on diversifying the word choices
while preserving the labels for the classification task. For
example, Wei and Zou (2019) arbitrarily select target areas
of examples for synonym swap and random insertion. Yu
et al. (2018); Kumar, Choudhary, and Cho (2020) leverage
pre-trained language models for model-based augmentation.
Zhang, Yu, and Zhang (2020) create synthetic examples by
softly combining input and output sequences.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10894

