The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

HiTKG:
Towards Goal-Oriented Conversations via Multi-Hierarchy Learning
Jinjie Ni, Vlad Pandelea, Tom Young, Haicang Zhou, Erik Cambria
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{jinjie001, yang0552, haicang001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {vlad.pandelea, cambria}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Grilled Fish

B

Chinese Dish

B

China Town

C

Cinema

belong to

A
global goal

Human conversations are guided by short-term and longterm goals. We study how to plan short-term goal sequences
as coherently as humans do and naturally direct them to
an assigned long-term goal in open-domain conversations.
Goal sequences are a series of knowledge graph (KG) entityrelation connections generated by KG walkers that traverse
through the KG. The existing recurrent and graph attention
based KG walkers either insufficiently utilize the conversation states or lack global guidance. In our work, a hierarchical
model learns goal planning in a hierarchical learning framework. We present HiTKG, a hierarchical transformer-based
graph walker that leverages multiscale inputs to make precise
and flexible predictions on KG paths. Furthermore, we propose a two-hierarchy learning framework that employs two
stages to learn both turn-level (short-term) and global-level
(long-term) conversation goals. Specifically, at the first stage,
HiTKG is trained in a supervised fashion to learn how to plan
turn-level goal sequences; at the second stage, HiTKG tries to
naturally approach the assigned global goal via reinforcement
learning. In addition, we propose MetaPath as the backbone
method for KG path representation to exploit the entity and
relation information concurrently. We further propose Multisource Decoding Inputs and Output-level Length Head to
improve the decoding controllability. Our experiments show
that HiTKG achieves a significant improvement in the performance of turn-level goal learning compared with state-of-theart baselines. Additionally, both automatic and human evaluation prove the effectiveness of the two-hierarchy learning
framework for both short-term and long-term goal planning.

I love the grilled fish sooooo much!

Cinema

Yeah. it's a famous Chinese dish.

Haha, there's lots of Chinese food in China
Town, do you want to have a try?

exist in

Really? I would say I love China then!

A cinema named Golden Village is nearby,
how about watching a movie after dinner?

is near

For sure! That sounds great!

Figure 1: A goal-driven dialogue sample. Starting from an
initial entity (A), the chatbot plans turn-level conversation
goals (B) based on dialogue content and history goal trajectory, also trying to naturally direct B to a global goal (C).

Human conversations are usually guided by several small
goals or a global goal. As shown in Fig. 1, Grilled Fish,
Chinese Dish, China Town, and Cinema are turn-level goals,
while the Cinema is also the global goal at the same time.
During the conversation, the agent intends to approach the
global goal by naturally transitioning between turn-level
goals. However, most dialogue systems passively respond
to the user without explicit goals, causing incoherent or illogical responses. In recent years, some researchers attempt
to ground dialogue systems on knowledge graphs (KGs) to
actively guide conversation topics/goals. KG is a structured
knowledge network that consists of vertices, or entities, being connected by edges, or relations (Ji et al. 2022).
KGs contain commonsense relationships between realworld entities that can also be seen as conversation goals.
Generating or retrieving responses according to the walking
trajectory in KGs is effective in generating goal-oriented responses. The current graph walkers can generally be divided
into recurrent walkers (Young et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019;
Moon et al. 2019; Li et al. 2022) and graph attention based
walkers (Jung, Son, and Lyu 2020). Recurrent walkers decode KG paths depending on a fixed-length vector, which
creates a bottleneck for the performance.

Introduction
Building a human-like dialogue system has been a longlasting goal in the community of conversational AI (Ni et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2020). In the pursuit of this goal, multiple research topics have emerged: context awareness (Qiu
et al. 2020), response coherence (Liu et al. 2019a) and diversity (Su et al. 2020), speaker consistency (Madotto et al.
2019), empathetic response (Song et al. 2019), conversation
topic (Wu et al. 2019), knowledge-grounded system (Chen
et al. 2020), etc. Conversation goal is one of the most representative elements that reflect human intelligence.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11112

