The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ACGNet: Action Complement Graph Network for Weakly-Supervised Temporal
Action Localization
Zichen Yang1 , Jie Qin2 , Di Huang1∗
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
{yangzichen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, qinjiebuaa@gmail.com
Negative Example

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL) in
untrimmed videos has emerged as a practical but challenging task since only video-level labels are available. Existing
approaches typically leverage off-the-shelf segment-level features, which suffer from spatial incompleteness and temporal
incoherence, thus limiting their performance. In this paper,
we tackle this problem from a new perspective by enhancing segment-level representations with a simple yet effective graph convolutional network, namely action complement
graph network (ACGNet). It facilitates the current video segment to perceive spatial-temporal dependencies from others
that potentially convey complementary clues, implicitly mitigating the negative effects caused by the two issues above.
By this means, the segment-level features are more discriminative and robust to spatial-temporal variations, contributing
to higher localization accuracies. More importantly, the proposed ACGNet works as a universal module that can be flexibly plugged into different WTAL frameworks, while maintaining the end-to-end training fashion. Extensive experiments are conducted on the THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet1.2
benchmarks, where the state-of-the-art results clearly demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach.

Hard Example

Positive Example

ACGNet

Enhanced Features

？
Original Features

Figure 1: Intuition behind the proposed action complement
graph network (ACGNet). By exploiting complementary information across different segments, more discriminative
segment-level action representations are learned, leading to
more accurate localization results. The blue/green dashed
lines indicate the classification hyperplanes.

methods (Shou et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2018, 2019; Zhao
et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019) often make use of deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on video
datasets with frame-level annotations. Unfortunately, as the
dataset size grows rapidly and the total video length even
reaches several decades (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2016), it is
obviously unrealistic to acquire such fine-grained annotations. To this end, weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL) (Wang et al. 2017), where only videolevel action categories are annotated, has recently emerged
as a more practical task. To tackle WTAL, a common practice is to uniformly sample short segments of equal length,
for which classifiers are trained (usually through multiple
instance learning (Paul, Roy, and Roy-Chowdhury 2018))
with video-level labels, and localization results are generated based on the classification/activation scores of each segment with regard to action categories.
However, in this paradigm, the evenly sampling strategy
incurs two critical issues that greatly limit localization performance. On the one hand, the action segments often suffer from occlusion, blurring, out of field, etc., thus lack of
certain spatial details. On the other hand, a complete action
usually spans a long temporal window and a short action

Introduction
Understanding human actions in videos is an important research direction and has been actively studied in the computer vision community (Wu et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020;
Zolfaghari, Singh, and Brox 2018; Qin et al. 2017; Li et al.
2020; Qi et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020; Feichtenhofer et al.
2019; Kong et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Ni, Qin, and
Huang 2021). The fundamental step is to build meaningful spatial-temporal representations, which involve not only
static features from each frame, but also dynamic dependencies across consecutive frames. Among the main tasks
in action understanding, temporal action localization (Wu
et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2018, 2019) has received tremendous
efforts in the past several years, with a wide range of applications (e.g., intelligent surveillance, video retrieval, and
human-computer interaction).
To achieve accurate localization results, conventional
(fully-supervised) temporal action localization (FTAL)
∗

indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3090

