The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Trading Complexity for Sparsity in Random Forest Explanations
Gilles Audemard1 , Steve Bellart1 , Louènas Bounia1 ,
Frédéric Koriche1 , Jean-Marie Lagniez1 , Pierre Marquis1,2
1

Univ. Artois, CNRS, CRIL, F-62300 Lens, France
2
Institut Universitaire de France
{audemard, bellart, bounia, koriche, lagniez, marquis}@cril.fr

Abstract

are made is essential for securing user confidence in machine
learning technologies (Miller 2019; Molnar 2019).
This paper focuses on classifications made by random
forests, a popular ensemble learning method that constructs
multiple randomized decision trees during the training
phase, and predicts by taking a majority vote over the base
classifiers (Breiman 2001). Since decision tree randomization is achieved by essentially coupling data subsampling (or
bagging) and feature subsampling, random forests are easy
to implement, with few tuning parameters. Furthermore,
they often make accurate and robust predictions in practice,
even for small data samples and high-dimensional feature
spaces (Biau 2012). For these reasons, random forests have
been used in various applications including, among others,
computer vision (Criminisi and Shotton 2013), crime prediction (Bogomolov et al. 2014), ecology (Cutler et al. 2007),
genomics (Chen and Ishwaran 2012), and medical diagnosis
(Azar et al. 2014).
However, random forests are often considered far less
interpretable than decision trees. Thus, while many XAI
queries are tractable for decision trees, they are not tractable
for random forests (Audemard et al. 2021). Especially, the
prediction made on a given data instance can be easily interpreted by reading the direct reason furnished by the classifier. For a decision tree, it is the unique root-to-leaf path
that covers the instance (also known as its path-restricted
explanation (Izza, Ignatiev, and Marques-Silva 2020)). By
contrast, no such direct reason has been defined so far for a
random forest. More generally, a key issue in random forests
is to infer abductive explanations, that is, to capture in concise terms why a data instance is classified as positive or
negative by the model ensemble.

Random forests have long been considered as powerful model
ensembles in machine learning. By training multiple decision
trees, whose diversity is fostered through data and feature
subsampling, the resulting random forest can lead to more
stable and reliable predictions than a single decision tree. This
however comes at the cost of decreased interpretability: while
decision trees are often easily interpretable, the predictions
made by random forests are much more difficult to understand, as they involve a majority vote over multiple decision
trees. In this paper, we examine different types of reasons
that explain “why” an input instance is classified as positive
or negative by a Boolean random forest. Notably, as an alternative to prime-implicant explanations taking the form of
subset-minimal implicants of the random forest, we introduce
majoritary reasons which are subset-minimal implicants of a
strict majority of decision trees. For these abductive explanations, the tractability of the generation problem (finding one
reason) and the optimization problem (finding one minimumsized reason) are investigated. Unlike prime-implicant explanations, majoritary reasons may contain redundant features. However, in practice, prime-implicant explanations for which the identification problem is DP-complete - are
slightly larger than majoritary reasons that can be generated using a simple linear-time greedy algorithm. They are
also significantly larger than minimum-sized majoritary reasons which can be approached using an anytime PARTIAL
M AX SAT algorithm.

Introduction
Over the past two decades, rapid progress in statistical machine learning has led to the deployment of models endowed
with remarkable predictive capabilities. Yet, as the spectrum
of applications using statistical learning models becomes increasingly large, explanations for why a model is making
certain predictions are ever more critical. For example, in
medical diagnosis, if some model predicts that an image is
malignant, then the physician may need to know which features in the image have led to this classification. Similarly, in
the banking sector, if some model predicts that a customer
commits fraud, then the banker might want to know why.
Therefore, deriving explanations for why certain predictions

Related Work. Explaining random forest predictions has
received increasing attention in recent years (Bénard et al.
2021; Choi et al. 2020; Izza and Marques-Silva 2021). In the
classification setting, Choi et al. (2020) and Izza & MarquesSilva (2021) have focused on prime-implicant explanations,
also known as sufficient reasons (Darwiche and Hirth 2020).
Informally, if we view any random forest classifier as a
Boolean function f , then a prime-implicant explanation for
classifying a data instance x as positive by f is a subsetminimal implicant t of f covering x. By construction, t is
an abductive explanation involving only relevant features,

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5461

