The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ReX: An Efficient Approach to Reducing Memory Cost in Image Classification
Xuwei Qian, Renlong Hang* , Qingshan Liu
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
20191223049@nuist.edu.cn, renlong hang@163.com, qsliu@nuist.edu.cn

Abstract

high computational efficiency. However, the early modules
tend to have large intermediate activations and thus require
large working memory for inference (as shown in Figure 1
(left)). Since memory takes up a large portion of the device
chip and has high continuous power requirements, it tends
to be the most constrained resource on low-power devices
(Jouppi et al. 2017). Most low-power ARM Cortex-M* microcontrollers have less than 256KB of RAM.
To reduce working memory, a straightforward solution is
to use pooling or stride convolution with large stride length to
reduce the size of early activations, but this can result in poor
performance of subsequent classifiers as features important
to the task are washed out in early modules. Therefore, their
use is limited to small receptive fields, usually no larger than
3 × 3, and activation maps cannot be actively reduced by
aggregating larger receptive fields.
In this paper, we are interested in whether this peak RAM
can be effectively reduced without sacrificing accuracy. We
develop a memory-efficient recurrent aggregation operator
(ReX), aiming at bypassing large early activations while using RNNs to effectively aggregate intra-patch features within
a large receptive field to obtain delicate local representations.
Specifically, our method first takes a quick traverse along
each row and column with the first RNN to get a cheap summary of the row or column. Then we fuse them through a
linear projection to produce coarse global information. Finally, the second RNN summarizes the outputs of the first
RNN bi-directionally. A ReX layer consists of a single recurrent aggregation operator with stride s and allows rapid
down-sampling of images and activation maps. Additionally,
a single layer of ReX is most efficient when used to replace
multiple memory-intensive blocks in the early modules of
the network where the activation map sizes are large and thus
require the most memory and computation. The resulting
model, named ReXNet, can be trained efficiently on GPUs
and has high inference speed on mobile devices. An illustration of ReXNet is shown in Figure 1 (right).
Next, we further extend ReXNet so that it can stop inference dynamically based on the input sample. To implement
this idea, a natural solution is to calculate softmax prediction scores as confidence for the internal classifiers and then
set a threshold to make the classifier exit early. However,
we should note that prediction probabilities as confidence
metrics, may be unreliable and usually lead to significant

Exiting simple samples in adaptive multi-exit networks
through early modules is an effective way to achieve high
computational efficiency. One can observe that deployments
of multi-exit architectures on resource-constrained devices
are easily limited by high memory footprint of early modules.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach named recurrent
aggregation operator (ReX), which uses recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to effectively aggregate intra-patch features
within a large receptive field to get delicate local representations, while bypassing large early activations. The resulting
model, named ReXNet, can be easily extended to dynamic
inference by introducing a novel consistency-based early exit
criteria, which is based on the consistency of classification
decisions over several modules, rather than the entropy of the
prediction distribution. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets, i.e., Visual Wake Words, ImageNet-1k, demonstrate that our method consistently reduces the peak RAM
and average latency of a wide variety of adaptive models on
low-power devices.

Introduction
The inference-time computational demands of deep neural networks (DNNs) are increasing, owing to the “going
deeper” (Szegedy et al. 2015) strategy for improving accuracy. This strategy has enabled breakthroughs in many tasks,
such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) or speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), at the
price of costly inferences. The increased computational complexity makes various very deep models inappropriate for
resource-constrained processors, which are common in devices such as smartphones, wearables, and drones.
To address this issue, several recent works have shown
that some samples, which are already correctly classified by
shallow networks, do not necessitate the extra complexity
(Bolukbasi et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2019; Graves
2016). This observation has stimulated the study of inputadaptive mechanisms, in particular, multi-exit architectures
(Teerapittayanon, McDanel, and Kung 2016; Huang et al.
2018; Kaya, Hong, and Dumitras 2019; Hu et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2020). Exiting easy samples in adaptive multi-exit networks through early modules is an effective way to achieve
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2099

