The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Complete Criterion for Value of Information in Soluble Influence Diagrams
Chris van Merwijk∗ ,1 Ryan Carey∗ ,1 Tom Everitt2
1

University of Oxford,
2
DeepMind
chris.vanmerwijk@philosophy.ox.ac.uk, ryan.carey@jesus.ox.ac.uk, tomeveritt@google.com

Abstract

1

Q0

X

Influence diagrams have recently been used to analyse the
safety and fairness properties of AI systems. A key building
block for this analysis is a graphical criterion for value of
information (VoI). This paper establishes the first complete
graphical criterion for VoI in influence diagrams with multiple
decisions. Along the way, we establish two techniques for
proving properties of multi-decision influence diagrams: ID
homomorphisms are structure-preserving transformations of
influence diagrams, while a Tree of Systems is a collection of
paths that captures how information and control can flow in
an influence diagram.

D

V

X0

D0

U

chance node
decision node
utility node

Figure 1: Does X has positive value of information for D?

Introduction

One approach to analysing the safety and fairness of AI systems is to represent them using variants of Bayesian networks
(Everitt et al. 2019; Kusner et al. 2017). Influence diagrams
(IDs) can be viewed an extension of Bayesian networks for
representing agents (Howard et al. 2005; Everitt et al. 2021a).
This graphical perspective offers a concise view of key relationships, that abstracts away from much of the internal
complexity of modern-day AI systems.
Once a decision problem is represented graphically, key
aspects can be summarised. One well-studied concept is the
value of information (VoI) (Howard 1966), which describes
how much more utility an agent is able to obtain if it can
observe a variable in its environment, compared with if it
cannot. Other summary concepts includes “materiality”,
“value of control”, “response incentives”.
These concepts have been used to analyse the redirectability (Everitt et al. 2021b; Holtman 2020) of AI
systems, fairness (Everitt et al. 2021a; Ashurst et al. 2022),
ambitiousness (Cohen, Vellambi, and Hutter 2020), and
the safety of reward learning systems (Armstrong et al.
2020; Everitt et al. 2019; Langlois and Everitt 2021; Evans
and Kasirzadeh 2021; Farquhar, Carey, and Everitt 2022).
Typically, this analysis involves applying graphical criteria,
that indicate which properties can or cannot occur in a given
diagram, based on the graph structure alone. Graphical
criteria are useful because they enable qualitative judgements
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10034

even when the precise functional relationships between
variables are unknown or unspecified.
For the single-decision case, complete criteria have been
established for all four of the aforementioned concepts
(Everitt et al. 2021a). However, many AI applications such as
reinforcement learning involve an agent making multiple decisions. For the multi-decision case, multiple criteria for VoI
have been proposed (Nielsen and Jensen 1999; Shachter 1998;
Nilsson and Lauritzen 2000), but none proven complete.
This means that for some graphs, it is not known whether
a node can have positive VoI. For example, in Fig. 1, it is
not known whether it can be valuable for D to observe X.
Specifically, the edge X → D does not meet the criterion
of nonrequisiteness used by Nilsson and Lauritzen (2000),
so we cannot rule out that it contains valuable information.
However, the procedure that is used to prove completeness
in the single-decision setting (Everitt et al. 2021a) does not
establish positive VoI.
We prove that the graphical criterion of Nilsson and Lauritzen (2000) is complete, in that any environmental variable
not guaranteed to have zero VoI by their criterion must have
positive VoI in some compatible ID. In the course of the
proof, we develop several tools for reasoning about soluble
IDs. In summary, our main contributions are:
• ID homomorphisms. These allow us to transform an ID
into another with similar properties, that may be more
easily analysed (Section 4).
• Trees of systems. A system is a set of paths that make
information valuable to a decision. A tree of systems
describes how those paths traverse other decisions
(Section 5.3).
• A complete VoI criterion. We prove the criterion in
Section 5. In Section 6 we explain why this criterion may
be useful, how it may be used in an AI safety application,
and share an open source implementation.

