The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multilingual Code Snippets Training for Program Translation
Ming Zhu, Karthik Suresh, Chandan K. Reddy
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington VA - 22203.
mingzhu@vt.edu, karthiks@vt.edu, reddy@cs.vt.edu

Abstract

and C++) (Roziere et al. 2020a). 2) Adapting software to
different operating systems and platforms. For instance, for
an Android application to run on iOS and Web browsers,
it needs to be re-developed in Objective-C and Javascript.
Traditional rule-based program translation usually relies on
meticulous manual rule-crafting, which requires expertise
in both programming languages, and requires an enormous
amount of time and resources.
In recent years, deep learning based methods have
been employed to address this problem. The success of
transformer-based models (Vaswani et al. 2017) in natural language processing (NLP) has motivated researchers
to utilize them for programming languages. A few recent
works based on neural machine translation (NMT) have
been applied to this task and achieved some impressive results (Roziere et al. 2020a; Ahmad et al. 2021). One of the
important requirements for NMT models is the availability
of high-quality parallel data for model training. Such data
is even more critical for the program translation problem
since it requires the generated code to be logically precise
as well. However, existing code translation datasets have significant limitations. Most of the commonly used datasets (Lu
et al. 2021; Chen, Liu, and Song 2018; Nguyen, Nguyen,
and Nguyen 2015; Karaivanov, Raychev, and Vechev 2014;
Nguyen, Nguyen, and Nguyen 2013) only contain two languages (Java and C#), and the alignment comes from mining
similar function names from open source projects. Github
has a huge number of open-source repositories in several
languages. However, the data is not parallel and cannot be
used for supervised translation. Project CodeNet (Puri et al.
2021) and Google Code Jam1 datasets contain solutions submitted to coding problems in multiple programming languages. However, given that the alignment comes from solutions to the same problems, they are aligned at the task level.
Since programs that solve the same problem can have a high
diversity in terms of variable names, method design and logical flow, these datasets are not ideal to train program translation models. This especially becomes a bottleneck in case
of low resource languages, since models for those languages
cannot be trained using limited data with high variance in
distribution.
The scarcity of high quality parallel data has become a

Program translation aims to translate source code from one
programming language to another. It is particularly useful in
applications such as multiple-platform adaptation and legacy
code migration. Traditional rule-based program translation
methods usually rely on meticulous manual rule-crafting,
which is costly both in terms of time and effort. Recently,
neural network based methods have been developed to address this problem. However, the absence of high-quality parallel code data is one of the main bottlenecks which impedes
the development of program translation models. In this paper, we introduce CoST , a new multilingual Code Snippet
Translation dataset that contains parallel data from 7 commonly used programming languages. The dataset is parallel
at the level of code snippets, which provides much more finegrained alignments between different languages than the existing translation datasets. We also propose a new program
translation model that leverages multilingual snippet denoising auto-encoding and Multilingual Snippet Translation
(MuST) pre-training. Extensive experiments show that the
multilingual snippet training is effective in improving program translation performance, especially for low-resource
languages. Moreover, our training method shows good generalizability and consistently improves the translation performance of a number of baseline models. The proposed model
outperforms the baselines on both snippet-level and programlevel translation, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on
CodeXGLUE translation task. The code, data, and appendix
for this paper can be found at https://github.com/reddy-labcode-research/MuST-CoST.

Introduction
Program Translation is the problem of converting source
code from one programming language to another. Different from computer compilers which translate high-level programming languages to lower-level machine code, it mainly
focuses on translation between high-level programming languages. Efficient and accurate program translation is of
enormous value in a variety of scenarios, such as: 1) Migrating legacy code to another language. For instance, many
industries spend several hundreds of millions of dollars to
convert code written in older programming languages (such
as FORTRAN and COBOL) to newer ones (such as Java
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11783

https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/codejam/archive

