The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Frequency-Aware Contrastive Learning for Neural Machine Translation
Tong Zhang1 , Wei Ye1, * , Baosong Yang2 , Long Zhang1 , Xingzhang Ren2 ,
Dayiheng Liu2 , Jinan Sun1, * , Shikun Zhang1 , Haibo Zhang2 , Wen Zhao1
1

National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group
{zhangtong17, wye, zhanglong418, sjn, zhangsk, zhaowen}@pku.edu.cn
{yangbaosong.ybs, xingzhang.rxz, liudayiheng.ldyh, zhanhui.zhb}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Low-frequency word prediction remains a challenge in modern neural machine translation (NMT) systems. Recent adaptive training methods promote the output of infrequent words
by emphasizing their weights in the overall training objectives. Despite the improved recall of low-frequency words,
their prediction precision is unexpectedly hindered by the
adaptive objectives. Inspired by the observation that lowfrequency words form a more compact embedding space,
we tackle this challenge from a representation learning perspective. Specifically, we propose a frequency-aware tokenlevel contrastive learning method, in which the hidden state
of each decoding step is pushed away from the counterparts
of other target words, in a soft contrastive way based on the
corresponding word frequencies. We conduct experiments on
widely used NIST Chinese-English and WMT14 EnglishGerman translation tasks. Empirical results show that our proposed methods can not only significantly improve the translation quality but also enhance lexical diversity and optimize
word representation space. Further investigation reveals that,
comparing with related adaptive training strategies, the superiority of our method on low-frequency word prediction
lies in the robustness of token-level recall across different frequencies without sacrificing precision.

Figure 1: Average token representation distance and 1-gram
recall of token buckets with different frequencies on NIST
Zh-en test sets and a well-trained vanilla Transformer model.
We sort all tokens in target vocabulary based on their frequencies in LDC training set, and divide them into five
equal-size buckets. Obviously, the average token distance
and 1-gram recall similarly deteriorate with decreasing frequency.

Introduction
Neural Machine Translation (NMT, Sutskever, Vinyals, and
Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al.
2017) has made revolutionary advances in the past several
years. However, the effectiveness of these data-driven NMT
systems is heavily reliant on the large-scale training corpus,
where the word frequencies demonstrate a long-tailed distribution according to Zipf’s Law (Zipf 1949). The inherently
imbalanced data leads NMT models to commonly prioritize the generation of frequent words while neglect the rare
ones. Therefore, predicting low-frequency yet semantically
rich words remains a bottleneck of current data-driven NMT
systems (Vanmassenhove, Shterionov, and Way 2019).
A common practice to facilitate the generation of infrequent words is to smooth the frequency distribution of tokens. For example, it has become a de-facto standard to split

words into more fine-grained translation units such as subwords (Wu et al. 2016; Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016).
Despite that, NMT systems still face the token imbalance
phenomenon (Gu et al. 2020). More recently, some efforts
have been dedicated to applying adaptive weights to target
tokens in training objectives based on their frequency (Gu
et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021b). By heightening the exposure
of low-frequency tokens during training, these models can
meliorate the neglect of low-frequency tokens and improve
lexical diversity of the translations. However, simply promoting low-frequency tokens via loss re-weighting may potentially sacrifice the learning of high-frequency ones (Gu
et al. 2020; Wan et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020). Besides, our
further investigation on these methods reveals that generating more unusual tokens comes at the unexpected expense
of their prediction precision (Section ).

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In modern NMT models, the categorical distribution of
the predicted word in a decoding step is generated by multiplying the last-layer hidden state by the softmax embedding
11712

