The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

One More Check: Making “Fake Background” Be Tracked Again
Chao Liang1 * , Zhipeng Zhang2 * , Xue Zhou1, 3, 4† , Bing Li2 , Weiming Hu2
1

School of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
2
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
4
Intelligent Terminal Key Laboratory of SiChuan Province
chaoliang1996@gmail.com, zhangzhipeng2017@ia.ac.cn, zhouxue@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract
The one-shot multi-object tracking, which integrates object
detection and ID embedding extraction into a unified network, has achieved groundbreaking results in recent years.
However, current one-shot trackers solely rely on singleframe detections to predict candidate bounding boxes, which
may be unreliable when facing disastrous visual degradation, e.g., motion blur, occlusions. Once a target bounding
box is mistakenly classified as background by the detector,
the temporal consistency of its corresponding tracklet will
be no longer maintained. In this paper, we set out to restore
the bounding boxes misclassified as “fake background” by
proposing a re-check network. The re-check network innovatively expands the role of ID embedding from data association to motion forecasting by effectively propagating previous tracklets to the current frame with a small overhead. Note
that the propagation results are yielded by an independent and
efficient embedding search, preventing the model from overrelying on detection results. Eventually, it helps to reload the
“fake background” and repair the broken tracklets. Building
on a strong baseline CSTrack, we construct a new one-shot
tracker and achieve favorable gains by 70.7 → 76.4, 70.6 →
76.3 MOTA on MOT16 and MOT17, respectively. It also
reaches a new state-of-the-art MOTA and IDF1 performance.
Code is released at https://github.com/JudasDie/SOTS.

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.5

0.5

0.1

0.5

0.6

0.5

0.7

0.5

0.3

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.5

0.6

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

Figure 1: Illustration of tracklets generated from CSTrack
on two clips. Wherein, “fake background” is represented by
red box. The blue arrow indicates the motion direction of the
target. Best viewed in color and zoom in.
identification) network (Wojke, Bewley, and Paulus 2017;
Zheng et al. 2017). Recently, the one-shot methods (Xiao
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020a; Liang et al.
2020), which integrate detection and ID embedding extraction into a unified network, have drawn great attention because of their balanced speed and accuracy. By sharing features and conducting multi-task learning, they are capable
of running at quasi real-time speed. We observed that most
existing one-shot trackers work under a strong complete detection assumption, in other words, all targets are presumed
to be correctly localized by the detector. However, various
real-world challenges may break such assumption and cause
these approaches to fail. Fig. 1 shows typical failure cases
of the one-shot trackers (e.g., CSTrack (Liang et al. 2020)),
where targets (red boxes) are considered as the background
in some frames due to small foreground probabilities. The
missed targets will break temporal consistency of a tracklet.
Revisiting the failures of one-shot trackers, we find that
the integrated detector solely considers single-frame visual cues. Nevertheless, the challenging scenes in practical
tracking, e.g., occlusion, motion blur, background clutter,
will cause visual feature degradation, which may eventually
mislead the detector to classify the targets as background.
Hence, heavily relying on single frame detections is not reliable. In contrast, human vision has a dynamic view of tar-

Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT), aiming to estimate the trajectory of each target in a video sequence, is one of the most
fundamental yet challenging tasks in computer vision (Luo
et al. 2020). The related technique underpins significant applications from video surveillance to autonomous driving.
The current MOT methods are categorized into two-step
and one-shot frameworks. The two-step framework (Bewley
et al. 2016; Wojke, Bewley, and Paulus 2017; Yu et al. 2016;
Tang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019), following the trackingby-detection paradigm (or more precisely, tracking-afterdetection), disentangles MOT into candidate boxes prediction and tracklet association. Though favored in astonishing performance, they suffer from massive computation
cost brought by separately extracting ID (identity) embedding of each candidate box through an isolated ReID (Re* Equally Contribute.
† Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1546

