The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Pretrained Transformers as Universal Computation Engines
Kevin Lu,1,2 Aditya Grover,2,3 Pieter Abbeel,1 Igor Mordatch4
1

UC Berkeley, 2 Facebook AI Research, 3 UCLA, 4 Google Brain
kzl@fb.com

1

Abstract

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) has
shown broad successes in deep learning, serving as the backbone of large models for tasks such as modeling natural language (Brown et al. 2020), images (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020),
proteins (Jumper et al. 2021), and multimodal tasks comprising of both images and text (Lu et al. 2019; Radford et al.
2021). Inspired by these successes, we seek to explore the
generalization capabilities of a transformer in transferring
from one modality to another.
Classical approaches to sequence processing used recurrent neural network (RNN) approaches (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1985; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997).
In contrast, transformers utilize self-attention layers to extract features across tokens of a sequence, such as words
(Vaswani et al. 2017) or image patches (Dosovitskiy et al.
2020). Furthermore, it has become common practice to train
large models on unsupervised objectives before finetuning
or evaluating zero-shot generalization on a downstream task.
However, the downstream tasks that have been studied are
generally restricted to the same modality as the original
training set: for example, train GPT (Radford et al. 2018) on
a large language corpus, and finetune on a small task-specific
dataset. Our goal in this work is to investigate finetuning on
modalities distinct from the training modality.
We hypothesize that transformers – namely the selfattention layers – can be pretrained on a data-rich modality (i.e. where data is plentiful, such as a language corpus)
and identify feature representations that are useful for arbitrary data sequences, enabling downstream transfer to different modalities. In particular, we seek to investigate what
pretrained language models (LMs) are capable of in terms
of generalizing to other modalities with sequential structure.
To investigate this hypothesis, we take a transformer
model pretrained on natural language data, GPT-2 (Radford
et al. 2019), and finetune only the linear input and output
layers, as well as the positional embeddings and layer norm
parameters. These decisions are made to highlight the parameters already in the language model, and not for performance purposes. We call this model a Frozen Pretrained
Transformer (FPT). On a range of tasks across a variety of
modalities – including numerical computation, image classification, and protein fold prediction – FPT displays comparable performance to training the entire transformer from

We investigate the capability of a transformer pretrained on
natural language to generalize to other modalities with minimal finetuning – in particular, without finetuning of the selfattention and feedforward layers of the residual blocks. We
consider such a model, which we call a Frozen Pretrained
Transformer (FPT), and study finetuning it on a variety of
sequence classification tasks spanning numerical computation, vision, and protein fold prediction. In contrast to prior
works which investigate finetuning on the same modality as
the pretraining dataset, we show that pretraining on natural
language can improve performance and compute efficiency
on non-language downstream tasks. Additionally, we perform
an analysis of the architecture, comparing the performance of
a random initialized transformer to a random LSTM. Combining the two insights, we find language-pretrained transformers can obtain strong performance on a variety of nonlanguage tasks.

Test Accuracy

Performance on Multimodal Sequence Benchmarks
100 100

100 100

61

98

99 99.5
72

50

38

70

74

39

38
17

Bit Memory

Bit XOR

ListOps

Frozen Pretrained Transformer

42
12

MNIST

CIFAR-10

13

9

12

CIFAR-10 LRA Homology

Full Transformer

Introduction

Full LSTM

Figure 1: A frozen language-pretrained transformer (FPT)
– without finetuning the self-attention and feedforward layers – can achieve strong performance compared to a transformer fully trained from scratch on a downstream modality
on literature benchmarks (Tay et al. 2020; Rao et al. 2019).
We show results on diverse classification tasks (see Section
2.1): numerical computation (Bit Memory/XOR, ListOps),
image classification (MNIST, CIFAR-10, LRA), and protein fold prediction (Homology). We also show results for
a fully-trained from-scratch LSTM as a baseline. Our code
is available at: github.com/kzl/universal-computation

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7628

