The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

VAST: The Valence-Assessing Semantics Test
for Contextualizing Language Models
Robert Wolfe and Aylin Caliskan
University of Washington
rwolfe3@uw.edu, aylin@uw.edu

Abstract

Introduction

We introduce VAST, the Valence-Assessing Semantics Test,
a novel intrinsic evaluation task for contextualized word embeddings (CWEs). Despite the widespread use of contextualizing language models (LMs), researchers have no intrinsic evaluation task for understanding the semantic quality of
CWEs and their unique properties as related to contextualization, the change in the vector representation of a word based
on surrounding words; tokenization, the breaking of uncommon words into subcomponents; and LM-specific geometry
learned during training. VAST uses valence, the association
of a word with pleasantness, to measure the correspondence
of word-level LM semantics with widely used human judgments, and examines the effects of contextualization, tokenization, and LM-specific geometry. Because prior research
has found that CWEs from OpenAI’s 2019 English-language
causal LM GPT-2 perform poorly on other intrinsic evaluations, we select GPT-2 as our primary subject, and include
results showing that VAST is useful for 7 other LMs, and can
be used in 7 languages. GPT-2 results show that the semantics
of a word incorporate the semantics of context in layers closer
to model output, such that VAST scores diverge between our
contextual settings, ranging from Pearson’s ρ of .55 to .77
in layer 11. We also show that multiply tokenized words are
not semantically encoded until layer 8, where they achieve
Pearson’s ρ of .46, indicating the presence of an encoding
process for multiply tokenized words which differs from that
of singly tokenized words, for which ρ is highest in layer 0.
We find that a few neurons with values having greater magnitude than the rest mask word-level semantics in GPT-2’s
top layer, but that word-level semantics can be recovered by
nullifying non-semantic principal components: Pearson’s ρ in
the top layer improves from .32 to .76. Downstream POS tagging and sentence classification experiments indicate that the
GPT-2 uses these principal components for non-semantic purposes, such as to represent sentence-level syntax relevant to
next-word prediction. After isolating semantics, we show the
utility of VAST for understanding LM semantics via improvements over related work on four word similarity tasks, with a
score of .50 on SimLex-999, better than the previous best of
.45 for GPT-2. Finally, we show that 8 of 10 WEAT bias tests,
which compare differences in word embedding associations
between groups of words, exhibit more stereotype-congruent
biases after isolating semantics, indicating that non-semantic
structures in LMs also mask social biases.

Contextualizing language models (LMs) are among the most
widely used of the ”foundation models” described by Bommasani et al. (2021), a class of powerful but poorly understood AI systems trained on immense amounts of data
and used or adapted in many domains. LMs are widely deployed: Google uses BERT for search (Nayak 2019), Facebook uses Linformer for hate speech detection (Schroepfer
2020), and the LMs of the Transformers library of Wolf
et al. (2020) are downloaded by millions. However, despite
the popularity and use of LMs in consequential applications
like medical coding (Salian 2019) and mental health chatbots (Tewari et al. 2021), there is no intrinsic evaluation task
- a method to assess quality based on the correspondence of
vector geometric properties to human judgments of language
- made for contextualized word embeddings (CWEs). Other
research assesses CWE semantics using tasks for static word
embeddings (SWEs), like SimLex-999, but such tasks are
not designed to capture the dynamic behavior of CWEs.
We introduce VAST, the Valence-Assessing Semantics
Test, an intrinsic evaluation task for CWEs using valence
(association with pleasantness) to measure word-level semantics. VAST is unique among intrinsic evaluation tasks,
as it is designed for LMs, and measures LM behavior related
to how contextualization (change in the vector representation of a word based on surrounding words), tokenization
(breaking of uncommon words into subcomponents), and
dominant directions (high-magnitude neurons) affect the semantics of CWEs. VAST takes Pearson’s ρ of CWE valence
associations and human ratings of valence to quantify the
correspondence of CWE semantics with widely held human
judgments. We apply VAST to the 12-layer version of the
English-language causal LM GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019).
The contributions of VAST are outlined below:
VAST measures the effects of contextualization on
word-level semantics. Adaptation to context allows CWEs
to differently represent the senses of polysemous words, and
CWEs from LMs like GPT encode information about a full
sentence (Radford et al. 2018). However, we lack methods
for distinguishing when a CWE reflects information related
to a word, its context, or both. VAST measures valence in
aligned (context has the same valence as the word), misaligned, bleached (no semantic information but the word),
and random settings to isolate LM layers where the seman-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11477

