The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

fGOT: Graph Distances Based on Filters and Optimal Transport
Hermina Petric Maretic1, 2 , Mireille El Gheche3 , Giovanni Chierchia4 , Pascal Frossard1
1

EPFL, LTS4, Lausanne, Switzerland
Amazon, London, United Kingdom
3
Sony AI, Zürich, Switzerland
4
Université Gustave Eiffel, LIGM (UMR 8049), ESIEE Paris, CNRS, F-93162, Noisy-le-Grand, France
hermina.petricmaretic@epfl.ch, mireille.elgheche@sony.com, giovanni.chierchia@esiee.fr, pascal.frossard@epfl.ch
2

Abstract

it does not capture the importance of an edge in the graph.
Edges can have a very different influence on the graph structure, as well as on its local or global spectral characteristics.
In this paper, we propose the filter graph distance, a dissimilarity measure based on optimal transport, which compares two graphs through the probability distribution of data
generated with graph filters. Graph filters have been largely
studied in the field of Graph Signal Processing (Shuman
et al. 2013; Ortega et al. 2018), and offer a high level of
flexibility in modelling the relationship between data and the
underlying graph.1 Hence, their use in defining filter graph
distance permits to capture a wide range of structural graph
properties, including local characteristics, global structure,
and any combination of spectral graph properties.
Equipped with this new distance, we derive an efficient
approximation for the graph alignment problem, which is a
necessary step in graph comparison. Our approximation permits to remove computational complexity bottlenecks in the
alignment problem (e.g., (Petric Maretic et al. 2019)). It also
enables the comparison of graphs of different size, which
brings an important advantage in practice. The solution of
the graph alignment problem directly leads to the computation of the minimal filter graph distance, which eventually
permits to compare different graphs.
Our new formulation of the graph alignment problem
leads to a nonconvex optimization framework. We solve
the problem efficiently with a novel stochastic algorithm
based on mirror gradient descent (MDG), which has the peculiarity of being applicable to any filter graph distance.
We demonstrate the benefits of our method in alignment,
clustering and classification tasks with both synthetic and
real graph datasets. Filter graph distances show better performance than the standard optimal transport distances on
simple graph alignment tasks, while significantly decreasing the computational cost of alignment recovery. The proposed stochastic algorithm also achieves significantly better
results for community detection in structured graphs, when
compared to the vanilla MGD. This suggests that our algorithm successfully addresses the inherent difficulty of graph
alignment. Finally, experiments on benchmark graph classification datasets demonstrate how the benefits of our method
propagate to other distance-related tasks, confirming the im-

Graph comparison deals with identifying similarities and dissimilarities between graphs. A major obstacle is the unknown
alignment of graphs, as well as the lack of accurate and inexpensive comparison metrics. In this work we introduce the
filter graph distance. It is an optimal transport based distance
which drives graph comparison through the probability distribution of filtered graph signals. This creates a highly flexible distance, capable of prioritising different spectral information in observed graphs, offering a wide range of choices
for a comparison metric. We tackle the problem of graph
alignment by computing graph permutations that minimise
our new filter distances, which implicitly solves the graph
comparison problem. We then propose a new approximate
cost function that circumvents many computational difficulties inherent to graph comparison and permits the exploitation of fast algorithms such as mirror gradient descent, without grossly sacrificing the performance. We finally propose
a novel algorithm derived from a stochastic version of mirror gradient descent, which accommodates the non-convexity
of the alignment problem, offering a good trade-off between
performance accuracy and speed. The experiments on graph
alignment and classification show that the flexibility gained
through filter graph distances can have a significant impact
on performance, while the difference in speed offered by the
approximation cost makes the framework applicable in practical settings.

Introduction
With the rapid development of digitization in various domains, the volume of data continuously increases. A large
share of it takes the form of structured data, which is often represented by graphs that capture potentially complex
information structures. The analysis of such data often requires the design of algorithms that are able to properly
compute distances between different graphs. It stays however pretty challenging to compare graphs for two main reasons. First, it is usually not clear a priori how to align the
nodes of graphs under comparison, leading to a very large
number of possible solutions. Second, even if the nodes are
aligned, it is not obvious how to define a meaningful metric for comparing graphs. In particular, a naive comparison
of graph adjacency matrices is not an optimal measure, as
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7710

The data living on a graph is also referred to as a graph signal.

