The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Bounded Context-Free-Grammar via LSTM and the Transformer:
Difference and Explanations
Hui Shi1 , Sicun Gao1 , Yuandong Tian2 , Xinyun Chen3 , Jishen Zhao1
1

University of California San Diego,
2
Facebook AI Research,
3
University of California, Berkeley
{hshi, jzhao, sicung}@ucsd.edu, yuandong@fb.com, xinyun.chen@berkeley.edu
Abstract

hghani et al. 2018; Joulin and Mikolov 2015). Several explanations of the performance gap between practice and theory
are 1) some theoretical proofs relies on infinite precision
assumption while the precision in practical computations
is limited (Weiss, Goldberg, and Yahav 2018; Korsky and
Berwick 2019); 2) given fixed latent space dimension, according to the pigeonhole principle, as input sequence length
goes towards infinity, there will be information that can not
encode into the latent space or is forgotten (Hahn 2020).
Despite the soundness of the theoretical proofs and explanations, none of them can directly explain the phenomenons
in practice: 1) given the same computation precision, Transformer has an advantage over LSTM model in many cases;
2) both Transformer and LSTM fail even when the input
sequence is short and their latent space dimension is huge.
In this work, we study the empirical representation power
of the LSTM and the Transformer networks and investigate
the origination of their difference. We compare the models via learning context-free languages. The reason to study
CFLs other than regular languages or Turing machines is that
the learning of CFLs provides most insights into NLP tasks
where understanding the underlying hierarchy of a sequence
(e.g. utterance and programs) is crucial. In the rest of the
paper, we will first introduce an oracle training paradigm to
predict the status of the PDA that accepts the CFL, and a
regularizer to explicitly decompose the latent space of the
LSTM and the Transformer such that the PDA state and the
positions in the stack are encoded in distinct dimensions.
Lastly, the experiment section exhibits the empirical results
and leads us to the following conclusions 1 :
• LSTM and the Transformer have a similar upper bound
of empirical representation power in simulating PDAs.
• LSTM fails to factorize its latent space to encode the
state and multiple elements of the stack without explicit
supervision, which is the pivot to its compromised performance in real-world tasks. Meanwhile, the Transformer
is marginally affected by the absence of explicit decomposition regularization.
• Language recognition is not a reliable task to compare the
empirical capacity of LSTM and Transformer since the
results are sensitive to the setting of PDAs, the hyperpa-

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Transformers are two
popular neural architectures used in natural language processing tasks. Theoretical results show that both are Turingcomplete and can represent any context-free languages (CFLs).
In practice, it is often observed that the Transformer models
have better representation power than the LSTM. But the reason is barely understood. We study such practical differences
between LSTM and the Transformer and propose an explanation based on their latent space decomposition patterns. To
achieve this goal, we introduce an oracle training paradigm,
which forces the decomposition of the latent representation
of LSTM and the Transformer, and supervises with the transitions of the corresponding Pushdown Automaton (PDA) of
the CFL. With the forced decomposition, we show that the
performance upper bounds of LSTM and the Transformer in
learning CFL are close: both of them can simulate a stack
and perform stack operation along with state transitions. However, the absence of forced decomposition leads to the failure
of LSTM models to capture the stack and stack operations,
while having a marginal impact on the Transformer model.
Lastly, we connect the experiment on the prototypical PDA to
a real-world parsing task to re-verify the conclusions.

Introduction
The LSTM network has achieved great success in various
natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014; Wang et al. 2016), and in recent years, the
Transformer network keeps breaking the record of state-ofthe-art performances established by LSTM-based models in
translation (Vaswani et al. 2017), question-answering (Devlin
et al. 2018), and so on(Dehghani et al. 2018; Brown et al.
2020). Besides exploring the capacity boundary of the Transformer network, there is an increasing interest in investigating
the representation power of the Transformer network and explaining its advantage over the LSTM models theoretically
and empirically.
Existing analysis has proven that both LSTM (Siegelmann and Sontag 1995) and the Transformer network (Pérez,
Marinković, and Barceló 2019) are Turing-Complete. However, much empirical evidence shows both models are far
from perfect in imitating even simple Turing machines (De-

1
The code is available at https://github.com/shihui2010/learn
cfg with neural network

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8267

