The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

SCAN: Cross Domain Object Detection with Semantic Conditioned Adaptation
Wuyang Li1 , Xinyu Liu1 , Xiwen Yao2 , Yixuan Yuan1 *
1

City University of Hong Kong
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{wuyangli2, xliu423}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, yaoxiwen517@gmail.com, yxyuan.ee@cityu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
The domain gap severely limits the transferability and scalability of object detectors trained in a specific domain when
applied to a novel one. Most existing works bridge the domain gap by minimizing the domain discrepancy in the category space and aligning category-agnostic global features.
Though great success, these methods model domain discrepancy with prototypes within a batch, yielding a biased estimation of domain-level distribution. Besides, the categoryagnostic alignment leads to the disagreement of class-specific
distributions in the two domains, further causing inevitable
classification errors. To overcome these two challenges, we
propose a novel Semantic Conditioned AdaptatioN (SCAN)
framework such that well-modeled unbiased semantics can
support semantic conditioned adaptation for precise domain
adaptive object detection. Specifically, class-specific semantics crossing different images in the source domain are graphically aggregated as the input to learn an unbiased semantic paradigm incrementally. The paradigm is then sent to a
lightweight manifestation module to obtain conditional kernels to serve as the role of extracting semantics from the
target domain for better adaptation. Subsequently, conditional kernels are integrated into global alignment to support the class-specific adaptation in a well-designed Conditional Kernel guided Alignment (CKA) module. Meanwhile,
rich knowledge of the unbiased paradigm is transferred to the
target domain with a novel Graph-based Semantic Transfer
(GST) mechanism, yielding the adaptation in the categorybased feature space. Comprehensive experiments conducted
on three adaptation benchmarks demonstrate that SCAN outperforms existing works by a large margin.

Figure 1: Illustration of the mAP (%) improvement after replacing the output maps, including classification (CLS), regression (REG), and centerness (CTR) output maps, compared with source only model.
conducted that introduce Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) to adapt object detectors trained in the annotated
source domain to an unlabeled target domain. A natural idea
is to adapt features with adversarial learning (Chen et al.
2018; Saito et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020), giving a pixel-topixel adaptation on feature pyramids. Instead of aligning the
overall feature maps, some works (Kim et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2020) focus on RPN-based region proposals and adopt a
foreground adaptation to align those regions of interest. Recently, some works (Xu et al. 2020; Zhang, Wang, and Mao
2021) explore the category-level adaptation and model semantic knowledge with category centers, referred to as prototypes within inner-batch. They measure the distance between prototypes as domain discrepancy and minimize this
discrepancy to bridge the domain gap.
Though great success, there are two challenges in existing
category-level approaches. Firstly, these works model category prototypes within a batch, which inevitably bring about
a biased estimation of domain-level distribution due to the
limited and noisy information within the batch-wise observation. Since object occlusion and imbalanced object categories always appear in image batches, prototypes within a
batch are hard to provide critical cues to establish an implicit probabilistic model fitting class-specific distributions
well, leading to the difficulty of the alignment. Furthermore,

Introduction
Object detection (Ren et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2017; Tian
et al. 2019) aims to recognize and localize object instances
of predefined categories, which plays a critical part in several applications like self-driving and video analysis, etc.
While these approaches have achieved remarkable performance when trained and tested in a specific domain, they
will suffer severe performance degradation if evaluated in a
novel domain due to the domain gap (Chen et al. 2018).
To address this challenge, a variety of studies (Chen et al.
2018; Xu et al. 2020; Hoffman et al. 2016) have been
* Yixuan Yuan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1421

