The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Bayesian Optimization over Permutation Spaces
Aryan Deshwal, Syrine Belakaria, Janardhan Rao Doppa, Dae Hyun Kim
School of EECS, Washington State University
{aryan.deshwal, syrine.belakaria, jana.doppa, daehyun.kim}@wsu.edu

Abstract

the sequence of inputs for function evaluation to uncover
high-performing inputs.
A large body of the BO literature focuses on continuous
input spaces (Greenhill et al. 2020) with few recent works
(Oh et al. 2019; Baptista and Poloczek 2018; Dadkhahi et al.
2020; Doppa 2021) tackling the challenging setting of input spaces over discrete structures, e.g., sets, sequences, and
graphs. Unlike continuous spaces, discrete spaces come with
many unique challenges such as difficulty of defining a general representation, non-smoothness, etc. which require specialized treatment of different types of combinatorial structures (BakIr et al. 2007). In this paper, we consider the understudied space of all permutations of d objects, which is
equivalently characterized by the non-Abelian Symmetric
group Sd of cardinality d!, consisting of all bijections from
a set to itself. In contrast, all of the existing work on combinatorial BO is focused on the input space with categorical/binary variables which corresponds to the direct sums of
abelian cyclic groups Z/cZ of cardinality cd , where each of
the d variables can take one of the c categories. Combinatorial BO methods such as COMBO (Oh et al. 2019) cannot
exploit the special characteristics of permutation spaces. For
example, they account for dd space ≫ d! permutation space.
The key challenge to devise effective solutions for BO
over Permutation Spaces (BOPS) is to trade-off the complexity of statistical model and tractability of search to select permutations with high utility/acquisition values (e.g.,
expected improvement). We propose and evaluate two algorithms for BOPS by addressing this challenge. First, BOPST uses a simpler statistical model in the form of GP with
Kendall kernels (Jiao and Vert 2015). By considering the
weight space view of the GP model and employing Thompson sampling as the acquisition strategy, we show that the
acquisition function optimization is a Quadratic Assignment
problem which can be solved using Tractable Semi-definite
programming relaxation based solvers. Second, BOPS-H
uses a complex statistical model in the form of GP with
Mallow kernels (Jiao and Vert 2015; Mania et al. 2018).
We employ expected improvement as the acquisition strategy and perform Heuristic search (local search with multiple restarts) to select the permutations for function evaluation. We analyze the theoretical properties of BOPS-T and in
terms of regret bounds and show that it achieves a sublinear
(time) regret. Our comprehensive experiments on both syn-

Optimizing expensive to evaluate black-box functions over
an input space consisting of all permutations of d objects is
an important problem with many real-world applications. For
example, placement of functional blocks in hardware design
to optimize performance via simulations. The overall goal is
to minimize the number of function evaluations to find highperforming permutations. The key challenge in solving this
problem using the Bayesian optimization (BO) framework is
to trade-off the complexity of statistical model and tractability of acquisition function optimization. In this paper, we propose and evaluate two algorithms for BO over Permutation
Spaces (BOPS). First, BOPS-T employs Gaussian process
(GP) surrogate model with Kendall kernels and a Tractable
acquisition function optimization approach based on Thompson sampling to select the sequence of permutations for evaluation. Second, BOPS-H employs GP surrogate model with
Mallow kernels and a Heuristic search approach to optimize
expected improvement acquisition function. We theoretically
analyze the performance of BOPS-T to show that their regret grows sub-linearly. Our experiments on multiple synthetic and real-world benchmarks show that both BOPS-T
and BOPS-H perform better than the state-of-the-art BO algorithm for combinatorial spaces. To drive future research
on this important problem, we make new resources and realworld benchmarks available to the community.

1

Introduction

Optimizing expensive black-box functions is a common
problem in many science and engineering applications (Frazier and Wang 2016; Yang, Wu, and Arnold 2019; Zhou et al.
2020; Deshwal, Simon, and Doppa 2021). An important
class of such problems involve optimizing over the space of
all permutations of a set of objects. For example, in the design of integrated circuits (ICs), we need to find placement
of functional blocks to optimize performance via expensive
simulations. Another example is to find a schedule for the
jobs in additive manufacturing (parts can be built layer-bylayer) to optimize throughput via simulations. Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al. 2016) has proven to be a
successful approach for optimizing black-box functions in a
sample-efficient manner. The key idea is to learn a surrogate
statistical model, e.g., Gaussian process, and use it to select
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6515

