The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Batch Active Learning with Graph Neural Networks via Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Yuheng Zhang1 , Hanghang Tong1 , Yinglong Xia2 , Yan Zhu2 , Yuejie Chi3 , Lei Ying4
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Facebook AI
3
CMU
4
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
yuhengz2@illinois.edu, htong@illinois.edu, yxia@fb.com, yzhu@fb.com, yuejiechi@cmu.edu, leiying@umich.edu
Abstract

Although there exist many effective active learning algorithms for computer vision and natural language processing (Aggarwal et al. 2014) (Settles 2009), these methods
are primarily designed for independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data which is quite different from graphstructured data containing inter-dependent connections between different samples (i.e., nodes). How to design an
effective and efficient active learning method for graphs
largely remains a challenge.
Recently, several methods have been proposed (Cai,
Zheng, and Chang 2017) (Gao et al. 2018) (Hu et al. 2020)
to incorporate the graph characteristics into active learning. They design several selection metrics such as information entropy, node centrality, and information density to
measure the informativeness of candidate unlabeled nodes.
To balance the weights of different metrics, (Cai, Zheng,
and Chang 2017) proposes to use a time-sensitive parameter drawn from a beta distribution. (Gao et al. 2018) utilizes a multi-armed bandit mechanism to learn an adaptive
weight vector with performance improvement as the reward.
To further exploit the topology information on graphs, (Hu
et al. 2020) proposes a transferable reinforcement learning
framework and parameterizes the policy network as a graph
convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2016). At
each iteration, they select the sample with the highest action probability output from the policy network. Although
(Hu et al. 2020) has achieved remarkable results with small
query budgets, it becomes inefficient when applied to a large
scale dataset where selecting samples one by one takes prolonged time. Hence, in order to improve the efficiency of the
active learning method, a more promising setting is batch
active learning where the agent acquires labels of multiple
samples at each time.
Different from one-by-one active learning, batch active
learning poses several unique challenges as follows. First, in
the batch setting, the agent not only needs to select the most
informative samples but also needs to avoid selecting redundant samples. Effective acquisition strategies should simultaneously consider informativeness and diversity. Second,
when applying reinforcement learning to batch active learning, each action represents the selection of multiple nodes
instead of a single node, which causes a combinatorial explosion of the action space. One has to carefully design a
batch-mode algorithm in order to train the policy network

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved tremendous
success in many graph learning tasks such as node classification, graph classification and link prediction. For the classification task, GNNs’ performance often highly depends on the
number of labeled nodes and thus could be significantly hampered due to the expensive annotation cost. The sparse literature on active learning for GNNs has primarily focused on selecting only one sample each iteration, which becomes inefficient for large scale datasets. In this paper, we study the batch
active learning setting for GNNs where the learning agent can
acquire labels of multiple samples at each time. We formulate batch active learning as a cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning problem and present a novel reinforced
batch-mode active learning framework (B I G E N E). To avoid
the combinatorial explosion of the joint action space, we introduce a value decomposition method that factorizes the total Q-value into the average of individual Q-values. Moreover, we propose a novel multi-agent Q-network consisting
of a graph convolutional network (GCN) component and a
gated recurrent unit (GRU) component. The GCN component takes both the informativeness and inter-dependences
between nodes into account and the GRU component enables
the agent to consider interactions between selected nodes
in the same batch. Experimental results on multiple public
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
proposed method.

Introduction
Graph data are pervasive in many real-world scenarios, e.g.,
social networks, citation networks, protein-protein interaction networks and many more. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have attracted tremendous attention because
of significant success in downstream tasks such as node classification (Kipf and Welling 2016), link prediction (Zhang
and Chen 2018), and graph classification (Morris et al.
2019). However, many of these successes have been limited due to expensive annotation costs. Active learning is
a promising direction to tackle this challenge. With effective active learning algorithms for graphs, the learning agent
could identify samples which are most informative for improving the training. Thus, a high accuracy GNN could be
trained with minimal labeling effort.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9118

