The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Recursive Reasoning Graph
for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Xiaobai Ma1 , David Isele2 , Jayesh K. Gupta1 , Kikuo Fujimura2 , Mykel J. Kochenderfer1
1

Stanford University
Honda Research Institute US
maxiaoba@stanford.edu, disele@honda-ri.com, jkg@cs.stanford.edu, kfujimura@honda-ri.com, mykel@stanford.edu
2

Abstract

time. Algorithms adopting this setting often demonstrate
better interactive strategies (Sunehag et al. 2018; Rashid
et al. 2018; Gupta, Egorov, and Kochenderfer 2017). However, most existing algorithms are limited due to their lack
of ability at explicitly considering the reasoning process of
other agents (Lowe et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019; Wei et al.
2018). They therefore cannot develop plans that account for
the influence of their behavior changes on opponents’ response (Wen et al. 2018).
Reasoning about others’ reasoning, referred to as recursive reasoning, is important for humans interacting with
each other. Von Der Osten, Kirley, and Miller (2017) use recursive nested beliefs to predict the actions of other agents,
but their method is limited to few state variables and discrete action spaces. The PR2 method (Wen et al. 2018) applies recursive reasoning by explicitly modeling the other
agent’s response to the ego agent’s action. However, as PR2
adopts decentralized-training, each learning agent uses a single model to learn the response of all the opponents by assuming that the other agents share the same reward as itself, which limits its application to fully-cooperative games.
Li et al. (2019) augment the multi-agent deep deterministic
policy gradient (MADDPG) (Lowe et al. 2017) using adversarial training with linear approximations to model the
minimax optimization, which is limited to zero-sum games.
In this paper, we propose to augment the existing CTDE
framework with auxiliary central actors to learn the optimal response of each agent given opponents’ actions. Based
on this, we build a graph structure to model the recursive reasoning procedure between interacting agents. This
graph structure allows us to model the relationships between agents and explicitly consider the their responses.
The recursive actions of each agent are efficiently sampled and shared through message passing in the graph. The
proposed method, which we call the Recursive Reasoning
Graph (R2G), works in both competitive and cooperative
games. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose R2G, a multi-agent reinforcement learning
framework that explicitly models the recursive reasoning
process of the agents in general-sum games.
• We augment the existing centralized-trainingdecentralized-execution algorithms with centralized
actors and graph-like message passing to efficiently train
the learning agents under R2G framework.

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) provides an efficient way for simultaneously learning policies for multiple
agents interacting with each other. However, in scenarios requiring complex interactions, existing algorithms can suffer
from an inability to accurately anticipate the influence of selfactions on other agents. Incorporating an ability to reason
about other agents’ potential responses can allow an agent to
formulate more effective strategies. This paper adopts a recursive reasoning model in a centralized-training-decentralizedexecution framework to help learning agents better cooperate
with or compete against others. The proposed algorithm, referred to as the Recursive Reasoning Graph (R2G), shows
state-of-the-art performance on multiple multi-agent particle
and robotics games.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning have
shown impressive success in single-agent scenarios including games (Hessel et al. 2018) and robotics (Johannink et al.
2019). However, many real-world problems involve interactions between multiple agents with limited information exchange, where multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
is needed (Vinyals et al. 2019; Wen et al. 2020; Yang et al.
2019). The simplest approach to MARL is independent reinforcement learning (Tan 1993), which trains each agent independently by treating the other learning agents as part of
the environment. Unfortunately, these methods often have
stability issues since the environment dynamics from the
perspective of each learning agent is non-stationary due to
the learning of other agents (Mohseni-Kabir, Isele, and Fujimura 2019). To account for this, we can build behavior
models of other agents and thus separate this unstable component out of the environment dynamics. Many decentralized MARL algorithms follow this idea (He et al. 2016; Wen
et al. 2018; Shen and How 2021).
However, modeling other agents’ could be difficult as
they are continuously learning (Albrecht and Stone 2018).
In the centralized-training-decentralized-execution (CTDE)
framework, such problems are avoided by allowing the
learning algorithm to have direct access to all agents’ internal information (policy, value network, etc.) at training
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7664

