The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Deep Spatial Adaptive Network for Real Image Demosaicing
Tao Zhang,1 Ying Fu,1∗ Cheng Li2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{tzhang,fuying}@bit.edu.cn, licheng89@huawei.com

Abstract
Demosaicing is the crucial step in the image processing
pipeline and is a highly ill-posed inverse problem. Recently, various deep learning based demosaicing methods
have achieved promising performance, but they often design
the same nonlinear mapping function for different spatial locations and do not well consider the difference of mosaic pattern for each color. In this paper, we propose a deep spatial
adaptive network (SANet) for real image demosaicing, which
can adaptively learn the nonlinear mapping function for different locations. The weights of spatial adaptive convolution
layer are generated by the pattern information in the receptive
filed. Besides, we collect a paired real demosaicing dataset
to train and evaluate the deep network, which can make the
learned demosaicing network more practical in the real world.
The experimental results show that our SANet outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods under both comprehensive quantitative metrics and perceptive quality in both noiseless and
noisy cases.

①

②

①

③

④

②

Figure 1: The interpolation filter for different locations in
R, G, B channels. Note that the B channel is the same as R
channel. We take filter with 5 ∗ 5 kernel size as example, and
there are 4 types for R and B channels and 2 types for G
channel, respectively.

the hand-crafted priors are insufficient to represent the variety of the real-world noisy data, and some challenging high
frequency regions appear some visually disturbing artifacts
such as checkerboard patterns, zippering around edges, and
moire (Gharbi et al. 2016).
Different from traditional methods which rely on handcrafted priors, deep learning methods (Tan et al. 2017b;
Tan, Chen, and Hua 2018; Gharbi et al. 2016; Kokkinos
and Lefkimmiatis 2018; Liu et al. 2020; Chen, Wen, and
Chan 2021) employ convolution neural network (CNN) to
implicitly learn the prior from training dataset. Some methods (Gharbi et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2020; Chen, Wen, and
Chan 2021) decompose a mosaic image with Bayer pattern
into four-channel RGGB image and feed it to a CNN, which
is similar to image super-resolution (Song et al. 2020; Pan
et al. 2020). The other methods (Tan et al. 2017b; Tan, Chen,
and Hua 2018; Kokkinos and Lefkimmiatis 2018) directly
input the mosaic image to a CNN. All these methods employ
the same nonlinear mapping function for different spatial locations. Nevertheless, as shown in Figure 1, different locations need different interpolation filters, i.e., different mapping functions.
In addition, deep learning methods rely heavily on training dataset. There several datasets are utilized mostly, and
they can be grouped into three categories. The first kind of

Introduction
To reduce cost, most digital camera captures image through
a single CCD/CMOS sensor with color filter array (CFA),
e.g., RGGB Bayer pattern, where two-thirds of the information is lost and the rest one-third of the information may be
perturbed by different kinds of noise. Modern digital camera employs Image Signal Processing (ISP) pipeline to create high-quality color image from the raw data. The first and
most crucial step in the sequence of ISP steps is demosaicing. The recovery errors during the early step of ISP may
negatively influence the visual appearance of final result.
Since demosaicing is under-determined, prior knowledge
of the natural image is usually utilized to regularize the recovery. The traditional techniques encode the heuristic handcrafted priors into local filter and interpolate the mosaic
image (Cok 1987; Laroche 1994; Malvar, He, and Cutler
2004; Buades et al. 2009). These local filters are adaptively
in terms of the local CFA information and/or image content. Besides, optimization approaches iteratively recovery
color image by embedding hand-crafted prior into optimization, such as nonlocal prior (Heide et al. 2014). However,
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3326

