The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Gradient Flow in Sparse Neural Networks and How Lottery Tickets Win
Utku Evci* 1 , Yani Ioannou* 2 , Cem Keskin3 , Yann Dauphin1
1

Google, 2 University of Calgary, 3 Facebook
evcu@google.com, yani.ioannou@ucalgary.ca, cem.keskin@fb.com, ynd@google.com

Abstract

Two methods in particular have shown some success at addressing this problem — Lottery Tickets (LTs) and Dynamic
Sparse Training (DST). However, we don’t know how to
find Lottery Tickets (LTs) efficiently; while RigL (Evci et al.
2020), a recent DST method, requires 5× the training steps
to match dense NN generalization. Only in understanding
how these methods overcome the difficulty of sparse training
can we improve upon them.
A significant breakthrough in training dense DNNs — addressing vanishing and exploding gradients — arose from
understanding gradient flow both at initialization, and during training. In this work we investigate the role of gradient
flow in the difficulty of training unstructured sparse NNs
from random initializations and from LT initializations. Our
experimental investigation results in the following insights:

Sparse Neural Networks (NNs) can match the generalization
of dense NNs using a fraction of the compute/storage for inference, and have the potential to enable efficient training.
However, naively training unstructured sparse NNs from random initialization results in significantly worse generalization, with the notable exceptions of Lottery Tickets (LTs) and
Dynamic Sparse Training (DST). Through our analysis of
gradient flow during training we attempt to answer: (1) why
training unstructured sparse networks from random initialization performs poorly and; (2) what makes LTs and DST
the exceptions? We show that sparse NNs have poor gradient
flow at initialization and demonstrate the importance of using
sparsity-aware initialization. Furthermore, we find that DST
methods significantly improve gradient flow during training
over traditional sparse training methods. Finally, we show that
LTs do not improve gradient flow, rather their success lies
in re-learning the pruning solution they are derived from —
however, this comes at the cost of learning novel solutions.

1

1. Sparse NNs have poor gradient flow at initialization.
In §3.1, §4.1 we show that the predominant method for
initializing sparse NNs is incorrect in not considering
heterogeneous connectivity. We believe we are the first to
show that sparsity-aware initialization methods improve
gradient flow and training.
2. Sparse NNs have poor gradient flow during training.
In §3.2, §4.2, we observe that even in sparse NN architectures less sensitive to incorrect initialization, the gradient
flow during training is poor. We show that DST methods
achieving the best generalization have improved gradient
flow, especially in early training.
3. Lottery Tickets don’t improve upon (1) or (2), instead
they re-learn the pruning solution. In §3.3, §4.3 we
show that a LT initialization resides within the same basin
of attraction as the original pruning solution it is derived
from, and a LT solution is highly similar to the pruning
solution in function space.

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are the state-of-the-art
method for solving problems in computer vision, speech
recognition, and many other fields. While early research in
deep learning focused on application to new problems, or
pushing state-of-the-art performance with ever larger/more
computationally expensive models, a broader focus has
emerged towards their efficient real-world application. One
such focus is on the observation that only a sparse subset of
this dense connectivity is required for inference, as apparent
in the success of pruning.
Pruning has a long history in Neural Network (NN) literature (Mozer and Smolensky 1989; Han et al. 2015), and
remains the most popular approach for finding sparse NNs.
Sparse NNs found by pruning algorithms (Han et al. 2015;
Zhu and Gupta 2018; Molchanov, Ashukha, and Vetrov 2017;
Louizos, Ullrich, and Welling 2017) (i.e. pruning solutions)
can match dense NN generalization with much better efficiency at inference time. However, naively training an (unstructured) sparse NN from a random initialization (i.e. from
scratch), typically leads to significantly worse generalization.

2

Related Work

Pruning Pruning is used commonly in NN literature to
obtain sparse networks (Mozer and Smolensky 1989; Han
et al. 2015; Kusupati et al. 2020). While the majority of
pruning algorithms focus on pruning after training, a subset
focuses on pruning NNs before training (Lee, Ajanthan, and
Torr 2019; Wang, Zhang, and Grosse 2020; Tanaka et al.
2020). Gradient Signal Preservation (GRaSP) (Wang, Zhang,
and Grosse 2020) is particularly relevant to our study, since

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6577

