The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Random Tensor Theory for Tensor Decomposition
Mohamed Ouerfelli1,2 , Mohamed Tamaazousti 1 , Vincent Rivasseau 2
1

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120 Palaiseau, France
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS/IN2P3, IJCLab, 91405 Orsay, France
Mohamed-oumar.ouerfelli@cea.fr, Mohamed.tamaazousti@cea.fr, vincent.rivasseau@ijclab.in2p3.fr
2

Abstract

(learning latent variable models, in particular latent Dirichlet allocation (Anandkumar et al. 2014, 2015)), supervised
learning (training of two-layer neural networks, (Janzamin,
Sedghi, and Anandkumar 2015)) and reinforcement learning
(Azizzadenesheli, Lazaric, and Anandkumar 2016). However, despite this formal and well known correspondence between tensor PCA and Tensor decomposition, it is important
to note that the respective literature of both subjects have
quite different motivations.
Indeed, even if there are some practical applications
of Tensor PCA (e.g. in telecommunications (Decurninge,
Land, and Guillaud 2020)), the main motivation of its related literature is theoretical. In particular, these works concern the study of statistical limits when the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) is low (Lesieur et al. 2017; Arous et al. 2019,
2020; Perry et al. 2020; Jagannath et al. 2020) and the
study of the gradient-based exploration of high dimensional
landscapes through Tensor PCA (Ros et al. 2019a) or its
simplified version, the Matrix-Tensor PCA (Mannelli et al.
2019; Sarao Mannelli et al. 2019; Mannelli et al. 2020). In
opposite, even if there are some theoretical results in the
tensor decomposition (e.g. (Wang and Anandkumar 2016),
(Zhang and Xia 2018)), the main motivation of its related literature is the practical applications (Tensor faces
(Vasilescu and Terzopoulos 2002), Hyperspectral imagery
(Lin and Bourennane 2013), DNN compression (Astrid and
Lee 2017), chemical materials (Sun and Braatz 2020), multimodal data fusion (Lahat, Adali, and Jutten 2015), data mining (Papalexakis, Faloutsos, and Sidiropoulos 2016), etc.).
We argue that these point of views are complementary.
For example, the statistical study of the performance of a
practical tensor decomposition algorithm is important since
it opens the possibility to apply this algorithm in high-risk
and safety-critical applications where we need quantitative
guarantees or certifications. Thus, it is important to have the
possibility to find new algorithms to address a large set of
problems (i.e. symmetric or asymmetric tensor), with the
best possible precision/accuracy while also being able to
compute the statistical performances of the algorithms regarding the SNR.
Recently, a fundamentally different set of mathematical
tools organised in the framework of Random Tensor Theory
(RTT) have been developed for tensors in the context of high
energy physics. In this paper, leverage these novel and valu-

We propose a new framework for tensor decomposition based
on trace invariants, which are particular cases of tensor networks. In general, tensor networks are diagrams/graphs that
specify a way to ”multiply” a collection of tensors together
to produce another tensor, matrix or scalar. The particularity
of trace invariants is that the operation of multiplying copies
of a certain input tensor that produces a scalar obeys specific symmetry constraints. In other words, the scalar resulting from this multiplication is invariant under some specific
transformations of the involved tensor. We focus our study
on the O(n)-invariant graphs, i.e. invariant under orthogonal
transformations of the input tensor. The proposed approach is
novel and versatile since it allows to address different theoretical and practical aspects of both CANDECOMP/PARAFAC
(CP) and Tucker decomposition models. In particular we obtain several results: (i) we generalize the computational limit
of Tensor PCA (a rank-one tensor decomposition) to the
asymmetric case (ii) we introduce new algorithms for both
decomposition models (iii) we obtain theoretical guarantees
for these algorithms and (iv) we show improvements with respect to state of the art on synthetic and real data which also
highlights a promising potential for practical applications.

Introduction
Tensor PCA is a model introduced in (Richard and Montanari 2014) that is formally equivalent to the best rank-one
approximation of a tensor. It consists in detecting and retrieving a spike v0⊗k associated to an unknown unit vector
v0 from noise-corrupted multi-linear measurements put in
the form of a tensor T
T = βv0⊗k + Z,

(1)

with Z ∈ (Rn )⊗k a pure Gaussian noise tensor of order
k and dimension n with identically independent distributed
(iid) standard Gaussian entries: Zi1 ,i2 ,...,ik ∼ N (0, 1) and β
is the signal-to-noise ratio.
Thus, it could be seen as a particular case (rank one) of
both the CP and the Tucker tensor decomposition models,
which are the two most notable generalizations of the matrix SVD to the tensor case and were recently successfully
used to address important problems in unsupervised learning
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7913

