The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Cross-Modal Mutual Learning
for Audio-Visual Speech Recognition and Manipulation
Chih-Chun Yang1 , Wan-Cyuan Fan2 * , Cheng-Fu Yang 2 * , and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang 2,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan, R.O.C.
2
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan, R.O.C.
3
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan, R.O.C.
{r08922050, r09942092, cfyang58, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw
Speaker A

Abstract

Face-to-face

A
B

As a key characteristic in audio-visual speech recognition
(AVSR), relating linguistic information observed across visual and audio data has been a challenge, benefiting not
only audio/visual speech recognition (ASR/VSR) but also
for manipulating data within/across modalities. In this paper, we present a feature disentanglement-based framework
for jointly addressing the above tasks. By advancing crossmodal mutual learning strategies, our model is able to convert visual or audio-based linguistic features into modalityagnostic representations. Such derived linguistic representations not only allow one to perform ASR, VSR, and AVSR,
but also to manipulate audio and visual data output based on
the desirable subject identity and linguistic content information. We perform extensive experiments on different recognition and synthesis tasks to show that our model performs
favorably against state-of-the-art approaches on each individual task, while ours is a unified solution that is able to jointly
tackle the aforementioned audio-visual learning tasks.

“About”
Speaker B

Visual Identity
Space
“About”

“Bank”

Speaker C

“Child”
Speaker D

“Debate”

“Child”

“Bank”
“Debate”

Linguisic space
via cross-modal
mutual learning
C
D
Audio Identity
Space

“Bank”
Voice-to-face

“Debate”

ASR/VSR
Face-to-voice

“About”
Voice-to-voice

“Child”

Figure 1: Illustration of joint audio-visual speech recogntion
and manipulation. With decoupled linguistic and identity
spaces, we aim to perform six different intra/cross-modality
tasks, as noted in Table 1.

Introduction
Audio-visual speech recognition (AVSR) is the task to perform speech recognition, with the aid of the observed visual
information (e.g., lip motion). On the other hand, audiovisual speech synthesis can be viewed as an extension of
AVSR, aiming at generating realistic talking face video or
audio outputs. Such manipulated data outputs are conditioned on either audio or visual information observed from
particular inputs (e.g., subjects), and the learning tasks such
as face-to-face, face-to-voice, voice-to-voice, and voice-toface conversion (Chen et al. 2018, 2019; van den Oord,
Vinyals, and kavukcuoglu 2017; KR et al. 2019; Prajwal
et al. 2020a,b; Song et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2019) can be
viewed as the applications of audio-visual speech synthesis.
It can be seen that, for both audio-visual speech recognition and synthesis, one needs to extract representative features from cross-modality (i.e., audio vs. visual) input data.
While extracting linguistic representation would be necessary to realize the task of AVSR, modality-preserving information such as subject identity needs to be preserved for
data recovery/synthesis purposes. With the above two types

of representations derived, one can perform the aforementioned intra- or cross/inter-modality synthesis tasks such as
multi-speaker speaking synchronization (Zhou et al. 2019),
visual audio lip synchronization(Prajwal et al. 2020b), automatic voice acting (Prajwal et al. 2020a), voice conversion
(Ding and Gutierrez-Osuna 2019), and audio-visual speech
separation (Gao and Grauman 2021). However, most existing works typically focus on addressing only one or few selected tasks. For such cross-modality learning tasks, it would
be desirable to advance multi-task learning strategies to utilize inputs across modalities for solving the above diverse
yet related learning tasks.
To extract linguistic features from given input data, techniques of adversarial training, vector quantization (VQ),
or instance normalization (IN) (Chou, Yeh, and Lee 2019;
Ding and Gutierrez-Osuna 2019; van den Oord, Vinyals, and
kavukcuoglu 2017; Zhou et al. 2019) have been proposed.
However, previous studies (Ding and Gutierrez-Osuna 2019;
Zhang, Song, and Qi 2018) suggest that such techniques
might suffer from training instability or the degraded synthesis data quality due to the design of the information bottleneck. Furthermore, performing audio-visual speech synthesis requires learning from cross-modality data; how to per-

* indicates equal contribution
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3036

