The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Decompose the Sounds and Pixels, Recompose the Events
∗

Varshanth R. Rao1 , Md Ibrahim Khalil1,2 , Haoda Li1,3 , Peng Dai1 , Juwei Lu1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
University of Waterloo, Canada
3
University of Toronto, Canada
{varshanth.rao1, md.ibrahim.khalil, haoda.li, peng.dai, juwei.lu}@huawei.com
2

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a framework centering around a
novel architecture called the Event Decomposition Recomposition Network (EDRNet) to tackle the Audio-Visual Event
(AVE) localization problem in the supervised and weakly supervised settings. AVEs in the real world exhibit common
unravelling patterns (termed as Event Progress Checkpoints
(EPC)), which humans can perceive through the cooperation
of their auditory and visual senses. Unlike earlier methods
which attempt to recognize entire event sequences, the EDRNet models EPCs and inter-EPC relationships using stacked
temporal convolutions. Based on the postulation that EPC
representations are theoretically consistent for an event category, we introduce the State Machine Based Video Fusion,
a novel augmentation technique that blends source videos using different EPC template sequences. Additionally, we design a new loss function called the Land-Shore-Sea loss to
compactify continuous foreground and background representations. Lastly, to alleviate the issue of confusing events during weak supervision, we propose a prediction stabilization
method called Bag to Instance Label Correction. Experiments
on the AVE dataset show that our collective framework outperforms the state-of-the-art by a sizable margin.

Figure 1: A depiction of event atomization. Events can be
decomposed into Event Progress Checkpoints (top row) according to the temporal position along the event line. The
corresponding audio-visual sequence is displayed in the
middle row, while the ground truth segment labels are indicated in the bottom row.
Zisserman 2018; Senocak et al. 2018), audio-visual speech
recognition (Noda et al. 2015; Afouras et al. 2018), etc.
Under the umbrella of video understanding, the AudioVisual Event Localization (AVEL) problem (Tian et al.
2018) has garnered increasing attention. AVEL entails the
localization and identification of events which are both audible and visible. Supervised Event Localization (SEL) is to
perform AVEL when the segment-level labels are available
for supervision while for the Weakly Supervised Event Localization (WSEL) task, only the video level labels are available. Although the accompanying AVE dataset (Tian et al.
2018) is size-wise small (4143 videos covering 28 event categories), it is currently the only dataset to offer segment level
audio-visual labels, hence facilitating the SEL task.
Previous works resolve short and long-term temporal relationships by sequentially traversing through the video using
memory networks like LSTMs. Digressing from their approach and inspired from the viewpoint of bottom-up temporal action localization (Lin et al. 2018, 2019; Liu et al.
2019), we propose that events can be atomized into three
Event Progress Checkpoints (EPCs); Event Initiation, Event
Continuation, and Event Termination. We visualize these
EPC formations in Fig. 1, where member segments delineate
the commencement, uninterrupted procession, and completion of the event respectively. A natural choice for aggregating segments into EPCs is through Temporal Convolutional
Networks (TCN) (Lea et al. 2017). By stacking TCN layers,
we can establish temporal dependencies (potentially longer

Introduction
As videos transform the landscape of information exchange
and entertainment, audio-visual understanding becomes vital to augment the related applications. True to the quote
by Harry Houdini - “What the eyes see and the ears hear,
the mind believes”, the successful perception of videos is
powered through the activation and interplay of the visual
and auditory sensory streams. A pragmatic testimony of the
necessity of the audio-visual integration is the McGurk effect (McGurk and MacDonald 1976) in speech perception
(Schwartz, Berthommier, and Savariaux 2002). Additionally, ambient noise in real life like traffic or wind may mask
or overlap with the sound of interest, rendering audio to be
the noisier modality. The marriage of the two modalities has
benefited various audio-visual tasks such as sound source localization and separation (Zhao et al. 2018; Owens and Efros
2018; Korbar, Tran, and Torresani 2018; Arandjelovic and
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2144

