The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Chess as a Testbed for Language Model State Tracking
Shubham Toshniwal1 , Sam Wiseman2 , Karen Livescu1 , Kevin Gimpel1
1

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
2
Duke University
{shtoshni, klivescu, kgimpel}@ttic.edu, swiseman@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Transformer language models have made tremendous strides
in natural language understanding tasks. However, the complexity of natural language makes it challenging to ascertain
how accurately these models are tracking the world state underlying the text. Motivated by this issue, we consider the task
of language modeling for the game of chess. Unlike natural
language, chess notations describe a simple, constrained, and
deterministic domain. Moreover, we observe that the appropriate choice of chess notation allows for directly probing the
world state, without requiring any additional probing-related
machinery. We find that: (a) With enough training data, transformer language models can learn to track pieces and predict legal moves with high accuracy when trained solely on
move sequences. (b) For small training sets providing access
to board state information during training can yield significant improvements. (c) The success of transformer language
models is dependent on access to the entire game history i.e.
“full attention”. Approximating this full attention results in a
significant performance drop. We propose this testbed as a
benchmark for future work on the development and analysis
of transformer language models.

1

Introduction

Recently, transformer-based language models have stretched
notions of what is possible with the simple self-supervised
objective of language modeling, becoming a fixture in state
of the art language technologies (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020). However, the black
box nature of these models combined with the complexity
of natural language makes it challenging to measure how
accurately they represent the world state underlying the text.
In order to better measure the extent to which these models
can capture the world state underlying the symbolic data they
consume, we propose training and studying transformer language models for the game of chess. Chess provides a simple, constrained, and deterministic domain where the exact
world state is known. Chess games can also be transcribed
exactly and unambiguously using chess notations (Section 2).
Most importantly, the form of chess notations allows us to
probe our language models for aspects of the board state using simple prompts (Section 3) and without changing the

language modeling objective or introducing any new classifiers.1
Due to the simplicity and precision of chess, we can evaluate language model predictions at a more fine-grained level
than merely comparing them to the ground truth. For example, even if the next move prediction doesn’t match the
ground truth move, we can still evaluate whether the move
is legal given the board state, and if it is illegal, the error can
be automatically analyzed. Moreover, since world state transitions are deterministic and known, we can evaluate models
using counterfactual queries as well. Our proposed evaluation sets and metrics are described in Section 3.2.
While chess represents a controlled domain, it is by no
means trivial for a language model. To illustrate the challenges of language modeling for chess, consider the left
board shown in Figure 1b, where white is next to move. In order to generate a valid next move, the language model needs
to (a) infer that it is white’s turn, (b) represent the locations
of all pieces, both white and black, (c) select one of the white
pieces which can be legally moved, and finally (d) make a
legal move with the selected piece. Thus, a language model
has to learn to track the board state, learn to generate moves
according to the rules of chess, and on top of that learn chess
strategies to predict the actual move.
We find that when given enough training data, transformers can learn to both track piece locations and predict legal
moves with high accuracy. However, when trained on small
training sets, predictive ability suffers. In this more challenging setting, introducing parts of the board state as tokens in
the training sequences (Section 3.1) improves piece tracking
significantly.
Our results also provide some key insights on transformer
language models: (i) They are robust to changes in input distribution where additional tokens, related to board state, are
added to input sequence only during training (Section 3.1).
In contrast to LSTMs, transformers achieve this robustness
even with smaller training sets (Section 5.3). (ii) Even
though chess is Markovian, the model relies on having access to the whole history, and the performance drops when
limiting this access (Section 5.3).

1
Code and data available at - https://github.com/shtoshni/
learning-chess-blindfolded

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11385

