The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Regularization Guarantees Generalization in Bayesian Reinforcement Learning
through Algorithmic Stability
Aviv Tamar, Daniel Soudry, Ev Zisselman
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract

For high-dimensional problems, and when the prior does
not obey a very simple structure such as a Dirichlet
prior (Ghavamzadeh et al. 2016), solving BRL is intractable,
and one must resort to approximations. A common approximation, which has been popularized under the term metaRL (Duan et al. 2016; Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), is
to replace the distribution over tasks with an empirical sample of tasks, and seek an optimal policy with respect to the
sample, henceforth termed the empirical risk minimization
policy (ERM policy). In this paper, we investigate the performance of the ERM policy on a novel task from the task
distribution, that is – we ask how well the policy generalizes.
We focus on the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)
framework, which is popular in supervised learning, and
adapt it to the BRL setting. Since the space of deterministic history-dependent policies is finite (in a finite horizon
setting), a trivial generalization bound for a finite hypothesis space can be formulated. However, the size of the policy
space, which such a naive bound depends on, leads us to
seek alternative methods for controlling generalization. In
particular, regularization is a well-established method in supervised learning that can be used to trade-off training error
and test error. In RL, regularized MDPs are popular in practice (Schulman et al. 2017), and have also received interest
lately due to their favorable optimization properties (Shani,
Efroni, and Mannor 2020; Neu, Jonsson, and Gómez 2017).
The main contribution of this work is making the connection between regularized MDPs and PAC generalization,
as described above. We build on the classical analysis of
Bousquet and Elisseeff (2002), which bounds generalization
through algorithmic stability. Establishing algorithmic stability results for regularized MDPs, however, is not trivial,
as the loss function in MDPs is not convex in the policy. Our
key insight is that while not convex, regularized MDPs satisfy a certain quadratic growth criterion, which is sufficient
to establish stability. To show this, we build on the recently
discovered fast convergence rates for mirror descent in regularized MDPs (Shani, Efroni, and Mannor 2020). Our result,
which may be of independent interest, allows us to derive
generalization bounds that can be controlled by the regularization magnitude. Furthermore, we show that when the
MDP prior obeys certain structure, our results significantly
improve the trivial finite hypothesis space bound.
To our knowledge, this is the first work to formally study

In the Bayesian reinforcement learning (RL) setting, a prior
distribution over the unknown problem parameters – the rewards and transitions – is assumed, and a policy that optimizes the (posterior) expected return is sought. A common
approximation, which has been recently popularized as metaRL, is to train the agent on a sample of N problem instances
from the prior, with the hope that for large enough N , good
generalization behavior to an unseen test instance will be obtained. In this work, we study generalization in Bayesian RL
under the probably approximately correct (PAC) framework,
using the method of algorithmic stability. Our main contribution is showing that by adding regularization, the optimal
policy becomes stable in an appropriate sense. Most stability results in the literature build on strong convexity of the
regularized loss – an approach that is not suitable for RL as
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are not convex. Instead,
building on recent results of fast convergence rates for mirror descent in regularized MDPs, we show that regularized
MDPs satisfy a certain quadratic growth criterion, which is
sufficient to establish stability. This result, which may be of
independent interest, allows us to study the effect of regularization on generalization in the Bayesian RL setting.

1

Introduction

How can an agent learn to quickly perform well in an unknown task? This is the basic question in reinforcement
learning (RL). The most popular RL algorithms are designed in a minimax approach – seeking a procedure that
will eventually learn to perform well in any task (Strehl et al.
2006; Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010; Jin et al. 2018). Lacking prior information about the task, such methods must
invest considerable efforts in uninformed exploration, typically requiring many samples to reach adequate performance. In contrast, when a prior distribution over possible
tasks is known in advance, an agent can direct its exploration much more effectively. This is the Bayesian RL (BRL,
Ghavamzadeh et al. 2016) setting. A Bayes-optimal policy
– the optimal policy in BRL – can be orders of magnitude
more sample efficient than a minimax approach, and indeed,
recent studies demonstrated a quick solution of novel tasks,
sometimes in just a handful of trials (Duan et al. 2016; Zintgraf et al. 2020; Dorfman, Shenfeld, and Tamar 2020).
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8423

