The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Self-Supervised Mixed-Curvature Graph Neural Network
Li Sun1∗ , Zhongbao Zhang2 , Junda Ye2 , Hao Peng3 , Jiawei Zhang4 ,
Sen Su2 and Philip S. Yu5 .
1

School of Control and Computer Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
IFM Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn; {zhongbaozb, susen}@bupt.edu.cn; penghao@act.buaa.edu.cn;
jiawei@ifmlab.org; psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

a single constant-curvature representation space (Gu et al.
2019). Such methods can only work well on particular kinds
of structure that they are designed for. For instance, the constant negative curvature hyperbolic space is well-suited for
graphs with hierarchical or tree-like structures (Liu, Nickel,
and Kiela 2019). The constant positive curvature spherical space is especially suitable for data with cyclical structures, e.g., triangles and cliques (Bachmann, Bécigneul, and
Ganea 2020), and the zero-curvature Euclidean space for
grid data (Wu et al. 2021). However, graph structures in
reality are usually mixed and complicated rather than uniformed, in some regions hierarchical, while in others cyclical (Papadopoulos et al. 2012; Ravasz and Barabási 2003).
Even more challenging, the curvatures over different hierarchical or cyclical regions can be different as will be shown
in this paper. In fact, it calls for a new representation space
to match the wide variety of graph structures, and we seek
spaces of mixed-curvature to provide better representations.
Learning Paradigm: Learning graph representations usually
requires abundant supervision label information (Veličković
et al. 2018; Chami et al. 2019). Labels are usually scarce
in real applications, and undoubtedly, labeling graphs is expensive—manual annotation or paying for permission, and
is even impossible to acquire because of the privacy policy. Fortunately, the rich information in graphs provides the
potential for self-supervised learning, i.e., learning representations without labels (Liu et al. 2021). Self-supervised
graph representation learning is a more favorable choice,
particularly when we intend to take the advantages from the
unlabeled graphs in real applications. Recently, contrastive
learning (Veličković et al. 2019; Qiu et al. 2020) emerges
as a successful method for the graph self-supervised learning. However, existing self-supervised methods, to the best
of our knowledge, cannot be applied to the mixed-curvature
spaces due to the intrinsic differences in the geometry.
To address these aforementioned limitations, we take the
first attempt to study the self-supervised graph representation learning in the mixed-curvature space in this paper.
To this end, we present a novel Self-Supervised MixedCurvature Graph Neural Network, named S ELF MGNN. To
address the first limitation, we propose to learn the repre-

Graph representation learning received increasing attentions
in recent years. Most of the existing methods ignore the complexity of the graph structures and restrict graphs in a single
constant-curvature representation space, which is only suitable to particular kinds of graph structure indeed. Additionally, these methods follow the supervised or semi-supervised
learning paradigm, and thereby notably limit their deployment on the unlabeled graphs in real applications. To address
these aforementioned limitations, we take the first attempt
to study the self-supervised graph representation learning in
the mixed-curvature spaces. In this paper, we present a novel
Self-Supervised Mixed-Curvature Graph Neural Network
(S ELF MGNN). To capture the complex graph structures, we
construct a mixed-curvature space via the Cartesian product
of multiple Riemannian component spaces, and design hierarchical attention mechanisms for learning and fusing graph
representations across these component spaces. To enable
the self-supervised learning, we propose a novel dual contrastive approach. The constructed mixed-curvature space actually provides multiple Riemannian views for the contrastive
learning. We introduce a Riemannian projector to reveal these
views, and utilize a well-designed Riemannian discriminator
for the single-view and cross-view contrastive learning within
and across the Riemannian views. Finally, extensive experiments show that S ELF MGNN captures the complex graph
structures and outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Graph representation learning (Cui et al. 2018; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017) shows fundamental importance in
various applications, such as link prediction and node classification (Kipf and Welling 2017), and thus receives increasing attentions from both academics and industries. Meanwhile, we have also observed great limitations with the existing graph representation learning methods in two major
perspectives, which are described as follows:
Representation Space: Most of existing methods ignore the
complexity of real graph structures, and limit the graphs in
∗

Corresponding Author: Li Sun, ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4146

