The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Causal Binary Concepts Discovery with VAE
for Black-Box Model Explanation
Thien Q. Tran, Kazuto Fukuchi, Youhei Akimoto, Jun Sakuma
1

University of Tsukuba
2
Riken AIP
thientquang@mdl.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp, {fukuchi,akimoto,jun}@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
We aim to explain a black-box classifier with the form: ‘data
X is classified as class Y because X has A, B and does not
have C’ in which A, B, and C are high-level concepts. The
challenge is that we have to discover in an unsupervised manner a set of concepts, i.e., A, B and C, that is useful for explaining the classifier. We first introduce a structural generative model that is suitable to express and discover such concepts. We then propose a learning process that simultaneously
learns the data distribution and encourages certain concepts
to have a large causal influence on the classifier output. Our
method also allows easy integration of user’s prior knowledge
to induce high interpretability of concepts. Finally, using multiple datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed method can
discover useful concepts for explanation in this form.

Figure 1: Binary concept middle stroke and some global
variants. Border color indicates the classifier output.
with experts. From now on, we refer to such a concept as binary concept. However, we also note that binary concepts
might be insufficient for representing useful concepts with
continuous domain, such as color or length.
Our method employs three different notions in the explanation: causal binary switches, concept-specific variants
and global variants. We illustrate these notions in Figure 1.
First, causal binary switches and concept-specific variants,
that come in pair, represent different binary concepts. In particular, causal binary switches control the presence of each
binary concept in a sample. Alternating this switch, i.e., removing or adding a binary concept to a sample, affects the
prediction of that sample (e.g., removing the middle stroke
turns E to C). In contrast, concept specific variants, whose
each is tied to a specific binary concept, express different
variants within a binary concept that do not affect the prediction (e.g., changing the length of the middle stroke does
not affect the prediction). Finally, global variants, which are
not tied to specific binary concepts, represent other variants
that do not affect the prediction (e.g., skewness).
Our goal is to discover a set of binary concepts that can
explain the classifier using their binary switches in an unsupervised manner. Similar to some existing works, to construct conceptual explanations, we learn a generative model
that maps each input into a low-dimensional representation
in which each factor encodes an aspect of the data. There are
three main challenges in achieving our goal. (1) It requires
an adequate generative model to express the binary concepts,
including the binary switches and the variants within each
concept. (2) The discovered binary concepts must have a
large causal influence on the classifier output. We want to
avoid finding confounding concepts that correlate with but
do not cause the prediction. For example, the sky concept ap-

Introduction
Deep neural network has been recognized as the state-ofthe-art model for various tasks. As they are being applied
in more practical applications, there is an arising consensus
that these models need to be explainable, especially in highstake domains. Various methods are proposed to solve this
problem, including building a model with interpretable components and post-hoc methods that explain trained black-box
models. We focus on the post-hoc approach and propose a
novel causal concept-based explanation framework.
We are interested in the symbolic explanation: ‘data X is
classified as class Y because X has A, B and does not have
C’ where A, B, and C are high-level concepts. From the linguistic perspective, such an explanation communicates using nouns and their part-whole relation, i.e., the semantic relation between a part and the whole object. In many classification tasks, especially image classification, the predictions
rely on binary components; for example, we can distinguish
a panda from a bear by its white patched eyes or a zebra from
a horse by its stripe. This is also a common way humans
use to classify categories and organize knowledge (Gardenfors 2014). Thus, an explanation in this form should excel
in providing human-friendly and organized insights into the
classifier, especially for tasks that involve higher-level concepts such as checking the alignment of the black-box model
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9614

