The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Partner-Aware Algorithms in Decentralized Cooperative Bandit Teams
Erdem Bıyık1 , Anusha Lalitha1 , Rajarshi Saha1 , Andrea Goldsmith1,2 , Dorsa Sadigh1,3
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{ebiyik, alalitha, rajsaha, dorsa}@stanford.edu, goldsmith@princeton.edu

2

Abstract

to exit and get gas at a cheaper station. Although explicit
communication can alleviate some of these challenges, it is
often impractical or expensive: we cannot expect the guidance system to ask for and expect feedback after every decision of the driver. On the other hand, humans rely on implicit communication for coordination in many interactive
settings (Breazeal et al. 2005; Che, Okamura, and Sadigh
2020; Losey et al. 2020). They generally make effective inferences by simply observing and reasoning over their partner’s actions. Hence, we question if AI agents can accurately
model others’ policies without explicit communication to effectively coordinate and cooperate.
Previous works such as theory of mind (Simon 1995;
Baker et al. 2017; Brooks and Szafir 2019; Lee, Sha, and
Breazeal 2019) and opponent modeling in multi-agent learning (Foerster et al. 2018; Shih et al. 2021; Xie et al.
2020) showed the performance of human-AI and multiagent teams may significantly increase if the agents accurately model each other’s policies. However, most of these
approaches require recursive belief modeling or rely on
learned partner representations, which can often be complex
and computationally intractable.
Our goal is to develop a simple and tractable approach for
modeling partners in decentralized multi-agent teams that
is guaranteed to improve performance. We specifically focus on decentralized Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems,
which extend the stochastic MAB, a fundamental model
for sequential decision-making to explore an agent’s environment efficiently. Our decentralized MAB formulation
captures the essential elements of multi-agent collaborative
learning. First, we model the team reward to be dictated by
the actions of all agents, which is common in many realistic collaborations, e.g., the safety and comfort of a semiautonomous vehicle depend on both the driver’s and the
guidance system’s actions. Second, we model the heterogeneity in the information available to each agent by introducing partial observability over rewards, e.g., the vehicle does not always accurately observe whether the human
is looking for the fastest route or the cheapest gas station.
Hence, our formulation requires collaboration among agents
to accomplish the task of learning the optimal team action
while only observing each others’ actions.
One might hope that naı̈ve extensions of well-known bandit algorithms such as Thompson Sampling and Upper Con-

When humans collaborate with each other, they often make decisions by observing others and considering the consequences that
their actions may have on the entire team, instead of greedily doing what is best for just themselves. We would like our AI agents
to effectively collaborate in a similar way by capturing a model of
their partners. In this work, we propose and analyze a decentralized Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem with coupled rewards
as an abstraction of more general multi-agent collaboration. We
demonstrate that naı̈ve extensions of single-agent optimal MAB
algorithms fail when applied for decentralized bandit teams. Instead, we propose a Partner-Aware strategy for joint sequential
decision-making that extends the well-known single-agent Upper
Confidence Bound algorithm. We analytically show that our proposed strategy achieves logarithmic regret, and provide extensive
experiments involving human-AI and human-robot collaboration
to validate our theoretical findings. Our results show that the proposed partner-aware strategy outperforms other known methods,
and our human subject studies suggest humans prefer to collaborate with AI agents implementing our partner-aware strategy.

1

Introduction

One of the key characteristics of human-human interaction
is people’s ability to seamlessly anticipate and take complementary actions when working with others. For example, the moment our partner reaches for a box of cereal,
we automatically walk to the fridge to grab milk. The success of multi-agent systems or human-AI teams usually depends on not only each agent’s actions, but also how well
they model other agents’ policies and the interplay between
them. As another example, consider a semi-autonomous car
where both the actions of the driver, e.g., keeping or changing lanes, and assistive guidance, e.g., corrections that keep
the car inside the lanes, determine the control of the vehicle.
Here, we expect the guidance to predict the driver’s intent
and augment their actions to enhance safety and comfort.
Decentralized learning is particularly challenging when
some agents have limited information of the outcomes of the
actions taken by the team. In the car example, even though
both human and assistive guidance share the same goal of
safety and comfort, the guidance may not fully observe the
driver’s internal objective of, for instance, changing lanes
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9296

