The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Network Architecture for Open-Set Recognition
Xuelin Zhang1,3 , Xuelian Cheng1,3 , Donghao Zhang2,3 , Paul Bonnington2 , Zongyuan Ge2,3
1
Monash University,
Monash eResearch Centre,
3
Monash Medical AI
{xuelin.zhang,xuelian.cheng,donghao.zhang,paul.bonnington,zongyuan.ge}@monash.edu
2

Abstract

ing the conventional closed-set assumption. More specifically, under the open-set assumption, data can be split
into three categories, known known classes (KKCs), known
unknown classes (KUCs), and unknown unknown classes
(UUCs) (Scheirer et al. 2013). The goal of Open-set research
is to make sure the model can successfully distinguish all
known classes from the training set while rejecting unknown
classes in the inference phase.
OSR methods can be simply classified into two main
streams, traditional machine learning based methods and
deep learning based methods. A representative traditional
machine learning based OSR method is the compact abating
probability (CAP) model proposed in (Scheirer, Jain, and
Boult 2014) to explicitly reduce the open space risk. Deep
learning based methods use deep learning models with different losses and recognition functions to tackle OSR. Early
deep learning OSR models (Bendale and Boult 2016) calibrate softmax scores and use extreme value theorem to detect
outliers.
CAP models: An OSR model should be able to reduce the
open space risk, which is proposed in (Scheirer et al. 2013). It
is defined as the relative measure of open space compared to
the overall measure space.According to (Scheirer, Jain, and
Boult 2014), the compact abating probability (CAP) model
is proven to reduce the open space risk by the idea that a
CAP model ensures the recognition function is decreasing
away from the training data. A Weibull-calibrated SVM with
standard RBF kernels is a CAP model. The properties of the
CAP model ensure a smooth boundary of the training data,
and thus thresholding can be used to limit the labeled region
and classify unknowns. An advantage of the CAP model is by
adjusting the threshold, one can reduce the amount of open
space that can be labeled positive and control the open space
risk. Theoretically, a CAP model should be able to reduce the
open space risk to zero. However, as mentioned in (Scheirer,
Jain, and Boult 2014), the performance of the CAP model still
depends on how well the model can learn positive regions of
known classes using probabilities. Under the deep learning
setting, this is equivalent to whether the model has the ability
to learn feature representations with smooth boundaries. This
ability is affected by the model architecture, as the operations
and connections in a model determine the projection of input
data to the corresponding feature representation.
Model architecture: Prior OSR works have exploited

Given the incomplete knowledge of classes that exist in the
world, Open-set Recognition (OSR) enables networks to identify and reject the unseen classes after training. This problem
of breaking the common closed-set assumption is far from
being solved. Recent studies focus on designing new losses,
neural network encoding structures, and calibration methods to
optimize a feature space for OSR relevant tasks. In this work,
we make the first attempt to tackle OSR by searching the architecture of a Neural Network (NN) under the open-set assumption.In contrast to the prior arts, we develop a mechanism to
both search the architecture of the network and train a network
suitable for tackling OSR.Inspired by the compact abating
probability (CAP) model, which is theoretically proven to reduce the open space risk, we regularize the searching space by
VAE contrastive learning.To discover a more robust structure
for OSR, we propose Pseudo Auxiliary Searching (PAS), in
which we split a pretended set of know-unknown classes from
the original training set in the searching phase, hence enabling
the super-net to explore an effective architecture that can handle unseen classes in advance. We demonstrate the benefits of
this learning pipeline on 5 OSR datasets, including MNIST,
SVHN, CIFAR10, CIFARAdd10, and CIFARAdd50, where
our approach outperforms prior state-of-the-art networks designed by humans. To spark research in this field, our code is
available at https://github.com/zxl101/NAS OSR.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in classification and
recognition tasks (He et al. 2016; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2015). However, due
to the assumption that the test classes are consistent with the
classes from the training set, models often fail in real-world
scenarios when unexplored unknown classes appear during
the inference stage, e.g. clinical diagnosis (Tian et al. 2020)
and autonomous driving (Wong et al. 2020). The key question
to ask is – Without enough knowledge about the world with
open space risk (Cevikalp and Serhan Yavuz 2017), can our
models still perform well when facing challenging unseen
scenarios?
Open-set Recognition setting by introducing novel unknown classes into the model testing provides a new evaluation criterion to verify the robustness of models by breakCopyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3362

