The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Event-Aware Multimodal Mobility Nowcasting
Zhaonan Wang1,3† , Renhe Jiang1,2§ , Hao Xue3 , Flora D. Salim3 , Xuan Song1 , Ryosuke Shibasaki1
1

Center for Spatial Information Science, University of Tokyo; 2 Information Technology Center, University of Tokyo
3
School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University
{znwang, jiangrh, songxuan, shiba}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {zhaonan.wang, hao.xue, flora.salim}@rmit.edu.au

Abstract
As a decisive part in the success of Mobility-as-a-Service
(MaaS), spatio-temporal predictive modeling for crowd
movements is a challenging task particularly considering
scenarios where societal events drive mobility behavior deviated from the normality. While tremendous progress has
been made to model high-level spatio-temporal regularities
with deep learning, most, if not all of the existing methods
are neither aware of the dynamic interactions among multiple transport modes nor adaptive to unprecedented volatility brought by potential societal events. In this paper, we are
therefore motivated to improve the canonical spatio-temporal
network (ST-Net) from two perspectives: (1) design a heterogeneous mobility information network (HMIN) to explicitly
represent intermodality in multimodal mobility; (2) propose
a memory-augmented dynamic filter generator (MDFG) to
generate sequence-specific parameters in an on-the-fly fashion for various scenarios. The enhanced event-aware spatiotemporal network, namely EAST-Net, is evaluated on several
real-world datasets with a wide variety and coverage of societal events. Both quantitative and qualitative experimental
results verify the superiority of our approach compared with
the state-of-the-art baselines. Code and data are published on
https://github.com/underdoc-wang/EAST-Net.

Figure 1: Time Series Histograms of Citywide Taxi and
Share Bike Demands in Washington DC from 24 Dec. 2015
to 31 Jan. 2016, during which Christmas, New Year, and a
Historic Blizzard “Jonas” Took Place

mobility significantly from the normality (e.g. daily, weekday routines). Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 1, the impacts of different events differ, e.g. taxi demand rockets on
New Year’s eve but vanishes at Christmas and during the
blizzard, and the volatility brought to each transport mode
varies, e.g. recovery of share bike demand takes longer than
the one of taxi after the blizzard.
While tremendous progress has been made in spatiotemporal modeling thanks to deep learning (Shi et al. 2015;
Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Li et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019;
Zheng et al. 2020), most, if not all, of them advance by exploiting high-level spatio-temporal regularities. The volatility brought by societal events, on the other hand, is by far
downplayed and usually handled by simple rectifications,
such as incorporating temporal covariates (e.g. time-of-day,
day-of-week, whether-holiday) as auxiliary input (Yao et al.
2018; Zonoozi et al. 2018), adding a memory bank to reuse
similar patterns in history (Yao et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2020).
These manipulations to a certain degree bring time and holiday awareness, but they mainly help with the periodic and
precedent parts and would still fail under more extreme
scenarios like unprecedented events (e.g. historic blizzard,
COVID-19 pandemic). There is another line of research (Fan
et al. 2015; Jiang et al. 2018, 2019) attempting to capture
anomalous mobility tendency under events in an online fashion based on low-order Markov assumption and fine-grained
time slot setting. These practices are arguably circumventing
the inherent difficulty of the task instead of truly tackling it.
In this paper, we tackle the identified twofold unaware-

Introduction
Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS), as an emerging paradigm of
transport service, seamlessly integrates multimodal mobility
services (e.g. public transport, ride-hailing, bike-sharing),
which streamlines trip planning, ticketing (for users), operating optimization, emergency response (for providers), and
traffic management (for city managers). For a smooth operation of MaaS, spatio-temporal predictive modeling for multimodal transport of crowds is indispensable. However, the
existing methods either implicitly handle the interaction between supply and demand of different modes or assume it
to be time-invariant (Ye et al. 2019). This task is even more
challenging in scenarios where societal events (e.g. holiday,
severe weather, epidemic) take place and deviate collective
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Work was done while the first author was virtually visiting the
CRUISE research group at RMIT University.
§
Corresponding author.

4228

