The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Early-Bird GCNs: Graph-Network Co-optimization towards More Efficient GCN
Training and Inference via Drawing Early-Bird Lottery Tickets
Haoran You, Zhihan Lu, Zijian Zhou, Yonggan Fu, Yingyan Lin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
{haoran.you, zl55, zjzhou, yf22, yingyan.lin}@rice.edu

Abstract

(hierarchical) feed-forward propagation to update the feature of the given node.
Despite their promise, GCN training and inference can
be notoriously challenging, hindering their great potential
from being unfolded in large real-world graphs. This is because as the graph dataset grows, the large number of node
features and the abundant adjacency matrix can easily explode the required memory and data movements (Geng et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2021). For example, a mere 2-layer GCN
model with 32 hidden units requires 19 GFLOPs (FLOPs:
floating point operations) to process the Reddit graph (Tailor, Fernandez-Marques, and Lane 2020), twice as much as
that of a powerful deep neural network (DNN) ResNet50,
which has a total of 8 GFLOPs when processing ImageNet
(Canziani, Paszke, and Culurciello 2016). The giant computational cost of GCNs comes from three aspects. First,
graphs (or graph data), especially real-world ones, are often
extraordinarily large and irregular as exacerbated by their
intertwined complex neighbor connections, e.g., a total of
232,965 nodes in the Reddit graph with each node having
about 50 neighbors (Kersting et al. 2016). Second, the dimension of GCNs’ node feature vectors can be very high,
e.g., each node in the Citeseer graph has 3703 features.
Third, the extremely high sparsity and unbalanced distribution of non-zero data in GCNs’ adjacency matrices imposes
a paramount challenge for effectively accelerating GCNs
(Geng et al. 2020; Yan et al. 2020), e.g., as high as 99.9%
vs. 10% to 50% generally observed in DNNs.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges and unleash the
full potential of GCNs, various techniques have been developed. For instance, Tailor et al. (Tailor, Fernandez-Marques,
and Lane 2020) leverages quantization-aware training to
demonstrate 8-bit GCNs; SGCN (Li et al. 2020b) is the first
to consider GCN sparsification by formulating and solving
it as an optimization problem.
The impressive performance achieved by existing GCN
compression works indicates that there are redundancies
within GCNs to be leveraged for aggressively trimming
down their complexity while maintaining their performance.
In this work, we attempt to take a new perspective by drawing inspiration from the tremendous success of DNN compression, particularly the lottery ticket (LT) finding (Frankle
and Carbin 2019; Liu et al. 2018; You et al. 2020). While
conceptually simple, the unique structures of GCNs make it

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have emerged as the
state-of-the-art deep learning model for representation learning on graphs. However, it remains notoriously challenging to
train and inference GCNs over large graph datasets, limiting
their application to large real-world graphs and hindering the
exploration of deeper and more sophisticated GCN graphs.
This is because as the graph size grows, the sheer number of
node features and the large adjacency matrix can easily explode the required memory and data movements. To tackle
the aforementioned challenges, we explore the possibility of
drawing lottery tickets when sparsifying GCN graphs, i.e.,
subgraphs that largely shrink the adjacency matrix yet are capable of achieving accuracy comparable to or even better than
their full graphs. Specifically, we for the first time discover
the existence of graph early-bird (GEB) tickets that emerge at
the very early stage when sparsifying GCN graphs, and propose a simple yet effective detector to automatically identify
the emergence of such GEB tickets. Furthermore, we advocate graph-model co-optimization and develop a generic efficient GCN early-bird training framework dubbed GEBT that
can significantly boost the efficiency of GCN training by (1)
drawing joint early-bird tickets between the GCN graphs and
models and (2) enabling simultaneously sparsification of both
the GCN graphs and models. Experiments on various GCN
models and datasets consistently validate our GEB finding
and the effectiveness of our GEBT, e.g., our GEBT achieves
up to 80.2% ∼ 85.6% and 84.6% ∼ 87.5% savings of GCN
training and inference costs while offering a comparable or
even better accuracy as compared to state-of-the-art methods.
Our source code and supplementary material are available at
https://github.com/RICE-EIC/Early-Bird-GCN.

Introduction
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf and Welling
2016) have emerged as state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms
for graph-based learning tasks, such as graph classification
(Xu et al. 2018) and node classification (Kipf and Welling
2016). It is well recognized that the superior performance
largely benefits from GCNs’ ability for handling irregularity
and unrestricted neighborhood connections. Specifically, for
each node in a graph, GCNs first aggregate neighbor nodes’
features, and then transform the aggregated feature through
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8910

