The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Label Dependence-Aware Sequence Generation Model for
Multi-Level Implicit Discourse Relation Recognition
Changxing Wu1 , Liuwen Cao1 , Yubin Ge2 , Yang Liu3 , Min Zhang4 , Jinsong Su5∗
1

School of Software, East China Jiaotong University, Nanchang, China
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Soochow University, Soochow, China
5
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
wuchangxing@ecjtu.edu.cn, caoliuwencc@163.com, yubinge2@illinois.edu,
liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn, minzhang@suda.edu.cn, jssu@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Implicit discourse relation recognition (IDRR) is a challenging but crucial task in discourse analysis. Most existing methods train multiple models to predict multi-level labels independently, while ignoring the dependence between hierarchically structured labels. In this paper, we consider multi-level
IDRR as a conditional label sequence generation task and
propose a Label Dependence-aware Sequence Generation
Model (LDSGM) for it. Specifically, we first design a label
attentive encoder to learn the global representation of an input
instance and its level-specific contexts, where the label dependence is integrated to obtain better label embeddings. Then,
we employ a label sequence decoder to output the predicted labels in a top-down manner, where the predicted higherlevel labels are directly used to guide the label prediction at
the current level. We further develop a mutual learning enhanced training method to exploit the label dependence in a
bottom-up direction, which is captured by an auxiliary decoder introduced during training. Experimental results on the
PDTB dataset show that our model achieves the state-of-theart performance on multi-level IDRR. We release our code at
https://github.com/nlpersECJTU/LDSGM.

Figure 1: An implicit PDTB instance with annotated multilevel labels and the inserted connective. Labels defined in
PDTB are organized in a three-layer hierarchical structure,
and the inserted connectives can be considered as the fourthlevel (most fine-grained) labels. For an instance, its multilevel labels and the inserted connective can be considered as
a label sequence, e.g., Contingency, Cause, Reason, because
(the path of blue nodes) for the above instance.

the absence of explicit connectives. Due to its wide applications in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as summarization (Cohan et al. 2018) and event relation extraction (Tang et al. 2021), IDRR has become one of
hot research topics recently.
With the rapid development of deep learning, previous
IDRR models relying on human-designed features have evolved to neural network based models (Zhang et al. 2015;
Liu and Li 2016; Lei et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2020; Zhang et al. 2021). Despite their success, these studies usually train multiple models to predict multi-level labels independently, while ignoring the dependence between
these hierarchically structured labels. To address this issue,
Nguyen et al. (2019) defined three loss terms to leverage the
dependence between labels and connectives. Though achieving promising results, they only exploit the label-connective
dependence to guide the model training. Wu et al. (2020)
introduced a hierarchical multi-task neural network stacked
with a CRF layer to infer the sequence of multi-level labels.
However, there still exist two drawbacks: 1) They stack several feature layers together, and directly use features from d-

Introduction
As a crucial task in discourse analysis, implicit discourse
relation recognition (IDRR) aims to identify semantic relations (e.g., Contingency) between two arguments (sentences
or clauses). Figure 1 shows an instance from PDTB (Prasad
et al. 2008). It consists of two arguments (arg1 and arg2 )
and is annotated with three hierarchical labels1 , where the
second-level/child label Cause further refines the semantic
of the top-level/parent label Contingency, and so on. During
annotation, an implicit connective because is first inserted
to benefit the label annotation, and can be considered as the
most fine-grained label. Compared with explicit discourse
relation recognition, IDRR is more challenging because of
∗
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
It is noteworthy that the organization of discourse relation labels is predominantly hierarchical, which holds in the corpora of
different languages, for example, CDTB (Li et al. 2014).

11486

