The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Predicting Physical World Destinations for Commands Given to Self-Driving Cars
Dusan Grujicic* 2 , Thierry Deruyttere* 1 , Marie-Francine Moens1 and Matthew Blaschko2
1

Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Belgium
Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, Belgium
{dusan.grujicic, thierry.deruyttere, sien.moens, matthew.blaschko}@kuleuven.be
2

Abstract

Many companies are in the race to be the first to develop
fully self-driving cars. It is expected that once this technology matures, manufacturers might entirely remove the steering wheel. While some enthusiasts are eagerly waiting for
this day, surveys (Othman 2021; Deruyttere, Milewski, and
Moens 2021; Schoettle and Sivak 2014) have indicated that
an average person is wary of relinquishing physical control
of the car. However, it was found that the notion of being
able to give spoken commands that can change the behavior of the vehicle tends to make people much more at ease
(Deruyttere, Milewski, and Moens 2021).
In recent years, researchers have investigated systems
where passengers can give commands to self-driving cars.
For instance, (Vasudevan, Dai, and Van Gool 2021; Chen
et al. 2019) consider navigational commands such as “Take

the first left and at the red building turn right. Afterwards,
drive to the white building”. On the other hand, Talk2Car
(Deruyttere et al. 2019) considers commands that abruptly
change the driving dynamics in the imminent future, such
as “Let me out near my friend with the red shirt on the
left”. The two former datasets feature graph-based navigation at a city level, where each node represents an individual
street scene. The latter dataset takes a lower level approach
and focuses on predicting objects referred to by the command within an individual street scene, without addressing
the navigational aspects of executing the command.
Taking the same low-level approach, we focus on the environment within the observable vicinity of the current location and extend the Talk2Car dataset with the 3D physical
destination for each given command. This extension is interesting as it requires models to interpret spatial language
in a 3D visual context. The works of (Dendorfer, Osep, and
Leal-Taixé 2020; Mangalam et al. 2020) suggest that it is
also beneficial to first predict the end goal of a path before starting to navigate. Therefore, we focus on predicting
the end destination given the passenger command (an example is given in Figure 1), after which, in a practical setting,
one of the many already existing systems could be tasked
with safely navigating to it within the dynamic environment
(Messaoud et al. 2020).
Additionally, indicating the destination as understood
from the command offers additional visual insight to the passenger in their interaction with the car. It may also alleviate
a degree of uneasiness that comes with the absence of direct
physical control. To the best of our knowledge, our dataset is
the first of its kind where a model needs to predict the physical, 3D destination of the self-driving car of the passenger
that has given a command. We will refer to the car in which
the passenger is as ego car from now on. In this paper, we
investigate if existing models are adequate enough to perform well on this task. In addition to this, we propose a new
model called PDPC for this destination task which outperforms our evaluated baselines. Our proposed model uses a
feature pyramid network to predict distributions at different
feature levels and finally aggregates them into a distribution
mixture. The contributions in this paper are the following:

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We introduce an expansion, Talk2Car-Destination, for
the Talk2Car dataset (Deruyttere et al. 2019) where we
annotate the possible destinations in the physical world

In recent years, we have seen significant steps taken in
the development of self-driving cars. Multiple companies are starting to roll out impressive systems that work
in a variety of settings. These systems can sometimes
give the impression that full self-driving is just around
the corner and that we would soon build cars without
even a steering wheel. The increase in the level of autonomy and control given to an AI provides an opportunity
for new modes of human-vehicle interaction. However,
surveys have shown that giving more control to an AI in
self-driving cars is accompanied by a degree of uneasiness by passengers. In an attempt to alleviate this issue,
recent works have taken a natural language-oriented approach by allowing the passenger to give commands
that refer to specific objects in the visual scene. Nevertheless, this is only half the task as the car should also
understand the physical destination of the command,
which is what we focus on in this paper. We propose an
extension in which we annotate the 3D destination that
the car needs to reach after executing the given command and evaluate multiple different baselines on predicting this destination location. Additionally, we introduce a model that outperforms the prior works adapted
for this particular setting.

1

Introduction

715

