The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Practical Fixed-Parameter Algorithms for Defending Active Directory Style
Attack Graphs
Mingyu Guo, Jialiang Li, Aneta Neumann, Frank Neumann, Hung Nguyen
School of Computer Science
University of Adelaide, Australia
{mingyu.guo, j.li, aneta.neumann, frank.neumann, hung.nguyen}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Due to its popularity, Active Directory has been a focused
cyber attack target. An Active Directory environment naturally describes an attack graph, where the nodes represent
accounts, computers, security groups, etc. A directed edge
from node A to B represents that an attacker can reach from
A to B via existing accesses or known exploits. There are
a number of software tools for analysing/visualising Active Directory attack graphs. Among these tools, B LOOD H OUND1 is the most influential. Motivated by (Dunagan,
Zheng, and Simon 2009), B LOOD H OUND models the identity snowball attack under Active Directory. Typically, an
identity snowball attack starts when an attacker gains initial access to the internal network. The attacker starts from
a low-privilege user account (often obtained via phishing
emails). The attacker then moves from low-privilege nodes
admin access
to high-privilege nodes (i.e., account A −−−−−−−→ computer

Active Directory is the default security management system
for Windows domain networks. We study the shortest path
edge interdiction problem for defending Active Directory
style attack graphs. The problem is formulated as a Stackelberg game between one defender and one attacker. The attack
graph contains one destination node and multiple entry nodes.
The attacker’s entry node is chosen by nature. The defender
chooses to block a set of edges limited by his budget. The attacker then picks the shortest unblocked attack path. The defender aims to maximize the expected shortest path length for
the attacker, where the expectation is taken over entry nodes.
We observe that practical Active Directory attack graphs have
small maximum attack path lengths and are structurally close
to trees. We first show that even if the maximum attack path
length is a constant, the problem is still W [1]-hard with respect to the defender’s budget. Having a small maximum
attack path length and a small budget is not enough to design fixed-parameter algorithms. If we further assume that
the number of entry nodes is small, then we derive a fixedparameter tractable algorithm.
We then propose two other fixed-parameter algorithms by exploiting the tree-like features. One is based on tree decomposition and requires a small tree width. The other assumes
a small number of splitting nodes (nodes with multiple outgoing edges). Finally, the last algorithm is converted into a
graph convolutional neural network based heuristic, which
scales to larger graphs with more splitting nodes.

AdminTo

scan memory

B −−−−−−−→ account C). The goal of the attacker is to reach
HasSession

the highest-privilege account, called the Domain Admin DA.
The core functionality of B LOOD H OUND is to automatically generate the shortest attack path from the attacker’s
entry node to DA, where the distance is defined as the number of hops. Following the shortest attack path implies less
time spent on the attack and less chance of failure. Before
the invention of B LOOD H OUND, attackers used to explore
aimlessly in the internal network hoping to discover a privilege escalation pathway. Dunagan, Zheng, and Simon (2009)
briefly described a heuristic edge blocking algorithm. The
aim is to block a small number of edges to cut the attack
graph into multiple disconnected regions, which essentially
removes the attack paths from most entry nodes.
We derive optimal edge blocking policies. The defender
can assign different utilities on attack paths of different
lengths. That is, maximizing the number of attack paths
cut is a special case of our model. We adopt a two-player
Bayesian Stackelberg game (Paruchuri et al. 2008) setup
with pure strategies only. In our game, the defender (leader)
has a limited budget b for blocking edges. Not all edges are
blockable. The attacker’s type is characterized by his entry
node. In practise, the entry account is often from a phishing attack victim. Therefore, we assume that the attacker’s
entry node is drawn randomly by nature from a set of entry

Introduction
Cyber attack graphs model the chain of events (conceptual
or physical) that lead to successful cyber attacks. Despite
its popularity in both academia and industry, there is not a
canonical definition of cyber attack graphs. Lallie, Debattista, and Bal (2020) surveyed over 180 attack graphs/trees
studied in literature, and discovered over 90 different selfnominated definitions of attack graphs/trees.
For industry practitioners, there is one attack graph model
that stands out and finds its place in many practitioners’
toolkit, which is the Active Directory attack graph. Microsoft Active Directory is the default security management
system for Windows domain networks, which has a dominant market share among large organisations worldwide.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9360

https://github.com/BloodHoundAD/BloodHound

