The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Local Similarity Pattern and Cost Self-Reassembling for Deep Stereo Matching
Networks
Biyang Liu 1,2 , Huimin Yu 1,2,3,4 , Yangqi Long 1, 2
1

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-League Research & Development Center
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
4
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Processing, Communication and Networking
{biyangliu, yhm2005, longyangqi}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
-0.1

Although convolutional neural network based stereo matching architectures have made impressive achievements, there
are still some limitations: 1) Convolutional Feature (CF)
tends to capture appearance information, which is inadequate
for accurate matching. 2) Due to the static filters, current convolution based disparity refinement modules often produce
over-smooth results. In this paper, we present two schemes
to address these issues, where some traditional wisdoms are
integrated. Firstly, we introduce a pairwise feature for deep
stereo matching networks, named LSP (Local Similarity Pattern). Through explicitly revealing the neighbor relationships,
LSP contains rich structural information, which can be leveraged to aid CF for more discriminative feature description.
Secondly, we design a dynamic self-reassembling refinement
strategy and apply it to the cost distribution and the disparity
map respectively. The former could be equipped with the unimodal distribution constraint to alleviate the over-smoothing
problem, and the latter is more practical. The effectiveness
of the proposed methods is demonstrated via incorporating
them into two well-known basic architectures, GwcNet and
GANet-deep. Experimental results on the SceneFlow and
KITTI benchmarks show that our modules significantly improve the performance of the model. Code is available at
https://github.com/SpadeLiu/Lac-GwcNet.

0.9

-0.2

(a) image patch

1.0
1.0

0.3
0.1

0.2

(b) neighbor relationships

0.2

8
channels

0.3
-0.1

(c) output feature

(d) structural property

Figure 1: The operation paradigm of LSP. Each yellow circle
represents a point in the image or the feature map. Local
structural property is reflected in the close relationships.

Zhang 2020). However, they concentrate more on the cost
aggregation stage. In this paper, we mainly investigate some
limitations of the used features and the refinement modules.
Aiming at breaking the limitations, we present two schemes,
introduced as follows.
1) Convolutional Feature (CF) is utilized to describe the
points to construct the matching cost in current stereo matching networks. Despite the rich appearance information, CF
contains less structural information since the learned convolutional kernels can not explicitly reveal the pixel relationships. Due to the view transformation, the appearance of an
object might get changed while the structural characteristic
is more stable (Zabih and Woodfill 1994). Therefore, it is
essential for accurate matching to combine the appearance
information and the structural information, as demonstrated
in AD-Census (Mei et al. 2011).
To this end, we design a pairwise feature for deep stereo
matching networks, named LSP (Local Similarity Pattern).
Based on the unary features extracted from the convolutional
layers, the relationships (e.g. cosine similarities) of a point
and its neighbors are calculated as LSP, as illustrated in Figure 1. With such an operating mechanism, LSP clearly discloses some structural clues (e.g. trees are vertical), making
it a beneficial complement for CF. At the same time, LSP

Introduction
Depth information is essential for plenty of applications
such as autonomous driving and augmented reality. As
a convenient and low-cost means to obtain depth, stereo
matching has been studied for a long time. The objective
of this task is to estimate the disparity from a rectified image
pair, which can be converted to depth with the focal length
and baseline of the camera system. Typically, stereo matching algorithms consist of four steps (Scharstein and Szeliski
2002): matching cost computation, cost aggregation, disparity optimization, and disparity refinement.
Although convolutional neural network (CNN) based
stereo matching methods have been dominant on several
benchmarks, the vanilla convolution is not perfect, there are
still some flaws in CNN based architectures. Previous works
have proved that integrating traditional knowledge will benefit the designing of the model (Zhang et al. 2019; Xu and
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1647

