The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Molecular Contrastive Learning with Chemical Element Knowledge Graph
Yin Fang1,2,3 * , Qiang Zhang1,2,3 * , Haihong Yang1,2,3 , Xiang Zhuang1,2,3 , Shumin Deng1,3 , Wen
Zhang4 , Ming Qin1,2,3 , Zhuo Chen1,2,3 , Xiaohui Fan5,6,7 , Huajun Chen1,2,3†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
AZFT Joint Lab for Knowledge Engine
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
5
Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University
6
Innovation Center in Zhejiang University, State Key Laboratory of Component-Based Chinese Medicine
7
Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine
{fangyin, qiang.zhang.cs, haihong825, zhuangxiang, 231sm, wenzhang2015,
qinandming, zhuo.chen, fanxh, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

While effective, these methods face the challenges of limited
labeled data, as laboratory experiments are expensive and
time-consuming to annotate data. Moreover, due to the enormous diversity of chemical molecules, these works could
barely generalize to unseen cases (Hu et al. 2020; Rong et al.
2020), which greatly hinders practical applicability.
One line of works to alleviate these issues is to design
pretext tasks to learn node or graph representations without
labels. Several attempts have been made to investigate different strategies for such tasks, including masked attribute prediction (Hu et al. 2020), graph-level motif prediction (Rong
et al. 2020), and graph context prediction (Liu et al. 2019).
The other line follows a contrastive learning framework
from the computer vision domain (Wu et al. 2018b; Chen
et al. 2020), which aims to construct similar and dissimilar
view pairs via graph augmentations, including node dropping, edge perturbation, and subgraph extraction (You et al.
2020). Due to the smaller amount of parameters and simpler
predefined tasks, we adopt contrastive learning in our work.
However, unlike images, contrastive learning on graphs
has its unique challenges. First, the structural information and semantics of the graphs vary significantly across
domains, which makes it difficult to design a universal
augmentation scheme for graphs. Especially for molecular
graphs, removing or adding a chemical bond or a functional group will drastically change their identities and properties (You et al. 2020). More importantly, existing graph
contrastive learning models mainly focus on graphs structures, without considering fundamental domain knowledge
into graph semantics. Another neglected defect is that they
model the atoms in molecular graphs as individuals that
can only interact when there exists an edge (i.e., a chemical bond), failing to consider the correlations between atoms
(e.g., commonalities between atoms of the same attributes).
To overcome these challenges, we enrich the molecular
graph contrastive learning by incorporating domain knowledge. Since chemical domain knowledge is crucial prior, we
hypothesize that the attributes of elements (atom is an instance of element) can affect molecular properties. To ob-

Molecular representation learning contributes to multiple
downstream tasks such as molecular property prediction and
drug design. To properly represent molecules, graph contrastive learning is a promising paradigm as it utilizes selfsupervision signals and has no requirements for human annotations. However, prior works fail to incorporate fundamental
domain knowledge into graph semantics and thus ignore the
correlations between atoms that have common attributes but
are not directly connected by bonds. To address these issues,
we construct a Chemical Element Knowledge Graph (KG)
to summarize microscopic associations between elements
and propose a novel Knowledge-enhanced Contrastive Learning (KCL) framework for molecular representation learning.
KCL framework consists of three modules. The first module,
knowledge-guided graph augmentation, augments the original molecular graph based on the Chemical Element KG.
The second module, knowledge-aware graph representation,
extracts molecular representations with a common graph encoder for the original molecular graph and a Knowledgeaware Message Passing Neural Network (KMPNN) to encode
complex information in the augmented molecular graph. The
final module is a contrastive objective, where we maximize
agreement between these two views of molecular graphs. Extensive experiments demonstrated that KCL obtained superior performances against state-of-the-art baselines on eight
molecular datasets. Visualization experiments properly interpret what KCL has learned from atoms and attributes in the
augmented molecular graphs.

Introduction
Accurately predicting the properties of molecules lies at
the core of fundamental tasks in the chemical and pharmaceutical communities. In light of deep learning, several
supervised models have been investigated to learn molecular representations through predicting molecular properties (Gilmer et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2019; Song et al. 2020).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3968

