The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multi-View Graph Representation for Programming
Language Processing: An Investigation into Algorithm Detection
Ting Long* 1 , Yutong Xie* 2 , Xianyu Chen1 , Weinan Zhang1† , Qinxiang Cao1 , Yong Yu1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
{longting,xianyujun,wnzhang,caoqinxiang}@sjtu.edu.cn, yutxie@umich.edu, yyu@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

2016; Alon et al. 2019) while ignoring the semantics of programs. Thus, some researchers propose to include semantic
information by adding semantic edges onto ASTs (Allamanis, Brockschmidt, and Khademi 2018; Zhou et al. 2019).
However, the program representation still highly depends on
the syntax, and the semantics are relatively underweighted.
Moreover, in previous methods, information from different
aspects like syntax, data flow, and control flow are often
mixed up into one single view, making the information hard
to be disentangled.
Therefore in this paper, to address the problem mentioned
above, we propose to use a multi-view graph (MVG) representation for source code. To obtain a more comprehensive understanding of programs, we consider multiple graph
views from various aspects and levels. In particular, we emphasize more on semantics and include the following views
in MVG: the data-flow graph (DFG), control-flow graph
(CFG), read-write graph (RWG), and a combined graph
(CG). Among these views, DFG and CFG are widely used
in compiling and traditional program analysis. We construct
RWG based on DFG and CFG to capture the relationship
between operations and operands. We further include CG, a
combination of the former-mentioned graphs, to have an integral representation of the program. We then apply a gated
graph neural network (GGNN) (Li et al. 2016) to automatically extract information from the four graph views.
We validate our proposed MVG method in the context
of algorithm detection, which is a fundamental subfield of
PLP and aims at identifying the algorithms and data structures that appear in the source code. The first reason for
which we choose this subfield is because of its wide application range: the detection results can be used as intermediate information for further program analysis; we might
also apply algorithm detection in areas like programming
education, e.g., determining which algorithms are mastered
by the students. In addition to the wide range of applications, algorithm detection is also very challenging and
can serve as a benchmark for PLP program representation.
This is because: (1) A piece of code can contain multiple different algorithms and data structures; (2) One algorithm or data structure can have multiple possible implementations (e.g., Dynamic Programming, Segment
Tree); (3) Different algorithms can have very similar
implementations (e.g., Dijkstra’s Algorithm and

Program representation, which aims at converting program
source code into vectors with automatically extracted features, is a fundamental problem in programming language
processing (PLP). Recent work tries to represent programs
with neural networks based on source code structures. However, such methods often focus on the syntax and consider
only one single perspective of programs, limiting the representation power of models. This paper proposes a multiview graph (MVG) program representation method. MVG
pays more attention to code semantics and simultaneously
includes both data flow and control flow as multiple views.
These views are then combined and processed by a graph neural network (GNN) to obtain a comprehensive program representation that covers various aspects. We thoroughly evaluate
our proposed MVG approach in the context of algorithm detection, an important and challenging subfield of PLP. Specifically, we use a public dataset POJ-104 and also construct a
new challenging dataset ALG-109 to test our method. In experiments, MVG outperforms previous methods significantly,
demonstrating our model’s strong capability of representing
source code.

Introduction
With the advent of big code (Allamanis et al. 2018), programming language processing (PLP) gains plenty of attention in recent years. PLP aims at assisting computers automatically understanding and analyzing source code, which
benefits downstream tasks in software engineering like code
retrieval (Nie et al. 2016), code annotation (Yao, Peddamail,
and Sun 2019), bug predicting and fixing (Xia et al. 2018;
Wang, Su, and Singh 2018), program translation (Chen, Liu,
and Song 2018; Gu et al. 2017). To take advantage of deep
learning, the program representation problem, i.e., how to
convert source code into representational vectors, becomes
a critical issue in PLP.
A great deal of literature devotes its efforts to the problem of program representation. Among these works, a majority of them represent source code only based on syntactic information like abstract syntax trees (ASTs) (Mou et al.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5792

