The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Model-Driven Network for Shadow Removal
Yurui Zhu1 , Zeyu Xiao1 , Yanchi Fang2 , Xueyang Fu1 ∗ , Zhiwei Xiong1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1

University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
University of Toronto, Canada
{zyr, zeyuxiao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yanchi.fang@mail.utoronto.ca, {xyfu, zwxiong, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based methods
have achieved significant breakthroughs in the task of single
image shadow removal. However, the performance of these
methods remains limited for several reasons. First, the existing shadow illumination model ignores the spatially variant
property of the shadow images, hindering their further performance. Second, most deep CNNs based methods directly
estimate the shadow free results from the input shadow images like a black box, thus losing the desired interpretability.
To address these issues, we first propose a new shadow illumination model for the shadow removal task. This new shadow
illumination model ensures the identity mapping among unshaded regions, and adaptively performs fine grained spatial
mapping between shadow regions and their references. Then,
based on the shadow illumination model, we reformulate the
shadow removal task as a variational optimization problem.
To effectively solve the variational problem, we design an iterative algorithm and unfold it into a deep network, naturally
increasing the interpretability of the deep model. Experiments
show that our method could achieve SOTA performance with
less than half parameters, one-fifth of floating-point of operations (FLOPs), and over seventeen times faster than SOTA
method (DHAN).

Figure 1: Comparison among different models PSNR performance, number of models parameters and FLOPs. Shadow
removal results are achieved on ISTD dataset.
transformation relationship between the shadow-free image
Ins and shadow image Is is explicitly expressed as
Ilit = ω ∗ Is + b,
Ins = α ∗ Is + (1 − α) ∗ Ilit ,

(1)
(2)

where Ilit is the relit result of transforming Is with six constants (ω = [ωR , ωG , ωB ], b = [bR , bG , bB ]) for different
image channels. The matte α balances the shadow effects in
penumbra areas. Given the above formula, they design networks to predict different parameters in two stages. In the
first stage, this illumination model strongly assumes that all
areas of the umbra are equally affected by shadows, which
largely ignores the spatial-variant property of shadow images. We argue that directly predicting a uniform mapping
function for all umbra area pixels is not accurate. Neither of
these methods considers a more finer-grained, more adaptive
mapping function for each pixel in umbra regions.
Lacking sufficient interpretability of CNNs. Deep CNNs significantly promote the single image shadow removal
performance in conjunction with the large-scale datasets
of shadow/non-shadow pairs. However, many deep CNNsbased methods (Qu et al. 2017; Wang, Li, and Yang 2018;
Cun, Pun, and Shi 2020) mainly focus on designing the network architectures, and then adopt an end-to-end training
strategy to directly learn the mapping function between Is
and Ins to remove shadows. This learning paradigm makes
the deep network act as a black box and ignores the intrin-

Introduction
Shadows, which are caused by light being blocked by objects, widely exist in various natural scenes. Shadows present a
substantial challenge for computer vision applications such
as tracking (Sanin, Sanderson, and Lovell 2010; Guo et al.
2020) and object detection (Cucchiara et al. 2003). Consequently, removing shadows is a crucial preprocessing step
in computer vision, and has attracted extensive research attention. Currently, deep CNNs-based methods (Qu et al.
2017; Wang, Li, and Yang 2018; Cun, Pun, and Shi 2020;
Le and Samaras 2020; Liu et al. 2021c) dominate this field
and achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, these
approaches have some inherent problems:
Simplified assumption in the existing shadow illumination model. Recently, many researchers try to further explore the physical properties of the shadow phenomenon. In
(Le and Samaras 2019, 2020), the illumination model of the
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3635

