The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

With False Friends Like These, Who Can Notice Mistakes?
Lue Tao1,2 , Lei Feng3 , Jinfeng Yi4 , Songcan Chen1,2 *
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University
4
JD AI Research

Abstract

tify predictions), compared with only 94.4% accuracy on benign examples. Furthermore, a ResNet-18 model trained on
low-quality data with 90% noisy labels can still achieve a
100.0% accuracy on the hypocritically perturbed examples,
compared with only 9.8% accuracy on the clean data.
Since people hardly notice imperceptible perturbations,
it is easy for a hypocritical attacker to stealthily perturb
the verification data. For instance, many practitioners collect images from the internet (where malicious users may
exist) and annotate them accurately (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009; Deng et al. 2009; Northcutt, Athalye, and Mueller
2021). Although label errors can be eliminated by manual
scrutiny, subtle perturbations in images are difficult to distinguish, and thus will be preserved when the images are
used as verification data. As another example, autonomous
vehicles are obliged to pass the verification in designated
routes (such as Mzone in Beijing2 ) to obtain permits for deployment. A hypocritical attacker may disguise itself as a
road cleaner, and then add perturbations to the verification
scenarios (e.g., a “stop sign”) without being noticed.
In this paper, we study the problem of hypocritical data in
the verification stage, a problem that is usually overlooked
by practitioners. Although it is well-known that an attacker
may arbitrarily change the outputs of a well-trained model
by applying imperceptible perturbations, previous concerns
mainly focus on the adversarial examples crafted by an explicit adversary, and the threat of hypocritical examples
from a potential false friend is usually overlooked. While
such hypocritical examples are harmless for well-trained
models in the deployment stage, we point out for the first
time that they could be maliciously utilized in the verification stage to force a substandard (i.e., not as good as required) model to show abnormally high performance. Once
a deployer trusts the hypocritical performance and applies
the “well-performed” model in real-world applications, unexpected failures may happen even in benign environments.
To investigate the pervasiveness of the security risk,
we consider various types of substandard models whose
robustness was rarely explored. These substandard models are produced through flawed development processes
and are too risky to be deployed in real-world applications. We evaluate the vulnerability of the substandard mod-

Adversarial examples crafted by an explicit adversary have
attracted significant attention in machine learning. However,
the security risk posed by a potential false friend has been
largely overlooked. In this paper, we unveil the threat of hypocritical examples—inputs that are originally misclassified yet
perturbed by a false friend to force correct predictions. While
such perturbed examples seem harmless, we point out for the
first time that they could be maliciously used to conceal the
mistakes of a substandard (i.e., not as good as required) model
during an evaluation. Once a deployer trusts the hypocritical
performance and applies the “well-performed” model in realworld applications, unexpected failures may happen even in
benign environments. More seriously, this security risk seems
to be pervasive: we find that many types of substandard models are vulnerable to hypocritical examples across multiple
datasets. Furthermore, we provide the first attempt to characterize the threat with a metric called hypocritical risk and try
to circumvent it via several countermeasures. Results demonstrate the effectiveness of the countermeasures, while the risk
remains non-negligible even after adaptive robust training.

1

Introduction

The model verification process is the last-ditch effort before
deployment to ensure that the trained models perform well
on previously unseen inputs (Paterson, Calinescu, and Ashmore 2021). However, the process may not work as expected
in practice. According to TechRepublic, 85% of attempted
deployments eventually fail to bring their intended results
to production1 . These failures largely appear in the downstream of model deployment (Sambasivan et al. 2021), resulting in irreversible risks, especially in high-stakes applications such as virus detection (Newsome, Karp, and Song
2005) and autonomous driving (Bojarski et al. 2016). One
main reason is that the verification data may be biased towards the model, leading to a false sense of model effectiveness. For example, a naturally trained ResNet-18 (He
et al. 2016) on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009) can
achieve 100% accuracy on the hypocritically perturbed examples (i.e., inputs that are perturbed to hypocritically rec* Correspondence to: Songcan Chen hs.chen@nuaa.edu.cni.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://decisioniq.com/blog/ai-project-failure-rates-are-high

2

8458

http://www.mzone.site/

