The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

New Results in Bounded-Suboptimal Search
Maximilian Fickert,* 1 Tianyi Gu,* 2 Wheeler Ruml2
1

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, University of New Hampshire, USA
fickert@cs.uni-saarland.de, {gu, ruml}@cs.unh.edu

Abstract

2011) and DPS (Gilon, Felner, and Stern 2016). Briefly, EES
tries to exploit an inadmissible cost-to-go heuristic ĥ(n) and
an estimate of state space graph distance-to-go ˆ
d(n) in order to quickly find solutions within the suboptimality bound.
DPS tries to expand the node that is estimated to be most
likely to lead to a solution within the suboptimality bound.
Neither algorithm consistently outperforms the other on the
classic search benchmarks on which they have been tested.
In this paper, we consider two additional ideas that have
been investigated in other contexts: explicitly estimating
the probability that a node will lead to a sufficiently good
solution (Fickert, Gu, and Ruml 2021) and using alternating search queues ordered by different criteria (Röger
and Helmert 2010). By remixing these ideas with previous work, we develop several new bounded-suboptimal algorithms. We perform the most comprehensive empirical
comparison of bounded-suboptimal search algorithms to
date, considering not only classic search benchmarks but
also domain-independent classical planning domains, and
we find that one of the new algorithms, a simple alternating queue scheme, significantly outperforms both EES and
DPS across most benchmarks. In addition to establishing
a new state-of-the-art in bounded-suboptimal search, this
work shows that there is still plenty of room for incorporating new ideas into classic single-agent unidirectional search.

In bounded-suboptimal heuristic search, one attempts to find
a solution that costs no more than a prespecified factor of
optimal as quickly as possible. This is an important setting,
as it admits faster-than-optimal solving while retaining some
control over solution cost. In this paper, we investigate several new algorithms for bounded-suboptimal search, including novel variants of EES and DPS, the two most prominent
previous proposals, and methods inspired by recent work in
bounded-cost search that leverages uncertainty estimates of
the heuristic. We perform what is, to our knowledge, the most
comprehensive empirical comparison of bounded-suboptimal
search algorithms to date, including both search and planning
benchmarks, and we find that one of the new algorithms, a
simple alternating queue scheme, significantly outperforms
previous work.

Introduction
Heuristic search methods are widely used in many realworld autonomous systems. For example, search-based
methods have been used in self-driving cars (Ferguson,
Howard, and Likhachev 2008), Mars rovers (Mudgal et al.
2005), container terminals (Kim and Park 2004), and Amazon warehouses (Li et al. 2021), as well as for power
scheduling (Thiébaux et al. 2013) and protein design (Allouche et al. 2019). However, users always want to solve
search problems that are too large to be solved optimally.
To find an optimal solution, one must examine every node
that is not provably too expensive, that is, all reachable
nodes n where f (n) < C ∗ , the optimal solution cost. Even
with an almost-perfect heuristic, there can be many such
nodes (Helmert and Röger 2008). This motivates suboptimal
search, in which one is allowed to return a solution whose
cost is greater than C ∗ .
One popular suboptimal setting is bounded-suboptimal
search, where we require that the returned solution’s cost
lies within a given factor w of C ∗ . The best-known algorithm for this setting is weighted A* (Pohl 1970), a simple modification of A* that performs a best-first search on
f 0 (n) = g(n) + w · h(n). The state-of-the-art algorithms
for bounded-suboptimal search are EES (Thayer and Ruml

Background
A bounded-suboptimal search problem can be defined as a
six-tuple hS, sinit , succ(s), c(s, s0 ), G, wi, where S is a set
of states, sinit ∈ S is the initial state, succ(s) is the transition function yielding the set of successor states of s, c(s, s0 )
is the cost of the transition from state s to its successor
s0 ∈ succ(s), G ⊆ S is the set of goal states, and w is a given
suboptimality bound. The task is to find a path from sinit to
a goal state, known variously as a solution or a plan, whose
sum of transition costs is within the factor w of optimal.
We say that a solution is w-admissible if it satisfies this requirement and an algorithm is called a bounded-suboptimal
search algorithm if it is guaranteed to return a w-admissible
solution.
A node n represents a state in the search space with a corresponding path to it from the initial state; the cost of the
path is denoted by g(n) and h(n) is a heuristic estimate of

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10166

