The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Conditional Abstract Dialectical Frameworks
Jesse Heyninck1,2 , Matthias Thimm3 , Gabriele Kern-Isberner1 , Tjitze Rienstra4 , Kenneth Skiba3
1

Technische Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
2
University of Cape Town and CAIR, South-Africa
3
FernUniversität Hagen, Hagen, Germany
4
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands

(At, L, C) where At represents a set of atoms or arguments,
L ⊆ At × At represents a set of argumentative relations between the atoms and C is a set of acceptance conditions Cs
for every s ∈ At. As such, ADFs are able to capture all of
the major semantics of abstract argumentation and offer a
general framework for argumentation-based inference. Furthermore, ADFs were shown to capture logic programming
(Brewka et al. 2013). In (Heyninck et al. 2019), first attempts
were made to translate non-monotonic conditional logics in
ADFs.
However, there are limits to the representative capabilities
of ADFs, both on a conceptual as well as a more technical
level. On the conceptual level, acceptance conditions are assigned to atoms, which means that, e. g., an attack on a set
of arguments cannot be captured by ADFs. For example, to
state that the set {p, q} is attacked by r we would have to be
able to set the acceptance condition of p ∧ q to ¬r, which is
not possible in ADFs. Likewise, it is not immediately obvious how to represent more complicated logic programming
languages in ADFs, such as disjunctive logic programming.
Such limitations are, not unsurprisingly, also reflected on a
more technical level. For example, a (polynomial) translation of disjunctive logic programming into ADFs is impossible in view of considerations on complexity. Finally, in
(Heyninck et al. 2019) it was shown that only a fragment
of the full language of conditional logics can be translated
in ADFs in view of their limited syntax.
In this paper, we generalize ADFs as to allow for the
assignment of acceptance conditions to complex formulas.
This results in conditional abstract dialectical frameworks
(in short, cADFs) which are sets of acceptance pairs of the
form φ C ψ with arbitrary formulas φ and ψ, interpreted as
a defeasible version of “φ is the case if and only if ψ is the
case”. The semantics of cADFs are formulated as a generalization of the semantics of ADFs, with the Γ-function, on
its turn based on a non-truth-functional four-valued logic,
as a central component. Some of the main results include
existence results for all the major semantics, as well as the
definition of the so-called grounded state, a single-state semantics which can be iteratively constructed and represents
the minimal information entailed by a given cADF.
Outline of this Paper: We first state all the necessary preliminaries in Section 2 on propositional logic (Section 2),
and abstract dialectical argumentation (Section 2). The syn-

Abstract
Abstract dialectical frameworks (in short, ADFs) are a unifying model of formal argumentation, where argumentative
relations between arguments are represented by assigning acceptance conditions to atomic arguments. This idea is generalized by letting acceptance conditions being assigned to
complex formulas, resulting in conditional abstract dialectical frameworks (in short, cADFs). We define the semantics of
cADFs in terms of a non-truth-functional four-valued logic,
and study the semantics in-depth, by showing existence results and proving that all semantics are generalizations of the
corresponding semantics for ADFs.

1

Introduction

Formal argumentation is one of the major approaches
to knowledge representation. In the seminal paper (Dung
1995), abstract argumentation frameworks were conceived
of as directed graphs where nodes represent arguments and
edges between these nodes represent attacks. So-called argumentation semantics determine which sets of arguments
can be reasonably upheld together given such an argumentation graph. Various authors have remarked that other relations between arguments are worth consideration. For example, in (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex 2005), bipolar argumentation frameworks are developed, where arguments can
support as well as attack each other.
The last decades saw a proliferation of such extensions
of the original formalism of (Dung 1995), and it has often
proven hard to compare the resulting different dialects of the
argumentation formalisms. To cope with the resulting multiplicity, (Brewka et al. 2013) introduced abstract dialectical
frameworks (in short, ADFs) that aims to unify these different dialects (Polberg 2016). Just like in (Dung 1995), ADFs
are directed graphs. In difference to abstract argumentation
frameworks, however, in ADFs, edges between nodes do not
necessarily represent attacks but can encode any relationship
between arguments. Such a generality is achieved by associating an acceptance condition with each argument, which
is a Boolean formula in terms of the parents of the argument
that expresses the conditions under which an argument can
be accepted. This results in an ADF being defined as a triple
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5692

