The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Multimodal Adversarially Learned Inference with Factorized Discriminators
Wenxue Chen1 , Jianke Zhu1,2*
1

2

Zhejiang University
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{wxchern, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

(VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) are two
well-known representative deep generative models. In the
original formulation, GANs are not able to perform inference like VAEs, the adversarially learned inference (ALI)
and bidirectional GAN (BiGAN) (Donahue, Krähenbühl,
and Darrell 2017; Dumoulin et al. 2017) proposed an extension by training the inference model and the generative
model together using the adversarial process.
Recent approaches (Suzuki, Nakayama, and Matsuo
2017; Shi et al. 2019; Sutter, Daunhawer, and Vogt 2020)
have extended the VAEs to the multimodal setting, where
learning of the model corresponds to maximize the evidence variational lower bound (ELBO) on the marginal loglikelihood of multimodal data. However, they are not able to
utilize the unimodal data efficiently, as combining unimodal
ELBOs and multimodal ELBOs naively does not yield a
valid lower bound on the marginal log-likelihood of multimodal data anymore, which may even hurt performance.
Shi et al. (2021) propose a constrastive version of multimodal ELBO to improve data-efficiency, where the model
can make use of the unpaired unimodal data. However, their
optimization objective is derived heuristically and empirically weighted to avoid degenerate solutions, where the
model only learns to generate the random noise.
To address the above limitations, in this paper, we propose a novel GAN-based multimodal generative model to
make use of unimodal data more efficiently. We show that it
is necessary to align the different encoder distributions with
the joint decoder distribution, simultaneously. To align multiple distributions, we resort to adversarial learning. Specifically, training the discriminators in the D-step of GANs can
be regarded as estimating the probability density ratio. This
perspective of GANs enables us to factorize the discriminators and compute a wide range of divergences. By factorizing discriminators, we can train discriminators on unimodal
data, which improves the data-efficiency. By taking advantages of the flexibility of GANs, we propose a principled
way to combine the unimodal and multimodal training under the same framework.
From the above all, the contributions of our work are summarized in threefold as below:

Learning from multimodal data is an important research topic
in machine learning, which has the potential to obtain better
representations. In this work, we propose a novel approach to
generative modeling of multimodal data based on generative
adversarial networks. To learn a coherent multimodal generative model, we show that it is necessary to align different
encoder distributions with the joint decoder distribution simultaneously. To this end, we construct a specific form of the
discriminator to enable our model to utilize data efficiently,
which can be trained constrastively. By taking advantage of
contrastive learning through factorizing the discriminator, we
train our model on unimodal data. We have conducted experiments on the benchmark datasets, whose promising results
show that our proposed approach outperforms the-state-ofthe-art methods on a variety of metrics. The source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/6b5d/mmali.

Introduction
Real-world data usually have several heterogeneous modalities. Co-occurrence of different modalities provides the extra
supervision signals, since the different modalities of data are
usually associated by the underlying common factors. By
exploiting such commonality among different modalities,
the representations learned from the multimodal data are
promised to be more robust and generalizable across different modalities. Existing works have shown the potential of
the representations learned from the multimodal data (Tsai
et al. 2019; Shi et al. 2021).
Supervised representation learning requires the labeled
data, which are typically scarce comparing to the vast
amount of unlabeled data. Recently, some progress on generative modeling has been made in the multimodal setting and
demonstrates the power of the representations learned from
the multimodal generative models (Suzuki, Nakayama, and
Matsuo 2017; Wu and Goodman 2018; Shi et al. 2019; Sutter, Daunhawer, and Vogt 2020). In this work, we focus our
attention on generative modeling of the multimodal data.
Generative models offer an elegant way to learn
from the data without labels. Variational auto-encoders
* corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We show that the different encoder distributions and decoder distribution need to be aligned simultaneously to
6304

