The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Secretary Problem with Competing Employers on Random Edge Arrivals
Xiaohui Bei1 , Shengyu Zhang2
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Tencent
xhbei@ntu.edu.sg, shengyzhang@tencent.com

Abstract

best candidate from a pool of candidates. This setting effectively converts the problem of online decision making into
an online secretary game played among multiple employers. In this secretary game, a random stream of candidates
arrives one by one. Upon the arrival of each candidate, a
set of employers all learn the relative rankings of this candidate and then each makes a hiring decision. The goal of
each employer is again to maximize the probability of hiring
the best candidate. A sequence of works (Dynkin 1967; Szajowski 1993, 1995; Fushimi 1981) study the secretary problem with two competing employers and analyze the equilibrium behavior. These works differ in their assumptions
on the payoff structure and how the conflicts are resolved
when multiple employers make offers to the same candidate. Sakaguchi (Sakaguchi 1995) reviews the game from an
optimal stopping strategy perspective. Immorlica et al (Immorlica, Kleinberg, and Mahdian 2006) consider a general
setting with multiple indistinguishable employers and argue
that the timing of the earliest offer decreases as the number of employers increases. Karlin and Lei (Karlin and Lei
2015) consider the secretary game with ranked employers
and show how to compute subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium strategies of the game. Ezra et al. (Ezra, Feldman, and
Kupfer 2020) consider a variant of the setting that allows
deferred selections from the employers. Note that all these
works discussed above use a vertex arrival model. That is,
the employers are interviewing the same random sequence
of the candidates, and when a candidate arrives, this candidate applies to all employers in a certain (e.g. fixed or random) order. It is also assumed that all employers have the
same preferences over the candidates. This fits the scenarios
where the candidates possess some intrinsic values that all
employers can observe from an interview, or that the only
information of available to the employers to make decisions
on a candidate is a score from some standard test.

The classic secretary problem concerns the problem of an employer facing a random sequence of candidates and making
online hiring decisions to try to hire the best candidate. In this
paper, we study a game-theoretic generalization of the secretary problem where a set of employers compete with each
other to hire the best candidate. Different from previous secretary market models, our model assumes that the sequence of
candidates arriving at each employer is uniformly random but
independent from other sequences. We consider two versions
of this secretary game where employers can have adaptive or
non-adaptive strategies, and provide characterizations of the
best response and Nash equilibrium of each game.

1

Introduction

The secretary problem represents a canonical setup for
studying online algorithms. Consider a player trying to hire
the best secretary among a totally-ordered set of n candidates. The candidates arrive in a random order. At time step
t, a candidate at arrives. The employer learns this candidate’s relative order among all candidates arrived so far, but
does not know how to compare it with the future candidates
that he has not seen. The employer needs to make an irrevocable decision on whether to hire the current candidate at
or not. If he hires, then the game is over, and the employer
wins if the hired at is the best among all the n candidates.
If the employer does not hire, then the next candidate at+1
arrives and the game goes on. The secretary problem asks
how to design a strategy for the employer to maximize the
chance of hiring the best candidate. The optimal strategy for
this problem turns out to be passing the first (1/e)-fraction
of the candidates regardless of their relative rankings, and
then hiring the first candidate afterwards that is better than
the best he has seen so far. This optimal strategy first appeared almost six decades ago (Dynkin 1963) and has been
discussed in reviews (Ferguson 1989). The secretary problem has also been generalized along various directions. We
refer to (Freeman 1983; Ajtai, Megiddo, and Waarts 2001)
for some good surveys.
Among these generalizations, one natural extension is
when there are multiple employers competing for hiring the

In this work, we consider an edge arrival model of
this problem. More precisely, suppose that we still have
n candidates 1, 2, . . . , n, associated with intrinsic values
v(1), v(2), . . . , v(n), respectively. There are k ≥ 2 employers competing for hiring the best of these candidates. Consider a complete bipartite graph (L, R, E) where L is the set
of k employers, R is the set of n candidates, and E is initialized to L × R. In an edge arrival model, at each time step, a
random pair (i, j) ∈ E arrives, corresponding to candidate

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4818

