The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Sharp Analysis of Random Fourier Features in Classification
Zhu Li
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London
zhu.li@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

and Seeger 2001a; Rahimi and Recht 2007; Mahoney and
Drineas 2009; Alaoui and Mahoney 2015; Rudi, Carratino,
and Rosasco 2017; Zhang, Duchi, and Wainwright 2015).
Among many approximation frameworks, the random
Fourier features (RFFs) method proposed by (Rahimi and
Recht 2007) has received great attention recently (see Liu
et al. 2020, for a comprehensive review). The key idea of
RFFs is to approximate the infinite dimensional feature map
φ(·) with an explicit s-dimensional random feature map φs (·)
through Bochner’s theorem (Bochner 1932; Rudin 2017),
which states that φs (·) can be constructed through sampling
from some spectral measure. Kernel methods are now reduced to linear learning in the feature space, which can be
computed via fast linear solver (Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2011).
The computational cost decreases from roughly O(n3 ) in
time and O(n2 ) in space to O(ns2 ) and O(ns) respectively.
As a result, significant computational savings can be achieved
as long as s  n.
Despite their empirical success (Rahimi and Recht 2007;
Huang et al. 2014; Dai et al. 2014), theoretical understanding of the RFFs is incomplete. In particular, the question of
how to choose s in order to obtain the RFFs estimators with
performance provably comparable to original kernel methods
remains unclear. To this end, several authors study the properties of the RFFs to approximate the kernel function and
the kernel Gram-matrix (see e.g., Rahimi and Recht 2007;
Sriperumbudur and Szabó 2015; Sutherland and Schneider
2015, and references therein). However, all of these works
require s = Ω(n) features to guarantee no loss of prediction
accuracy, which translates to no computational savings at all.
A highly refined analysis in the context of ridge regression is
proposed recently (see e.g., Rudi and Rosasco 2017; Avron
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2021). When the spectral
measure is
√
used for sampling, they first show that O( n log n) features
are adequate
to guarantee the minimax optimal learning rate
√
O(1/ n), the same learning rate obtained with full kernel
ridge regression. Furthermore, they prove that the RFFs regression can obtain a fast learning rate at the expense of
increasing the number of features. Finally, they demonstrate
that using a problem-dependent sampling distribution can
significantly reduce the number of features to s = Ω(1).
A question motivating our study is whether similar theoretical results hold in the classification setting where a key
difference is the loss functions employed (Lipschitz con-

We study the theoretical properties of random Fourier features
classification with Lipschitz continuous loss functions such as
support vector machine and logistic regression. Utilizing the
regularity condition, we show for the first time that
√ random
Fourier features classification
can achieve O(1/ n) learn√
ing rate with only Ω( n log n) features, as opposed to Ω(n)
features suggested by previous results. Our study covers the
standard feature sampling method for which we reduce the
number of features required, as well as a problem-dependent
sampling method which further reduces the number of features while still keeping the optimal generalization property.
Moreover, we prove that the random Fourier features classification can obtain a fast O(1/n) learning rate for both sampling
schemes under Massart’s low noise assumption. Our results
demonstrate the potential effectiveness of random Fourier features approximation in reducing the computational complexity
(roughly√
from O(n3 ) in time and O(n2 ) in space to O(n2 )
and O(n n) respectively) without having to trade-off the statistical prediction accuracy. In addition, the achieved trade-off
in our analysis is at least the same as the optimal results in the
literature under the worst case scenario and significantly improves the optimal results under benign regularity conditions.

Introduction
Kernel methods have been widely used in many machine learning tasks such as regression and classification
(Schölkopf and Smola 2001; Schölkopf, Tsuda, and Vert
2004), as they provide a simple framework to model highly
complicated functional relationships and well-established theoretical guarantees (Caponnetto and De Vito 2007; Steinwart
and Christmann 2008). The power of kernel methods comes
from the so-called ”kernel trick”, where it utilizes a feature
function φ(·) to implicitly map the data into a high or possibly
infinite dimensional feature space and thus allows non-linear
functional learning. However, kernel methods are notorious
for being time-consuming, since a typical kernel learning
algorithm requires O(n3 ) computation and O(n2 ) memory,
where n is the number of training samples. Due to the prohibitive computational requirements, a flurry of research has
been devoted to developing algorithms that efficiently approximate kernel functions (Smola and Schökopf 2000; Williams
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7444

