The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Triangle-Densest-k-Subgraph Problem: Hardness, Lovász Extension, and
Application to Document Summarization
Aritra Konar, and Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, VA, USA
(aritra,nikos)@virginia.edu

Abstract

specification of the desired subgraph size. Adding a simple
size constraint to the DS problem results in the densest-ksubgraph (DkS) problem (Feige, Peleg, and Kortsarz 2001),
which, for a specified node-size k, aims to find the subgraph with the maximum number of induced edges. Unfortunately, the constraint also renders DkS NP–hard. Moreover, the problem is notorious for being very difficult to approximate, in the worst-case sense (Khot 2006; Bhaskara
et al. 2012; Manurangsi 2017). Notwithstanding such pessimistic results, polynomial-time algorithms which work
well in practice for DkS are known – these include low (constant) rank matrix approximation techniques (Papailiopoulos et al. 2014) and a recent work (Konar and Sidiropoulos
2021), which uses tools from submodular optimization to
construct a convex relaxation for DkS.
A salient feature of the aforementioned formulations is
that they quantify subgraph density in terms of induced
edges, which represent pair-wise relationships between vertices. However, real-world graphs are often rich in higherorder motifs, which signify stronger associations among vertices as compared to pair-wise relationships alone (Watts and
Strogatz 1998). This suggests that leveraging higher-order
motif structure for dense subgraph discovery can detect subgraphs which are more clique-like compared to those obtained via the edge-based formulations. For example, prior
work (Tsourakakis 2015) has introduced the `-clique densest subgraph problem to extract the subgraph with the largest
average number of induced `-cliques. This is a generalization of the DS problem (the latter corresponds to choosing ` = 2) which remains polynomial-time solvable and
also admits effective approximation via a greedy algorithm
(Tsourakakis 2015). More importantly, applying this formulation with ` = 3 (triangles, the simplest example of a
higher-order motif) to real-world graphs yields subgraphs of
higher edge density compared to using the DS with ` = 2.
However, like its edge-based counterpart, the `-clique densest subgraph problem formulation does not provide a means
of explicitly controlling the desired subgraph size. We argue that this is a restrictive feature, since it does not allow
the end-user the flexibility in picking a desired solution. By
varying the size explicitly, one can obtain small subsets of
vertices which are tightly knit, to larger subsets which exhibit smaller density, and everything in-between.
For this purpose, in this paper, we introduce the triangle-

We introduce the triangle-densest-k-subgraph problem
(TDkS) for undirected graphs: given a size parameter k, compute a subset of k vertices that maximizes the number of
induced triangles. The problem corresponds to the simplest
generalization of the edge based densest-k-subgraph problem
(DkS) to the case of higher-order network motifs. We prove
that TDkS is NP-hard and is not amenable to efficient approximation, in the worst-case. By judiciously exploiting the
structure of the problem, we propose a relaxation algorithm
for the purpose of obtaining high-quality, sub-optimal solutions. Our approach utilizes the fact that the cost function of
TDkS is submodular to construct a convex relaxation for the
problem based on the Lovász extension for submodular functions. We demonstrate that our approaches attain state-of-theart performance on real-world graphs and can offer substantially improved exploration of the optimal density-size curve
compared to sophisticated approximation baselines for DkS.
We use document summarization to showcase why TDkS is
a useful generalization of DkS.

Introduction
The task of extracting dense subgraphs from a given graph
has diverse applications in graph mining ranging from fraud
detection (Hooi et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2017), chemical informatics (Podolyan and Karypis 2009), computational biology (Saha et al. 2010) and knowledge discovery (Angel
et al. 2012; Tixier, Malliaros, and Vazirgiannis 2016). Owing to its practical relevance, the problem has received extensive attention (see (Cadena, Chen, and Vullikanti 2018)
and references therein) - we briefly highlight some prominent formulations.
Given an undirected graph, the classic densest-subgraph
(DS) problem (Goldberg 1984) aims to detect the subgraph
with the maximum average induced degree. The problem is
known to be polynomial-time solvable, and admits a simple linear-time 1/2 approximation via a greedy algorithm
(Charikar 2000). However, real-world examples are known
(Tsourakakis et al. 2013) where the greedy algorithm returns the trivial solution corresponding to the graph itself as
the densest subgraph. This undesirable behavior can be attributed to the fact that the approach does not allow explicit
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4075

