The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Semi-random Likelihood of Doctrinal Paradoxes
Ao Liu and Lirong Xia
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th St, Troy, NY 12180, USA
liua6@rpi.edu, xial@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract

inconsistent. This phenomenon is known as the doctrinal
paradox, as shown in the following example.
Example 1 (Doctrinal paradox). Suppose there are three
three agents (n = 3), whose judgements on ω1 , ω2 , and ω3
are shown in Table 1. Notice that while every agent’s judgements are consistent with the logic relationship ω3 ↔ω1 ∧ω2 ,
the output of proposition-wise majority is inconsistent with
the logic.

When aggregating logically interconnected judgements from
n agents, the result might be logically inconsistent. This phenomenon is known as the doctrinal paradox, which plays a
central role in the field of judgement aggregation. Previous
work has mostly focused on the worst-case analysis of the
doctrinal paradox, leading to many impossibility results. Little is known about its likelihood of occurrence in practical settings, except for the study under certain distributions by List
in 2005. In this paper, we characterize the likelihood of the
doctrinal paradox under a general and realistic model called
semi-random social choice framework (proposed by Xia in
2020). In the framework, agents’ ground truth judgements
can be arbitrarily correlated, while the noises are independent. Our main theorem states that under mild conditions, the
semi-random likelihood of the doctrinal paradox is either 0,
exp(-Θ(n)), Θ(nˆ (-0.5)) or Θ(1). This not only answers open
questions by List in 2005, but also draws clear lines between
situations with frequent paradoxes and with vanishing paradoxes.

Propositions ω1 ω2 ω3
Agent 1 Y N N
Agent 2 N Y N
Agent 3 Y Y Y
Aggregation Y Y N

?

ω3 ↔ ω1 ∧ ω2
True
True
True
False

Table 1: Doctrinal paradox.
In general, the doctrinal paradox can happen for p ≥ 1
premises (logically independent propositions), plus one conclusion, whose value is determined by the values of the
premises. The doctrinal paradox “originated the whole field
of judgement aggregation” (Grossi and Pigozzi 2014), and
continued to play a central role since then (List 2012; Grossi
and Pigozzi 2014; Brandt et al. 2016). A large body of literature has shown the negative effects of the doctrinal paradox
in law (Kornhauser and Sager 1986; Hanna 2009; Chilton
and Tingley 2012), economics (Mongin 2019), computational social choice (Bonnefon 2010; Brandt et al. 2016),
philosophy (Sorensen 2003; Mongin 2012) and psychology (Bonnefon 2011), etc. Unfortunately, the paradox is unavoidable under mild assumptions (List and Pettit 2002),
and there is a large body of literature on impossibility theorems as well as ways for escaping from them (List and Polak
2010; Grossi and Pigozzi 2014; Endriss 2016).
Despite the mathematical impossibilities, it is unclear
how frequently doctrinal paradoxes happens in reality.
Empirical studies have been limited by the lack of datasets,
as many classical applications of judgement aggregations
are in high-stakes, low frequent, privacy-sensitive domains, such as judicial systems. To embrace AI-powered
e-democracy, we believe that it is now the right time to
theoretically study the likelihood of the paradox under
realistic models. A low likelihood is desirable, because it
suggests that, despite the fact that the paradox exists in the
worst case, it is likelihood not be a big concern in practice.

Introduction
The field of judgement aggregation studies the aggregation
of agents’ judgements (yes/no votes) on multiple logically
interconnected propositions in a consistent way. For example, suppose a defendant is involved in a traffic accident
where a victim is injured. A jury of n agents (jurors) are
asked to make collective decisions on the following three
propositions:
Proposition ω1 : The injury is caused by the defendant.
Proposition ω2 : The injury is serious enough.
Proposition ω3 : The defendant is guilty.
Each agent is asked to provide a yes/no judgement to each
proposition in a logically consistent way, i.e., her answer to
ω3 is Y if and only if her answers to both ω1 and ω2 are
Y, or equivalently, ω3 ↔ω1 ∧ ω2 must hold. Then, agents’
judgements, called a profile, are aggregated by a rule r.
One classical rule for judgement aggregation is
proposition-wise majority, which performs majority
voting on each proposition separately. Unfortunately,
the output of proposition-wise majority can be logically
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5124

