The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Towards Fully Sparse Training: Information Restoration with Spatial Similarity
Weixiang Xu1,2 , Xiangyu He1,2 , Ke Cheng1,2 , Peisong Wang1 , Jian Cheng1∗
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xuweixiang2018,chengke2017}@ia.ac.cn, {xiangyu.he, peisong.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
The 2:4 structured sparsity pattern released by NVIDIA Ampere architecture, requiring four consecutive values containing at least two zeros, enables doubling math throughput for
matrix multiplications. Recent works mainly focus on inference speedup via 2:4 sparsity while training acceleration
has been largely overwhelmed where backpropagation consumes around 70% of the training time. However, unlike inference, training speedup with structured pruning is nontrivial due to the need to maintain the fidelity of gradients and
reduce the additional overhead of performing 2:4 sparsity
online. For the first time, this article proposes fully sparse
training (FST) where ‘fully’ indicates that ALL matrix multiplications in forward/backward propagation are structurally pruned while maintaining accuracy. To this end, we begin with saliency analysis, investigating the sensitivity of different sparse objects to structured pruning. Based on the observation of spatial similarity among activations, we propose
pruning activations with fixed 2:4 masks. Moreover, an Information Restoration block is proposed to retrieve the lost information, which can be implemented by efficient gradient-shift
operation. Evaluation of accuracy and efficiency shows that
we can achieve 2× training acceleration with negligible accuracy degradation on challenging large-scale classification
and detection tasks.

Figure 1: Computation Graph for (a) conventional training and (b) fully sparse training (FST). S(·) denotes the
2:4 structured pruning. GEMM/SPMM represents general/structured sparse matrix multiplications. IR indicates our
information restoration block.
P (Mishra et al. 2021) obtains 2:4 pruned models by initializing from dense pre-trained models and training with a
fixed mask. Independent of computationally expensive pretraining, SR-STE (Zhou et al. 2021) further proposes training from scratch with dynamic masks. However, the power of 2:4 sparsity in accelerating training has not been explored.
Unlike inference time acceleration, training with structured pruning is more challenging. First, the backpropagation dominates training costs. As shown in Figure 2, the
backward procedure occupies up to 80% of the total calculation burden in SR-STE, to which previous inference speedup
methods can not directly apply. Second, due to the accumulation in gradient descent optimization, the backpropagation
is more sensitive to perturbation than inference (Zhou et al.
2016). As a result, the compression in backpropagation jeopardizes the optimization stability, causing severe accuracy
degradation.
Moreover, unstructured pruning methods on gradients
proposed by previous works (Sun et al. 2017; Goli and
Aamodt 2020; Ye et al. 2020; Chmiel et al. 2021; M Abdelmoniem et al. 2021) are no longer applicable to structured cases for two reasons: 1) 2:4 structured sparsity en-

Introduction
Network pruning (Han et al. 2015; Wen et al. 2016; He et al.
2019b) has drawn significant attention of researchers to alleviate the high computational complexity and intensive memory footprint in convolutional neural networks. Recent Ampere architecture, released by NVIDIA and equipped with
Sparse Tensor Cores (NVIDIA 2020b), is the first commercial GPU architecture that supports fine-grained structured
sparsity. Concretely, matrix-multiply operations can achieve
2× acceleration when one of the two arguments in GEMM meets the 2:4 structured sparsity requirement, providing
a possibility for training/inference speedup. Here, the 2:4 sparsity means that each chunk of four adjacent elements in
matrix rows has at least two zeros.
Attracted by the new characteristic, recent works focus
on utilizing it to accelerate inference. For example, AS∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2929

