The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

On the Transferability of Pre-trained Language Models:
A Study from Artificial Datasets
Cheng-Han Chiang, Hung-yi Lee
National Taiwan University, Taiwan
dcml0714@gmail.com, hungyilee@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

have attributed this success to the pre-trained models having learned the semantic dependencies among tokens (Saunshi, Malladi, and Arora 2020) and being able to model the
complex co-occurrence statistics of the tokens (Sinha et al.
2021). While these justifications are reasonable, it is unclear
whether there are other factors of the pre-training data that
affect the transferability of the pre-trained LMs.
The core problem we determine to answer is: What specific traits in the pre-training data, other than the semantics, make a pre-trained LM more easier to achieve better
downstream performance. To answer the above question, we
design the following experiments: we create miscellaneous
artificial datasets, each possessing different traits, and we
pre-train many different transformer LMs on those datasets.
We then fine-tune the pre-trained models on English downstream tasks. The process is illustrated in Figure 1. Illustrations of the artificial datasets used in this paper are in Figure 2. This is the first paper to study a transformer-based
LM’s transferability through the lens of artificial datasets.
Based on the experiments, we have the following takeaway observations:

Pre-training language models (LMs) on large-scale unlabeled
text data makes the model much easier to achieve exceptional downstream performance than their counterparts directly trained on the downstream tasks. In this work, we study
what specific traits in the pre-training data, other than the
semantics, make a pre-trained LM superior to their counterparts trained from scratch on downstream tasks. We propose
to use artificially constructed datasets as the pre-training data
to exclude the effect of semantics, and further control what
characteristics the pre-training corpora have. By fine-tuning
the pre-trained models on GLUE benchmark, we can learn
how beneficial it is to transfer the knowledge from the model
trained on the dataset possessing that specific trait. We define and discuss three different characteristics in the artificial
dataset: 1) matching the token’s uni-gram or bi-gram distribution between pre-training and downstream fine-tuning, 2) the
presence of the explicit dependencies among the tokens in a
sequence, 3) the length of the implicit dependencies among
the tokens in a sequence. Our experiments show that the explicit dependencies in the sequences of the pre-training data
are critical to the downstream performance. Our results also
reveal that models achieve better downstream performance
when pre-trained on a dataset with a longer range of implicit
dependencies. Based on our analysis, we find that models pretrained with artificial datasets are prone to learn spurious correlation in downstream tasks. Our work reveals that even if
the LMs are not pre-trained on natural language, they still
gain transferability on certain human language downstream
tasks once the LMs learn to model the token dependencies in
the sequences. This result helps us understand the exceptional
transferability of pre-trained LMs.

1

• We find that, surprisingly, pre-training MLMs on certain
artificial datasets with no natural language semantics information makes their downstream task performance superior to models pre-trained from scratch on downstream
tasks.
• We discover that pre-training on data with a longer range
of both explicit and implicit token dependencies1 makes
them superior to their counterparts pre-trained on data
with shorter token dependencies. This indicates that the
ability to model long-term dependency among tokens in
the sequence is important for the transferability of the
pre-trained model.
• We analyze the models’ behaviors against two challenging datasets and show that models pre-trained with artificial datasets are vulnerable toward spurious correlation.

Introduction

Pre-training LMs by masked language modeling (MLM) is
prevalent in the natural language processing (NLP) community, and they are indispensable to a variety of NLP tasks.
The popularity of pre-trained LMs mainly lies in their exceptional transferability on downstream tasks: fine-tuning
these downstream-agnostic pre-trained models on miscellaneous downstream tasks often gives extraordinary performances compared with training from scratch. While the
exact reasons for the success of MLM is unclear, some

2

Related Work

Our work uses artificial datasets to understand pre-trained
LMs’ ability to be fine-tuned. Bhattamishra, Ahuja, and
1
The definition of explicit token dependency and implicit token
dependency will be given in Section 6 and Section 7, respectively.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10518

