The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

OoDHDR-Codec: Out-of-Distribution Generalization for HDR Image
Compression
Linfeng Cao1 , Aofan Jiang1 , Wei Li2 , Huaying Wu1 , Nanyang Ye1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
linfengcao1996@gmail.com, stillunnamed@sjtu.edu.cn, liwei472@hisilicon.com, 987941090@qq.com,
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn
Original SDR Image

Abstract
Recently, deep learning has been proven to be a promising approach in standard dynamic range (SDR) image compression. However, due to the wide luminance distribution
of high dynamic range (HDR) images and the lack of large
standard datasets, developing a deep model for HDR image
compression is much more challenging. To tackle this issue,
we view HDR data as distributional shifts of SDR data and
the HDR image compression can be modeled as an out-ofdistribution generalization (OoD) problem. Herein, we propose a novel out-of-distribution (OoD) HDR image compression framework (OoDHDR-codec). It learns the general
representation across HDR and SDR environments, and allows the model to be trained effectively using a large set
of SDR datasets supplemented with much fewer HDR samples. Specifically, OoDHDR-codec consists of two branches
to process the data from two environments. The SDR branch
is a standard black-box network. For the HDR branch, we develop a hybrid system that models luminance masking and
tone mapping with white-box modules and performs content
compression with black-box neural networks. To improve the
generalization from SDR training data on HDR data, we introduce an invariance regularization term to learn the common representation for both SDR and HDR compression. Extensive experimental results show that the OoDHDR codec
achieves strong competitive in-distribution performance and
state-of-the-art OoD performance. To the best of our knowledge, our proposed approach is the first work to model HDR
compression as OoD generalization problems and our OoD
generalization algorithmic framework can be applied to any
deep compression model in addition to the network architectural choice demonstrated in the paper. Code available at
https://github.com/caolinfeng/OoDHDR-codec.

Original HDR Image

(a)
HDR-VDP prediction map

0%

Probability of detection

BPP: 0.437; HDR-VDP: 8.574
Zaid et al

HDR-VDP prediction map

100%

0%

(b)

Probability of detection

100%

BPP: 0.432; HDR-VDP: 9.318
OoDHDR-codec

Figure 1: (a) Comparison between SDR and HDR images
of “pedestrian overpass” from HDRI HAVEN 1 . (b) Visualization of results with approximately 0.43 bpp. Visual Difference Predictor for HDR images (HDR-VDP) (Mantiuk
et al. 2011) predicts the distortions are visible to the human
observer or not, where the higher the value, the better the
image quality (Better viewed on screen).

gamut and allows to preserve more information of the real
scenes. As an example shown in Figure 1(a), the SDR image
(left column) losses most of the details at high luminance
region, while the tone-mapped HDR image (right column)
presents the scene containing extreme sunlight and shade,
providing a more lifelike visual experience. Undoubtedly,
the maturity and popularity of HDR technology can greatly
enrich the interactive experience of traditional multimedia.
Although several HDR encoding formats including Radiance RGBE (.hdr) (Ward 1991), OpenEXR (.exr) (Kainz,
Bogart, and Stanczyk 2009), LogLuv TIFF (.tiff) (Larson
1998), etc. have been proposed to facilitate the application
of HDR technology, it still faces many challenges for prevalence. In addition to the hardware cost, significantly higher
storage and transmission bandwidth costs also prevent HDR
from being widely used in streaming media (e.g., YouTube)
and social media (e.g., TikTok, Twitter) platforms. Thus, it is

Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) technology, originated in the
1970s (Mann and Ali 2016), is leading a visual revolution
at present. Compared with standard dynamic range (SDR)
images, HDR technology has a larger dynamic range ratio between the maximum and minimum luminance, which
greatly broadens the boundaries of the displayable color
* Nanyang Ye is the Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://hdrihaven.com/hdris/

158

