The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Explainable and Local Correction of Classification Models Using Decision Trees
Hirofumi Suzuki,1 Hiroaki Iwashita,1 Takuya Takagi,1
Keisuke Goto,1 Yuta Fujishige,1 Satoshi Hara 2
1

Fujitsu Limited,
Osaka University
{suzuki-hirofumi, iwashita.hiroak, takagi.takuya, goto.keisuke, fujishige.yuta}@fujitsu.com,
satohara@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
2

Abstract

When correcting the model to adapt to new data, some
forms of consistency are expected between the models before and after the correction. Suppose a machine learning
model is a part of a complex system or software, and there
are several processes that depend on the prediction results.
A drastic correction of the model will change the operation
of the entire system significantly. Such a drastic update of
the system is not favorable; We do not want to release a
completely different system from the previous version in order not to lose the user’s experience and trust in the system.
Therefore, we want to make as few corrections as possible
for machine learning models embedded in complex systems.
In this study, to avoid drastic updates of the entire system,
we consider two requirements for model correction:

In practical machine learning, models are frequently updated,
or corrected, to adapt to new datasets. In this study, we pose
two challenges to model correction. First, the effects of corrections to the end-users need to be described explicitly, similar to standard software where the corrections are described
as release notes. Second, the amount of corrections need to
be small so that the corrected models perform similarly to the
old models. In this study, we propose the first model correction method for classification models that resolves these two
challenges. Our idea is to use an additional decision tree to
correct the output of the old models. Thanks to the explainability of decision trees, the corrections are describable to the
end-users, which resolves the first challenge. We resolve the
second challenge by incorporating the amount of corrections
when training the additional decision tree so that the effects
of corrections to be small. Experiments on real data confirm
the effectiveness of the proposed method compared to existing correction methods.

1. The specification of the correction should be explicit.
2. The number of samples to which the correction applies
should be as small as possible.
The first requirement is that the user can check the changes
in the model and its specifications. In other words, we would
like it to be clear how the predictions are corrected so that
the corrections to be explainable to the users. Explainability
of correction is required, e.g., if the developer has to explain
to users that the correction of the model is not intended to
cause, for example, the encouragement of discrimination.
The second requirement is necessary to maintain consistency between the model before and after the correction.
In the analogy of a software update, this requirement corresponds to applying the minimum number of patches. The
corrected model satisfying this requirement will not lead to
drastic updates of the entire system.
In this paper, we propose Local Correction Tree (LCT),
a decision tree-based model correction method that satisfies
the two requirements above so that the correction is to be
explainable and to be small. The concept of LCT is shown
in Figure 1. LCT is a decision tree that outputs the amount
of prediction corrections to be added to the output of the
old model for the given input. With LCT, the old model is
corrected by adding the correction score written in the leaves
to the predicted score of the model.
LCT has two notable properties. First, the decision tree
itself can be regarded as a specification of the correction because each root-to-leaf path indicates a rule of how the samples will be corrected. Hence, LCT fulfills the first require-

Introduction
When the domain of test data changes over time, the prediction accuracy of machine learning models gets worse. In
such a case, it is necessary to update, or correct, the models to adapt to new datasets. The standard model correction scenario is as follows. We have a classification model
trained on old data. After the training, we obtain a new additional dataset. The model correction task is to correct the
old model to make accurate predictions on this additional
data. There are several approaches for model correction in
the literature, such as model retraining, transfer learning,
and domain adaptation. The majority of these methods assume that we can access the old training data. However, this
assumption is sometimes unrealistic because of privacy and
security reasons. For example, the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) requires that personal data may not be
retained longer than is necessary to achieve the prescribed
purpose (Voigt and Bussche 2017). In this paper, we consider the more restricted and practical problem setting for
model correction where we have the old model but have no
access to the old data.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8404

