The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Keypoint Message Passing for Video-Based Person Re-Identification
Di Chen† ,1,3 Andreas Döring† ,2 Shanshan Zhang∗ ,1 Jian Yang∗ ,1 Juergen Gall,2 Bernt Schiele3
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
University of Bonn
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
{dichen,shanshan.zhang,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, {doering,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de, {dichen,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
frame t-1 frame t frame t+1

Abstract
Video-based person re-identification (re-ID) is an important
technique in visual surveillance systems which aims to match
video snippets of people captured by different cameras. Existing methods are mostly based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), whose building blocks either process local
neighbor pixels at a time, or, when 3D convolutions are used
to model temporal information, suffer from the misalignment problem caused by person movement. In this paper, we
propose to overcome the limitations of normal convolutions
with a human-oriented graph method. Specifically, features
located at person joint keypoints are extracted and connected
as a spatial-temporal graph. These keypoint features are then
updated by message passing from their connected nodes with
a graph convolutional network (GCN). During training, the
GCN can be attached to any CNN-based person re-ID model
to assist representation learning on feature maps, whilst it
can be dropped after training for better inference speed. Our
method brings significant improvements over the CNN-based
baseline model on the MARS dataset with generated person
keypoints and a newly annotated dataset: PoseTrackReID. It
also defines a new state-of-the-art method in terms of top-1
accuracy and mean average precision in comparison to prior
works.

❌
❌

frame t-1

frame t

frame t+1

(a) Spatially Local (b) Temporally Misaligned (c) Keypoint Message Passing

Figure 1: Problems using 2D/3D convolution: (a) spatially
local and (b) temporal misalignment; We propose (c) keypoint message passing, where keypoint features on frame
t (marked with white circle) are updated with information
from connected nodes (red arrow) by graph convolution,
which is not bounded by the fixed shape and location of
normal convolutions. The complete spatial-temporal graph
structure is shown in Fig. 3.

and temporal information separately, i.e. using a 2D convolutional neural network (CNN) for spatial representation
learning, while handling temporal information by aggregating the high-level outputs of CNNs with pooling (Zheng
et al. 2016a), recurrent neural networks (Chung, Tahboub,
and Delp 2017; McLaughlin, Del Rincon, and Miller 2016;
Chen et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2017) or temporal attention (Fu et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2017; Xu et al.
2017; Liu, Yan, and Ouyang 2017; Li et al. 2018). Other
works (Liu et al. 2019b,a; Li, Zhang, and Huang 2019) learn
concurrent spatial-temporal representations with 3D convolutions. The core operation of both types of methods is convolution, which only processes information at a small local
range, especially when it is located at shallow hierarchies
of a network. Meanwhile, 3D convolution layers also have
the misalignment problem, i.e. the same position in adjacent frames may belong to different body parts due to person
movement, such that the appearance representations learned
by 3D convolution are polluted with the wrong body part
or background. The spatially local and temporally misalignment problems are shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b).
In this paper, we propose to overcome the limitations of
convolutions in video-based person re-ID with the help of
person pose estimation and graph convolution. Since hu-

Introduction
Visual surveillance systems play a vital role in modern society to ensure public safety. The massive data collected by the
systems raises the need for automatic visual understanding
techniques such as person re-identification (re-ID). Person
re-ID aims to associate the same person across cameras with
non-overlapping views, which is usually achieved by calculating the similarities between the representations of images.
Compared to images, video sequences provide much richer
information which is beneficial to address visual ambiguities. Therefore, video-based person re-ID emerged recently
as a parallel research field to image-based person re-ID.
The central problem of learning discriminative video representations is how to exploit both spatial and temporal information. Most existing solutions propose to capture spatial
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗

239

