The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Feature Generation and Hypothesis Verification for Reliable Face Anti-spoofing
Shice Liu1 * , Shitao Lu1,2 * , Hongyi Xu1,3 , Jing Yang1† , Shouhong Ding1† , Lizhuang Ma2,3
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{shiceliu,alonyang,ericshding}@tencent.com; lusto32768@gmail.com; xuhongyi@sjtu.edu.cn; lzma@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Although existing face anti-spoofing (FAS) methods achieve
high accuracy in intra-domain experiments, their effects drop
severely in cross-domain scenarios because of poor generalization. Recently, multifarious techniques have been explored, such as domain generalization and representation disentanglement. However, the improvement is still limited by
two issues: 1) It is difficult to perfectly map all faces to a
shared feature space. If faces from unknown domains are not
mapped to the known region in the shared feature space, accidentally inaccurate predictions will be obtained. 2) It is hard
to completely consider various spoof traces for disentanglement. In this paper, we propose a Feature Generation and Hypothesis Verification framework to alleviate the two issues.
Above all, feature generation networks which generate hypotheses of real faces and known attacks are introduced for
the first time in the FAS task. Subsequently, two hypothesis
verification modules are applied to judge whether the input
face comes from the real-face space and the real-face distribution respectively. Furthermore, some analyses of the relationship between our framework and Bayesian uncertainty estimation are given, which provides theoretical support for reliable defense in unknown domains. Experimental results show
our framework achieves promising results and outperforms
the state-of-the-art approaches on extensive public datasets.

1

Figure 1: Comparison among domain generalization-based
methods (DG), representation disentanglement-based methods (RD) and our FGHV framework.

aim of more generalized models, two categories of methods
are currently being studied.
Domain generalization-based methods are exploited to
learn a domain-agnostic feature space. Intuitively, if a model
works well in several known domains, it would be more
likely to be effective in other unknown domains. To achieve
it, commonly used solutions include metric learning (Jia
et al. 2020), adversarial training (Liu et al. 2021b), metalearning (Wang et al. 2021) and special structures (Yu et al.
2021c). Despite using different techniques, all these methods aim to attain a better feature extraction backbone so that
regardless of which domain the input comes from, the backbone always outputs generalized features. However, in real
scenarios, it is hard to perfectly map real and fake faces from
different domains to a generalized shared feature space. Additionally, from the perspective of Bayesian uncertainty estimation, models will be prone to giving wrong results if they
are fed with what they do not know.
Representation disentanglement-based methods hold the
view that features can be partitioned into liveness-related
parts (i.e., spoof trace) and liveness-unrelated parts (e.g., appearance, identification, age), and only the liveness-related
parts are leveraged to classify for better generalization. To

Introduction

Nowadays, face recognition (FR) has been widely used in
many AI systems in our daily lives. However, endless face
presentation attacks continuously threaten the security of
face applications. To endow the AI systems with this important defensive capability, FAS techniques must be equipped.
In the past few years, various FAS approaches have been
proposed. Some representative methods are handcrafted
feature-based (Boulkenafet et al. 2015), movement-based
(Pan et al. 2007), distortion-based (Wen et al. 2015), physiological signal-based (Li et al. 2016) and deep feature-based
(Yang et al. 2014). Although these methods perform well in
intra-domain experiments, the effects decrease severely in
cross-domain scenarios due to poor generalization. With the
* These authors contributed equally.
†

These authors are the corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1782

