The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Complexity of Temporal Vertex Cover in Small-Degree Graphs
Thekla Hamm1 , Nina Klobas2 , George B. Mertzios2 * , Paul G. Spirakis3,4†
1
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Austria
Department of Computer Science, Durham University, UK
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, UK
4
Computer Engineering & Informatics Department, University of Patras, Greece
thamm@ac.tuwien.ac.at, {nina.klobas, george.mertzios}@durham.ac.uk, p.spirakis@liverpool.ac.uk
2

and λ : E → 2N is a time-labeling function which assigns
to every edge of G a set of discrete-time labels.

Abstract
Temporal graphs naturally model graphs whose underlying
topology changes over time. Recently, the problems T EM PORAL V ERTEX C OVER (or TVC) and S LIDING -W INDOW
T EMPORAL V ERTEX C OVER (or ∆-TVC for time-windows
of a fixed-length ∆) have been established as natural extensions of the classic V ERTEX C OVER problem on static graphs
with connections to areas such as surveillance in sensor networks.
In this paper we initiate a systematic study of the complexity of TVC and ∆-TVC on sparse graphs. Our main result
shows that for every ∆ ≥ 2, ∆-TVC is NP-hard even when
the underlying topology is described by a path or a cycle.
This resolves an open problem from literature and shows a
surprising contrast between ∆-TVC and TVC for which we
provide a polynomial-time algorithm in the same setting. To
circumvent this hardness, we present a number of exact and
approximation algorithms for temporal graphs whose underlying topologies are given by a path, that have bounded vertex
degree in every time step, or that admit a small-sized temporal
vertex cover.

1

For an edge e ∈ E in the underlying graph G of a temporal graph (G, λ), if t ∈ λ(e) then we also say that e is active
at time t in (G, λ). That is, for every edge e ∈ E, λ(e) denotes the set of time slots at which e is active. Due to their
relevance and applicability in many areas, temporal graphs
have been studied from various perspectives and under different names such as dynamic (Giakkoupis, Sauerwald, and
Stauffer 2014; Casteigts et al. 2012), evolving (Bui-Xuan,
Ferreira, and Jarry 2003; Ferreira 2004; Clementi et al.
2010), time-varying (Flocchini, Mans, and Santoro 2009;
Tang et al. 2010; Aaron, Krizanc, and Meyerson 2014),
and graphs over time (Leskovec, Kleinberg, and Faloutsos
2007). For a comprehensive overview on the existing models
and results on temporal graphs from a distributed computing
perspective see the surveys (Casteigts et al. 2012; Casteigts
and Flocchini 2013a,b).
Mainly motivated by the fact that, due to causality, information can be transfered in a temporal graph along sequences of edges whose time-labels are increasing, the
most traditional research on temporal graphs has focused
on temporal paths and other “path-related” notions, such
as e.g. temporal analogues of distance, reachability, exploration and centrality (Klobas et al. 2021; Heeger et al. 2021;
Akrida et al. 2016; Erlebach, Hoffmann, and Kammer 2021;
Mertzios, Michail, and Spirakis 2019; Michail and Spirakis
2016; Akrida et al. 2017; Enright et al. 2021; Zschoche et al.
2020; Casteigts et al. 2021). To complement this direction,
several attempts have been recently made to define meaningful “non-path” temporal graph problems which appropriately model specific applications. Motivated by the contact patterns among high-school students, Viard et al. (Viard,
Latapy, and Magnien 2016), introduced ∆-cliques, an extension of the concept of cliques to temporal graphs (see
also (Himmel et al. 2017; Bentert et al. 2018)). Chen et
al. (Chen et al. 2018) presented an extension of the cluster editing problem to temporal graphs, in which all vertices
interact with each other at least once every ∆ consecutive
time steps within a given time interval. Furthermore, Akrida
et al. (Akrida et al. 2020) introduced the notion of temporal vertex cover (also with a sliding time window), motivated by applications of covering problems in sensor networks. Further examples of meaningful “non-path” temporal

Introduction

A great variety of modern, as well as of traditional networks,
are dynamic in nature as their link availability changes over
time. Information and communication networks, social networks, transportation networks, and various physical systems are only a few indicative examples of such inherently
dynamic networks (Holme and Saramäki 2013; Michail and
Spirakis 2018). All these application areas share the common characteristic that the network structure, i.e. the underlying graph topology, is subject to discrete changes over
time. In this paper, embarking from the foundational work
of Kempe et al. (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Kumar 2002), we
adopt the following simple and natural model for timevarying networks, which is given by a graph with sets of
time-labels associated with its edges, while the vertex set is
fixed.
Definition 1 (Temporal Graph). A temporal graph is a pair
(G, λ), where G = (V, E) is an underlying (static) graph
* Supported by the EPSRC grant EP/P020372/1.
†

Supported by the EPSRC grant EP/P02002X/1.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10193

