The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

A Graph Convolutional Network with Adaptive Graph Generation and Channel
Selection for Event Detection
Zhipeng Xie,Yumin Tu
School of Computer Science
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
xiezp@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Graph convolutional networks have been successfully applied to the task of event detection. However, existing works
rely heavily on a fixed syntactic parse tree structure from
an external parser. In addition, the information content extracted for aggregation is determined simply by the (syntactic) edge direction or type but irrespective of what semantics the vertices have, which is somewhat rigid. With
this work, we propose a novel graph convolutional method
that combines an adaptive graph generation technique and a
multi-channel selection strategy. The adaptive graph generation technique enables the gradients to pass through the graph
sampling layer by using the ST-Gumbel-Softmax trick. The
multi-channel selection strategy allows two adjacent vertices
to automatically determine which information channels to get
through for information extraction and aggregation. The proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
ACE2005 dataset.

Figure 1: An example sentence of event type Life:Be-Born.

in boosting the performance of event detection (Nguyen and
Grishman 2018). However, such a fixed syntactic parse tree
structure is unlikely to be the best for the task at hand.
For a given trigger candidate, its relevant words are often
multi-hop away. For example, for the sentence illustrated
in Figure 1, the shortest path between the trigger “delivered” and the relevant word “pregnant” is of length 4: “delivered–see–call–daughter–pregnant”. It was also reported
that more than half of event-related entities need more than
one hop to get to the corresponding trigger words (Yan et al.
2019). To capture the multi-hop dependencies, one way is
to stack multiple GCN layers (Nguyen and Grishman 2018;
Liu, Luo, and Huang 2018; Lai, Nguyen, and Nguyen 2020;
Cui et al. 2020), and another way is to extend first-order
graph to high-order graphs (Yan et al. 2019). Both ways
make it possible that the relevant words can pass useful information through multi-hops to the trigger candidate, but
they also introduce more spurious information from irrelevant words, suffering from the so-called “over-smoothing”
problem (Li, Han, and Wu 2018). Therefore, it is desirable
that the graph structure is adaptive such that the relevant
words are only one-hop from the trigger candidate, and thus
a single graph convolutional layer will be sufficient to retrieve enough information from the one-hop neighborhood
for effective event detection. However, in existing GCNbased event detection methods as shown in Figure 2a, graph
structures are usually syntactic dependency parse trees generated by an external off-the-shelf dependency parser. The
process of graph construction is not differentiable and cannot be optimized specifically for the event detection task
by gradient-based optimization techniques. Additionally, the
whole system is pipelined and the performance of event detection may suffer from the errors propagated from the external parser.
On the other hand, let us investigate how a GCN network
extracts and aggregates information from its neighborhood
to produce a global representation for each trigger candi-

Introduction
Event detection (ED) is a fundamental information extraction task in natural language processing, which aims to detect the event triggers and classify them to corresponding
event types from given texts. Each event trigger is a word or
phrase that identifies an event mention. For example, in the
sentence presented in Figure 1, event detection model should
identify “delivered” to be a trigger word of “Life:Be-Born”
event, but not “Movement:Transport”. In the age of deep
learning, sequence-based neural methods have been first developed for event detection (Chen et al. 2015; Nguyen, Cho,
and Grishman 2016). These methods empower the ED systems with the ability of generalization to unseen words and
automatic extraction of task-specific features (Nguyen, Cho,
and Grishman 2016), but are confronted with the difficulty
of capturing long-range dependencies.
Most recently, graph convolutional approaches have been
applied to event detection task (Nguyen and Grishman 2018;
Liu, Luo, and Huang 2018; Yan et al. 2019; Lai, Nguyen,
and Nguyen 2020; Cui et al. 2020) and achieved state-ofthe-art performance, which rely on dependency parse trees
as the graph structures. It has been shown that the syntactic connections between words provide effective constraints
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11522

