The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Formula Synthesis in Propositional Dynamic Logic with Shuffle
Sophie Pinchinat1 , Sasha Rubin2 , François Schwarzentruber1
1
IRISA/Univ Rennes, France
The university of Sydney, Australia
sophie.pinchinat@irisa.fr, sasha.rubin@sydney.edu.au, francois.schwarzentruber@ens-rennes.fr
2

Abstract

The mechanism we use to specify the set of formulas
are regular term-grammars: these are context-free grammars
that generate syntactic terms over a ranked alphabet, such as
logical formulas where the alphabet contains logical operators (for instance, the conjunction symbol has rank 2), and
that have nice closure properties we will make use of.
Our motivation for using regular-tree grammars stems
from their ability to provide a hierarchical description of
the input set of PDL|| formulas, and more specifically of
the program modalities occurring in the formulas, thus enabling to relate the formula-synthesis problem for PDL|| to
other synthesis problems where hierarchical features are essential. We discuss such connections in the related work section at the end of the paper. In particular, we show that the
formula-synthesis problem for PDL|| is a natural abstraction
of certain aspects of Hierarchical Task Network problems
in Planning (Georgievski and Aiello 2015) and Attack-tree
Synthesis in Security (Wideł et al. 2019). For instance, the
decomposition patterns of compound tasks into sequences
of actions one finds in the framework of Hierarchical Task
Networks for planning scenarios can be simulated by grammar rules on the program modalities in PDL|| , while the
state-transition system can represent the planning domain.
Thus in our setting, term-grammars replace methods in tasknetworks, and the formula-synthesis problem for PDL|| replaces the Hierarchical Task Network problem.
We remark that the model-checking problem against
PDL|| is a special case of the formula synthesis problem
for PDL|| in which the grammar generates a single formula.
Technically, our contributions are as follows:

We introduce the formula-synthesis problem for Propositional Dynamic Logic with Shuffle (PDL|| ). This problem, which generalises the model-checking problem againsts PDL|| is the following: given a finite transition system
and a regular term-grammar that generates (possibly infinitely
many) PDL|| formulas, find a formula generated by the grammar that is true in the structure (or return that there is none).
We prove that the problem is undecidable in general, but add
certain restrictions on the input structure or on the input grammar to yield decidability. In particular, we prove that (1) if the
grammar only generates formulas in PDL (without shuffle),
then the problem is EXPTIME-complete, and a further restriction to linear grammars is PSPACE-complete, and a further restriction to non-recursive grammars is NP-complete,
and (2) if one restricts the input structure to have only simple
paths then the problem is in 2-EXPTIME. This work is motivated by and opens up connections to other forms of synthesis from hierarchical descriptions, including HTN problems
in Planning and Attack-tree Synthesis problems in Security.

Introduction
Dynamic Logics, such as Propositional Dynamic Logic
(PDL) and its extension PDL|| with the shuffle operator
||, were introduced to formally reason about the dynamics
of possibly nondeterministic programs (Fischer and Ladner
1979; Abrahamson 1980; Göller 2008). In these logics, formulas are interpreted in a graph-like structure, called a statetransition system, whose vertices are states and edges are labeled by actions, reflecting program instruction effects. For
instance, the PDL formula h(a1 )∗ ; a2 ip expresses that some
execution of the nondeterministic program “do a1 some
number of times, and then do a2 ” results in a
state of the state-transition system that satisfies the atomic
property p.
In this work, we introduce the formula-synthesis problem for PDL|| : given a finite state-transition system and
a fintely-presented mechanism that generates (possibly infinitely many) PDL|| formulas, find a generated formula that
is true in the state-transition system (or return that there is
none).

1. We provide a crisp formalization of the formula synthesis
problem for Propositional Dynamic Logic with Shuffle,
which we call SYNTH PDL|| .
2. We prove that SYNTH PDL|| is undecidable by reducing the intersection problem for context-free wordgrammars, known to be undecidable, see, e.g., (Hopcroft,
Motwani, and Ullman 2003). This approach was used
earlier for a similar undecidability result in HTN planning (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996).
This motivates the study of special cases of the problem,
where restrictions are taken over the input structure or the
input grammar. More precisely, we establish that:

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9902

