The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Encoding Multi-Valued Decision Diagram Constraints as Binary Constraint Trees
Ruiwei Wang and Roland H.C. Yap
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, 13 Computing Drive, 117417, Singapore
{ruiwei,ryap}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Lecoutre, and Schaus 2018, 2019) show that table GAC algorithms using bitwise operations, e.g. the CT algorithm
(Demeulenaere et al. 2016), outperform MDD GAC algorithms on a large set of benchmarks. As such an open question is whether MDD GAC algorithms can overall outperform the CT algorithm. We answer this, showing solving table constraints as MDDs encoded with BCTs outperforms
the state-of-the-art table GAC algorithm CT.

Ordered Multi-valued Decision Diagram (MDD) is a compact
representation used to model various constraints, such as regular constraints and table constraints. It can be particularly
useful for representing ad-hoc problem specific constraints.
Many algorithms have been proposed to enforce Generalized Arc Consistency (GAC) on MDD constraints. In this paper, we introduce a new compact representation called Binary
Constraint Tree (BCT). We propose tree binary encodings to
transform any MDD constraint into a BCT constraint. We also
present a specialized algorithm enforcing GAC on the BCT
constraint resulting from a MDD constraint. Experimental results on a large set of benchmarks show that the BCT GAC
algorithm can significantly outperform state-of-the-art MDD
as well as table GAC algorithms.

Rather than using GAC for non-binary constraints, we can
transform the constraints into binary constraints and use Arc
Consistency (AC). Many binary encodings have been proposed to encode table constraints as binary constraints, such
as Dual/Double Encoding (Dechter and Pearl 1989; Stergiou
and Walsh 1999), Hidden Variable Encoding (HVE) (Rossi,
Petrie, and Dhar 1990) and Bipartite Encoding (BE) (Wang
and Yap 2020). AC on the encoded instances can achieve
GAC or higher-order consistencies on the original CSPs
(Bessiere, Stergiou, and Walsh 2008). Recently, it has been
shown that specialized AC propagators can work very well
on binary encoding instances (Wang and Yap 2019, 2020). A
question though is whether the binary encoding approach is
able to give compact representations for a MDD constraint,
We demonstrate a novel binary encoding which is at least as
compact as the MDD it encodes.

Introduction
Many combinatorial problems in real life can be modelled
as Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs). Especially, the
problems requiring specific constraints which do not fit well
with existing known constraints can be modelled with adhoc constraints, such as Ordered Multi-valued Decision Diagram (MDD) constraints (Cheng and Yap 2010). Some
ad-hoc constraints have been widely studied. For example,
many Generalized Arc Consistency (GAC) algorithms have
been proposed as the propagation algorithm to handle MDD
constraints and (non-binary) table constraints (Yap, Xia, and
Wang 2020). In this paper, we present a new representation
for MDDs, showing how to transform any MDD constraint
into Binary Constraint Trees (BCTs) and design MDD GAC
propagators using BCTs.
MDD (Srinivasan et al. 1990) is a compact representation
which can be exponentially smaller than its corresponding
table representation. MDD constraints have been shown to
be useful in modelling other constraints such as regular constraints (Pesant 2004), table constraints and problem specific constraints (Cheng and Yap 2006, 2010). Intuitively,
GAC propagators for MDD constraints have the potential to
outperform those of table constraints as they exploit structure inside the constraint. However, prior works (Verhaeghe,

In this paper, we introduce a compact representation
called BCT which is a set of binary constraints with a tree
structure. BCTs can be exponentially smaller than MDDs
when representing some constraints. We show that MDD
constraints can be transformed into BCT constraints by using Tree Binary Encodings (TBEs). We first propose a basic encoding, the Direct Tree Binary Encoding (DTBE) to
encode any MDD constraint as a BCT constraint with the
same size as the original MDD constraint. We then give
four reduction rules to reduce a BCT constraint by eliminating, merging and reconstructing variables. We propose a
specialized propagator to enforce GAC on MDD constraints
encoded as BCT constraints taking advantage of our new
representation. Experimental results show that the reduction
rules significantly reduce the size of BCTs making the GAC
propagator on BCT constraints much faster than the stateof-the-art MDD GAC propagator CD (Verhaeghe, Lecoutre,
and Schaus 2018) and also the table GAC propagator CT.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3850

