The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

QUILT: Effective Multi-Class Classification on Quantum Computers Using an
Ensemble of Diverse Quantum Classifiers
Daniel Silver, Tirthak Patel, Devesh Tiwari
Northeastern University
{silver.da, patel.ti, d.tiwari}@northeastern.edu

Abstract

While intuitive and widely-applied in the classical world, we
found that classical way of building ensembles is ineffective
– it improves the accuracy only by 5%-10% over the state
of the art. To mitigate this challenge, Quilt builds a novel
ensemble of quantum classifiers by (1) constructing diverse
classifiers, and (2) keeping them simple.
(2) Second, we demonstrate that Quilt further enhances
the classification accuracy obtained via carefully constructed diverse ensembles of models. Quilt makes an observation that when outputs from diverse models are combined, individual models agree on “most parts” of the output, but they may disagree on “some parts” due to the intrinsic noise, which cannot be mitigated simply by increasing
the diversity or number of members. To mitigate this, Quilt
designs a safeguard error correcting mechanism that detects
which parts have most disagreement and then, builds specific
error-correcting binary classifiers to increase the consensus
for those parts, improving the overall prediction accuracy.
(3) Third, we show how Quilt performs on a variety of
datasets and in different simulation environments. We evaluate Quilt on MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, and Cifar for four and
8 classes. Quilt demonstrates an advantage in every case by
up to 46% over state-of-the-art for eight classes of MNIST.
We also demonstrate that Quilt can be run on real quantum
machines today and test on IBM Manila and IBM Lima.

Quantum computers can theoretically have significant acceleration over classical computers; but, the near-future era of
quantum computing is limited due to small number of qubits
that are also error prone. Quilt is a framework for performing
multi-class classification task designed to work effectively
on current error-prone quantum computers. Quilt is evaluated
with real quantum machines as well as with projected noise
levels as quantum machines become more noise-free. Quilt
demonstrates up to 85% multi-class classification accuracy
with the MNIST dataset on a five-qubit system.

Introduction
Problem Motivation. Quantum algorithms have been developed in the areas of chemistry, cryptography, machine
learning, and optimization (Lu et al. 2019; Shor 1999; Tiwari and Melucci 2019; Khairy et al. 2020). A class of algorithms known as quantum variational algorithms are designed to optimize and execute quantum machine learning
and classification workloads (Benedetti et al. 2019).
While theoretically-promising, existing quantum machine
learning classifiers are designed for future large-scale ideal
quantum systems. This is because loading data, training,
and testing samples on existing near-term intermediate-scale
quantum (NISQ) computers is challenging due to significant
hardware errors (Schuld and Killoran 2019a; Jurcevic et al.
2021; Preskill 2018). Consequently, existing quantum classifiers have been demonstrated to be effective only for relatively simple binary classification tasks (Schuld, Fingerhuth,
and Petruccione 2017; Grant et al. 2018). As our evaluation confirms, existing state-of-the-art approach are ineffective for multi-class classification (e.g., <30% accuracy for
eight-class image classification). Currently, there is lack of
capability to perform multi-class classification tasks on the
real quantum machines for exploration and improvement.
Contributions. Quilt specifically bridges this gap by opensourcing its framework and dataset to the community for
multi-class classification on NISQ quantum machines. Quilt
makes the following key contributions:
(1) A key idea behind Quilt is to build an ensemble
of quantum classifiers to perform multi-class classification.

Quantum Classification Background
Qubit and State Manipulation. The qubit is the fundamental building block of a quantum computer. Where a classical
bit is strictly binary, a qubit can be in a superposition of both
binary states, as shown below in Dirac notation:
2

2

|Ψ⟩ = α |0⟩ + β |1⟩ s.t α, β ∈ C & ∥α∥ + ∥β∥ = 1 (1)
Here, |Ψ⟩ is the state of the qubit, which is in a superposition of the |0⟩ and |1⟩ basis states. When the qubit’s state is
measured, its superposition collapses and outputs state |0⟩
2
2
with probability ∥α∥ and |1⟩ with probability ∥β∥ .
Qubit states can be manipulated using unitary transformations that act as single- or multi-qubit quantum gates. Singlequbit gates are represented as rotation gates with three angle
parameters: R3 (θ1 , θ2 , θ3 ). Arbitrary superpositions can be
achieved by tuning the rotation angles of this R3 gate. Gates
spanning multiple qubits have the ability to entangle qubits
into a unified quantum system.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8324

