The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Partial Multi-Label Learning via Large Margin Nearest Neighbour Embeddings
Xiuwen Gong 1, 2 , Dong Yuan 1 , Wei Bao 1
1

Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
Hunan Huishiwei Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd.
{xiuwen.gong, dong.yuan, wei.bao}@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract
To deal with ambiguities in partial multi-label learning
(PML), existing popular PML research attempts to perform
disambiguation by direct ground-truth label identification.
However, these approaches can be easily misled by noisy
false-positive labels in the iteration of updating the model
parameter and the latent ground-truth label variables. When
labeling information is ambiguous, we should depend more
on underlying structure of data, such as label and feature
correlations, to perform disambiguation for partially labeled
data. Moreover, large margin nearest neighbour (LMNN) is
a popular strategy that considers data structure in classification. However, due to the ambiguity of labeling information
in PML, traditional LMNN cannot be used to solve the PML
problem directly. In addition, embedding is an effective technology to decrease the noise information of data. Inspried by
LMNN and embedding technology, we propose a novel PML
paradigm called Partial Multi-label Learning via Large Margin Nearest Neighbour Embeddings (PML-LMNNE), which
aims to conduct disambiguation by projecting labels and features into a lower-dimension embedding space and reorganize
the underlying structure by LMNN in the embedding space
simultaneously. An efficient algorithm is designed to implement the proposed method and the convergence rate of the algorithm is analyzed. Moreover, we present a theoretical analysis of the generalization error bound for the proposed PMLLMNNE, which shows that the generalization error converges
to the sum of two times the Bayes error over the labels when
the number of instances goes to infinity. Comprehensive experiments on artificial and real-world datasets demonstrate
the superiorities of the proposed PML-LMNNE.

Figure 1: An example of crowdsourcing image annotation
for PML. The candidate label set is {cloud, tree, bird, grass,
dog, river, people, building}, but only labels with a red dot
are the ground-truth labels.
crowdsourcing image annotation, a web image might be annotated online by a potential unreliable annotator with many
specific labels, such as, cloud, tree, bird, grass, river, dog,
people and building as shown in Fig. 1, but only the labels
with red dots are the ground-truth labels.
PML aims to train a classifier from partially labeled data
so as to predict the ground-truth labels for an unseen instance automatically. The main challenge is how to deal with
the ambiguities caused by false positive labels in candidate
label set. One straightforward way is to simply treat all candidate labels equally as the ground-truth labels, and then
solve the PML problem by off-the-shelf multi-label classification methods (Liu 2019), (Boutell et al. 2004). However, these methods can be easily misled by the noisy falsepositive labels in the candidate set, and fail to generalize well
in testing. As a result, the state-of-the-art PML methods attempt to perform disambiguation by identifying the groundtruth labels directly from candidate label set, which becomes
a popular and effective disambiguation strategy. However,
this kind of approaches can also be misled by the noisy falsepositive labels in the iteration of updating the model parameter and latent variables of ground-truth labels. When labeling
information is ambiguous in the partially labeled data, we
should depend more on the underlying data structure, such
as the label and feature inter-dependencies, to perform disambiguation. Xie and Huang (2018) proposed PML-lc and
PML-fp to implement disambiguation by either consider-

Introduction
Partial multi-label learning (PML) (Xie and Huang 2018)
is a weakly supervised learning problem (Goldberg et al.
2010), (Vasisht et al. 2014), where each instance is associated with a set of candidate labels, but only a part of them
are the ground-truth labels while others are false positive labels. In recent years, many real-world applications are arising as partially labeled data are much easier and less costly
to obtain and the demand for identifying ground-truth labels from partially labeled data is growing. For example, in
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6729

