The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Efficient Algorithms for General Isotone Optimization
Xiwen Wang, Jiaxi Ying, José Vinı́cius de M. Cardoso, Daniel P. Palomar
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{xwangew, jx.ying, jvdmc}@connect.ust.hk, palomar@ust.hk

Abstract

The isotone optimization of interests in this paper is
formulated as

Monotonicity is often a fundamental assumption involved in
the modeling of a number of real-world applications. From
an optimization perspective, monotonicity is formulated as
partial order constraints among the optimization variables,
commonly known as isotone optimization. In this paper,
we develop an efficient, provable convergent algorithm
for solving isotone optimization problems. The proposed
algorithm is general in the sense that it can handle any
arbitrary isotonic constraints and a wide range of objective
functions. We evaluate our algorithm and state-of-the-art
methods with experiments involving both synthetic and realworld data. The experimental results demonstrate that our
algorithm is more efficient by one to four orders of magnitude
than the state-of-the-art methods.

min f (x) , s.t. [C] ij (xi − xj ) ≤ 0, ∀i, j ∈ {1, . . . , p} .
x

It generalizes the isotonic regression in two aspects. On
the one hand, it allows the constraints to be defined on
arbitrary DAG. On the other hand, instead of the ℓ2 norm,
the objective function f can be more general.
Monotonicity is a common assumption in many realworld applications, in which we impose isotonic constraints
to formulate isotone optimization problems. For instance,
in machine learning, isotonic constraints are applied to
probability calibration (Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana 2005;
Guo et al. 2017; Naeini, Cooper, and Hauskrecht 2015),
as the reliability curve is assumed to be monotonically
increasing. In statistics, isotonic constraints are also called
shape constraints and are widely used in shape-restricted
non-parametric estimation (Feelders and Van der Gaag
2006; Horowitz and Lee 2017). In genetics, monotonicity
is viewed as a key feature of genotype-phenotype mappings
Gjuvsland et al. (2013); thus it is suitable to model genetic
interactions in heritability (Luss et al. 2012). In addition,
isotone optimization also appears in many other modeling
problems, such as dose-response (Hu et al. 2005) and
psychology models (Kruskal 1964).
Isotonic constraints may be categorized as chain, tree, and
arbitrary, whose respective DAGs are shown in Figure 1.
However, most existing methods available in the literature
focus on the chains (Ahuja and Orlin 2001). Algorithms that
can address arbitrary isotonic constraints are often restricted
to a small class of loss functions (Stout 2013).

Introduction
We consider a family of optimization problems under
partial orders, also known as isotonic constraints. This socalled isotone optimization problem can be regarded as a
generalization of the isotonic regression (Ayer et al. 1955;
Ubhaya 1974; Durot 2008), a fundamental problem in
statistics and machine learning.
As the simplest form of isotone optimization, isotonic
regression is formulated as
Pp
2
min i=1 (xi − yi ) , s.t. x1 ≤ x2 ≤ · · · ≤ xp , (1)
x
where the optimization variables {xi } pi=1 are linearly
p
ordered and {yi }i=1 are the data samples.
Isotonic constraints can be represented using a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) G (V, E), where V = {v1 , . . . , vp }
denotes the set of vertices associated with each element of
x = (x1 , . . . , xp ), and E = {(vi , vj ) , . . . } is the edge set
that defines a partial order over the vertices. For instance, the
edge set for problem (1) is expressed as a chain graph with
E = {(v1 , v2 ) , . . . , (vp−1 , vp )} . Let C ∈ Rp×p denote the
connectivity matrix of the graph G, where
[C]ij = 1, if (vi , vj ) ∈ E;

[C]ij = 0, if (vi , vj ) ∈
/ E.

Namely, a constraint xi ≤ xj exists iff [C]ij = 1.
Figure 1: Graph representation of isotonic constraints.
Arrow from xi to xj implies a partial order xi ≤ xj .

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8575

