The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimal Tensor Transport
Tanguy Kerdoncuff1 , Rémi Emonet1 , Michaël Perrot2 , Marc Sebban1
1

Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School, Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023,
Saint-Etienne, France
2
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
{tanguy.kerdoncuff, remi.emonet, marc.sebban}@univ-st-etienne.fr, michael.perrot@inria.fr

Abstract

to minimize the divergence between training data and samples drawn from a generative model, leading to the WGAN
(Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017; Gulrajani et al. 2017).
In order to expand the range of possible applications, different variants have been proposed in the OT literature to tackle
more complex settings. While the standard OT scenario assumes that the two datasets lie in the same feature space,
Gromov Wasserstein (GW) (Memoli 2007; Mémoli 2011;
Peyré, Cuturi, and Solomon 2016) extends the framework
to incomparable spaces by allowing the alignment of two
distributions when only the within-dataset pairwise distances
are available. This approach is particularly well suited to deal
with graphs described by their adjacency matrices (Xu et al.
2019; Xu, Luo, and Carin 2019; Chowdhury and Mémoli
2019). The GW discrepancy has been used efficiently in
various applications such as heterogeneous DA (Yan et al.
2018), word translation (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018)
or GAN (Vayer et al. 2019; Bunne et al. 2019). Recently,
Co-Optimal Transport (Co-OT) (Redko et al. 2020) extended
the OT theory to datasets lying in different vector spaces.
The idea is to jointly learn two transport plans. The first one
aligns the examples as in standard OT while the second one
aligns the most similar features. This has been shown to be
of particular interest in heterogeneous DA and co-clustering.
Motivation and Contribution. While GW and Co-OT
already cover a wide range of problems, we claim that many
other scenarios are not covered by these two extensions. Let
us suppose that both the source and target distributions are
represented by a collection of graphs of the same size (in
terms of nodes) but of different structure (in terms of edges).
This is typically the case of two graphs evolving over time.
In this case, the goal of OT would be to jointly align both
the two collections of graphs and the nodes. It turns out that
GW would be only able to handle the special case where
there exist a known one-to-one correspondence between the
graphs of the two collections. Another application is inspired
from comparison-based learning. Let us consider a source
and a target distribution represented by a set of users who
watched movies, users providing a list of triplet comparisons
of the form “movie xi is closer to xj than to xk ”. In this case,
neither GW nor Co-OT is able to align the two distributions
because of the nature of this triplet-based representation. A
last example comes from computer vision, where one may
want to align two collections of images while preserving

Optimal Transport (OT) has become a popular tool in machine
learning to align finite datasets typically lying in the same
vector space. To expand the range of possible applications,
Co-Optimal Transport (Co-OT) jointly estimates two distinct
transport plans, one for the rows (points) and one for the
columns (features), to match two data matrices that might use
different features. On the other hand, Gromov Wasserstein
(GW) looks for a single transport plan from two pairwise
intra-domain distance matrices. Both Co-OT and GW can be
seen as specific extensions of OT to more complex data. In
this paper, we propose a unified framework, called Optimal
Tensor Transport (OTT), which takes the form of a generic
formulation that encompasses OT, GW and Co-OT and can
handle tensors of any order by learning possibly multiple
transport plans. We derive theoretical results for the resulting
new distance and present an efficient way for computing it. We
further illustrate the interest of such a formulation in Domain
Adaptation and Comparison-based Clustering.

Introduction
Comparing two probability measures in the form of empirical distributions is at the core of many machine learning
tasks. Optimal Transport (OT) (Villani 2008; Peyré, Cuturi
et al. 2019) is a popular tool that allows such comparisons for
datasets typically lying in a common vector space. Given two
point clouds and a metric allowing to evaluate the transportation cost between two samples, the goal of OT is to learn
the transport plan that minimizes the alignment cost between
the two sets, resulting in the so-called Wasserstein distance.
OT has been shown to be of great interest when dealing with
machine learning tasks. For example, unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (DA) aims at benefiting from labeled data of a
source domain to classify examples drawn from a different
but related target domain. The DA theory prompts us to reduce the shift between the source and the target distributions,
a task that can be addressed by aligning the two datasets using
OT (Courty et al. 2016, 2017; Shen et al. 2018; Damodaran
et al. 2018). OT has also been successfully used in generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7124

