The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Prior Gradient Mask Guided Pruning-Aware Fine-Tuning
Linhang Cai1,2 , Zhulin An1 * , Chuanguang Yang1,2 , Yangchun Yan3 , Yongjun Xu1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Horizon Robotics, Beijing, China
Email: {cailinhang19g, anzhulin, yangchuanguang, xyj}@ict.ac.cn, yangchun.yan@horizon.ai

Abstract

pruning and filter pruning based on the granularity (Zhu and
Gupta 2018; Liu et al. 2019c; Frankle and Carbin 2019).
Weight pruning methods remove unimportant connections
or weights in the network, inducing unstructured sparsity in
filters, thus requiring specialized libraries for real acceleration. In contrast, filter pruning structurally remove unimportant filters, capable of compressing both the model size and
the computational burden. Hence we focus on filter pruning.
A three-step filter pruning pipeline consists of: training a
network, evaluating the importance of every filter to generate a pruning mask to mask out unimportant filters and then
fine-tuning the pruned network to compensate for the performance degradation. The pruning and fine-tuning phases
could be iteratively used to greedily compress the model.
These phases are relatively independent as the pruning
operation is non-differentiable, while our Prior Gradient
Mask Guided Pruning-Aware Fine-Tuning (PGMPF) utilizes a modified version of the pruning mask generated by
the pruning stage as a prior gradient mask to guide finetuning, as shown in Figure 1. Previous Soft Filter Pruning
(SFP) based methods, e.g., Asymptotic Soft Filter Pruning
(ASFP) and Asymptotic SofteR Filter Pruning (ASRFP) (He
et al. 2018, 2019a; Cai et al. 2021b), also allow pruned filters
to update their parameters to maintain a large model capacity
during fine-tuning to pursue better performance, shown in
Figure 1(b), where weight decay mask is a modified version
of the Boolean pruning mask to smoothly soften the pruning
operation in order to maintain more training information inside those filters chosen to be pruned. However, these methods confronted with catastrophic non-convergence of the
pruned model for relatively large pruning rates. The ”catastrophic non-convergence of the pruned model for large pruning rates” means that the Test Accuracy Drop before and
after pruning would be very huge, where 0 denotes no evident accuracy drops incurred by pruning. Note that soft
pruning based methods allow all filters to unconstrainedly
update the parameter during fine-tuning, ignoring the uneven
importance of filters.
Unlike Hard Filter Pruning (HFP) that disables the update of pruned filters, gradually reducing the model capacity or SFP based methods that encounter catastrophic nonconvergence of the pruned model, our PGMPF allows the
update of pruned filters via a prior gradient mask generated
by the pruning criterion, striking an excellent tradeoff be-

We proposed a Prior Gradient Mask Guided Pruning-Aware
Fine-Tuning (PGMPF) framework to accelerate deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). In detail, the proposed
PGMPF selectively suppresses the gradient of those ”unimportant” parameters via a prior gradient mask generated by
the pruning criterion during fine-tuning. PGMPF has three
charming characteristics over previous works: (1) Pruningaware network fine-tuning. A typical pruning pipeline consists of training, pruning and fine-tuning, which are relatively
independent, while PGMPF utilizes a variant of the pruning
mask as a prior gradient mask to guide fine-tuning, without
complicated pruning criteria. (2) An excellent tradeoff between large model capacity during fine-tuning and stable convergence speed to obtain the final compact model. Previous
works preserve more training information of pruned parameters during fine-tuning to pursue better performance, which
would incur catastrophic non-convergence of the pruned
model for relatively large pruning rates, while our PGMPF
greatly stabilizes the fine-tuning phase by gradually constraining the learning rate of those ”unimportant” parameters. (3) Channel-wise random dropout of the prior gradient
mask to impose some gradient noise to fine-tuning to further improve the robustness of final compact model. Experimental results on three image classification benchmarks CIFAR10/100 and ILSVRC-2012 demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method for various CNN architectures, datasets and
pruning rates. Notably, on ILSVRC-2012, PGMPF reduces
53.5% FLOPs on ResNet-50 with only 0.90% top-1 accuracy
drop and 0.52% top-5 accuracy drop, which has advanced the
state-of-the-art with negligible extra computational cost.

Introduction
Despite the superior performance of deep Convolutional
Neural Networks in various tasks, e.g., image classification (He et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2021), object detection (Bochkovskiy, Wang, and Liao 2020), image retrieval (Hu et al. 2020), semantic segmentation (He et al.
2017), the deployment of CNNs to resource-limited mobile
devices have posed great challenges. Network pruning is a
powerful method to compress the model with little performance loss, which can be divided into two categories: weight
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

140

