The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Differentially Describing Groups of Graphs
Corinna Coupette,∗1 Sebastian Dalleiger,∗2 Jilles Vreeken2
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract

L

How does neural connectivity in autistic children differ from
neural connectivity in healthy children or autistic youths?
What patterns in global trade networks are shared across
classes of goods, and how do these patterns change over time?
Answering questions like these requires us to differentially
describe groups of graphs: Given a set of graphs and a partition of these graphs into groups, discover what graphs in one
group have in common, how they systematically differ from
graphs in other groups, and how multiple groups of graphs are
related. We refer to this task as graph group analysis, which
seeks to describe similarities and differences between graph
groups by means of statistically significant subgraphs. To perform graph group analysis, we introduce G RAGRA, which
uses maximum entropy modeling to identify a non-redundant
set of subgraphs with statistically significant associations to
one or more graph groups. Through an extensive set of experiments on a wide range of synthetic and real-world graph
groups, we confirm that G RAGRA works well in practice.

R

L

R

Figure 1: G RAGRA discovers common and contrastive graph
patterns in noisy, heterogeneous groups of graphs, capturing, e.g., systematic similarities (left) and differences (right)
between the functional brain networks of adolescents with
and without autism spectrum disorder. Here, nodes represent centers of mass for brain regions from the AAL Atlas,
and edge color classes correspond to significant subgraphs
shared between (left) or specific to (right) groups, with individual edges signaling strong connectivity between regions.

Introduction
Differentially describing groups of graphs lies at the heart
of many scientific and societal challenges. Neuroscientists,
for example, might want to characterize brain activity in
healthy subjects, elucidate how it differs from brain activity
in subjects diagnosed with certain disorders or diseases (e.g.,
autism or Alzheimer’s), and investigate whether their findings are the same across different groups of subjects (e.g.,
children, adolescents, and adults; or men and women). Policymakers, security experts, and epidemiologists alike could
seek to understand patterns of human mobility, be it to improve the resilience of traffic infrastructure to random failures and targeted attacks, or to curb the spread of infectious
diseases. And international economists might want to investigate patterns of world trade, e.g., imports and exports
between countries, and ask how these vary across different
years and product classes.
We refer to the common task underlying these scenarios
as graph group analysis: Given a set of graphs and a partition of this set into graph groups, succinctly summarize the
commonalities and differences between graphs in the same

group, between graphs in different groups, and between the
relationships connecting the groups. In this paper, we formalize graph group analysis as a maximum likelihood modeling problem, using significant subgraphs as graph patterns
to factorize our probability distribution. We introduce G RA GRA (Graph group analysis) as an algorithm to solve this
problem, which jointly discovers a set of graph patterns and
an assignment of these patterns to graph groups.
As a real-world example of graph group analysis, consider Fig. 1. Here, we show the top shared (left) and specific
(right) patterns identified in resting-state functional brain
networks of adolescents with and without autism spectrum
disorder, where nodes in the graphs correspond to brain regions, and edges signal strong connectivity between regions.
On the right, patterns with red edges are characteristic of
autistic adolescents, and patterns with blue edges are characteristic of non-autistic adolescents. They indicate over- and
underconnectivity, respectively, in the brains of autistic adolescents when compared to typically developed controls. Although there is no consensus regarding the relationships between autism and neural connectivity (Hull et al. 2017), our

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3959

