The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Debiasing NLU Models via Causal Intervention and Counterfactual Reasoning
Bing Tian1 , Yixin Cao2 , Yong Zhang1 * , Chunxiao Xing1
1

DCST, BNRist, RIIT, Institute of Internet Industry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Singapore Management University
tb17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yixin.cao@ntu.edu.sg, {zhangyong05, xingcx}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

marks contain annotation artifacts: e.g., the entailed hypotheses tend to replace exact numbers/gender with approximates/generic words (some, at least, human, people etc.),
purpose clauses are a sign of neutral hypotheses, and negation is correlated with contradiction label (Gururangan et al.
2018). Table 1 shows the examples from the widely used
SNLI dataset that demonstrate these phenomena. With only
processing the hypothesis, models can reach accuracy scores
as high as twice the majority baseline (67% vs.34%) when
predict the class within the SNLI dataset (Tsuchiya 2018;
Gururangan et al. 2018). Fact verification (FEVER), another NLU task suffers from similar issue: a claim-only
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) model that classifies each claim
on its own, without associated evidence achieves 61.7%, far
above the majority baseline (33.3%) (Schuster et al. 2019).
As a result, models will fail to generalize well if they simply memorize the statistical shortcuts during training, and
suffer from a huge drop in performance when evaluated on
the datasets that are carefully designed to limit the spurious
cues.

Recent studies have shown that strong Natural Language Understanding (NLU) models are prone to relying on annotation biases of the datasets as a shortcut, which goes against
the underlying mechanisms of the task of interest. To reduce such biases, several recent works introduce debiasing
methods to regularize the training process of targeted NLU
models. In this paper, we provide a new perspective with
causal inference to find out the bias. On the one hand, we
show that there is an unobserved confounder for the natural language utterances and their respective classes, leading
to spurious correlations from training data. To remove such
confounder, the backdoor adjustment with causal intervention is utilized to find the true causal effect, which makes
the training process fundamentally different from the traditional likelihood estimation. On the other hand, in inference
process, we formulate the bias as the direct causal effect and
remove it by pursuing the indirect causal effect with counterfactual reasoning. We conduct experiments on large-scale
natural language inference and fact verification benchmarks,
evaluating on bias sensitive datasets that are specifically designed to assess the robustness of models against known biases in the training data. Experimental results show that our
proposed debiasing framework outperforms previous stateof-the-art debiasing methods while maintaining the original
in-distribution performance.

Premise and Hypothesis
Label
P: A woman is talking to two men.
entailment
H: There are at least three people.
P: Two dogs are running through a field.
neutral
H: Dogs are running to catch a stick.
P: The woman is awake.
contradiction
H: The woman is not awake.

Introduction
Despite the impressive performance on many NLU benchmarks (Wang et al. 2019), recent studies have demonstrated
that neural models tend to rely heavily on existing annotation biases, without learning the underlying task (Gururangan et al. 2018; Poliak et al. 2018; Schuster et al. 2019;
McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen 2019; Shah, Schwartz, and
Hovy 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). These biases are commonly
characterized as surface features of input examples that are
strongly associated with the target labels in the datasets.
For instance, natural language inference (NLI) is a task to
conduct combined feature reasoning to determine whether
a hypothesis sentence can be inferred from a premise sentence (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2005). However, recent work has demonstrated that large-scale NLI bench-

Table 1: Examples from SNLI that illustrate the annotation
artifacts.
Recent popular solution to such issue is to develop debiasing mehods that overcome these biases at the training stage (Belinkov et al. 2019; He, Zha, and Wang 2019;
Stacey et al. 2020; Mahabadi, Belinkov, and Henderson
2020; Utama, Moosavi, and Gurevych 2020; Ghaddar et al.
2021). Namely, they first use a bias model 1 to identify biased samples. And then adversarial learning or ensemble
training are utilized to either remove the bias from sentence
encoder or control the training loss by discouraging learning from the bias samples. However, we argue that biased

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11376

We follow the terminology used by (He, Zha, and Wang 2019)

