The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Not All Parameters Should Be Treated Equally: Deep Safe Semi-supervised
Learning under Class Distribution Mismatch
Rundong He1 , Zhongyi Han1∗ , Yang Yang2 , Yilong Yin1 *
1

Shandong University
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
rundong he@mail.sdu.edu.cn, hanzhongyicn@gmail.com, yyang@njust.edu.cn, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

2020b; Cascante-Bonilla et al. 2021) and some hybrid methods (Berthelot et al. 2019, 2020; Sohn et al. 2020).
Once the learning environment changes, like unseen-class
instances emerging in the unlabeled data, previous deep SSL
methods often suffer severe performance degradation due to
error propagation introduced by unseen-class unlabeled data
(Oliver et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020c; Guo et al. 2020). For
example, at the beginning stage of the outbreak of COVID19, the unlabeled data inevitably contains some imperceptible COVID-19 instances in the deep SSL pneumonia classification (Han et al. 2020b, 2021a). These unseen-class instances result in the loss of safety of the pneumonia classification model. We define this case as the problem of Safe
Deep semi-supervised learning with Unseen-class unlabeled data (SDU), which accommodates a variety of realworld applications but is rarely considered in the literature.
To solve the SDU problem defined above, several safe
deep SSL methods are proposed. Since unseen-class instances contained in unlabeled data can hurt the performance
of seen-class classification, these methods focus on the data
level that attempt to remove unseen-class data (Chen et al.
2020c; Yu et al. 2020) or assign lower weight to unseenclass data (Guo et al. 2020). Although they have weakened
the negative influence brought by unseen-class instances,
the performance is restricted because they could not thoroughly eliminate the adverse effects of unseen-class data.
Some hard unseen-class unlabeled instances inevitably participate in the model training, which causes partial parameters fitting to these hard unseen-class data.
Inspired by recent works (Zhang et al. 2021) and (Xia
et al. 2020), we present a novel insight: rather than focusing on data level; it is better to discover safe parameters.
We term the parameters fitting to unseen-class data as harmful parameters and the other as safe parameters. Driven by
this insight, we propose Safe Parameter Learning (SPL) to
reduce the adverse effects caused by unseen-class unlabeled
data in the learning process and thus enhance safe parameters for seen-class classification. SPL first identifies the safe
parameters in the pre-trained SSL model by exploiting the
magnitude of parameter weights and the class distribution
mismatch degree. In this way, SPL divides all parameters
into two parts: safe parameters and harmful parameters. SPL
then suggests a bi-level optimization strategy, where innerlevel optimization aims to enhance the reliability of safe pa-

Deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to utilize a sizeable unlabeled set to train deep networks, thereby reducing
the dependence on labeled instances. However, the unlabeled
set often carries unseen classes that cause the deep SSL algorithm to lose generalization. Previous works focus on the
data level that they attempt to remove unseen class data or
assign lower weight to them but could not eliminate their adverse effects on the SSL algorithm. Rather than focusing on
the data level, this paper turns attention to the model parameter level. We find that only partial parameters are essential
for seen-class classification, termed safe parameters. In contrast, the other parameters tend to fit irrelevant data, termed
harmful parameters. Driven by this insight, we propose Safe
Parameter Learning (SPL) to discover safe parameters and
make the harmful parameters inactive, such that we can mitigate the adverse effects caused by unseen-class data. Specifically, we firstly design an effective strategy to divide all parameters in the pre-trained SSL model into safe and harmful
ones. Then, we introduce a bi-level optimization strategy to
update the safe parameters and kill the harmful parameters.
Extensive experiments show that SPL outperforms the stateof-the-art SSL methods on all the benchmarks by a large margin. Moreover, experiments demonstrate that SPL can be integrated into the most popular deep SSL networks and be easily
extended to handle other cases of class distribution mismatch.

Introduction
Deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) has made breakthroughs in many applications, such as medical image analysis (Han et al. 2021b; Ren, Yeh, and Schwing 2020) , video
object segmentation (Lu et al. 2020b, 2021), and object
tracking (Lu et al. 2020a; Shen et al. 2021). The remarkable
success of deep SSL methods attributes to a large amount
of cheap unlabeled data and a static environment where
we draw labeled data and unlabeled data from an identical data distribution. The research of deep SSL methods
have grown into a big tree with three main branches: consistency regularization methods (Sajjadi, Javanmardi, and
Tasdizen 2016; Laine and Aila 2017; Tarvainen and Valpola
2017), pseudo-labeling methods (Rizve et al. 2021; Xie et al.
* Co-corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6874

