The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Fast and Constrained Absent Keyphrase Generation by Prompt-Based Learning
Huanqin Wu1 , Baijiaxin Ma2 , Wei Liu1 , Tao Chen1 , Dan Nie1
1

Tencent AI Platform Department, China
2
Peking University
{huanqinwu, thinkweeliu, vitochen, kathynie}@tencent.com, mabaijiaxin@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Title: Interactive visualization of volumetric data with WebGL in real-time
Document: This article presents and discusses the implementation of a
direct volume rendering system for the Web, which articulates a large
portion of the rendering task in the client machine. … The Web
increasingly competes against desktop applications in many scenarios, but
the graphical demands of some of the applications (e.g. interactive
scientific visualization by volume rendering), have impeded their
successful settlement in Web scenarios. Performance, scalability, accuracy,
security are some of the many challenges that must be solved before
visual Web applications popularize. In this publication we discuss both
performance and scalability of the volume rendering by WebGL ray
casting in two different but challenging application domains: medical
imaging and radar meteorology.

Generating absent keyphrases, which do not appear in the
input document, is challenging in the keyphrase prediction
task. Most previous works treat the problem as an autoregressive sequence-to-sequence generation task, which demonstrates promising results for generating grammatically correct and fluent absent keyphrases. However, such an end-toend process with a complete data-driven manner is unconstrained, which is prone to generate keyphrases inconsistent
with the input document. In addition, the existing autoregressive decoding method makes the generation of keyphrases
must be done from left to right, leading to slow speed during inference. In this paper, we propose a constrained absent keyphrase generation method in a prompt-based learning
fashion. Specifically, the prompt will be created firstly based
on the keywords, which are defined as the overlapping words
between absent keyphrase and document. Then, a maskpredict decoder is used to complete the absent keyphrase
on the constraint of prompt. Experiments on keyphrase generation benchmarks have demonstrated the effectiveness of
our approach. In addition, we evaluate the performance of
constrained absent keyphrases generation from an information retrieval perspective. The result shows that our approach
can generate more consistent keyphrases, which can improve
document retrieval performance. What’s more, with a nonautoregressive decoding manner, our model can speed up the
absent keyphrase generation by 8.67× compared with the autoregressive method.

Absent keyphrases: real time visualization, weather radar volume
Unconstrained generation result: virtual reality

Figure 1: Example of a document and its expected absent
keyphrases. The overlapping words between the input document and absent keyphrases are marked with red. We define
such words as keywords in this paper. Our approach treats
keywords as constrained signals for generating the absent
keyphrase.

Frank, and Witten 2009; Lopez and Romary 2010; Zhang
et al. 2016; Alzaidy, Caragea, and Giles 2019; Sun et al.
2020). Such methods focus on extracting text spans or
phrases from the document, which show promising results
on present keyphrase extraction. However, these extractive
methods cannot handle the absent keyphrase, which is also
important and requires comprehensive understanding of the
document.
To address this issue, various generative methods (Meng
et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2018; Ye and Wang 2018; Wang et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2019b; Chan et al. 2019; Zhao and Zhang
2019; Chen et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2020; Ahmad et al. 2021)
have been proposed. Such generative methods usually apply
the sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) model to predict a target sequence, which is a concatenation of present and absent keyphrases. Therefore, these generative approachs can
generate both kinds of keyphrases. However, such an endto-end generation manner is prone to generate some absent keyphrases inconsistent with the source documents. As
shown in Figure 1, although “virtual reality” is grammati-

Introduction
Keyphrase prediction task aims to obtain a set of keyphrases,
which are several phrases that highlight core topics or information of a document. As a basic NLP task, keyphrase
prediction is essential for numerous downstream tasks such
as information retrieval (Kim et al. 2013; Boudin, Gallina, and Aizawa 2020), document clustering (Hulth and
Megyesi 2006), and summarization (Wang and Cardie 2013;
Pasunuru and Bansal 2018).
Keyphrases of a document can be categorized into the
present keyphrase that appears continuously in the document
and absent keyphrase, which doesn’t appear in the document. Early works mostly focus on the keyphrase extraction (Witten et al. 2005; Nguyen and Kan 2007; Medelyan,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11495

