The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Protecting Intellectual Property of Language Generation APIs
with Lexical Watermark
Xuanli He, 1 Qiongkai Xu, 2 Lingjuan Lyu, 3 Fangzhao Wu, 4 Chenguang Wang, 5
1

Monash University
The Australian National University
3
Sony AI
4
Microsoft Research Asia
5
UC Berkeley
xuanli.he1@monash.edu, Qiongkai.Xu@anu.edu.au* , Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com*
2

Abstract
Nowadays, due to the breakthrough in natural language generation (NLG), including machine translation, document summarization, image captioning, etc., NLG models have been
encapsulated in cloud APIs to serve over half a billion people
worldwide and process over one hundred billion word generations per day.Thus, NLG APIs have already become essential
profitable services in many commercial companies. Due to
the substantial financial and intellectual investments, service
providers adopt a pay-as-you-use policy to promote sustainable market growth. However, recent works have shown that
cloud platforms suffer from financial losses imposed by model
extraction attacks, which aim to imitate the functionality and
utility of the victim services, thus violating the intellectual
property (IP) of cloud APIs. This work targets at protecting IP
of NLG APIs by identifying the attackers who have utilized
watermarked responses from the victim NLG APIs. However, most existing watermarking techniques are not directly
amenable for IP protection of NLG APIs. To bridge this gap,
we first present a novel watermarking method for text generation APIs by conducting lexical modification to the original
outputs. Compared with the competitive baselines, our watermark approach achieves better identifiable performance in
terms of p-value, with fewer semantic losses. In addition, our
watermarks are more understandable and intuitive to humans
than the baselines. Finally, the empirical studies show our approach is also applicable to queries from different domains,
and is effective on the attacker trained on a mixture of the
corpus which includes less than 10% watermarked samples.

1

Introduction

Thanks to the recent progress in natural language generation
(NLG), technology corporations, such as Google, Amazon,
Microsoft, etc., have deployed numerous and various NLG
models on their cloud platforms as pay-as-you-use services.
Such services are expected to promote trillions of dollars of
businesses in the near future. To obtain an outperforming
model, companies generally dedicate a plethora of workforce
and computational resources to data collection and model
training. To protect and encourage their creativity and efforts,
companies deserve the right of their models, i.e., intellectual
property (IP). Due to the underlying commercial value, IP

protection for deep models has drawn increasing interest from
both academia and industry. The misconducts of these models
or APIs should be considered as IP violations or breaches.
As a byproduct of the Machine-learning-as-a-service
(MLaaS) paradigm, it is believed that companies could prevent customers from redistributing models to illegitimate
users. Nevertheless, a series of emerging model extraction
attacks have validated that the functionality of the victim
API can be stolen with carefully-designed queries, causing IP
infringement (Tramèr et al. 2016; Wallace, Stern, and Song
2020; Krishna et al. 2020; He et al. 2021a). Such attacks
have been demonstrated to be effective on not only laboratory models, but also commercial APIs (Wallace, Stern, and
Song 2020; Xu et al. 2021).
On the other hand, it is challenging to prevent model extraction, while retaining the utility of the victim models for
legitimate users (Alabdulmohsin, Gao, and Zhang 2014; Juuti
et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019). Recent works have explored
the use of watermarks on deep neural networks models for
the sake of IP protection (Adi et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018;
Le Merrer, Perez, and Trédan 2020). These works leverage
a trigger set to stamp invisible watermarks on their commercial models before distributing them to customers. When
suspicion of model theft arises, model owners can conduct
an official ownership claim with the aid of the trigger set.
Although watermarking has been explored in security research, most of them focus on either the digital watermarking
applications (Petitcolas, Anderson, and Kuhn 1999), or watermarking discriminative models (Uchida et al. 2017; Adi
et al. 2018; Szyller et al. 2021; Krishna et al. 2020).
Little has been done to adapt watermarking to identify
IP violation via model extraction in NLG, whereby model
owners can manipulate the response to the attackers, but not
neurons of the extracted model (Lim et al. 2022). To fill in
this gap, we take the first effort by introducing watermarking
to text generation and utilizing the null-hypothesis test as a
post-hoc ownership verification on the extracted models. We
also remark that our watermarking method based on lexical
watermarks is more understandable and intuitive to human
judge in lawsuits. Overall, our main contributions include:
1. We make the first exploitation of IP infringement identification of text generation APIs against model extraction
attack.

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10758

