The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

The Perils of Learning Before Optimizing
Chris Cameron1 , Jason Hartford2 , Taylor Lundy1 , Kevin Leyton-Brown1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
Mila, Université de Montréal
{cchris13, tlundy, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca, jason.hartford@mila.quebec

Abstract

travel times to minimize mean squared error). In the second
stage, the model predictions are used to parameterize an optimization problem, which is then solved (e.g., recommend
facility locations given demand and travel time predictions).
Recently there has been a lot of interest in the “end-to-end”
approach of training a predictive model to minimize loss on
the downstream optimization task (Donti, Amos, and Kolter
2017; Demirović et al. 2019; Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe
2019; Wilder et al. 2020). Advances in deep learning have
enabled any set of differentiable functions to be chained together, allowing for the end-to-end training of a differentiable
prediction task coupled with a differentiable downstream task
using back propagation. Amos and Kolter (2017) introduced
the concept of optimization as a layer, showing how to analytically compute gradients through a QP solver. This sparked a
number of follow up papers showing how to build differentiable layers for different classes of optimization problems
(e.g., submodular optimization (Djolonga and Krause 2017),
linear programming (Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe 2019), general cone programs (Agrawal et al. 2019), and disciplined
convex programs (Agrawal et al. 2020)).
Such “end-to-end” approaches have been shown to improve performance on a diverse set of applications (e.g., inventory stocking (Amos and Kolter 2017), bipartite matching (Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe 2019), and facility location
(Wilder et al. 2020)). The improvements are often attributed
to the end-to-end approach having made better error tradeoffs than the two-stage approach. For example, Donti, Amos,
and Kolter (2017) argue that since all models inevitably make
errors, it is important to look at a final task-based objective;
Wilder, Dilkina, and Tambe (2019) suggest that end-to-end
optimization is likely to be especially beneficial for difficult problems where the best model is imperfect (e.g., when
either model capacity or data is limited); and Elmachtoub
and Grigas (2020) argue for the effectiveness of end-to-end
when there is model misspecification and perfect prediction
is unattainable. One might therefore assume that end-to-end
learning offers no benefit in an “error-free” setting where we
have access to the Bayes optimal predictor for a given loss
function.
This paper shows otherwise: that even when there is no
limit on model capacity or training set size, the two-stage
approach can fail catastrophically in the common case where
the prediction stage models expectations over prediction tar-

Formulating real-world optimization problems often begins
with making predictions from historical data (e.g., an optimizer
that aims to recommend fast routes relies upon travel-time predictions). Typically, learning the prediction model used to
generate the optimization problem and solving that problem
are performed in two separate stages. Recent work has showed
how such prediction models can be learned end-to-end by
differentiating through the optimization task. Such methods
often yield empirical improvements, which are typically attributed to end-to-end making better error tradeoffs than the
standard loss function used in a two-stage solution. We refine
this explanation and more precisely characterize when endto-end can improve performance. When prediction targets are
stochastic, a two-stage solution must make an a priori choice
about which statistics of the target distribution to model—we
consider expectations over prediction targets—while an endto-end solution can make this choice adaptively. We show
that the performance gap between a two-stage and end-toend approach is closely related to the price of correlation
concept in stochastic optimization and show the implications
of some existing POC results for the predict-then-optimize
problem. We then consider a novel and particularly practical setting, where multiple prediction targets are combined to
obtain each of the objective function’s coefficients. We give
explicit constructions where (1) two-stage performs unboundedly worse than end-to-end; and (2) two-stage is optimal. We
use simulations to experimentally quantify performance gaps
and identify a wide range of real-world applications from the
literature whose objective functions rely on multiple prediction targets, suggesting that end-to-end learning could yield
significant improvements.

1

Introduction

It is increasingly common to face optimization problems
whose inputs must be learned from data rather than being
given directly. For example, consider a facility location application in which loss depends on predictions about both traffic
congestion and demand. The most natural way to address
such problems is to separate prediction from optimization
into two separate stages (Yan and Gregory 2012; Centola
2018; Bahulkar et al. 2018). In the first stage, a model is
trained to optimize some standard loss function (e.g., predict
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3708

