The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

You Only Infer Once: Cross-Modal Meta-Transfer
for Referring Video Object Segmentation
Dezhuang Li1 * , Ruoqi Li1 * , Lijun Wang1 , Yifan Wang1† , Jinqing Qi1 , Lu Zhang1 , Ting Liu2 ,
Qingquan Xu2 , Huchuan Lu1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Meitu Inc., China
{Merci, dutlrq77}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {ljwang, wyfan, jinqing}@dlut.edu.cn,
luzhangdut@gmail.com, {lt, xqq}@meitu.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

We present YOFO (You Only inFer Once), a new paradigm
for referring video object segmentation (RVOS) that operates
in an one-stage manner. Our key insight is that the language
descriptor should serve as target-specific guidance to identify the target object, while a direct feature fusion of image
and language can increase feature complexity and thus may
be sub-optimal for RVOS. To this end, we propose a metatransfer module, which is trained in a learning-to-learn fashion and aims to transfer the target-specific information from
the language domain to the image domain, while discarding
the uncorrelated complex variations of language description.
To bridge the gap between the image and language domains,
we develop a multi-scale cross-modal feature mining block
that aggregates all the essential features required by RVOS
from both domains and generates regression labels for the
meta-transfer module. The whole system can be trained in
an end-to-end manner and shows competitive performance
against state-of-the-art two-stage approaches.

1

(a)

"a man riding a motorbike“
"a green motorbike"

Abstract
Net-1

+

Net-1

Net-1

"a man riding a motorbike“
"a green motorbike"

Image-level

(b)

Net-2

+

Video-level

YOFO
Video-level

Figure 1: A comparison between (a) the two-stage method
URVOS (Seo, Lee, and Han 2020) and (b) our one-stage
YOFO. URVOS first obtains initial masks via referring image segmentation, and then produces the final segmentation
results by conducting semi-supervised VOS. In contrast, our
YOFO performs RVOS task in one stage and is end-to-end
trainable.

Introduction

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims to segment target objects from a video sequence according to
the language referring expressions. In contrast to semisupervised VOS (Perazzi et al. 2016) that requires a perpixel mask to initialize target location, RVOS identifies
the target relying only on an abstract language query. For
one thing, RVOS inherently provides a more convenient
choice for human-computer interaction, and thus attracts
wide attention from the community (Khoreva, Rohrbach,
and Schiele 2018; Seo, Lee, and Han 2020). For another,
RVOS is also more challenging as it requires simultaneous
interpretation of both visual and language modalities.
Though still in its infancy, RVOS has witnessed significant research progress in recent years, where they are mostly
addressed in a two-stage pipeline. For instance, in the seminal work (Khoreva, Rohrbach, and Schiele 2018), RVOS
is decomposed into referring bounding box tracking task
followed by a bounding box segmentation step. In a more

recent study, Seo et al. (Seo, Lee, and Han 2020) propose
a unified segmentation approach, which first obtains initial
masks guided by the referring expressions, and then performs semi-supervised VOS to produce the final results by
propagating the most confident initial masks and referring
expressions. Compared to their one-stage counterparts, twostage RVOS methods can effectively improve the segmentation accuracy at the cost of higher computational overhead.
It is then natural to ask whether we can combine the merits
of both frameworks, i.e., achieving the high accuracy of twostage approaches while enjoying the efficiency of one-stage
methods.
We make the first attempt towards this goal by proposing
YOFO (You Only inFer Once), a one-stage RVOS method.
As opposed to prior art (Bellver et al. 2020) that uses the
combined feature of the image and referring expression for
segmentation, we conjecture that the direct feature fusion of

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1297

