The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

P3 -Net: Part Mobility Parsing from Point Cloud Sequences via
Learning Explicit Point Correspondence
Yahao Shi1 , Xinyu Cao1 , Feixiang Lu2 , Bin Zhou1,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China,
2
Robotics and Autonomous Driving Laboratory, Baidu Research, Beijing, China,
3
Department of Mathematics and Theories, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China,
zhoubin@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Understanding an articulated 3D object with its movable
parts is an essential skill for an intelligent agent. This paper presents a novel approach to parse 3D part mobility from
point cloud sequences. The key innovation is learning explicit point correspondence from a raw unordered point cloud
sequence. We propose a novel deep network called P3 -Net
to parallelize the trajectory feature extraction and the point
correspondence establishment, performing joint optimization
between them. Specifically, we design a Match-LSTM module to reaggregate point features among different frames by a
point correspondence matrix, a.k.a. the matching matrix. To
obtain this matrix, an attention module is proposed to calculate the point correspondence. Moreover, we implement a
Gumbel-Sinkhorn module to reduce the many-to-one relationship for better point correspondence. We conduct comprehensive evaluations on public benchmarks, including the
motion dataset and the PartNet dataset. Results demonstrate
that our approach outperforms SOTA methods on various 3D
parsing tasks of part mobility, including motion flow prediction, motion part segmentation, and motion attribute (i.e., axis
& range) estimation. Moreover, we integrate our approach
into a robot perception module to validate its robustness.

Figure 1: Part mobility parsing. A key aspect of the robot
manipulation application (a) is part mobility parsing. Given
a motion sequence of an articulated object (b), we obtain a
point could sequence (c-d). Then, our algorithm parses part
mobility, including motion flow prediction, motion part segmentation, and motion attribute estimation (e).

Introduction
et al. 2020). However, these snapshot-based approaches are
limited for a robot to accomplish interaction tasks, due to
lacking the consecutive part motion information, e.g., the
observation of a single snapshot confuses the robot whether
a closed door should be opened from the right side or the left
side. Thanks to the recent advances in real-time 3D acquisition techniques such as commercial RGB-D and LiDAR
cameras, point cloud sequences are readily available for visual perception. Unlike a single static snapshot, point cloud
sequences contain meaningful semantic, spatial, and temporal information, enabling a robot to perform dynamic perception of part mobility with fine granularity.
However, it is difficult to learn the spatial-temporal information from the unordered point cloud sequences. In general, the main challenges are threefold: (1) how to extract a
proper trajectory feature among multiple frames for each 3D
point; (2) how to establish the one-to-one, point-level, consecutive correspondences from the point cloud sequences;
and (3) how to optimize above 3D point trajectories. The pioneer work (Shi, Cao, and Zhou 2021) obtains aligned point

Our environment packs with plenty of articulated objects, e.g., a cabinet or a fridge. Automatically parsing an articulated object into its 3D part mobility is indispensable for
driving an agent to complete a manipulation task (Mo et al.
2021). Fig. 1 demonstrates a typical scenario of robot-object
interaction. A human user says “please open the fridge and
carry an apple to me”. Following this instruction, the household robot should find out where the door of the fridge is
and how to open it. Therefore, the robot perception module requires various 3D part mobility parsing techniques, including motion flow prediction (Yi et al. 2018; Liu, Qi, and
Guibas 2019), motion part segmentation (Yi et al. 2018; Yan
et al. 2019), and motion attribute (i.e., axis & range) estimation (Li et al. 2020; Hu et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2019).
Several attempts have been made to parse part mobility
from a single snapshot such as a point cloud (Wang et al.
2019; Yan et al. 2019; Mo et al. 2021) and a depth image (Li
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2244

