The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning Influence Adoption in Heterogeneous Networks
Vincent Conitzer1 , Debmalya Panigrahi1 , Hanrui Zhang2
1

Duke University
Carnegie Mellon University
conitzer@cs.duke.edu, debmalya@cs.duke.edu, hanruiz1@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

outcome for an individual that we have not observed. For example, suppose a university is trying to identify individuals
affected by an infectious disease in its student population.
Due to limited resources, it might be infeasible to test every
student, at least not frequently; instead, it can test a sample
of students and use additional information such as shared
dorm residency, class registration, etc., to identify the students who are at risk of contracting the disease. We call this
the influence adoption phenomenon in a network, and seek
to study its learnability.
Recently, Conitzer, Panigrahi, and Zhang (2020) introduced this problem and studied it in the homogeneous
model, where any individual who comes in contact with an
infected individual gets infected as well. The state of an
individual is then determined by the initial set of infected
individuals and the propagation network itself (which may
be random). In practice, however, individuals differ in their
characteristics, and have varying levels of susceptibility to a
spreading contagion. For instance, some diseases infect only
people of particular age groups, some computer viruses infect only computers with specific system configurations, and
some memes are meaningful only to people in particular professions. In many cases, if an individual is not infected, she
is not a spreader either.
Indeed, this heterogeneity significantly changes the learning task at hand. For instance, if a disease only infects adults,
and the community we care about consists exclusively of
children, then we only need to learn the fact that children
are unaffected, rather than the status of any particular individual. Or, if a disease were to infect people of a particular
blood group, the learning task becomes more challenging
since the spread of the disease is now controlled by two sets
of information – the initial set of infected individuals and
the individual features of members of the population – in addition to the propagation network itself (which may again be
random). This leads to the following fundamental question:

We study the problem of learning influence adoption in networks. In this problem, a communicable entity (such as an
infectious disease, a computer virus, or a social media meme)
propagates through a network, and the goal is to learn the
state of each individual node by sampling only a small number of nodes and observing/testing their states. We study this
problem in heterogeneous networks, in which each individual node has a set of distinct features that determine how it is
affected by the propagating entity. We give an efficient algorithm with nearly optimal sample complexity for two variants
of this learning problem, corresponding to symptomatic and
asymptomatic spread. In each case, the optimal sample complexity naturally generalizes both the complexity of learning
how nodes are affected in isolation, and the complexity of
learning influence adoption in a homogeneous network.

1

Introduction

The spread of contagious entities such as biological infections, social media memes, or computer viruses in a population via network propagation is a central object of study
in the field of network science. Consider, for example, the
spread of an infectious disease. Quite often, a new disease
originates by genetic mutation, and begins to propagate by
first infecting a group of people in close contact with the
original source of the disease. After the initial infections,
the disease continues to propagate as carriers of the disease
interact with others: each carrier exposes colleagues, family,
and friends to the disease, who may contract the disease and
become spreaders themselves.
While there is substantive research on how to control
(or maximize, say in viral advertising) such spread (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Chen, Wang, and Yang 2009;
Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014), and to infer network parameters from it (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007; Chierichetti,
Liben-nowell, and Kleinberg 2011; Du et al. 2012), much
less is known about learning the state of individuals in the
network based on the propagation process. In the latter problem, we observe the outcome of the propagation process for
a sample of individuals in the network, and use these observations to train a learning algorithm that can then infer the

What is the impact of heterogeneity among individuals
on the learnability of influence adoption in a network?

1.1

Our Contributions

Modeling heterogeneity. We model the community of interest as a network of heterogeneous nodes representing indi-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6411

