The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dual Decoupling Training for Semi-supervised Object Detection
with Noise-Bypass Head
Shida Zheng* , Chenshu Chen* , Xiaowei Cai, Tingqun Ye, Wenming Tan†
Hikvision Research Institute
{zhengshida, chenchenshu, caixiaowei6, yetingqun, tanwenming}@hikvision.com

loc. score

cls. score

Abstract
Pseudo bounding boxes from the self-training paradigm are
inevitably noisy for semi-supervised object detection. To
cope with that, a dual decoupling training framework is proposed in the present study, i.e. clean and noisy data decoupling, and classification and localization task decoupling. In
the first decoupling, two-level thresholds are used to categorize pseudo boxes into three groups, i.e. clean backgrounds,
noisy foregrounds and clean foregrounds. With a specially
designed noise-bypass head focusing on noisy data, backbone networks can extract coarse but diverse information; and
meanwhile, an original head learns from clean samples for
more precise predictions. In the second decoupling, we take
advantage of the two-head structure for better evaluation of
localization quality, thus the category label and location of
a pseudo box can remain independent of each other during
training. The approach of two-level thresholds is also applied
to group pseudo boxes into three sections of different location accuracy. We outperform existing works by a large margin on VOC datasets, reaching 54.8 mAP (+1.8), and even up
to 55.9 mAP (+1.5) by leveraging MS-COCO train2017 as
extra unlabeled data. On MS-COCO benchmark, our method
also achieves about 1.0 mAP improvements averaging across
protocols compared with the prior state-of-the-art.

noisy foreground

clean background

clean and noisy

clean foreground

accurate location
noisy

bad location

classification and localization
+

: train main head
: train noise-bypass head

Figure 1: Illustration of 2-dimension decoupling. X-axis is
about tasks. Localization is decoupled from classification
with the help of the localization score. Pseudo-labels with
scores from 0 to 1 are split into three parts for each task, and
noisy ones teach the noise-bypass head as ground truths.

Introduction
the threshold, the higher the recall for pseudo boxes, yet the
more wrongly classified the boxes, i.e. false positives, interfering with the convergence of semi-supervised training.
The higher the threshold, the higher the precision for pseudo
boxes, but positive recalls with low confidence may be filtered, undermining the ability of trained models to detect
tiny or hard samples. It seems fair to conclude that there is
always a trade-off between recall and precision when there
is only one confidence threshold, and thus noise in pseudo
boxes is unavoidable.
Since confidence is based on outputs of classifiers, it can
be argued that confidence alone may be able to qualify classification, but not localization. Considering that, Liu et al.
remove the localization training for pseudo boxes, which is
not a best solution in our perspective.
In the present study, a dual decoupling training (DDT)
framework is proposed to overcome the above-mentioned
problems in SSOD. DDT introduces two-dimensional decoupling for self-training, specifically, clean and noisy data

Great progress has been made in object detection owing
to the development of deep convolutional neural networks.
Yet, training an accurate detector still demands a large
well-annotated dataset, which is labor-consuming. To lessen
the demand for expensive labeled data, semi-supervised
learning (SSL) in image classification has been widely researched, while semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) is
still an open issue with little literature about it.
Recent SSOD works following the self-training paradigm
show better performance than the consistency-based method
(Jeong et al. 2019). For self-training, a teacher model generates a set of predicted boxes on unlabeled images, with
a fixed confidence threshold filtering out possible negative
predictions. Remaining boxes, named pseudo boxes, are
then used as targets for training a student model. The lower
* Equal contributions
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3526

