The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hybrid Neural Networks for On-Device Directional Hearing
Anran Wang1 , Maruchi Kim1 , Hao Zhang2 , Shyamnath Gollakota1
1

University of Washington
2
ETH Zürich
{anranw,mkimhj,gshyam}@cs.washington.edu, hao.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract

in comparison (Luo and Mesgarani 2019; Jenrungrot et al.
2020) but are computationally expensive and to date, cannot
run on-device on wearable computing platforms.
Directional hearing applications however impose stringent computational, real-time and low-latency requirements
that are not met by any existing source separation networks.
Specifically, compared to other audio applications like teleconferencing where latencies on the order of 100 ms are
adequate, directional hearing requires real-time audio processing with much more stringent latency requirements. For
example, medical hearing aid research shows that we need
a latency less than 20 ms to be tolerable (Stone and Moore
1999). This is also true for augmented reality applications so
that any modified sound sources are correctly synced, both
visually and audibly, in the brain (Gupta et al. 2020).
These stringent low-latency constraints are challenging to
meet on wearable and medical devices. Directional hearing requires not only processing the continuous audio input stream, but also generating a continuous output stream
within these real-time constraints. While powerful GPUs
and specialized inference accelerators (e.g., TPU) can speed
up the network run-time (Wang, Wei, and Brooks 2019),
they are usually not available on a wearable device given
their power, size and weight requirements. In fact, even
the CPU capabilities and memory bandwidth available on
wearables can be significantly constrained even compared
to smartphones. For example, the iPhone 12 CPU is more
than 10 times faster than that used in Google glasses and
Apple watch. Offloading computation to other devices (e.g.,
smartphone) is not an option given the additional wireless
roundtrip latency on the order of tens of milliseconds.
In this paper, we show for the first time that real-time directional hearing using deep learning can be achieved on
computationally-constrained platforms. Instead of designing an end-to-end neural net to perform the task, we create a hybrid model that combines lightweight beamforming
algorithms with neural networks. Our key insight is that the
beamforming algorithms can provide spatial hints to a neural
net that can drastically reduce the network complexity and
its computational cost while achieving similar source separation performance to state-of-the-art causal neural networks
that are computationally expensive. At a high level, while
neural networks are a powerful tool to approximate functions, approximating beamforming functions like matrix in-

On-device directional hearing requires audio source separation from a given direction while achieving stringent humanimperceptible latency requirements. While neural nets can
achieve significantly better performance than traditional
beamformers, all existing models fall short of supporting
low-latency causal inference on computationally-constrained
wearables. We present HybridBeam, a hybrid model that
combines traditional beamformers with a custom lightweight
neural net. The former reduces the computational burden of
the latter and also improves its generalizability, while the latter is designed to further reduce the memory and computational overhead to enable real-time and low-latency operations. Our evaluation shows comparable performance to stateof-the-art causal inference models on synthetic data while
achieving a 5x reduction of model size, 4x reduction of computation per second, 5x reduction in processing time and generalizing better to real hardware data. Further, our real-time
hybrid model runs in 8 ms on mobile CPUs designed for lowpower wearable devices and achieves an end-to-end latency
of 17.5 ms.

Introduction
Directional hearing is the ability to amplify speech from a
specific direction while reducing sounds coming from other
directions. This has multiple applications ranging from medical devices to augmented reality and wearable computing.
Directional hearing aids can help individuals with hearing
impairments who have increased difficulty hearing in the
presence of noise and interfering sounds (Doclo et al. 2010;
Brayda et al. 2015). It can also be combined with augmented
reality headsets to customize the sounds and noises from different directions, e.g., sensors like gaze trackers can enable
a wearer to be in a noisy room and amplify the speech from
a specific direction, simply by looking at the source.
For decades, the predominant approach to achieving this
goal was to perform beamforming (Krim and Viberg 1996;
Brayda et al. 2015; Chhetri et al. 2018). While these signal
processing techniques can be computationally light-weight,
they have a limited performance (Souden, Benesty, and
Affes 2010; Kumatani et al. 2012). Recent work has shown
that neural networks achieve exceptional source separation
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11421

