The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

ASM2TV: An Adaptive Semi-supervised Multi-Task Multi-View Learning
Framework for Human Activity Recognition
Zekai Chen1 , Xiao Zhang2 * , Xiuzhen Cheng2
1

George Washington University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
zech chan@gwu.edu, xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn, xzcheng@sdu.edu.cn

2

Abstract

lected from diverse sources simultaneously (Caruana 1998;
He and Lawrence 2011). Compared with single-task multiview learning, the M2TVL paradigm can further improve the
training efficiency and reduce inference cost while promoting the generalization effect (Baxter 1997; Ruder 2017; Wu,
Zhan, and Jiang 2018; Sun et al. 2020) by learning shared
representations across related tasks and views.
When addressing M2TVL in mobile sensing problems,
we encounter several challenges. (1) Since both views and
tasks can be either heterogeneous or homogeneous, one instinctive question is which views should share across which
tasks under what circumstances to avoid harmful interference or negative transfer (Kang, Grauman, and Sha 2011;
Standley et al. 2020) and optimally reinforce the positive
learning. Most prior works (Zhang and Huan 2012; Jin
et al. 2013, 2014; Lu et al. 2017) utilized soft-sharing constraints and considered each view separately by dividing the
M2TVL problem into multiple multi-task learning problems
under different views while ignoring the more fine-grained
task-view-interacted relatedness. (2) Also, as the total number of views and tasks grows, the computation cost proliferates, making the soft-sharing scheme more computationally limited. (3) Moreover, obtaining labeled data in the real
mobile sensing world is costly, while the unlabeled data is
prevalent and easily accessible (Mahdavinejad et al. 2018).
Thus, a semi-supervised learning approach is strongly preferred to utilize these unlabeled data adequately.
Along this line, we propose a novel semi-supervised
multi-task multi-view learning framework ASM2TV to address the above problems (see Figure 1). Considering
computation efficiency, we inherit the spirit of the hardparameter sharing. Unlike previous M2TVL hard-sharing
schemes, we pre-define a set of commonly shared bottoms
composed of hidden layers for tasks across all views instead
of designing specific shared layers for each view. The main
idea is to learn an adaptive gating control policy that determines which shared block should be open-gated and others
are closed for any view across any task. In other words, the
model can adaptively learn what views across which tasks
should share common knowledge via the same block to gain
the maximum positive transfer benefits. We also design a
regularization term that encourages each view-specific function to agree with the view-fusion function as much as possible. Considering most sensor devices generate data con-

Many real-world scenarios, such as human activity recognition (HAR) in IoT, can be formalized as a multi-task multiview learning problem. Each specific task consists of multiple shared feature views collected from multiple sources,
either homogeneous or heterogeneous. Common among recent approaches is to employ a typical hard/soft sharing
strategy at the initial phase separately for each view across
tasks to uncover common knowledge, underlying the assumption that all views are conditionally independent. On
the one hand, multiple views across tasks possibly relate to
each other under practical situations. On the other hand, supervised methods might be insufficient when labeled data
is scarce. To tackle these challenges, we introduce a novel
framework ASM2TV for semi-supervised multi-task multiview learning. We present a new perspective named gating control policy, a learnable task-view-interacted sharing
policy that adaptively selects the most desirable candidate
shared block for any view across any task, which uncovers more fine-grained task-view-interacted relatedness and
improves inference efficiency. Significantly, our proposed
gathering consistency adaption procedure takes full advantage of large amounts of unlabeled fragmented time-series,
making it a general framework that accommodates a wide
range of applications. Experiments on two diverse real-world
HAR benchmark datasets collected from various subjects
and sources demonstrate our framework’s superiority over
other state-of-the-arts. The detailed codes are available at
https://github.com/zachstarkk/ASM2TV.

Introduction
In IoT mobile sensing world, with the rapidly growing volume of Internet-connected sensory devices, the IoT generates massive data characterized by its velocity in terms
of spatial and temporal dependency (Mahdavinejad et al.
2018). The sensing data collected from heterogeneous devices are multiple modalities, and multi-task multi-view
learning (M2TVL) provides a useful paradigm. For instance,
in human activity recognition (HAR), sensor monitoring
data from various on-body positions can be multi-view.
M2TVL aims to improve accuracy by learning multiple objectives of tasks with multiple shared view features col* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6342

