The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

KerGNNs: Interpretable Graph Neural Networks with Graph Kernels
Aosong Feng1 , Chenyu You1 , Shiqiang Wang2 , Leandros Tassiulas1
1

Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
aosong.feng@yale.edu, chenyu.you@yale.edu, wangshiq@us.ibm.com, leandros.tassiulas@yale.edu
2

(a)

Abstract
Graph kernels are historically the most widely-used technique
for graph classification tasks. However, these methods suffer
from limited performance because of the hand-crafted combinatorial features of graphs. In recent years, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have become the state-of-the-art method
in downstream graph-related tasks due to their superior performance. Most GNNs are based on Message Passing Neural Network (MPNN) frameworks. However, recent studies
show that MPNNs can not exceed the power of the WeisfeilerLehman (WL) algorithm in graph isomorphism test. To address the limitations of existing graph kernel and GNN methods, in this paper, we propose a novel GNN framework,
termed Kernel Graph Neural Networks (KerGNNs), which
integrates graph kernels into the message passing process
of GNNs. Inspired by convolution filters in convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), KerGNNs adopt trainable hidden
graphs as graph filters which are combined with subgraphs
to update node embeddings using graph kernels. In addition, we show that MPNNs can be viewed as special cases
of KerGNNs. We apply KerGNNs to multiple graph-related
tasks and use cross-validation to make fair comparisons with
benchmarks. We show that our method achieves competitive
performance compared with existing state-of-the-art methods, demonstrating the potential to increase the representation
ability of GNNs. We also show that the trained graph filters in
KerGNNs can reveal the local graph structures of the dataset,
which significantly improves the model interpretability compared with conventional GNN models.

3

1-WL

1

(b)
{{ 2 , 3 }}

subgraph-based

3

2
3

1

1
2

v

v

{{ 2 , 3 }}

3

1
2

subgraph Gv

graph ﬁlters {Hi} i

2

Figure 1: (a) 1-WL graph isomorphism test cannot distinguish one hexagon and two triangles because of same neighborhood multisets, while subgraph-based method can find
the difference based on different subgraph topologies. (b)
The yellow shadow represents the subgraph of node v. After
interacting with graph filters, the updated node is colored in
blue.
receiving messages from its neighbors, (2) aggregating messages, and (3) updating its own features to encode the local
structural information. For graph-level tasks, a permutationinvariant readout function is used to extract feature representations from the entire graph. In fact, MPNNs have been motivated and derived as a continuous and differentiable analog
of the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) algorithm (Leman and Weisfeiler 1968) which is known to successfully test graph isomorphism for a broad class of graphs. However, recent studies (Xu et al. 2018; Morris et al. 2019) show that MPNNs are
at most as powerful as the WL kernel (Shervashidze et al.
2011) and WL algorithm regarding the graph isomorphism
tests. This demonstrates theoretical limits in the expressivity of popular GNNs. For example, Figure 1(a) shows two
graphs which cannot be distinguished by 1-WL algorithm,
and therefore are also indistinguishable by MPNNs.
Before the advent of GNNs, graph kernels were the most
widely-used techniques for solving graph classification tasks
(Kriege, Johansson, and Morris 2020). Graph kernels measure the similarity between graphs, and can be applied into
a kernel machine (e.g., support vector machine). Kernel
functions remove the need of learning node embeddings
in high dimensions, and enable us to operate in a high
dimensional feature space by simply computing the kernel value in the low-dimensional feature space, which is
more computationally efficient than computing in the highdimensional space directly. Because of the empirical success of kernel-based methods and the increasing availability
of graph-structured datasets, numerous graph kernel meth-

Introduction
In recent years, the machine learning research community
has devoted substantial energy to applying graph neural
networks (GNNs) to numerous downstream graph-related
tasks (Ying et al. 2018; Kipf and Welling 2016; Zhang
and Chen 2018; Chen, Li, and Bruna 2017). Considering
graph-structured tasks, the commonalities between different variants of GNNs are Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al. 2017). MPNNs consist of two
stages, including neighborhood aggregation and graph-level
readout. Specifically, for neighborhood aggregation, there
are three steps for each node to generate embeddings: (1)
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6614

