The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AutoCFR: Learning to Design Counterfactual Regret Minimization Algorithms
Hang Xu1,2∗ , Kai Li1,2∗ , Haobo Fu4 , Qiang Fu4 , Junliang Xing1,2,3†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tsinghua University 4 Tencent AI Lab
{xuhang2020, kai.li}@ia.ac.cn, {haobofu, leonfu}@tencent.com, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) is the most commonly used algorithm to approximately solving two-player
zero-sum imperfect-information games (IIGs). In recent years, a series of novel CFR variants such as CFR+, Linear CFR, DCFR have been proposed and have significantly improved the convergence rate of the vanilla CFR. However, most of these new variants are hand-designed by researchers through trial and error based on different motivations, which generally requires a tremendous amount of efforts and insights. This work proposes to meta-learn novel
CFR algorithms through evolution to ease the burden of manual algorithm design. We first design a search language that
is rich enough to represent many existing hand-designed CFR
variants. We then exploit a scalable regularized evolution algorithm with a bag of acceleration techniques to efficiently
search over the combinatorial space of algorithms defined by
this language. The learned novel CFR algorithm can generalize to new IIGs not seen during training and performs on par
with or better than existing state-of-the-art CFR variants. The
code is available at https://github.com/rpSebastian/AutoCFR.

Figure 1: Convergence speed of four CFR-type algorithms
and our learned one in four games. Different CFR-type algorithms perform distinctively in these games. Our framework
learns a new CFR variant performing consistently well.

Introduction
Games in extensive form provide a mathematical framework
for modeling sequential decision-making problems with
imperfect information. Solving such imperfect-information
games (IIGs) requires reasoning under uncertainty about the
opponents’ hidden information. The hidden information is
omnipresent in real-world strategic interactions, such as negotiation, business, and security, making the research on IIGs crucial both theoretically and practically.
In this work, we focus on solving two-player zero-sum
IIGs. For these games, the common goal is to find an (approximate) Nash equilibrium (NE) (Nash 1950) in which no
player can improve by deviating from this equilibrium. As
a popular method of computing NE, counterfactual regret
minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al. 2007) has attracted extensive attention due to its sound theoretical guarantee and
strong empirical performance. CFR iteratively minimizes
the regrets of both players so that the time-averaged strategy gradually approximates the NE. Over the past decade,

many novel CFR variants have been proposed (Tammelin
2014; Brown and Sandholm 2019; Li et al. 2020; Farina
et al. 2019) with faster convergence than the vanilla CFR.
For example, CFR+ (Tammelin 2014; Bowling et al. 2015)
was the key to solve the heads-up limit Texas Hold’em poker. Discount CFR (DCFR) (Brown and Sandholm 2019) is
a family of algorithms that assigns more weights to the later iterations and obtains competitive performance compared
with other CFR variants. Linear CFR (Brown and Sandholm
2019; Brown et al. 2019) is a simplified version of DCFR
and performs well in practice.
Despite the great success of CFR and its existing variants,
most of them are hand-designed by researchers based on different motivations, which usually requires a lot of efforts
and insights. CFR-type algorithms have many design choices, e.g., regrets accumulation, average strategy calculation,
etc. Therefore, it is difficult to systematically consider the
space of all CFR variants to design effective ones that can
efficiently solve across a wide variety of IIGs. As shown in
Figure 1, it is clear that CFR variants perform differently
in various IIGs, and no one performs consistently well in

∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5244

