The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

DDG-DA: Data Distribution Generation for Predictable Concept Drift Adaptation
Wendi Li1,2 * , Xiao Yang2 * , Weiqing Liu2 , Yingce Xia2 , Jiang Bian2
1

University of Wisconsin–Madison
2
Microsoft Research
Wendi.Li@wisc.edu, {Xiao.Yang, Weiqing.Liu, Yingce.Xia, Jiang.Bian}@microsoft.com

Historical data

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, we often deal with streaming
data that is sequentially collected over time. Due to the nonstationary nature of the environment, the streaming data distribution may change in unpredictable ways, which is known
as concept drift. To handle concept drift, previous methods
first detect when/where the concept drift happens and then
adapt models to fit the distribution of the latest data. However, there are still many cases that some underlying factors
of environment evolution are predictable, making it possible
to model the future concept drift trend of the streaming data,
while such cases are not fully explored in previous work. In
this paper, we propose a novel method DDG-DA, that can
effectively forecast the evolution of data distribution and improve the performance of models. Specifically, we first train
a predictor to estimate the future data distribution, then leverage it to generate training samples, and finally train models
on the generated data. We conduct experiments on three realworld tasks (forecasting on stock price trend, electricity load
and solar irradiance) and obtain significant improvement on
multiple widely-used models.

Unseen data

Figure 1: An example of concept drifts on streaming data.
Triangle and circle represent two classes of data. Data comes
like a stream. The data distribution changes over time.

expectedly and it is unpredictable (Gama et al. 2014) for
streaming data.
To handle concept drift, previous studies usually leverage
a two-step approach. Particularly, the first step is detecting
the occurrence of concept drift in the streaming data, followed by the second step, if concept drift does occur, which
adapts the model with new coming data by training a new
model purely with latest data or making an ensemble between the new model with the current one, or fine-tuning the
current model with latest data (Lu et al. 2018). Most of these
studies share the same assumption that the latest data contains more useful information w.r.t. the upcoming streaming
data (Zhao, Cai, and Zhou 2020), and thus the detection of
concept drift and following model adaptation is mainly applied to the latest data.
Therefore, existing methods for handling concept drift
will detect concept drift on the latest arrived data Data(t)
at timestamp t and adapt the forecasting model accordingly. The concept drift continues, and the adapted model
on Data(t) will be used on unseen streaming data in the future (e.g., Data(t+1) ). The previous model adaptation has
a one-step delay to the concept drift of upcoming streaming
data, which means a new concept drift has occurred between
timestamp t and t + 1.
Nevertheless, apart from detecting unexpectedly occurred
concept drift, most of the existing studies paid less attention to the scenarios that concept drift evolves in a gradual
nonrandom way, which are in fact more common in streaming data. In Figure 2, we visualize the trace of concept drift
in streaming data on three real-world tasks: forecasting on

Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have been widely applied to
many real-world applications. One of the foundations of its
success lies in assuming that the data is independent and
identically distributed (briefly, the i.i.d. assumption). However, such an assumption is not always true for those learning tasks under broadly existing scenarios with streaming
data. In a typical learning task over streaming data, as shown
in Figure 1, the data comes in a sequential mode, meaning that, at any timestamp t, the learning task can only
observe the new coming information, i.e., Data(t) , in addition to historical ones, i.e., Data(t−1) , Data(t−2) , · · · ,
Data(1) . The goal of the task is usually to predict a certain
target related to Data(t+1) . Due to the non-stationary nature
of the real-world environment, the data distribution could
keep changing with continuous data streaming. Such a phenomenon/problem is called concept drift (Lu et al. 2018),
where the basic assumption is that concept drift happens un* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4092

