The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Beyond Shared Subspace: A View-Specific Fusion for
Multi-View Multi-Label Learning
Gengyu Lyu* , Xiang Deng* , Yanan Wu, Songhe Feng†
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
{18112030, 20120346, 19112034, shfeng}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In multi-view multi-label learning (MVML), each instance
is described by several heterogeneous feature representations
and associated with multiple valid labels simultaneously. Although diverse MVML methods have been proposed over
the last decade, most previous studies focus on leveraging
the shared subspace across different views to represent the
multi-view consensus information, while it is still an open issue whether such shared subspace representation is necessary
when formulating the desired MVML model. In this paper,
we propose a DeepGCN based View-Specific MVML method
(D-VSM) which can bypass seeking for the shared subspace
representation, and instead directly encoding the feature representation of each individual view through the deep GCN
to couple with the information derived from the other views.
Specifically, we first construct all instances under different
feature representations into the corresponding feature graphs
respectively, and then integrate them into a unified graph by
integrating the different feature representations of each instance. Afterwards, the graph attention mechanism is adopted
to aggregate and update all nodes on the unified graph to form
structural representation for each instance, where both intraview correlations and inter-view alignments have been jointly
encoded to discover the underlying semantic relations. Finally, we derive a label confidence score for each instance by
averaging the label confidence of its different feature representations with the multi-label soft margin loss. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that our proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: An exemplar of multi-view multi-label learning.
labels (comedy movie, America, Mark Cendrowski), MVML
provides an effective framework to learn from such complicate data and predicts proper labels for unseen instances.
The main challenge to deal with multi-view data lies in
how to integrate the multiple types of heterogeneities in an
efficient way. A general practice is to learn a shared subspace representation to excavate and exploit the consensus
and complementary information among different views. For
example, (Liu et al. 2015) employs matrix factorization to
seek a shared low-dimensional representation, which further
strengthens the complementarities across different views by
considering the different contributions of multiple views’ reconstruction. (Zhang et al. 2018) also learns a shared subspace representation under matrix factorization framework,
and it simultaneously employs Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion to further remain the consensus on the shared
representation. Although the above methods have achieved
competitive performance in many MVML tasks, they suffer
from the limitation of shared subspace inevitably, i.e., it is
hard for a single shared subspace to fully capture the global
structure of multi-view data and comprehensively characterize all the relevant labels, without exploring the distinctive
information hidden in individual views.
To tackle the above issue, in this paper, we bypass the
shared subspace strategy and propose a DeepGCN based
View-Specific MVML method named D-VSM, where each
individual view fused with other views’ complementarities
can directly contribute to the final discriminative model.
Specifically, we first construct all instances under different views into different feature graphs respectively, i.e.,

Introduction
Multi-View Multi-Label learning (MVML) learns from the
training data, where each instance is represented by several
heterogeneous feature representations and associated with
multiple valid labels simultaneously (Luo et al. 2013; Liu
et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018; Tan, Yu, and Wang 2019).
Recently, such learning paradigm has been widely used in
many real-world applications. For example, in film classification (Figure 1), given the film of The Big Bang Theory,
which is represented by diverse channel information (audio,
cover picture, text description) and annotated with multiple
* Gengyu Lyu and Xiang Deng have equal contributions.
†

Songhe Feng is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7647

