The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Theoretical Guarantees of Fictitious Discount Algorithms for Episodic
Reinforcement Learning and Global Convergence of Policy Gradient Methods
Xin Guo1,2 , Anran Hu1 , Junzi Zhang2 *
1

University of California, Berkeley
2
Amazon.com
xinguo@berkeley.edu, anran hu@berkeley.edu, junziz@amazon.com

Abstract

costs. Theoretically, fictitious discount algorithms designed
for average reward MDPs have been analyzed (Marbach
1998; Marbach and Tsitsiklis 2001) and the asymptotic local
convergence1 has been established (Marbach and Tsitsiklis
2003).
It remains open, however, to establish the non-asymptotic
global convergence for this fictitious-discount-factor approach in the finite-time-horizon framework. The major
challenges are to characterize the bias introduced by the discount factor, and to close the gap between the non-stationary
optimal policies for finite-time-horizon MDPs and the stationary algorithm policies.
This paper takes the first steps towards rigorously analyzing the global and non-asymptotic convergence of fictitious discount algorithms for finite-time-horizon episodic
reinforcement learning. It focuses on the convergence analysis of two concrete algorithms in the context of policy gradient methods. The first one is a widely used variant of the
vanilla policy gradient (VPG) method with discounted advantage estimations (DAE). This variant was originally proposed for average reward problems (Marbach 1998; Baxter and Bartlett 1999, 2001; Marbach and Tsitsiklis 2001),
later extended to episodic deep reinforcement learning setting (Schulman et al. 2015b) and implemented in popular
solvers such as Spinning Up (Achiam 2018). The second one
is a new doubly discounted variant of VPG, with the introduction of an additional fictitious discount factor in the score
functions of the policy gradient estimators. This additional
discount factor is shown to help reduce the bias in DAE and
thus improve asymptotically the algorithm convergence.

When designing algorithms for finite-time-horizon episodic
reinforcement learning problems, a common approach is to
introduce a fictitious discount factor and use stationary policies for approximations. Empirically, it has been shown that
the fictitious discount factor helps reduce variance, and stationary policies serve to save the per-iteration computational
cost. Theoretically, however, there is no existing work on
convergence analysis for algorithms with this fictitious discount recipe. This paper takes the first step towards analyzing these algorithms. It focuses on two vanilla policy gradient (VPG) variants: the first being a widely used variant with
discounted advantage estimations (DAE), the second with an
additional fictitious discount factor in the score functions of
the policy gradient estimators. Non-asymptotic convergence
guarantees are established for both algorithms, and the additional discount factor is shown to reduce the bias introduced
in DAE and thus improve the algorithm convergence asymptotically. A key ingredient of our analysis is to connect three
settings of Markov decision processes (MDPs): the finitetime-horizon, the average reward and the discounted settings.
To our best knowledge, this is the first theoretical guarantee
on fictitious discount algorithms for the episodic reinforcement learning of finite-time-horizon MDPs, which also leads
to the (first) global convergence of policy gradient methods
for finite-time-horizon episodic reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

This paper studies episodic reinforcement learning with each
episode consisting of a finite-time-horizon Markov decision
process (MDP). For such finite-time-horizon episodic reinforcement learning problems, a popular heuristic approach
is to introduce a fictitious discount factor and use stationary policies when designing algorithms; see for instance, the
renowned DQN (Mnih et al. 2015), DDPG (Lillicrap et al.
2015), and recent works of (François-Lavet, Fonteneau, and
Ernst 2015; Xu, van Hasselt, and Silver 2018; Burda et al.
2018; Hessel et al. 2018; Fedus et al. 2019; Tessler and Mannor 2020).
Empirically, it has been shown that discount factors serve
to reduce variance (Thomas 2014; Haarnoja et al. 2017),
and stationary policies help save per-iteration computational

Our approach. There are three main ingredients in our
analysis. The first is establishing quantitative connections
among three settings of MDPs: the finite-time-horizon, the
average award, and the discounted settings (cf. §2). These
relations enable us to connect the finite-time-horizon suboptimality gap with the average reward (cf. Theorem 14) and
the discounted (cf. Theorem 18) ones. The second is utilizing the convergence property of value iteration algorithms to
analyze the gap between the stationary policies of the average reward MDPs and the non-stationary optimal policies of
1

In this paper, “local convergence” indicates convergence to stationary points of value functions, and “global convergence” means
convergence in terms of the value function sub-optimality gaps.

* Work done prior to joining or outside of Amazon.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6774

