The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Imagine by Reasoning: A Reasoning-Based Implicit Semantic Data Augmentation
for Long-Tailed Classification
Xiaohua Chen1,2 , Yucan Zhou1 * , Dayan Wu1 ,
Wanqian Zhang1 , Yu Zhou1 , Bo Li1,2 , Weiping Wang1,2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{chenxiaohua, zhouyucan, wudayan, zhangwanqian, zhouyu, libo, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn
2

Abstract

Similar
Classes

Real-world data often follows a long-tailed distribution,
which makes the performance of existing classification algorithms degrade heavily. A key issue is that samples in tail categories fail to depict their intra-class diversity. Humans can
imagine a sample in new poses, scenes, and view angles with
their prior knowledge even if it is the first time to see this category. Inspired by this, we propose a novel reasoning-based
implicit semantic data augmentation method to borrow transformation directions from other classes. Since the covariance
matrix of each category represents the feature transformation
directions, we can sample new directions from similar categories to generate definitely different instances. Specifically,
the long-tailed distributed data is first adopted to train a backbone and a classifier. Then, a covariance matrix for each category is estimated, and a knowledge graph is constructed to
store the relations of any two categories. Finally, tail samples
are adaptively enhanced via propagating information from all
the similar categories in the knowledge graph. Experimental
results on CIFAR-100-LT, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist 2018
have demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed method
compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

Sparrow

Parrot

Changing Background
Kingfisher

+ Prior Knowledge

Imagine

Augmented
Kingfisher

Figure 1: An illustration of imagining new samples by reasoning. people can imagine a kingfisher in various view angles, poses, and backgrounds with their prior knowledge.

categories by assigning higher penalties to the loss of tail
classes. Although these methods can alleviate hyperplane
skewness, over-fitting on tail categories is still a big issue
because of the limited intra-class diversity.
Data augmentation is an efficient way to enrich tail categories, where cropping, rotation, mixup, and generative
adversarial network are adopted to generate new samples
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2015; He et al. 2016; Ratner
et al. 2017; Bowles et al. 2018). Nevertheless, with the increasing number of augmented examples, the training speed
is sharply slowed down. Fortunately, ISDA (Wang et al.
2019) propose an instance-based implicit data augmentation
method to reduce the computation cost, where new instances
can be generated by changing the original instance to semantic transformation directions sampled from the feature
covariance matrix. However, for tail classes, it is incapable
to estimate a diversified covariance matrix (Li et al. 2021).
We argue that humans can imagine a rare animal in different poses, colors, and backgrounds with prior knowledge,
though we have only seen one picture of this animal. For
instance (shown in Figure ??), as “Kingfisher” is similar to
“Sparrow” in humans’ prior knowledge, we can easily imagine a “Kingfisher” with an open mouth when we have seen a
“Sparrow” with an open mouth. Inspired by this, tail classes
can borrow semantic transformations from other classes.
In this paper, in order to mimic the human reasoning pro-

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved dramatic performance
when high-quality annotated and balance-distributed training data is provided (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017). However, in realworld scenarios, data is usually long-tail distributed, where
many tail categories occupy a small number of samples and
most samples belong to a few head categories. It is a great
challenge to train deep models on long-tail distributed data.
On the one hand, the separating hyperplane will be heavily
skewed to the tail classes because of their weak statistical
ability. More importantly, tail classes are easily overfitted as
their samples fail to describe their intra-class diversity.
To strengthen the effect of tail classes in training, a typical and intuitive strategy is re-balancing, including data resampling and loss re-weighting. Data re-sampling achieves
training fairness by balancing the data distribution through
sampling, while loss re-weighting pays more attention to tail
* Yucan Zhou is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

356

