The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Distribution Aware VoteNet for 3D Object Detection
Junxiong Liang∗ , Pei An∗ , Jie Ma†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{liangjunxiong, anpei, majie}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Occlusion is common in the actual 3D scenes, causing the
boundary ambiguity of the targeted object. This uncertainty
brings difficulty for labeling and learning. Current 3D detectors predict the bounding box directly, regarding it as Dirac
delta distribution. However, it does not fully consider such
ambiguity. To deal with it, distribution learning is used to efficiently represent the boundary ambiguity. In this paper, we
revise the common regression method by predicting the distribution of the 3D box and then present a distribution-aware
regression (DAR) module for box refinement and localization quality estimation. It contains scale adaptive (SA) encoder and joint localization quality estimator (JLQE). With
the adaptive receptive field, SA encoder refines discriminative
features for precise distribution learning. JLQE provides a reliable location score by further leveraging the distribution statistics, correlating with the localization quality of the targeted object. Combining DAR module and the baseline VoteNet,
we propose a novel 3D detector called DAVNet. Extensive
experiments on both ScanNet V2 and SUN RGB-D datasets
demonstrate that the proposed DAVNet achieves significant
improvement and outperforms state-of-the-art 3D detectors.

Figure 1: Occlusion is common in 3D scenes. (a) The boundary of a partly-seen object is ambiguous. (b)The ground truth
size of the same object may be different due to the occlusion.

Introduction
3D object detection has a pivotal role in the field of robotic
scene perception. Current 3D detectors (Qi et al. 2019; Shi,
Wang, and Li 2019) have made progress these years. However, they regress 3D bounding box directly, limited in Dirac
delta distribution. They do not fully consider the label ambiguity of the occluded object. Occlusion is common in the
3D scene. As shown in Figure 1 (a), we can hardly confirm the size of a partly seen object. The position and the size
of an incomplete target tend to be ambiguous even though
they were manually labeled. Dirac delta distribution fails to
represent such uncertainty.
To solve the label ambiguity, some researchers made efforts in the 2D domain (He et al. 2019). GFocalLoss (Li
et al. 2020b) has confirmed the effectiveness of distribution
representation for box boundary. It predicts the general distribution of the distance between the anchor point and four

boundaries. However, it is unsuitable for 3D object detection
for the inconsistency with the common 3D box representation. Most 3D detectors regress the residual offset of the center, size, and orientation. Hence, we keep this representation
method and learn the distribution of the offsets above (see
Figure 2). We design distribution aware regression (DAR)
module for precise boundary perception.
For accurate distribution prediction, we aim to improve
the procedure of feature extraction. VoteNet (Qi et al. 2019)
proposed an approach for proposal generation by predicting
the corresponding center of each point. Nevertheless, it used
a fixed region for set abstraction, which is unsuitable for objects of different sizes. The vote point remains a certain distance from the center when the voting step brings unsatisfactory prediction, especially for the large object (see Figure 3
(a)). A fixed region brings unbalanced pooling quality to different categories. Besides, the set abstraction performance
heavily depends on the voting accuracy. To avoid such concerns, we adopt scale adaptive (SA) encoder to re-pooling
the features with a rough 3D proposal. According to the pri-

∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1583

