The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

AutoGCL: Automated Graph Contrastive Learning via
Learnable View Generators
Yihang Yin1 , Qingzhong Wang2 , Siyu Huang3 , Haoyi Xiong2 , Xiang Zhang4
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Baidu Research
3
Harvard University
4
The Pennsylvania State University
yyin009@e.ntu.edu.sg, wangqingzhong@baidu.com, huang@seas.harvard.edu, xionghaoyi@baidu.com, xzz89@psu.edu
Abstract

on a high volume of fine-annotated data. However, labeling graph data requests a huge amount of effort from professional annotators with domain knowledge. To alleviate
this issue, GAE (Kipf and Welling 2016b) and GraphSAGE
(Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) have been proposed to
exploit a naive unsupervised pretraining strategy that reconstructs the vertex adjacency information. Some recent works
(Hu et al. 2019; You et al. 2020b) introduce self-supervised
pretraining strategies to GNNs which further improve the
generalization performance.
More recently, with developments of contrastive multiview learning in computer vision (Tian, Krishnan, and Isola
2019; He et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020a) and natural language processing (Logeswaran and Lee 2018; Yang et al.
2019), some self-supervised pretraining approaches perform
as good as (or even better than) supervised methods. In general, contrastive methods generate training views using data
augmentations, where views of the same (positive pairs) input are concentrated in the representation space with views
of different inputs (negative pairs) pushed apart. To work on
graphs, DGI (Veličković et al. 2018) has been proposed to
treat both graph-level and node-level representations of the
same graph as positive pairs, pursuing consistent representations from local and global features. CMRLG (Hassani and
Khasahmadi 2020) achieves a similar goal by grouping adjacency matrix (local features) and its diffusion matrix (global
features) as positive pairs. GCA (Zhu et al. 2020b) generates the positive view pairs through sub-graph sampling with
the structure priors with node attributes randomly masked.
GraphCL (You et al. 2020a) offers even more strategies for
augmentations, such as node dropping and edge perturbation. While above attempts incorporate contrastive learning
into graphs, they usually fail to generate views with respect
to the semantic of original graphs or adapt augmentation
policies to specific graph learning tasks.
Blessed by the invariance of image semantics under various transformation, image data augmentation has been
widely used (Cubuk et al. 2019) to generative contrastive
views. However, the use of graph data augmentation might
be ineffective here, as transformations on a graph might
severely disrupt its semantics and properties for learning. In
the meanwhile, InfoMin (Tian et al. 2020) improves contrastive learning for vision tasks and proposes to replace image data augmentation with a flow-based generative model

Contrastive learning has been widely applied to graph representation learning, where the view generators play a vital role in generating effective contrastive samples. Most of
the existing contrastive learning methods employ pre-defined
view generation methods, e.g., node drop or edge perturbation, which usually cannot adapt to input data or preserve
the original semantic structures well. To address this issue,
we propose a novel framework named Automated Graph
Contrastive Learning (AutoGCL) in this paper. Specifically,
AutoGCL employs a set of learnable graph view generators orchestrated by an auto augmentation strategy, where every graph view generator learns a probability distribution of
graphs conditioned by the input. While the graph view generators in AutoGCL preserve the most representative structures
of the original graph in generation of every contrastive sample, the auto augmentation learns policies to introduce adequate augmentation variances in the whole contrastive learning procedure. Furthermore, AutoGCL adopts a joint training strategy to train the learnable view generators, the graph
encoder, and the classifier in an end-to-end manner, resulting in topological heterogeneity yet semantic similarity in the
generation of contrastive samples. Extensive experiments on
semi-supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and transfer
learning demonstrate the superiority of our AutoGCL framework over the state-of-the-arts in graph contrastive learning.
In addition, the visualization results further confirm that the
learnable view generators can deliver more compact and semantically meaningful contrastive samples compared against
the existing view generation methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Somedaywilldo/AutoGCL.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2016a;
Veličković et al. 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Xu et al. 2018) are gaining increasing attention in the realm
of graph representation learning. By generally following a
recursive neighborhood aggregation scheme, GNNs have
shown impressive representational power in various domains, such as point clouds (Shi and Rajkumar 2020), social
networks (Fan et al. 2019), chemical analysis (De Cao and
Kipf 2018), and so on. Most of the existing GNN models
are trained in an end-to-end supervised fashion, which relies
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8892

