The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Panini-Net: GAN Prior Based Degradation-Aware Feature Interpolation
for Face Restoration
Yinhuai Wang1 , Yujie Hu1 , Jian Zhang1,2
1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{yinhuai; hhuyujie}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

low dimension of latent space and its poor spatial expression capability, these methods are often unable to fully capture the facial structures of the degraded face image, which
usually manifests as identity inconsistency.
To further capture the facial structural information of
the degraded face image while preserving the realness contributed by GAN Prior, some methods (Chan et al. 2021;
Yang et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021b) not only encode the degraded face image into the latent space but also fuse external
features (e.g., features extracted from the degraded face image) with the GAN Prior features. These methods achieve
significant improvements in identity consistency than previous GAN Prior based FR methods. However, they don’t provide an explicit design for degradation-aware feature fusion
and consequently result in inadequate robustness in visual
quality when facing different degradation levels.
Inspired by recent progress in contrastive learning (He
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020c,a,b) and visual attention (Hu,
Shen, and Sun 2018; Woo et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2021a), an unsupervised degradation representation
learning (UDRL) strategy has been proposed in this paper
to pre-train a degradation representation encoder (DRE).
DRE extracts the degradation representations (DR) of input degraded images, regarded as a global condition to
guide the restoration process. In addition, we propose a
novel degradation-aware feature interpolation (DAFI) module, which can dynamically fuse the features (i.e., features
of GAN Prior and features extracted from the degraded face
image) according to DR.
Further, we propose a novel network to integrate these designs for FR tasks. As the idea of selecting and fusing different sources of features is interestingly similar to the way
of making a panini, we dubbed our network as Panini-Net.
For instance, the degraded face image usually contains abundant valid information when suffering from mild degradation. Then, our Panini-Net will increase the fusion proportion of degraded image features while reducing the fusion
proportion of GAN Prior features. The degraded face image
usually lacks valid information when the degradation is severe. Then, Panini-Net will decrease the fusion proportion
of degraded image features while increasing the proportion
of GAN Prior features. Besides, the proposed DAFI shows
some interesting attributes. In our experiments and ablation
studies, DAFI performs better in details compared with nor-

Emerging high-quality face restoration (FR) methods often
utilize pre-trained GAN models (i.e., StyleGAN2) as GAN
Prior. However, these methods usually struggle to balance realness and fidelity when facing various degradation levels.
Besides, there is still a noticeable visual quality gap compared
with pre-trained GAN models. In this paper, we propose a
novel GAN Prior based degradation-aware feature interpolation network, dubbed Panini-Net, for FR tasks by explicitly learning the abstract representations to distinguish various degradations. Specifically, an unsupervised degradation
representation learning (UDRL) strategy is first developed
to extract degradation representations (DR) of the input degraded images. Then, a degradation-aware feature interpolation (DAFI) module is proposed to dynamically fuse the two
types of informative features (i.e., features from input images
and features from GAN Prior) with flexible adaption to various degradations based on DR. Ablation studies reveal the
working mechanism of DAFI and its potential for editable
FR. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our Panini-Net
achieves state-of-the-art performance for multi-degradation
face restoration and face super-resolution. The source code
is available at https://github.com/jianzhangcs/panini.

Introduction
Face restoration (FR) is typically an ill-posed image inverse problem, especially under high-degradation or multidegradation (e.g., downsampling, noise, blur, and compression) cases. Traditional deep network-based methods often
utilize a single model for end-to-end training (Wang et al.
2018; Yang et al. 2020), which can well grasp the overall
structure but lack the richness of details.
Due to the excellent performance of GAN models in recent years (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Karras et al. 2020,
2018), some methods (Menon et al. 2020; Richardson et al.
2021) begin to use pre-trained GAN models as GAN Prior
for FR tasks. These methods take advantage of the rich
details implicitly encapsulated in GAN Prior by encoding
the degraded face image into the latent space of pre-trained
GAN. Although high visual quality is achieved, due to the
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This work was supported in part by Shenzhen Fundamental Research Program (No.GXWD2020123116580700720200807164903001). Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.

2576

