The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Learning from the Tangram to Solve Mini Visual Tasks
Yizhou Zhao1 , Liang Qiu1 , Pan Lu1 , Feng Shi1 , Tian Han2 , Song-Chun Zhu1
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
2
Stevens Institute of Technology
yizhouzhao@g.ucla.edu

Abstract
Current pre-training methods in computer vision focus on
natural images in the daily-life context. However, abstract diagrams such as icons and symbols are common and important
in the real world. This work is inspired by Tangram, a game
that requires replicating an abstract pattern from seven dissected shapes. By recording human experience in solving tangram puzzles, we present the Tangram dataset and show that
a pre-trained neural model on the Tangram helps solve some
mini visual tasks based on low-resolution vision. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our proposed method generates
intelligent solutions for aesthetic tasks such as folding clothes
and evaluating room layouts. The pre-trained feature extractor can facilitate the convergence of few-shot learning tasks
on human handwriting and improve the accuracy in identifying icons by their contours. The Tangram dataset is available
at https://github.com/yizhouzhao/Tangram.

Figure 1: The left panel shows the square representation of
the Tangram that consists of five triangles of three sizes, one
parallelogram and one square. The right panel shows some
tangram puzzles: a bird, the letter M and a sailboat.

Introduction
As many vision tasks are relevant, one would expect a
model, particularly pre-trained from one dataset, to assist
a different challenge. Traditionally, supervised pre-training
on image classification has been employed to help object detection (Shinya, Simo-Serra, and Suzuki 2019) and semantic
parsing (Orsic et al. 2019). Moreover, popular unsupervised
pre-training has recently produced remarkable results in visual tasks such as image classification (Chen et al. 2020a)
and clustering (Chakraborty, Gosthipaty, and Paul 2020).
The common datasets to train basic models include PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al. 2010), ImageNet (Deng et al.
2009), and COCO (Lin et al. 2014), all of which contain
photographs.
It is natural to start the pre-training process from real-life
images to solve daily vision tasks. However, one of the underlying limitations of current works is their focus on content from natural images. Besides natural images, abstract
diagrams, such as texts, symbols, and signs, also carry rich
visual semantics and account for a large part of the visual
world. For instance, it is shown that emojis can express rich
human sentiments (Felbo et al. 2017), and diagrams like
icons can map the physical worlds into symbolic and aesthetic representations (Lagunas, Garces, and Gutierrez 2019;

Madan et al. 2018; Karamatsu et al. 2020). Furthermore,
most of the tasks related to natural images can be accomplished by low-resolution vision (Land and Nilsson 2012)
(see Figure 2). Therefore, training an enormous backbone
(e.g., a deep residual network (He et al. 2016)) to solve tasks
related to abstract diagrams complicates the problem.
In this paper, we argue that we can solve the tasks related
to abstract diagrams by learning from the process of replicating a tangram puzzle. The tangram, a dissection puzzle
consisting of seven planar polygons (tans), is world-famous
and has been used for many purposes, including art, design,
and education. Although it only consists of seven tans, it can
generate thousands of meaningful patterns such as animals,
buildings, letters, and numbers. Solving a tangram puzzle
associates with our cognitive and imaginative abilities.
We introduce the Tangram, a new dataset consisting of
more than 10, 000 snapshots recording the steps to solve a
total number of 388 tangram puzzles. A neural model can be
pre-trained from the Tangram to solve two groups of downstream tasks.
The first group is about aesthetics. We introduce two toy
tasks: folding clothes and organizing furniture (room layouts). Tuning the pre-trained network from several expert

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3490

