The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Dynamic Key-Value Memory Enhanced Multi-Step Graph Reasoning for
Knowledge-Based Visual Question Answering
Mingxiao Li1 , Marie-Francine Moens1
1

KU Leuven
mingxiao.li@kuleuven.be, sien.moens@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) is a
vision-language task that requires an agent to correctly answer image-related questions using knowledge that is not presented in the given image. It is not only a more challenging
task than regular VQA but also a vital step towards building a
general VQA system. Most existing knowledge-based VQA
systems process knowledge and image information similarly
and ignore the fact that the knowledge base (KB) contains
complete information about a triplet, while the extracted image information might be incomplete as the relations between
two objects are missing or wrongly detected. In this paper, we
propose a novel model named dynamic knowledge memory
enhanced multi-step graph reasoning (DMMGR), which performs explicit and implicit reasoning over a key-value knowledge memory module and a spatial-aware image graph, respectively. Specifically, the memory module learns a dynamic
knowledge representation and generates a knowledge-aware
question representation at each reasoning step. Then, this representation is used to guide a graph attention operator over
the spatial-aware image graph. Our model achieves new stateof-the-art accuracy on the KRVQR and FVQA datasets. We
also conduct ablation experiments to prove the effectiveness
of each component of the proposed model.

Figure 1: Two examples taken from the KRVQR dataset. To
correctly answer the question in the image, the model should
be able to utilize supporting facts which cannot be seen in
the image.

To bridge this gap between human behavior and current
VQA models, several knowledge-based VQA datasets have
been proposed. Wang et al. (2017) introduced the ”factbased VQA (FVQA)” task and developed the first KVQA
dataset containing images, questions with answers and a
knowledge base (KB) of fact triplets extracted from different sources including ConceptNET (Speer, Chin, and Havasi
2017), WebChild (Tandon et al. 2014) and DBPedia (Auer
et al. 2007). Recently, Cao et al. (2021) introduced the
first large-scale knowledge-based VQA dataset: Knowledgerouted VQA (KRVQR) that contains a KB for answering
the questions. In this work, we mainly focus on the KRVQR
dataset and also test our model on the FVQA dataset. Other
VQA datasets that require external knowledge exist (Marino
et al. 2019; Jain et al. 2021) but here the task is to search for
external knowledge, which is not the scope of this work.
Graph-based approaches (Narasimhan, Lazebnik, and
Schwing 2018; Zhu et al. 2020) have achieved successes
in the field of knowledge VQA. They use one or several
graphs to represent the information sources and conduct
cross-graph learning or different fusion methods to infer the
answer to the given question. However, they either suffer
from the drawbacks of ignoring the dynamics of multi-step

Introduction
Over the past few years, the domain of visual question answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015) has attracted great attention and witnessed significant progress (Antol et al. 2015;
Lu et al. 2016; Hudson and Manning 2019). However, most
VQA models cannot answer questions that require external
knowledge beyond what is provided in the image. Considering the top example in Figure 1, the question is ”What
is the relation between the object that belongs to the category of eukaryotes and the fork in the image?”. To correctly answer this question, it is necessary to both understand the visible content in the image and incorporate the
external knowledge that a cucumber belongs to the biological category of eukaryotes. When facing such challenging
questions, we humans can easily combine the image content
with general knowledge that is required for answering this
question, while many current VQA models fail due to their
incapability to utilize external knowledge.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10983

