The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Hard to Forget: Poisoning Attacks on Certified Machine Unlearning
Neil G. Marchant,1 Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein,1 Scott Alfeld2
1

School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science, Amherst College, Amherst, MA, USA
nmarchant@unimelb.edu.au, brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au, salfeld@amherst.edu

Abstract

Naı̈vely erasing data from a model by full retraining can
be computationally costly. This has motivated the recent
study of machine unlearning: how to efficiently undo the
impact of data on a model. Guo et al. (2020) develop an approximate update which is 3 orders of magnitude faster than
retraining, or supporting up to 10,000 approximate updates
before retraining is required, with only a small drop in accuracy. Ginart et al. (2019) find a 100× improvement in deletion efficiency with comparable clustering quality. Theoretical investigations has led to guarantees on privacy (indistinguishability of unlearned models with retrained models), but
have largely ignored computation cost.
In an adversarial setting where risks to privacy motivate
unlearning, we advocate that computation should also be
viewed under an adversarial lens. While the aforementioned
empirical results paint an optimistic picture for machine unlearning, such work assumes passive users who are trusted:
they work within provided APIs, but also don’t attempt to
harm system performance in any way. In this paper we consider an active adversary as is more typical in the adversarial
learning field (Huang et al. 2011). Users in this work can issue strategically chosen data for learning, and then request
their data be unlearned. We adopt a typical threat model
where users may apply a bounded perturbation to their (natural) data. Boundedness is motivated by a desire to remain
undetected. Under this threat model we identify a new vulnerability: poisoning attacks that effectively slow down
unlearning.
We highlight several perspectives on our results. They call
into question the extent to which unlearning improves performance over full retraining which achieves complete indistinguishability. Our work highlights the risk of deploying approximate unlearning algorithms with data-dependent running times. And more broadly we show that data poisoning
can harm computation beyond only accuracy—analogous to
conventional denial-of-service attacks.

The right to erasure requires removal of a user’s information
from data held by organizations, with rigorous interpretations
extending to downstream products such as learned models.
Retraining from scratch with the particular user’s data omitted fully removes its influence on the resulting model, but
comes with a high computational cost. Machine “unlearning”
mitigates the cost incurred by full retraining: instead, models are updated incrementally, possibly only requiring retraining when approximation errors accumulate. Rapid progress
has been made towards privacy guarantees on the indistinguishability of unlearned and retrained models, but current
formalisms do not place practical bounds on computation. In
this paper we demonstrate how an attacker can exploit this
oversight, highlighting a novel attack surface introduced by
machine unlearning. We consider an attacker aiming to increase the computational cost of data removal. We derive and
empirically investigate a poisoning attack on certified machine unlearning where strategically designed training data
triggers complete retraining when removed.

1

Introduction

Much of modern machine learning has been advanced by the
availability of large volumes of data. However, organizations
that collect user data must comply with data protection regulations and often prioritize privacy to mitigate risk of civil
litigation and reputational damage. Prominent regulations—
i.e., GDPR (Council of the EU 2016) and CCPA (California State Legislature 2018)—encode a right to erasure—
organizations must “erase personal data without undue delay” when requested. When tested, such regulations have
been found to extend to products derived from personal data,
including trained models (Federal Trade Commission 2021).
Veale, Binns, and Edwards (2018) argue that models could
be legally classified as personal data, which agrees with the
draft guidance from the UK Information Commissioner’s
Office (2020) that “erasure of the data... may not be possible without retraining the model... or deleting the model
altogether”. Such concerns are justified by a legitimate privacy risk: training data can be practically reconstructed from
models (Fredrikson, Jha, and Ristenpart 2015; Shokri et al.
2017; Veale, Binns, and Edwards 2018).

Contributions. We identify a new vulnerability of machine learning systems. Our suite of experiments considers:
the attack’s effect in a wide range of parameter settings; both
white-box and grey-box attacks; a range of perturbation geometries and bounds; trade-offs between optimality of the
attacker’s objective and time to compute the attack; and the
feasibility of running the attack long term.

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7691

