The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Active Sampling for Text Classification with Subinstance Level Queries
Shayok Chakraborty, Ankita Singh
Department of Computer Science, Florida State University

Abstract

learning model to the exemplar instances in the data population; the model thus typically depicts better generalization
than a passive learner, where the training data is sampled at
random. Active learning has depicted commendable performance in a variety of applications, including computer vision (Yoo and Kweon 2019), text mining (Tong and Koller
2001), anomaly detection (Pimentel et al. 2020) and medical
diagnosis (Gorriz et al. 2017) among others.

Active learning algorithms are effective in identifying the
salient and exemplar samples from large amounts of unlabeled data. This tremendously reduces the human annotation
effort in inducing a machine learning model as only a few
samples, which are identified by the algorithm, need to be
labeled manually. In problem domains like text mining and
video classification, human oracles peruse the data instances
incrementally to derive an opinion about their class labels
(such as reading a movie review progressively to assess its
sentiment). In such applications, it is not necessary for the
human oracles to review an unlabeled sample end-to-end in
order to provide a label; it may be more efficient to identify
an optimal subinstance size (percentage of the sample from
the start) for each unlabeled sample, and request the human
annotator to label the sample by analyzing only the subinstance, instead of the whole data sample. In this paper, we
propose a novel framework to address this challenging problem, in an effort to further reduce the labeling burden on the
human oracles and utilize the available labeling budget more
efficiently. We pose the sample and subinstance size selection
as a constrained optimization problem and derive a linear programming relaxation to select a batch of exemplar samples,
together with the optimal subinstance size of each, which can
potentially augment maximal information to the underlying
classification model. Our extensive empirical studies on six
challenging datasets from the text mining domain corroborate the practical usefulness of our framework over competing
baselines.

Annotating data in applications like text or video classification is much more tedious and labor-intensive, as the oracles need to meticulously review each sample before providing a label. Thus, the paucity of human labor and the
need to use it more efficiently is even more pronounced for
such applications. This necessitates specialized and more
user-friendly query mechanisms for the AL algorithms to
be useful in a real-world setting. We explore one such query
mechanism in this research. In the aforementioned applications, users form their notion about the label of a sample
incrementally, with the notion becoming more concrete as
a larger percentage of the sample is reviewed and analyzed.
Thus, it may not be always necessary to analyze each data
sample end-to-end to figure out its class label; depending on
the data sample, it may be possible to gauge its label after
reviewing only a certain percentage of the sample from the
start. For instance, in a movie review classification application, the human annotator need not read through the entire
review to provide a label (positive or negative); depending
on the review in question, it may be possible to provide a
label after reading, say, the first 40% of the text. Similarly,
in video genre classification, a human oracle may be in a
position to annotate a sample after watching only the first
50% of a given video. If the optimal subinstance size (percentage of a sample from the start) is accurately identified
for each data sample, it can result in substantial savings in
terms of time and human effort and result in a better utilization of the available query budget. However, this also poses
the challenge that if the subinstance size is too small, it may
not provide enough information to an annotator to make an
informed decision about its label; in that case, he can abstain from labeling resulting in a wastage of query budget.
We attempt to answer the following research question in this
paper: we are given a small amount of labeled training data
L and a large amount of unlabeled data U . Each unlabeled
data sample can be split into a predefined number (K) of

Introduction
A common bottleneck in developing supervised learning
algorithms is the requirement of large amounts of handannotated data. However, while unlabeled data is cheap and
easily available, obtaining class labels requires extensive human effort, often from experts with very limited availability. Active Learning (AL) algorithms alleviate this challenge
by intelligently querying the labels of the most informative
samples. This drastically reduces the human annotation effort, as the oracles only need to label the samples selected by
the algorithm 1 . Further, it exposes the underlying machine
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
we use the terms oracle, annotator, labeler and user synonymously in this paper

6150

