The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Play the Shannon Game With Language Models:
A Human-Free Approach to Summary Evaluation
Nicholas Egan, Oleg Vasilyev, John Bohannon
Primer AI
{negan, oleg, bohannon}@primer.ai

Abstract

at a summary of the document, and the third human is given
nothing at all. By measuring how many tries it takes the second human to guess the document compared to the other
humans, you can evaluate how much information about the
document is communicated in the summary, and therefore
measure how good the summary is.

The goal of a summary is to concisely state the most important information in a document. With this principle in mind,
we introduce new reference-free summary evaluation metrics
that use a pretrained language model to estimate the information content shared between a document and its summary.
These metrics are a modern take on the Shannon Game, a
method for summary quality scoring proposed decades ago,
where we replace human annotators with language models.
We also view these metrics as an extension of BLANC, a recently proposed approach to summary quality measurement
based on the performance of a language model with and without the help of a summary. Using transformer based language
models, we empirically verify that our metrics achieve stateof-the-art correlation with human judgement of the summary
quality dimensions of both coherence and relevance, as well
as competitive correlation with human judgement of consistency and fluency.

1

Contributions This paper proposes a new summarization
evaluation metric, the Shannon Score, that performs the
Shannon Game with a language model such as GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019). By using a language model to autoregressively generate a document both with and without a summary as a prompt, we measure the information provided by
the summary. One can view this method as a more theoretically driven extension to the recently proposed BLANC metric (Vasilyev, Dharnidharka, and Bohannon 2020), which
measures the accuracy of unmasking document tokens with
and without a summary. In addition to the Shannon Score,
we also propose a variant we call Information Difference.
To understand the empirical performance of this method
as a summary evaluation technique, we performed experiments to correlate our metrics against human judgement.
We found that our metrics perform strongly on the SummEval benchmark (Fabbri et al. 2021), achieving state-ofthe-art correlation with human judgement of summary coherence and relevance, and competitive correlation with human judgement of summary consistency and fluency.

Introduction

With the ever-expanding development of new summarization algorithms in the NLP community, metrics that reliably measure summary quality are more important than ever.
And yet, the most popular method for summary quality estimation remains the ROUGE (Lin 2004) family of metrics,
which require human written reference summaries for comparison and measure summary quality through simple token
overlap, ignoring the syntax and semantics governing the
way humans use language.
The goal of a summary is to concisely state the most important information conveyed by a document. Examining
summarization through this lens, one should be able to determine summary quality by measuring how much information
from the document is represented in the summary. Put another way, when comparing alternative summaries of similar length, the information we gain from reading the original
document should be minimal given the best summary.
The idea of measuring this difference in information content was proposed as the Shannon Game by Hovy and Lin
(1998): they assign 3 humans the task of guessing a document letter by letter, where the first human is allowed to
look at the document, the second human is allowed to look

2
2.1

Methods

Computing Information

Language models are probability distributions over documents, giving us p(D) for some document D. Autoregressive
language models do this by predicting next token probabilities given prior tokens, modeling
p(xt |x1 , . . . , xt−1 )
where our input document is broken into tokens
{x1 , . . . , xn }. The Shannon information content, or
surprisal, of event E with probability p(E) of happening
is defined as I(E) = − log p(E), so we can compute the
information of a document according to our language model
as
I(D) = − log p(x1 ) − log p(x2 |x1 ) − . . .
− log p(xn |x1 , x2 , . . . xn−1 )

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10599

