The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Latent Space Explanation by Intervention
Itai Gat1 * , Guy Lorberbom1 * , Idan Schwartz12 , Tamir Hazan1
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2
NetApp

Abstract
The success of deep neural nets heavily relies on their ability to encode complex relations between their input and their
output. While this property serves to fit the training data well,
it also obscures the mechanism that drives prediction. This
study aims to reveal hidden concepts by employing an intervention mechanism that shifts the predicted class based on
discrete variational autoencoders. An explanatory model then
visualizes the encoded information from any hidden layer
and its corresponding intervened representation. By the assessment of differences between the original representation
and the intervened representation, one can determine the concepts that can alter the class, hence providing interpretability.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on CelebA,
where we show various visualizations for bias in the data and
suggest different interventions to reveal and change bias.

Figure 1: Our method explains a layer of a given discriminative learner. We learn a discrete variational autoencoder of
the last layer representation over the data. Then, we produce
a visual explanation of it. Using the discrete latent space,
we can intervene in the conceptual world of the data, which
allows us to ‘see’ the world from the viewpoint of the classifier. This figure illustrates the explanation for the last layer in
two classification tasks on the CelebA dataset: attractive and
big nose. We find out that the classifier attributes attractiveness to young women and older man features to the opposite
label. This could imply a bias in the annotation process of
CelebA and/or reflects an inherent bias in the data.

Introduction
Machine learning is ubiquitous these days, and its impact
on everyday life is substantial. Supervised learning algorithms are instrumental to autonomous driving (Lavin and
Gray 2016; Bojarski et al. 2016; Luss et al. 2019), they serve
people with disabilities (Tadmor et al. 2016), they are applied to improve hearing aids (Schröter et al. 2020; Fedorov
et al. 2020), and they are being extensively used in medical
diagnosis (Deo 2015; Qayyum et al. 2020; Seo et al. 2020;
Richens, Lee, and Johri 2020). These advancements are
achieved with complex models, and their decisions are usually not well-understood by their operators. Consequently,
model interpretability is becoming an important challenge
for contemporary deep nets.
To this end, a magnitude of interpretability methods has
been proposed. Current model interpretability methods are
geared towards local feature relevance. In other words, given
a sample, they quantify how much each feature contributes
to the prediction. For example, gradient-based approaches
are widely used to interpret the model predictions since they
bring forth an insight into the internal mechanism of the
model (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Gu et al.
2018; Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Springenberg et al. 2014). These

gradient-based methods produce different explanation maps
using the gradient of a class-related output with respect to
its input data. While relevance scores in the input sample
are human-interpretable, they are sparsely scattered across
many pixels and do not accurately indicate concepts. Recently, counterfactual examples were used to measure the
causal effect of known data concepts (Goyal et al. 2019; Atzmon et al. 2020; Feder et al. 2021; Rosenberg et al. 2021).
However, these methods require costly predefined concepts
annotation, which is rarely apparent when learning from
data.
In this work, we focus on finding the high-level concepts
that explain the classifier’s decision. The bias within these
concepts is often the result of overlooked priors that are
woven into the dataset. In order to reveal bias in the data,
we propose a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) mechanism
that discretizes the input representation. This discrete latent
space is able to capture the concepts that are embedded in

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

679

