The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

XLM-K: Improving Cross-Lingual Language Model Pre-training with
Multilingual Knowledge
Xiaoze Jiang1 * , Yaobo Liang2 , Weizhu Chen3 , Nan Duan2
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Azure AI, Redmond, WA, USA
xzjiang@buaa.edu.cn, {yalia, wzchen, nanduan}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

2021), such as entity and relation. On one side, the structural
knowledge data is abundant and could be a great complement to the unstructured corpus for building a better language model. Many works have demonstrated its importance via incorporating basic knowledge into monolingual
pre-trained models (Zhang et al. 2019; Staliūnaitė and Iacobacci 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021b). On
another side, knowledge is often language agnostic, e.g.
different languages share the same entity via different surface forms. This can introduce a huge amount of alignment
data to learn a better cross-lingual representation (Cao et al.
2018a). However, there are few existing works on exploring the multilingual entity linking and relation in the crosslingual setting for pre-training (Huang et al. 2019; Yang
et al. 2020). For example, the de-facto cross-lingual pretraining standard, i.e. MLM (Devlin et al. 2019) plus TLM
(Conneau and Lample 2019), learns the correspondences between the words or sentences across the languages, neglecting the diverse background cross-lingual information behind
each entity.
To address this limitation, we propose XLM-K, a crosslingual language model incorporating multilingual knowledge in pre-training. The knowledge is injected into the
XLM-K via two additional pre-trained tasks, i.e. masked entity prediction task and object entailment task. These two
tasks are designed to capture the knowledge from two aspects: description semantics and structured semantics. Description semantics encourage the contextualized entity embedding in a sequence to be linked to the long entity description in the multilingual knowledge base (KB). Structured semantics, based on the triplet knowledge <subject,
relation, object>, connect cross-lingual subject and object
based on their relation and descriptions, in which the object
is entailed by the joint of the subject and the relation. The
object and subject are both represented by their description
from the KB. To facilitate the cross-lingual transfer ability,
on one hand, the entity and its description are from different
languages. On the other hand, the textual contents of the subject and object also come from a distinct language source.
We employ the contrastive learning (He et al. 2020) during
pre-training to make XLM-K distinguish a positive knowledge example from a list of negative knowledge examples.
There are three main contributions in our work:
• As the first attempt, we achieve the combination be-

Cross-lingual pre-training has achieved great successes using monolingual and bilingual plain text corpora. However,
most pre-trained models neglect multilingual knowledge,
which is language agnostic but comprises abundant crosslingual structure alignment. In this paper, we propose XLMK, a cross-lingual language model incorporating multilingual knowledge in pre-training. XLM-K augments existing
multilingual pre-training with two knowledge tasks, namely
Masked Entity Prediction Task and Object Entailment Task.
We evaluate XLM-K on MLQA, NER and XNLI. Experimental results clearly demonstrate significant improvements
over existing multilingual language models. The results on
MLQA and NER exhibit the superiority of XLM-K in knowledge related tasks. The success in XNLI shows a better crosslingual transferability obtained in XLM-K. What is more,
we provide a detailed probing analysis to confirm the desired knowledge captured in our pre-training regimen. The
code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/Unicoder/
tree/master/pretraining/xlmk.

Introduction
Recent development of pre-trained language model (Devlin
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019) has inspired a new surge of
interest in the cross-lingual scenario, such as Multilingual
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and XLM-R (Conneau et al.
2020). Existing models are usually optimized for masked
language modeling (MLM) tasks (Devlin et al. 2019) and
translation tasks (Conneau and Lample 2019) using multilingual data. However, they neglect the knowledge across
languages, such as entity resolution and relation reasoning.
In fact, the knowledge conveys similar semantic concepts
and similar meanings across languages (Vulić and Moens
2013; Chen et al. 2021), which is essential to achieve crosslingual transferability. Therefore, how to equip pre-trained
models with knowledge has become an underexplored but
critical challenge for multilingual language models.
Contextual linguistic representations in language models are ordinarily trained using unlabeled and unstructured
corpus, without the consideration of explicit grounding to
knowledge (Févry et al. 2020; Xiong et al. 2020; Fan et al.
* Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10840

