The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

CTIN: Robust Contextual Transformer Network for Inertial Navigation
Bingbing Rao1 , Ehsan Kazemi1, 2 , Yifan Ding1 , Devu M. Shila2 , Frank M. Tucker3 , Liqiang Wang1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
2
Unknot.id Inc., Orlando, FL, USA
3
U.S. Army CCDC SC, Orlando, FL, USA

Abstract

Harle 2013). In addition, inertial sensors are often combined
with additional sensors and models using Extended Kalman
Filter (Bloesch et al. 2015) to provide more accurate estimations, where the typical sensors include WiFi (Ahmetovic et al. 2016), Bluetooth (Li, Guo, and Li 2017), LiDAR (Zhang and Singh 2014), or camera sensors (Leutenegger et al. 2015). Nonetheless, these combinations with additional sensors are posing new challenges about instrument installations, energy efficiency, and data privacy. For
instance, Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) substantially depends on environmental factors such as lighting conditions,
signal quality, blurring effects (Usenko et al. 2016).
Recently, a growing number of data-driven approaches
such as IONet (Chen et al. 2018), RoNIN (Herath, Yan,
and Furukawa 2020), and IDOL (Sun, Melamed, and Kitani 2021) have demonstrated their capability of using welltrained neural networks to obtain accurate estimates from
IMU measurements with competitive performance over the
aforementioned methods. However, grand challenges still
exist when applying neural network techniques to IMU measurements: 1) most existing data-driven approaches leverage sequence-based models (e.g., LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997)) to learn temporal correlations but fail
to capture spatial relationships between multivariate timeseries. 2) There is few research work to explore rich contextual information among IMU measurements in dimensions
of spatial and temporal for inertial feature representation. 3)
Usually, uncertainties of IMU measurements and model output are assumed to be a fixed covariance matrix in these pure
and black-box neural inertial models, which brings significant inaccuracy and much less robustness because they can
fluctuate dramatically and unexpectedly in nature.
In response to the observations and concerns raised above,
a novel robust contextual Transformer network is proposed
to regress velocity and predict trajectory from IMU measurements. Particularly, CTIN extends the ideas of ResNet18 (He et al. 2016) and Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) to
exploit spatial and longer temporal information among IMU
observations and then uses the attention technique to fuse
this information for inertial navigation. The major contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• Extending ResNet-18 with attention mechanisms is to
explore and encode spatial information of IMU samples.
• A novel self-attention mechanism is proposed to extract

Recently, data-driven inertial navigation approaches have
demonstrated their capability of using well-trained neural
networks to obtain accurate position estimates from inertial
measurement units (IMUs) measurements. In this paper, we
propose a novel robust Contextual Transformer-based network for Inertial Navigation (CTIN) to accurately predict velocity and trajectory. To this end, we first design a ResNetbased encoder enhanced by local and global multi-head selfattention to capture spatial contextual information from IMU
measurements. Then we fuse these spatial representations
with temporal knowledge by leveraging multi-head attention
in the Transformer decoder. Finally, multi-task learning with
uncertainty reduction is leveraged to improve learning efficiency and prediction accuracy of velocity and trajectory.
Through extensive experiments over a wide range of inertial
datasets (e.g., RIDI, OxIOD, RoNIN, IDOL, and our own),
CTIN is very robust and outperforms state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
Inertial navigation is a never-ending endeavor to estimate
the states (i.e., position and orientation) of a moving subject (e.g., pedestrian) by using only IMUs attached to it.
An IMU sensor, often a combination of accelerometers and
gyroscopes, plays a significant role in a wide range of applications from mobile devices to autonomous systems because of its superior energy efficiency, mobility, and flexibility (Lymberopoulos et al. 2015). Nevertheless, the conventional Newtonian-based inertial navigation methods reveal not only poor performance, but also require unrealistic
constraints that are incompatible with everyday usage scenarios. For example, strap-down inertial navigation systems
(SINS) may obtain erroneous sensor positions by performing double integration of IMU measurements, duo to exponential error propagation through integration (Titterton, Weston, and Weston 2004). Step-based pedestrian dead reckoning (PDR) approaches can reduce this accumulated error
by leveraging the prior knowledge of human walking motion to predict trajectories (Tian et al. 2015). However, an
IMU must be attached to a foot in the zero-velocity update
(Foxlin 2005) or a subject must walk forward so that the
motion direction is constant in the body frame (Brajdic and
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5413

