The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Linear-Time Verification of Data-Aware Dynamic Systems with Arithmetic
Paolo Felli, Marco Montali, Sarah Winkler*
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano – Bolzano – Italy
{pfelli,montali,winkler}@inf.unibz.it

Abstract

gap-order constraints (Mayr and Totzke 2016; Bozzelli and
Pinchinat 2014) (e.g. x − y ≥ 2), or by limiting the control flow, as in the case of feedback freedom (Damaggio,
Deutsch, and Vianu 2012).
In this work, we focus on the framework of data-aware dynamic systems (DDSs) (de Leoni, Felli, and Montali 2020),
an expressive yet concise model for process analysis, which
we enrich with linear arithmetic. We call the resulting systems DDSs with arithmetic (DDSAs), and study the verification problem for the linear-time, finite-trace temporal logic
LTLf (de Giacomo and Vardi 2013) extended with arithmetic constraints. The following is a motivating example.

Combined modeling and verification of dynamic systems and
the data they operate on has gained momentum in AI and
in several application domains. We investigate the expressive yet concise framework of data-aware dynamic systems
(DDS), extending it with linear arithmetic, and provide the
following contributions. First, we introduce a new, semantic
property of “finite summary”, which guarantees the existence
of a faithful finite-state abstraction. We rely on this to show
that checking whether a witness exists for a linear-time, finitetrace property is decidable for DDSs with finite summary.
Second, we demonstrate that several decidability conditions
studied in formal methods and database theory can be seen
as concrete, checkable instances of this property. This also
gives rise to new decidability results. Third, we show how the
abstract, uniform property of finite summary leads to modularity results: a system enjoys finite summary if it can be partitioned appropriately into smaller systems that possess the
property. Our results allow us to analyze systems that were
out of reach in earlier approaches. Finally, we demonstrate
the feasibility of our approach in a prototype implementation.

1

Example 1.1. Consider the process of an auction at an
online market place. Its data variables are a timer d, the
offer o by the last bidder, identified by b, a threshold price t
for which the item can be sold immediately, and the sum s.
check : [dr > 0]
bid : [0 < bw ∧ ow > or ]
dec : [dr − dw ≥ 1]

Introduction

The analysis of complex dynamic systems is a core research
topic in AI. While process analysis has long focused on the
control-flow perspective, in recent years a multi-perspective
approach gained momentum, studying the interplay between
control flow and data (Reichert 2012; Calvanese, de Giacomo, and Montali 2013; Calvanese et al. 2018; Deutsch
et al. 2018). Verification in this setting is challenging, as it
must deal with potentially infinitely many states.
This is aggravated in the presence of arithmetic, notwithstanding that it is essential for practical applications
(Deutsch et al. 2018): model checking of transition systems operating over simple data with arithmetic constraints
is known to be undecidable, as it is easy to model a twocounter system. However, restrictions on the transition system have been shown to render certain verification tasks decidable. In particular, decidability has been obtained by confining the constraint language, as in the case of monotonicity constraints (Demri and D’Souza 2007) (e.g. x ≤ y) and

init : [dw > 0 ∧ tw > 0]
exp : [dr ≤ 0 ∧ br > 0]
sell now : [or > tr ]

fee : [sw = or +10]

sold

The timer d is initialized to a number of days, and t is fixed
(action init). Then, while the timer did not expire (check),
bids are taken (bid) or the timer may be decremented (dec).
The auction ends if the timer expires and a bid was set (exp),
or the offer exceeds t (sell now). Finally, fee sets s to the offer
plus an auction fee. We will use our approach to verify that
ψ = (sold ∧ d > 0 → o > t) holds, i.e., if the auction ends
before the timer expires, the offer exceeds the threshold. The
meaning of the colors will be clarified later.
Our contribution is as follows. (1) First, we introduce the
novel property of finite summary, and show that the above
restrictions studied in the literature (i.e. (i) monotonicity
constraints, (ii) gap-order constraints, (iii) feedback freedom) are instances of this property. We further generalize
feedback freedom introducing a new, expressive property
called (iv) bounded lookback. (2) Second, we prove that finite summary guarantees the existence of a faithful, finitestate abstraction for a DDSA by representing sets of states
as logical constraints. This is used to show that checking
existence of a witness for an LTLf property is decidable.
(3) Third, we illustrate a modularity result: if a DDSA B rep-

* This work is partially supported by the UNIBZ projects DaCoMan, QUEST, SMART-APP, VERBA, and WineId.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5642

