The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Optimal Admission Control for Multiclass Queues with Time-Varying Arrival
Rates via State Abstraction
Marc Rigter,1, 2 Danial Dervovic,2 Parisa Hassanzadeh,2
Jason Long,2 Parisa Zehtabi, 2 Daniele Magazzeni 2
1

Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford
2
J. P. Morgan AI Research
mrigter@robots.ox.ac.uk, {danial.dervovic, parisa.hassanzadeh, jason.x.long, parisa.zehtabi,
daniele.magazzeni}@jpmorgan.com
Abstract

far greater during business hours than at night. Therefore, we
allow the arrival rate of each task class to vary over time.
For such systems, we are interested in admission control,
the problem of deciding which tasks should be processed,
and which tasks should be ignored. We seek to optimise the
expected total price of tasks processed over a finite horizon
by a fixed number of identical servers.
The optimal control of multiclass queues has been considered by previous works (Ata 2006; Ata and Tongarlak
2013; Bertsimas, Paschalidis, and Tsitsiklis 1994; Cao and
Xie 2016; Harrison and Zeevi 2004; Klimov 1974). However,
all of these works consider an infinite horizon with constant
task arrival rates, which is a considerably easier problem as
the optimal solution is stationary (i.e. does not depend on
time). Yoon and Lewis (2004) consider optimal admission
control in a time-varying problem where there is only one
task class, and the task prices can only take on values from a
discrete set. The authors present an approximation algorithm,
but do not provide any theoretical analysis.
In contrast, we consider multiple task classes with timevarying arrival rates and allow task prices to be continuous. We rigorously prove that our discrete-time algorithm
approaches the optimal solution as the time step is reduced.
To improve the scalability of our approach to a greater number of task classes, we present an approximation based on
state abstraction to reduce the size of the state space.
Our main contributions are: 1) formulating a novel multiclass queuing problem with continuous task prices and timevarying arrival rates, 2) rigorously proving that our discretetime algorithm approaches the optimal continuous time solution as the time step is reduced, and 3) an approach based
on state abstraction to improve scalability. We validate our
approach on synthetic domains, as well as a real financial
fraud data set. Our results demonstrate that our approach
is computationally efficient and significantly improves the
average total price of tasks processed compared to baselines.

We consider a novel queuing problem where the decisionmaker must choose to accept or reject randomly arriving tasks
into a no buffer queue which are processed by N identical
servers. Each task has a price, which is a positive real number,
and a class. Each class of task has a different price distribution,
service rate, and arrives according to an inhomogenous Poisson process. The objective is to decide which tasks to accept
so that the total price of tasks processed is maximised over
a finite horizon. We formulate the problem using a discrete
time Markov Decision Process (MDP) with a hybrid state
space. We show that the optimal value function has a specific
structure, which enables us to solve the hybrid MDP exactly.
Moreover, we rigorously prove that as the gap between successive decision epochs grows smaller, the discrete time solution
approaches the optimal solution to the original continuous
time problem. To improve the scalability of our approach to
a greater number of servers and task classes, we present an
approximation based on state abstraction. We validate our approach on synthetic data, as well as a real financial fraud data
set, which is the motivating application for this work.

Introduction
In many service systems, the rate at which tasks arrive may
greatly exceed the capacity of servers to process the tasks. We
are motivated by the problem of financial fraud detection and
monitoring (Dal Pozzolo et al. 2014), where the rate at which
suspicious transactions are detected may considerably exceed
the rate at which human operators (servers) can intervene,
for example, by holding payments and calling customers to
verify their identities.
We associate each task with a price, and a class. The price
of a task represents the value associated with processing that
task. In the financial fraud domain, the value of intervening to
verify a suspicious transaction may be equal to that transaction’s monetary value. Tasks of each class may have different
service time requirements and price distributions. For example, validating a high-value bank transfer (task class A) may
require a more thorough process, and therefore a slower service rate, than a low-value credit card payment (task class
B). In the financial fraud domain, the rate of task arrivals
varies substantially with time: the volume of transactions is

Related Work
The stochastic sequential assignment problem (SSAP) with
random arrival times was proposed by Albright (1974), building on earlier work from Derman, Lieberman, and Ross
(1972). In this problem, tasks arrive according to an inhomogenous Poisson process and must be accepted or rejected
upon arrival. Furthermore, each task is associated with a con-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9918

