The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

GenCo: Generative Co-training for Generative Adversarial Networks with
Limited Data
Kaiwen Cui1 * , Jiaxing Huang1 * , Zhipeng Luo1 , Gongjie Zhang1 , Fangneng Zhan2 , Shijian Lu1†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University
{kaiwen001, zhipeng001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {jiaxing.huang, Gongjiezhang, fnzhan, shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg
1.0

Discriminator Loss

Abstract
Training effective Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
requires large amounts of training data, without which the
trained models are usually sub-optimal with discriminator
over-fitting. Several prior studies address this issue by expanding the distribution of the limited training data via massive and hand-crafted data augmentation. We handle datalimited image generation from a very different perspective.
Specifically, we design GenCo, a Generative Co-training network that mitigates the discriminator over-fitting issue by introducing multiple complementary discriminators that provide diverse supervision from multiple distinctive views in
training. We instantiate the idea of GenCo in two ways. The
first way is Weight-Discrepancy Co-training (WeCo) which
co-trains multiple distinctive discriminators by diversifying
their parameters. The second way is Data-Discrepancy Cotraining (DaCo) which achieves co-training by feeding discriminators with different views of the input images. Extensive experiments over multiple benchmarks show that GenCo
achieves superior generation with limited training data. In addition, GenCo also complements the augmentation approach
with consistent and clear performance gains when combined.

StyleGAN2
GenCo

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

500

1

2

3

4

5
1e3

2

3

4

5
1e3

Iteration

StyleGAN2
GenCo

400

FID

300
200
100
0

0

1

Iteration

Figure 1: The proposed GenCo improves data-limited image generation clearly (on 100-shot Obama): With limited
training samples, discriminator in most GANs such as StyleGAN2 tends to become over-fitting and produces very small
discriminator loss as shown in the upper graph. The very
small discriminator loss further leads to very large generator
loss as well as gradients which cause training to diverge and
generation to deteriorate as shown in the lower graph. The
proposed GenCo mitigates the discriminator over-fitting effectively with more stable training and better generation.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) have achieved great successes in various image
generation tasks such as image-to-image translation (Zhu
et al. 2017; Zhan, Zhu, and Lu 2019; Zhan et al. 2021),
domain adaptation (Hoffman et al. 2018; Hsu et al. 2020)
and image in-painting (Yu et al. 2019, 2021b,a). Nevertheless, high-fidelity image generation requires large amounts
of training samples which are laborious and time-consuming
to collect. Data-limited image generation, which aims to
generate realistic and high-fidelity images with a small number of training samples, is a very meaningful yet challenging
task for the widespread applications of image generation.
With limited training samples, the trained generation
model suffers from discriminator over-fitting (Zhao et al.
2020; Karras et al. 2020a) which leads to degraded generation. Specifically, over-fitting discriminator produces very

small discriminator loss as illustrated in the upper graph in
Fig. 1. The very small discriminator loss then leads to very
large generator loss and gradients which accumulate during
training and lead to training divergence and degraded generation (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2012, 2013) as illustrated in the lower graph in Fig. 1. The over-fitting issue
has attracted increasing interest recently, and the prevalent
approach addresses the issue through massive data augmentation. The idea is to massively augment the limited training
samples to expand the data distributions as much as possible.
Though prior studies (Karras et al. 2020a; Zhao et al. 2020)

* indicates equal contribution.
†

corresponding author.
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

499

