The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Unsupervised Underwater Image Restoration: From a Homology Perspective
Zhenqi Fu1∗ , Huangxing Lin1∗ , Yan Yang2 , Shu Chai1 , Liyan Sun1 , Yue Huang1 , Xinghao Ding1†
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
College of Computer Science & Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
{fuzhenqi, hxlin}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yangyanyy@hdu.edu.cn, {shuchai, sunly}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{yhuang2010, dxh}@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Plenty of techniques have been proposed for underwater image restoration. Most of the approaches either provide
handcrafted priors (Li et al. 2016) or deep learning based solutions for the restoration (Li et al. 2021b). Most of the deep
learning based methods rely on synthetic training data due
to the absence of large-scale real-world underwater image
datasets with ground-truths. Data synthesis may not capture
the complex features of the real-world degradation, and thus,
suffer from domain-shift problems (Ben-David et al. 2007).
In addition, a few deep learning based solutions belong to
weakly supervised approaches that use generative adversarial networks (Li, Guo, and Guo 2018).
Recently, “zero-shot” approaches (Li et al. 2021a; Kar
et al. 2021; Gandelsman, Shocher, and Irani 2019; Shocher,
Cohen, and Irani 2018) have been developed which learn
the restoration task using a single image and train a small
image-specific network at test time. As such “zero-shot”
methods do not use other supervision information beyond
the input image itself, they require to leverage self/unsupervised losses or regularizers for training. For example, the unsupervised single image restoration (Kar et al.
2021) estimates the parameters of Koschmieder’s model
through a controlled perturbation. The unsupervised image decomposition method (Gandelsman, Shocher, and Irani
2019) applies multiple “Deep-image-Prior” (DIP) networks
(Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018) and the power of
the internal patch recurrence to separate images into their
basic components. Although “zero-shot” approaches need
no extra training examples other than the input image, they
are probably inefficient to be applied for real-world applications due to a large number of optimization iterations at test
time.
In this paper, we propose an UnSupervised Underwater
Image Restoration method (USUIR), a novel deep neural
network trained for real-world and real-time underwater image restoration. Different from the “zero-shot” approaches,
USUIR applies a set of training instances to train the deep
neural network. To this end, we design a disentanglement
network with the homology constraint. Concretely, in each
iteration, we first disentangle the raw underwater image into
three latent components, i.e., the global background light,
the transmission map, and the scene radiance (the clean
image). Then, we randomly mix up the estimated scene
radiance and the raw underwater image to generate a re-

Underwater images suffer from degradation due to light scattering and absorption. It remains challenging to restore such
degraded images using deep neural networks since real-world
paired data is scarcely available while synthetic paired data
cannot approximate real-world data perfectly. In this paper,
we propose an UnSupervised Underwater Image Restoration method (USUIR) by leveraging the homology property between a raw underwater image and a re-degraded image. Specifically, USUIR first estimates three latent components of the raw underwater image, i.e., the global background light, the transmission map, and the scene radiance
(the clean image). Then, a re-degraded image is generated
by randomly mixing up the estimated scene radiance and the
raw underwater image. We demonstrate that imposing a homology constraint between the raw underwater image and the
re-degraded image is equivalent to minimizing the restoration
error and hence can be used for the unsupervised restoration.
Extensive experiments show that USUIR achieves promising
performance in both inference time and restoration quality.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in various lowlevel computer vision tasks. However, such success relies heavily on manually labeled datasets, which are timeconsuming and expensive to obtain (Liu et al. 2020; Li et al.
2019a). For example, it is hard even impossible to collect
a large-scale dataset with the clean ground truth image for
underwater image restoration.
Underwater images suffer from color distortion and poor
visibility (Akkaynak et al. 2017) because the light is absorbed and scattered when it propagates through turbid water mediums. Such degradations will lead to poor performance in underwater computer vision applications, e.g., underwater object tracking (Panetta et al. 2021), marine animal detection (Fan et al. 2020) and robotic navigation. The
degradations in underwater images can be described via the
modified Koschmieder’s light scattering model (Jaffe 1990)
where the transmission map is changed into a channel-wise
component and the atmospheric light is replaced by the
global background light.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

643

