The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Random vs. Best-First: Impact of Sampling Strategies
on Decision Making in Model-Based Diagnosis*
Patrick Rodler
University of Klagenfurt, Austria
patrick.rodler@aau.at

Abstract

system behavior in terms of potentially faulty system components. A sample of diagnoses can be (i) directly analyzed,
e.g., to manually discover or make estimations about the
actual fault (Stern et al. 2013; Rodler et al. 2019), to aid
proper algorithm choice (Slaney 2014), or to support users
in test case specifications or repair actions (Kalyanpur 2006;
Meilicke 2011; Schekotihin, Rodler, and Schmid 2018), or
(ii) used as an input or guidance to diagnostic algorithms.
We focus on (ii) in this work.
An important class of diagnostic algorithms that are
guided by a set of precomputed diagnoses are sequential diagnosis approaches (de Kleer and Williams 1987; de Kleer
and Raiman 1993). They use a sample of diagnoses to compute informative system measurements that allow to efficiently and systematically rule out spurious diagnoses until a single or highly probable one remains. Since achieving
(global) optimality of the sequence of measurements is intractable in general (Pattipati and Alexandridis 1990), stateof-the-art sequential diagnosis methods usually rely on local optimization (de Kleer, Raiman, and Shirley 1992) using
one out of numerous heuristics (Moret 1982; de Kleer and
Williams 1987; Shchekotykhin et al. 2012; Rodler 2018) as
optimality criteria. These heuristics can be seen as functions
that, based on a given sample of diagnoses, map measurement candidates to one numeric score each, and finally select the one measurement with the best score. In most cases,
these functions use two features of the sample, i.e., the

Statistical samples, in order to be representative, have to be
drawn from a population in a random and unbiased way. Nevertheless, it is common practice in the field of model-based
diagnosis to make estimations from (biased) best-first samples. One example is the computation of a few most probable
fault explanations for a defective system and the use of these
to assess which aspect of the system, if measured, would
bring the highest information gain. In this work, we scrutinize whether these statistically not well-founded conventions, that both diagnosis researchers and practitioners have
adhered to for decades, are indeed reasonable. To this end,
we empirically analyze various sampling methods that generate fault explanations. We study the representativeness of
the produced samples wrt. their estimations about fault explanations and how well they guide diagnostic decisions, and
we investigate the impact of sample size, the optimal trade-off
between sampling efficiency and effectivity, and how approximate sampling techniques compare to exact ones.

1

Introduction

Suppose we intend to predict the outcome of an election and
conduct a poll where we ask only, say, university professors
for whom they are going to vote. By this strategy, we will
most likely not gain insight into the real sentiment in the
population wrt. the election. The problem is that professors
are most probably not representative of all people. In modelbased diagnosis, however, such kind of samples are often
used as a basis for making decisions that rule the efficiency
of the diagnostic process.
Model-based diagnosis (Reiter 1987) deals with the detection, localization and repair of faults in observed systems
such as programs, circuits, knowledge bases or physical devices. One important prerequisite to achieve these goals is
the generation of diagnoses, i.e., explanations for the faulty

(F1) diagnoses’ probabilities, and
(F2) diagnoses’ predictions of the measurement outcome,
which allow to estimate the probabilities and diagnosis elimination rates of the measurement outcomes.
Literature offers a range of techniques to generate samples of diagnoses, among them ones that return a specific
sample (de Kleer and Williams 1987; Reiter 1987; Rodler
2020a) (which includes exactly a predefined subset of all
diagnoses), and others that compute an unspecific sample,
e.g., in a heuristic (Abreu and Van Gemund 2009), stochastic
(Feldman, Provan, and Van Gemund 2008) or simply undefined way (Shchekotykhin et al. 2014) (where no guarantee
can be given wrt. diagnosis selection for the sample).
Many existing sequential diagnosis approaches draw on

* An earlier version (Rodler and Elichanova 2020) of this work
was accepted and presented at the Int’l Workshop on Principles
of Diagnosis 2020 (DX’20). Please find an animated presentation,
a poster, and a video presentation of the present work at: tinyurl.
com/3shsn7p8, tinyurl.com/mjt9j4aw, and tinyurl.com/yahw5dcs .
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5869

