The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Weakly Supervised Neuro-Symbolic Module Networks
for Numerical Reasoning over Text
Amrita Saha,1 Shafiq Joty, 1,2 Steven C.H. Hoi 1
1

Salesforce Research Asia
Nanyang Technological University
amrita.saha, sjoty, shoi@salesforce.com
2

Abstract

not) over those entities to reach the final numerical answer.
There have been three broad genres of models that have
proven successful on the DROP numerical reasoning task.
First, large-scale pretrained language models like GenBERT (Geva, Gupta, and Berant 2020) use a monolithic
Transformer architecture and decodes numerical answers
digit-by-digit. Though they deliver mediocre performance
when trained only on the target data, their competency is derived from pretraining on massive synthetic data augmented
with explicit supervision of the gold numerical reasoning.
These are specifically synthetic datasets of numerical expressions and numerical MRC carefully designed with overlapping vocabulary, question templates and similar numerical ranges as in the target data (DROP).
Second kind of models are the reasoning-free hybrid models like NumNet (Ran et al. 2019), NAQANet (Dua et al.
2019), NABERT+ (Kinley and Lin 2019) and MTMSN (Hu
et al. 2019), NeRd (Chen et al. 2020). They explicitly incorporate numerical computations in the standard extractive
QA pipeline by learning a multi-type answer predictor over
different reasoning types (e.g., max/min, diff/sum, count,
negate) and directly predicting the corresponding numerical
expression, instead of learning to reason. This is facilitated
by exhaustively precomputing all possible outcomes of discrete operations and augmenting the training data with the
reasoning-type supervision and numerical expressions that
lead to the correct answer.
Lastly, the most relevant class of models for this work are
the modular networks for reasoning. Neural Module Networks (NMN) (Gupta et al. 2020) is the first explicit reasoning based QA model which parses the query into a specialized program and executes it step-wise over learnable
reasoning modules. However, to do so, apart from the exhaustive precomputation of all discrete operations, it also
needs more fine-grained supervision of the gold program
and the gold program execution, obtained heuristically, by
leveraging the abundance of templatized queries in DROP.
While being more pragmatic and richer at interpretability,
both modular and hybrid networks are also tightly coupled
with the additional supervision i.e., they cannot learn without it. While NMN is the first to enable learning from QA
pair alone, it still needs more finer-grained supervision for at
least a part of the training data. With this, it manages to supersede NABERT and MTMSN on a carefully chosen sub-

Neural Module Networks (NMNs) have been quite successful in incorporating explicit reasoning as learnable modules in
various question answering tasks, including the most generic
form of numerical reasoning over text in Machine Reading
Comprehension (MRC). However to achieve this, contemporary Neural Module Networks models obtain strong supervision in form of specialized program annotation from the QA
pairs through various heuristic parsing and exhaustive computation of all possible discrete operations on discrete arguments. Consequently they fail to generalize to more openended settings without such supervision. Hence, we propose Weakly-Supervised Neuro-Symbolic Module Network
(WNSMN) trained with answers as the sole supervision for
numerical reasoning based MRC. WNSMN learns to execute a noisy heuristic program obtained from the dependency
parse of the query, as discrete actions over both neural and
symbolic reasoning modules and trains it end-to-end in a reinforcement learning framework with discrete reward from
answer matching. On the subset of DROP having numerical answers, WNSMN outperforms NMN by 32% and the
reasoning-free generative language model GenBERT by 8%
in exact match accuracy under comparable weakly supervised
settings. This showcases the effectiveness of modular networks that can handle explicit discrete reasoning over noisy
programs in an end-to-end manner.

Introduction
End-to-end neural models have proven to be powerful tools
for an expansive set of language and vision problems by
effectively emulating the input-output behavior. However,
many real problems like Question Answering (QA) or Dialog need more interpretable models that can incorporate
explicit reasoning in the inference process. In this work,
we focus on the most generic form of numerical reasoning over text, encompassed by the reasoning-based MRC
framework. A particularly challenging setting for this task is
where the answers are numerical in nature as in the popular
MRC dataset, DROP (Dua et al. 2019). The example in Figure 1 shows the intricacies involved in the task which include
(i) passage and query language understanding, (ii) contextual understanding of the passage entities (dates, numbers),
and (iii) application of quantitative reasoning (e.g., max,
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11238

