The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Modification-Fair Cluster Editing
Vincent Froese, Leon Kellerhals, Rolf Niedermeier
Technische Universität Berlin, Faculty IV, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Berlin, Germany.
{vincent.froese, leon.kellerhals}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

(a)

The classic C LUSTER E DITING problem (also known as
C ORRELATION C LUSTERING) asks to transform a given
graph into a disjoint union of cliques (clusters) by a small
number of edge modifications. When applied to vertexcolored graphs (the colors representing subgroups), standard
algorithms for the NP-hard C LUSTER E DITING problem may
yield solutions that are biased towards subgroups of data (e.g.,
demographic groups), measured in the number of modifications incident to the members of the subgroups. We propose a
modification fairness constraint which ensures that the number of edits incident to each subgroup is proportional to its
size. To start with, we study M ODIFICATION -FAIR C LUS TER E DITING for graphs with two vertex colors. We show
that the problem is NP-hard even if one may only insert
edges within a subgroup; note that in the classic “non-fair”
setting, this case is trivially polynomial-time solvable. However, in the more general editing form, the modification-fair
variant remains fixed-parameter tractable with respect to the
number of edge edits. We complement these and further theoretical results with an empirical analysis of our model on
real-world social networks where we find that the price of
modification-fairness is surprisingly low, that is, the cost of
optimal modification-fair differs from the cost of optimal
“non-fair” solutions only by a small percentage.

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: An exemplary graph G with blue and red vertices
(a) and three modifications of G to a cluster graph (b)–(d).
Added edges are marked green, deleted edges are green and
dashed. (b) A modification of minimum size with five edits incident to the blues and one edit incident to the reds.
So ∆ed = |5/4 − 1/3| = 11/12, see Eq. (1). (c) A more fair
modification of minimum size (∆ed = 1/2). (d) A more fair
(but larger) modification (∆ed = 1/3).
learning and related areas. Clustering problems are fundamental topics of unsupervised learning and optimization in
general. In this work, we focus on graph-based data clustering, and therein on one of the most basic and best studied
problems, C LUSTER E DITING. Our main conceptual contribution is to introduce a fairness concept that is not modeling the “fairness of the output” of the algorithm (in our
case a disjoint set of cliques, the clusters), but rather the fairness of the generation process. In our case, this means each
party should pay (proportionally to its size) roughly the same
modification cost. We perform both a theoretical (algorithms
and complexity) as well as an empirical study. In a nutshell, we show that our new problem M ODIFICATION -FAIR
C LUSTER E DITING seems computationally harder (but not
hopelessly hard) than C LUSTER E DITING, but our experimental studies also indicate that the “price of fairness” (that
is, how much more edge edits are needed compared to the
classic, “non-fair” case) is relatively low if one does not go
for perfect fairness.

Introduction
Imagine two competing parties, the reds and the blues. The
party members are nodes in a (social) network. The goal is
to cluster the nodes into a set of disjoint cliques by a small
number of edge modifications, that is, edge deletions or insertions. As the parties are competing against each other,
they are very careful about the other party having to pay
the relatively same “modification cost”. That is, the average number of edits involving red vertices as edge endpoints
should be the same as the average number involving blue
vertices, see Figure 1 for an example. This yields a colored version of the well-studied NP-hard C LUSTER E DITING problem, where now the criterion of having relatively
same modification cost becomes a process-oriented fairness
concept which we are going to introduce in this paper.
In recent years, fairness in algorithmic problems has become a profoundly studied topic, particularly so in machine

Related work. For a thorough review on fairness in
the context of machine learning we refer to the survey
by Mehrabi et al. (2021). Closest to our work in terms of
the underlying clustering problem are studies on fair C OR RELATION C LUSTERING (Ahmadian et al. 2020b; Friggstad
and Mousavi 2021). Both works, following the disparate im-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6631

