The Thirty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-22)

Robust Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks against Adversarial Attacks
Mengmei Zhang1 , Xiao Wang1 , Meiqi Zhu1 , Chuan Shi1 * , Zhiqiang Zhang2 , Jun Zhou2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{zhangmm, xiaowang, zhumeiqi, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, {lingyao.zzq, jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com

Abstract

same author) and P-S-P (papers attached to the same subject). In recent years, with deep learning employed on HGs,
there is a surge of Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks
(HGNNs) (Wang et al. 2019b; Yun et al. 2019; Fu et al.
2020), which often adopt a hierarchical aggregation (including node-level and semantic-level) to capture the information from metapath-based neighbors, and have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of tasks, e.g.,
node classification and link prediction.
Despite the great success of HGNNs, there is no systematic understanding of the adversarial robustness of HGNNs,
i.e., whether the HGNNs can be easily fooled by slight
perturbations of the input topology. This is especially important for HGNN models since they are widely applied
to many real-world applications, e.g., e-commerce (Zhang
et al. 2019a; Hu et al. 2019) and cyber security (Zhang et al.
2019c; Zhong et al. 2020). So far, most works focus on adversarial vulnerabilities of homogeneous GNNs (Sun et al.
2018), but the robustness for HGNNs is indeed not foreseeable due to unique metapath-based aggregation.
To answer this question, we introduce the first study of
adversarial robustness of HGNNs through evaluating their
performance on dataset ACM under the same evasion adversarial attacks 1 , which perturb topology in the test phase,
and the attack results are shown in Figure 1(b). Surprisingly,
compared to the drop of GCN by about 3 points, HGNNs,
i.e., HAN, MAGNN, and GTN, dramatically decrease by
an average of 28 points. Obviously, HGNNs have significantly different adversarial robustness from GCNs, which
motivates us to further investigate the differences of architectures between GCNs and HGNNs.
In the further analysis of attack results, we observe that
the attackers tend to maliciously link the target node to
the large-degree node (i.e., hub). Taking HAN as an example, the attacker injects an adversarial edge (p1 , a3 ) in Figure 1(a), which will lead malicious (red) papers p4 · · · p66
to be the direct neighbors of p1 under metapath PAP. And
even they are assigned small attention values, they can still
dominate the receptive field of HAN in Figure 1(c). We
argue such vulnerabilities of HGNNs can be attributable
to two key reasons: (1) Perturbation enlargement effect.

Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs) have
drawn increasing attention in recent years and achieved outstanding performance in many tasks. However, despite their
wide use, there is currently no understanding of their robustness to adversarial attacks. In this work, we first systematically study the robustness of HGNNs and show that they can
be easily fooled by adding the adversarial edge between the
target node and large-degree node (i.e., hub). Furthermore,
we show two key reasons for such vulnerabilities of HGNNs:
one is perturbation enlargement effect, i.e., HGNNs, failing
to encode transiting probability, will enlarge the effect of the
adversarial hub in comparison of GCNs, and the other is soft
attention mechanism, i.e., such mechanism assigns positive
attention values to obviously unreliable neighbors. Based on
the two facts, we propose a novel robust HGNN framework
RoHe against topology adversarial attacks by equipping an attention purifier, which can prune malicious neighbors based
on topology and feature. Specifically, to eliminate the perturbation enlargement, we introduce the metapath-based transiting probability as the prior criterion of the purifier, restraining
the confidence of malicious neighbors from adversarial hub.
Then the purifier learns to mask out neighbors with low confidence, thus can effectively alleviate the negative effect of
malicious neighbors in the soft attention mechanism. Extensive experiments on different benchmark datasets for multiple
HGNNs are conducted, where the considerable improvement
of HGNNs under adversarial attacks will demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization ability of our defense framework.

Introduction
Many real-world datasets are usually modeled with Heterogeneous Graphs (HGs) (Shi et al. 2017), which contain diverse types of objects and relations. An example of ACM
citation network characterized by HG is given in Figure
1(a), consisting of three types of objects (Author (A), Paper (P), Subject (S)), and two types of relations (P-A and
P-S). Since HGs contain rich high-order structural information, metapath (sequence of relation types between two node
types) is widely used as a basic tool to capture such information (Shi et al. 2017), such as P-A-P (papers written by the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Attack algorithm and the implementation details of the compared GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017) can be found in Appendix.

4363

