The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Characterizing Structural Hardness of Logic Programs: What Makes Cycles and
Reachability Hard for Treewidth?
Markus Hecher
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, United States
hecher@mit.edu

Abstract

Example 1 (Encoding with ASP). The classical way of
encoding satisfiability (SAT) of a formula F is to guess for
each variable v ∈ at(F ) its truth value via the two rules
v ← ¬v̂ and v̂ ← ¬v. Then, for every clause l1 ∨ l2 ∨ . . . ∨ ln
in F , an additional constraint ensures the clause: ⊥ ←
l¯1 , l¯2 , . . . , l¯n with l¯i being vi , if li = ¬vi , and ˆli otherwise.
The computational complexity of ASP is fairly well studied, where for the consistency problem of deciding whether
a so-called normal logic program admits an answer set
is NP-complete (Bidoı́t and Froidevaux 1991; Marek and
Truszczyński 1991). This result also extends to the class of
head-cycle-free (HCF) programs (Ben-Eliyahu and Dechter
1994), but if full disjunctions are allowed in the heads of
a rule, the complexity increases to ΣP
2 -completeness (Eiter
and Gottlob 1995). Over the time, studying the complexity of ASP raised further attention. There is a wide range
of more fine-grained studies (Truszczynski 2011) for ASP,
also in the context of parameterized complexity (Cygan et al.
2015; Niedermeier 2006; Downey and Fellows 2013; Flum
and Grohe 2006), where certain parameters (Lackner and
Pfandler 2012) are taken into account. In parameterized complexity, the “hardness” of a problem is classified according
to the effort required to solve the problem, e.g., runtime dependency, in terms of a certain parameter. For ASP there is
growing research on the well-studied and prominent structural parameter treewidth (Jakl, Pichler, and Woltran 2009;
Bichler, Morak, and Woltran 2020; Bliem et al. 2020). Intuitively, treewidth yields a tree decomposition, which is a
structural representation that can be used for solving numerous combinatorially hard problems in parts; the treewidth
indicates the maximum number of variables of these parts
one has to investigate during problem solving.
Recently, it has been shown that when assuming the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) (Impagliazzo, Paturi, and
Zane 2001), which implies that SAT cannot be solved in
time better than single-exponential in the number of variables in the worst case, normal ASP seems to be slightly
harder (Hecher 2022) for treewidth than SAT. More precisely,
(i) normal ASP can be solved in time 2O(k·log(k)) · poly(n)
for any logic program of treewidth k with n variables (atoms)
and under ETH this dependency on the treewidth can not
be significantly improved. The reason for the hardness lies
in very large cycles (strongly connected components, SCCs)
of the program’s dependency graph; the hardness proof re-

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a problem modeling and
solving framework for several problems in KR with growing
industrial applications. Also for studies of computational complexity and deeper insights into the hardness and its sources,
ASP has been attracting researchers for many years. These
studies resulted in fruitful characterizations in terms of complexity classes, fine-grained insights in form of dichotomystyle results, as well as detailed parameterized complexity
landscapes. Recently, this lead to a novel result establishing
that for the measure treewidth, which captures structural density of a program, the evaluation of the well-known class of
normal programs is expected to be slightly harder than deciding satisfiability (SAT). However, it is unclear how to utilize
this structural power of ASP. This paper deals with a novel
reduction from SAT to normal ASP that goes beyond wellknown encodings: We explicitly utilize the structural power of
ASP, whereby we sublinearly decrease the treewidth, which
probably cannot be significantly improved. Then, compared to
existing results, this characterizes hardness in a fine-grained
way by establishing the required functional dependency of the
dependency graph’s cycle length (SCC size) on the treewidth.

1

Introduction

Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczyński 2011; Gebser et al. 2012) is a declarative problem modeling and solving framework for knowledge representation and reasoning and artificial intelligence in general.
This makes ASP a key formalism and suitable target language
for solving problems in that area effectively, e.g., (Balduccini,
Gelfond, and Nogueira 2006; Niemelä, Simons, and Soininen
1999; Nogueira et al. 2001; Guziolowski et al. 2013; Schaub
and Woltran 2018; Abels et al. 2019). Such problems are
thereby encoded in a logic program, which is a set of rules
describing its solutions by means of so-called answer sets
– an approach that goes beyond satisfying a set of clauses
(rules) as in SAT, but additionally requires justifications for
variables (atoms) that are claimed to hold. Considerable effort
has been put into providing extensions and a rich modeling
language that can be efficiently evaluated by solvers like
clasp (Gebser, Kaufmann, and Schaub 2009) or wasp (Alviano et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6407

