The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Visual Forced Alignment:
Learning to Align Transcription with Talking Face Video
Minsu Kim, Chae Won Kim, Yong Man Ro*
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{ms.k, chaewonkim, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Unaligned transcription and corresponding talking face video

Abstract

“THANK YOU ALL VERY MUCH”

Forced alignment refers to a technology that time-aligns a
given transcription with a corresponding speech. However,
as the forced alignment technologies have developed using
speech audio, they might fail in alignment when the input
speech audio is noise-corrupted or is not accessible. We focus on that there is another component that the speech can
be inferred from, the speech video (i.e., talking face video).
Since the drawbacks of audio-based forced alignment can be
complemented using the visual information when the audio
signal is under poor condition, we try to develop a novel
video-based forced alignment method. However, different
from audio forced alignment, it is challenging to develop a
reliable visual forced alignment technology for the following two reasons: 1) Visual Speech Recognition (VSR) has
a much lower performance compared to audio-based Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), and 2) the translation from
text to video is not reliable, so the method typically used
for building audio forced alignment cannot be utilized in developing visual forced alignment. In order to alleviate these
challenges, in this paper, we propose a new method that is
appropriate for visual forced alignment, namely Deep Visual Forced Alignment (DVFA). The proposed DVFA can
align the input transcription (i.e., sentence) with the talking
face video without accessing the speech audio. Moreover, by
augmenting the alignment task with anomaly case detection,
DVFA can detect mismatches between the input transcription
and the input video while performing the alignment. Therefore, we can robustly align the text with the talking face video
even if there exist error words in the text. Through extensive experiments, we show the effectiveness of the proposed
DVFA not only in the alignment task but also in interpreting
the outputs of VSR models.

Talking Face Video
w/o Sound

Transcription to be time-aligned

Deep Visual Forced Alignment

Time-aligned transcription
obtained by the proposed method

...
THANK

0.00s~0.44s

YOU

ALL

VERY

0.44s~0.53s 0.53s~0.70s 0.70s~0.95s

MUCH

0.95s~1.39s

Figure 1: The proposed DVFA can time-align a transcription
with a talking face video by watching its lip movements.

transcription with the corresponding speech and produce
the timeline information in word- or phoneme-levels for the
transcription. Methods for implementing forced alignment
can be categorized into two main approaches. The first approach is utilizing audio-based Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) methods that utilize Hidden Markov Models
(HMM) (Rabiner 1989) or Connectionst Temporal Classification (CTC) (Graves et al. 2006). By tracking the states of
HMM (McAuliffe et al. 2017) or finding the CTC-segment
(Kürzinger et al. 2020), we can obtain the time-alignment of
a given transcription. The second approach is utilizing Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) (Müller 2007), a time series
alignment algorithm. The transcription is firstly converted
into audio with timelines using Text-to-Speech (TTS). Then,
by using DTW, the synthesized audio is aligned with the real
audio to produce the alignment map (Pettarin 2017). Since
forced alignment technologies generally assume that the audio is accessible and clean, they could fail to align the transcription with speech when the audio is recorded in a noisy
environment or is absent.
These days, Visual Speech Recognition (VSR) has drawn
big attention for its complementary effect that it can assist or
replace ASR in noisy environments or even when the audio
is absent. This is possible since lips participate in producing
speech, and thus lip movements and speech audio are highly
correlated (Sataloff 1992). Analogous to that VSR developed as a complementary for ASR, one can try to design a
video-based forced alignment technology (denoted as visual

Introduction
When we watch a foreign movie, we naturally expect timealigned subtitles to appear with the dialogue presented in
the film. However, manually annotating the time-alignment
information between the transcription and speech is burdensome. To reduce the burden, we can automatically generate the time-aligned subtitles by using a technique called
forced alignment. Forced alignment aims to align the given
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8273

