The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Detecting and Grounding Important Characters in Visual Stories
Danyang Liu, Frank Keller
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
danyang.liu@ed.ac.uk, keller@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

character representations to build a character-centric storytelling model. Brahman et al. (2021) present a new dataset
of literary pieces paired with descriptions of characters that
appear in them for character-centric narrative understanding.
There is also a long line of work which aims to link character mentions in movie or TV scripts with their visual tracks
(Rohrbach et al. 2017; Bojanowski et al. 2013; Everingham,
Sivic, and Zisserman 2006; Sivic, Everingham, and Zisserman 2009; Tapaswi, Bäuml, and Stiefelhagen 2012).
Existing work on visual storytelling, however, tends to focus on detecting objects in images and discovering relationships between them, while neglecting character information.
Characters are treated as equally important as other objects,
and fed into a generation pipeline without distinguishing
them. For example, a recent approach to visual storytelling
(Xu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021; Hsu et al. 2020; Yang
et al. 2019) is to exploit an external commonsense knowledge graph to enrich the detected objects and thus improve
coherence of the generated stories. Despite being successful
in describing the sequence of events, such an approach is unable to model the characters in a story. It ends up generating
stories with incorrect co-reference and arbitrary characters –
characters that don’t have a consistent personality or background story. Detailed examples of the output of an existing
system can be found in the supplementary material.
Moreover, existing approaches are unable to take into account the importance of characters, which means they cannot distinguish protagonists from side characters in the generated stories. The fact that there are no visual story datasets
with character annotation makes it difficult to develop models for character-centric storytelling.
In this paper, we introduce the VIST-Character dataset,
which augments the test set of VIST (the Visual Storytelling
dataset; Huang et al. 2016) with rich character-related annotation. In VIST-Character, all mentions of the characters
in a story are marked in the text and identified by bounding
boxes in the image sequence. Mentions of the same character (both textual and visual) are annotated as part of a single co-reference chain. Furthermore, the dataset includes a
rating of all characters according to their importance in the
story. This makes it possible to distinguish protagonists and
side characters. Figure 1 shows an example story from the
VIST-Character dataset.
Based on our VIST-Character dataset, we propose two

Characters are essential to the plot of any story. Establishing
the characters before writing a story can improve the clarity of
the plot and the overall flow of the narrative. However, previous work on visual storytelling tends to focus on detecting objects in images and discovering relationships between them.
In this approach, characters are not distinguished from other
objects when they are fed into the generation pipeline. The
result is a coherent sequence of events rather than a charactercentric story. In order to address this limitation, we introduce
the VIST-Character dataset, which provides rich charactercentric annotations, including visual and textual co-reference
chains and importance ratings for characters. Based on this
dataset, we propose two new tasks: important character detection and character grounding in visual stories. For both tasks,
we develop simple, unsupervised models based on distributional similarity and pre-trained vision-and-language models.
Our new dataset, together with these models, can serve as the
foundation for subsequent work on analysing and generating
stories from a character-centric perspective.

Introduction
Visual storytelling, which aims to generate a fluent and coherent story based on an input image sequence, has recently
received increasing attention from both Computer Vision
and Natural Language Processing areas (Hsu et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2021; Hsu et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020; Huang et al. 2016). Unlike the traditional image captioning task where the output is usually descriptive text, visual storytelling requires more than just knowing the objects
in the image sequence and describing them literally. A convincing narrative must be composed by connecting different images and reasoning about what happens in the story.
In general, the most important elements of a story are the
plot and the characters. A human writer usually identifies the
characters in the story from the images first, and determines
who the main character is based on the plot they want to describe. Establishing the characters before writing the story
will make the plot clearer and the overall narrative more convincing. In recent years, there has been some work published
focused on character-centred story generation. For example,
Inoue et al. (2022) and Liu et al. (2020) propose to learn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13210

