The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Monitoring Arithmetic Temporal Properties on Finite Traces
Paolo Felli1 , Marco Montali2 , Fabio Patrizi3 , Sarah Winkler2
1
Università di Bologna – Bologna – Italy
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano – Bolzano – Italy
3
Sapienza Università di Roma – Rome – Italy
paolo.felli@unibo.it, {montali,winkler}@inf.unibz.it, patrizi@diag.uniroma1.it
2

Abstract

Dynamic systems in AI are often constituted by autonomous
agents and heterogeneous components whose internal specification is either unknown or not accessible, so that wellknown techniques to ascertain their correctness at designtime, such as model checking and testing, are not applicable. This calls for approaches to check desired properties
at runtime, by monitoring the executions of the black-box
system under scrutiny. A widely known, solid approach to
monitoring is that of runtime verification (RV), where given
a logical property, the monitor emits a provably correct verdict (Leucker and Schallhart 2009). Formalisms based on
LTL and its extensions have indeed been extensively applied
when monitoring multi-agent systems (Dastani, Torroni,
and Yorke-Smith 2018), software components (Leucker and
Schallhart 2009) and business processes (Ly et al. 2015).
Leucker and Schallhart (2009) highlight two essential semantic desiderata of linear-time monitors. First, a monitored
trace has a finite length, which calls for a finite-trace semantics. Second, a trace is the prefix of an unknown, full trace.
Thus, the verdict of the monitor should be anticipatory (Bartocci et al. 2018), i.e., depend not only on the data seen so

far, but also on its (infinitely many) possible continuations.
In addition, runtime monitors need to do as little computation as possible during monitoring, and therefore all the required machinery and anticipatory test conditions need to be
pre-computed. Similarly, the monitor itself cannot depend
on the specific trace being monitored, but should allow for
monitoring multiple traces against the same property.
In this spectrum, we build on the widely studied logic
LTLf , or LTL over finite traces (De Giacomo and Vardi
2013), where both the monitored prefixes and their infinitely
many suffixes have a finite (yet unbounded) length. Specifically, we focus on the more sophisticated setting of RVLTL by Bauer, Leucker, and Schallhart (2010), where the
verdict of the monitor of a property ψ at each point in time is
one of four possible values: currently satisfied (ψ is satisfied
now but may be violated in a future continuation), permanently satisfied (ψ is satisfied now and will necessarily stay
so), and the two complementary values of permanent and
current violation. Thus, RV-LTL monitoring is at least as
hard as satisfiability and validity. For propositional LTLf , an
RV-LTL monitor can be constructed from the deterministic
finite-state automaton (DFA) corresponding to the property,
by labeling each DFA state by an RV-LTL value, depending
on whether it is final and can reach final and non-final states
(Maggi et al. 2011; De Giacomo et al. 2022).
Prior work on LTLf monitoring like the above has often
focused on propositional traces, where states are described
by propositional interpretations. This coarse-grained representation creates a large abstraction gap w.r.t. dynamic systems, which often generate data-aware traces where states
contain richer objects from an infinite domain, e.g., strings
or numbers. On the other hand, for richer logics partial methods have been devised, but without guarantees that the monitoring task can be solved, e.g. (Reger, Cruz, and Rydeheard
2015). Aiming to bridge this gap, we (i) introduce an extension of LTLf , called ALTLf , which combines lineartime operators with linear arithmetic constraints over data
variables within and across states, (ii) study how to construct automata-based RV-LTL monitors for such formulae
and (iii) identify decidable classes of properties, given that
ALTLf monitoring is in general undecidable. The next example illustrates the challenge that we address.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Example 1. Consider monitoring of suspicious bidding
patterns in an on-line auction. There are three variables:

We study the monitoring of linear-time arithmetic properties
against finite traces generated by an unknown dynamic system. The monitoring state is determined by considering at
once the trace prefix seen so far, and all its possible finitelength, future continuations. This makes monitoring at least
as hard as satisfiability and validity. Traces consist of finite
sequences of assignments of a fixed set of variables to numerical values. Properties are specified in a logic we call ALTLf ,
combining LTLf (LTL on finite traces) with linear arithmetic
constraints that may carry lookahead, i.e., variables may be
compared over multiple instants of the trace. While the monitoring problem for this setting is undecidable in general, we
show decidability for (a) properties without lookahead, and
(b) properties with lookahead that satisfy the abstract, semantic condition of finite summary, studied before in the context
of model checking. We then single out concrete, practically
relevant classes of constraints guaranteeing finite summary.
Feasibility is witnessed by a prototype implementation.

Introduction

6346

