The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Memory-Augmented Theory of Mind Network
Dung Nguyen, Phuoc Nguyen, Hung Le, Kien Do, Svetha Venkatesh, Truyen Tran
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{dung.nguyen,phuoc.nguyen,thai.le,k.do,svetha.venkatesh,truyen.tran}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Social reasoning necessitates the capacity of theory of mind
(ToM), the ability to contextualise and attribute mental states
to others without having access to their internal cognitive
structure. Recent machine learning approaches to ToM have
demonstrated that we can train the observer to read the past
and present behaviours of other agents and infer their beliefs
(including false beliefs about things that no longer exist), goals,
intentions and future actions. The challenges arise when the
behavioural space is complex, demanding skilful space navigation for rapidly changing contexts for an extended period.
We tackle the challenges by equipping the observer with novel
neural memory mechanisms to encode, and hierarchical attention to selectively retrieve information about others. The
memories allow rapid, selective querying of distal related past
behaviours of others to deliberatively reason about their current mental state, beliefs and future behaviours. This results in
ToMMY, a theory of mind model that learns to reason while making little assumptions about the underlying mental processes.
We also construct a new suite of experiments to demonstrate
that memories facilitate the learning process and achieve better theory of mind performance, especially for high-demand
false-belief tasks that require inferring through multiple steps
of changes.

Introduction
Human social interactions necessitate a skill known as theory
of mind (ToM) to infer the mental states of others without
having access to their latent characteristics, internal states and
computation processes. Instead, we can rely on social cues
and past behaviours to construct models of others, thereby
attributing mental states to them, for example, inferring their
beliefs and intentions. The models need not perfectly match
with the true hidden internal mental states but facilitate accurate social prediction and planning (Premack and Woodruff
1978; Gallese and Goldman 1998; Rusch et al. 2020; Langley
et al. 2022).
Since often we can only have access to others’ past behaviours and current observable context, it is plausible that
we need memory to store and represent the past of others,
to contextualise the present, to draw analogies between the
present and the related past, and to reason about possibilities
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11630

(Grant, Nematzadeh, and Griffiths 2017). Cognitive scientists have employed memory of structured representation of
tasks to enable analogical reasoning in ToM, for example, to
recognise false beliefs (Rabkina et al. 2017). Likewise, the
work of (Nguyen and Gonzalez 2021) uses instance matching to model the human’s ToM ability. This cognitive model
assumes that the observer, who is constructing a model of
the actor, also has access to rewards for each experience of
the actor. These works rely on either domain knowledge to
construct the task structure or information that can be inaccessible to the observer.
In this paper, we take an alternative road to learn the
memory mechanisms to build the computational ToM capability into artificial social agents. Here mentalising and
predicting behaviours of an actor in a partially observable
environment are treated as a task to be learnt (Rabinowitz
et al. 2018). In the learning phase, the ToM observer first
acquires a general prior mental model from the observed
behavioural episodes of training actors. In the execution
phase, upon seeing an actor and its partial episode, the observer rapidly updates the specific posterior about the actor.
Realising this strategy, we equip the observer with a new
memory-augmented ToM network dubbed ToMMY (Theory
of Mind with MemorY). Central to this architecture is the
memory module, arranged as key-value pairs storing the past
behaviours of the actor. The analogy-making capability is
learned from training data, and once trained, it works by selectively querying relevant memory keys for a given context
to retrieve corresponding predictive values. The retrieved
values, combined with the selective few states of the current
episode, constitute the posterior of the actor’s mental state,
which serves as an input for predicting its future behaviours.
Learning memory-augmented neural networks is a powerful
technique for multi-step reasoning (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015;
Graves et al. 2016), handling rare events (Kaiser et al. 2017),
meta-learning (Santoro et al. 2016) and rapid reinforcement
learning (Le et al. 2021). However, little work has been done
in the area of mentalising other agents in social settings.
To assess the performance of ToMMY we introduce a new
false-belief test to evaluate the ToM ability under high reasoning demand. False-belief tasks determine if the actor is maintaining an outdated belief about something that no longer
holds. A classic example is the Sally-Anne Test (Wimmer
and Perner 1983; Baron-Cohen, Leslie, and Frith 1985), in

