The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dialogue State Distillation Network with Inter-slot Contrastive Learning for
Dialogue State Tracking
Jing Xu1 * , Dandan Song1† , Chong Liu2 , Siu Cheung Hui3 ,
Fei Li2 , Qiang Ju2 , Xiaonan He2 , Jian Xie2†
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{xujing, sdd}@bit.edu.cn, {liuchong06, lifei21, juqiang, hexiaonan, xiejian01}@baidu.com, asschui@ntu.edu.sg
User

Abstract

System

I need to know what trains are leaving Friday
evening.

In task-oriented dialogue systems, Dialogue State Tracking
(DST) aims to extract users’ intentions from the dialogue history. Currently, most existing approaches suffer from error
propagation and are unable to dynamically select relevant information when utilizing previous dialogue states. Moreover,
the relations between the updates of different slots provide
vital clues for DST. However, the existing approaches rely
only on predefined graphs to indirectly capture the relations.
In this paper, we propose a Dialogue State Distillation Network (DSDN) to utilize relevant information of previous dialogue states and migrate the gap of utilization between training and testing. Thus, it can dynamically exploit previous dialogue states and avoid introducing error propagation simultaneously. Further, we propose an inter-slot contrastive learning
loss to effectively capture the slot co-update relations from
dialogue context. Experiments are conducted on the widely
used MultiWOZ 2.0 and MultiWOZ 2.1 datasets. The experimental results show that our proposed model achieves the
state-of-the-art performance for DST.

Where are you looking to depart from?
I'm leaving from Peterborough.
There are two trains an hour leaving
Peterborough all evening. Do you know what
time you plan to leave?
Not really. I want to get there by 20:45 though.

Dialogue State
train-day: Friday

train-day: Friday
train-departure: Peterborough

train-day: Friday
train-departure: Peterborough
train-arriveby : 20:45

Figure 1: An example of DST. Utterances on the left side are
from the user and system over the continuation of the multiple turns of a dialogue. The corresponding dialogue state
for each turn is on the right side. Specifically, “train-day:
Friday” represents that the value of the slot “day” in the domain “train” is “Friday”.

process. To alleviate this problem, gated recurrent units are
used in a graph attention network to learn to decide which
dialogue states are kept (Chen et al. 2020a). In addition, a
uniform scheduled sampling strategy is also used to make
the DST model adapt to the data noise of dialogue states,
thus improving the robustness of the model (Zhou et al.
2021). Unfortunately, these attempts are still unable to tackle
the problems of the unavailable golden dialogue states and
the potential error of predicted dialogue states, though they
strive to reduce the negative impact of wrongly predicted
dialogue states during the testing process. Moreover, for different current dialogue contexts, the relevant information of
previous dialogue states should be dynamically obtained in
contrast to missing in the current approaches. Therefore, it
is a challenging problem on how to dynamically incorporate
previous dialogue states without error propagation for DST.
Further, we notice that State Operation Prediction (SOP),
which aims to predict whether the value of a given slot needs
to be updated compared with the previous turn, is an important auxiliary task for DST (Zhu et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2020a; Zhou et al. 2021). Most existing approaches conduct
the prediction of each slot independently. However, slot coupdate relations provide a vital clue for the prediction. For
example, if users provide their check-in time, they will also
tend to provide their hotel stay days when booking a hotel.

Introduction
As a key component of task-oriented dialogue systems, Dialogue State Tracking (DST) aims to extract users’ goals or
intents over the continuation of multiple turns of a dialogue,
which are described as a compact dialogue state. Specifically, a DST model aims to extract the corresponding values
of pre-defined slots given a dialogue history. Thus, the extracted dialogue state can be represented as a set of (slot,
value) pairs. A DST example is shown in Figure 1.
As previous dialogue states can provide effective and explicit information of a dialogue history (Kim et al. 2020),
recent approaches attempt to utilize the previous dialogue
state information for DST. Most of these approaches (Zhu
et al. 2020; Zeng and Nie 2020a,b) concatenate the dialogue
context and the corresponding previous dialogue state as input. However, the golden dialogue states can only be obtained during training. Therefore, utilizing the predicted dialogue states may lead to error propagation during the testing
* Work done during internship at Baidu Inc.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13834

