The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Drop Clause: Enhancing Performance, Robustness and Pattern Recognition
Capabilities of the Tsetlin Machine
Jivitesh Sharma, Rohan Yadav, Ole-Christoffer Granmo, Lei Jiao
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAIR)
University of Agder, Norway
{jivitesh.sharma, rohan.k.yadav, ole.granmo, lei.jiao}@uia.no

Abstract

rules (Granmo 2018). In brief, it employs an ensemble of
Tsetlin Automata (TA) that learns propositional logic expressions from Boolean input features, and TM achieves interpretability by leveraging sparse disjunctive normal form.
Indeed, humans are particularly good at understanding flat
and short logical AND-rules, reflecting human reasoning (Noveck et al. 1991). In addition, due to its Boolean
representations and finite-state learning mechanisms, it possesses a minimalistic memory footprint.
Similar to neural networks, the vanilla TM suffers overfitting in the sense that its learning elements, i.e., clauses,
are prone to capture noisy and redundant patterns. Initially,
we believed that this could be simply because of the large
number of clauses. However, by decreasing the number of
clauses, there was a proportionate decrease in performance.
In order to mitigate overfitting, inspired by Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), we propose a method named Drop Clause
(DC) in this paper1 . More specifically, DC method randomly
drops or switches off a set of clauses during training, which
is similar to what dropout does in neural networks. Unlike
dropout, DC induces stochasticity in TM learning, boosting
performance in terms of accuracy and learning speed. It further improves the patterns captured by the clauses, making
them more robust towards input perturbations. As a direct
consequence of DC during training, the training time is reduced proportionally and the heatmaps produced becomes
more distinct.

Logic-based machine learning has the crucial advantage of
transparency. However, despite significant recent progress,
further research is needed to close the accuracy gap between
logic-based architectures and deep neural network ones. This
paper introduces a novel variant of the Tsetlin machine (TM)
that randomly drops clauses, the logical learning element of
TMs. In effect, TM with Drop Clause ignores a random selection of the clauses in each epoch, selected according to a
predefined probability. In this way, the TM learning phase becomes more diverse. To explore the effects that Drop Clause
has on accuracy, training time and robustness, we conduct
extensive experiments on nine benchmark datasets in natural
language processing (IMDb, R8, R52, MR, and TREC) and
image classification (MNIST, Fashion MNIST, CIFAR-10,
and CIFAR-100). Our proposed model outperforms baseline
machine learning algorithms by a wide margin and achieves
competitive performance compared with recent deep learning models, such as BERT-Large and AlexNet-DFA. In brief,
we observe up to 10% increase in accuracy and 2× to 4×
faster in learning than those of the standard TM. We visualize the patterns learnt by Drop Clause TM in the form of
heatmaps and show evidence of the ability of drop clause
to learn more unique and discriminative patterns. We finally
evaluate how Drop Clause affects learning robustness by introducing corruptions and alterations in the image/language
test data, which exposes increased learning robustness.

Introduction

Paper Contributions:

Researchers across various fields are increasingly paying attention to the interpretability of AI techniques. While interpretability previously was inherent in most machine learning approaches, the state-of-the-art methods now increasingly rely on black-box deep neural network-based models.
Natively, these can neither be interpreted during the learning stage nor while producing outputs. For this reason, a
surge of techniques attempts to open the black box by visual
explanations and gradient-based interpretability (Simonyan,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2014; Zhang, Wu, and Zhu 2018;
Radhakrishnan et al. 2018; Bau et al. 2017; Selvaraju et al.
2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016).
The Tsetlin Machine (TM) is an interpretable rulebased machine learning algorithm that produces logical

• We propose to drop clauses randomly during each training iteration, which introduces additional stochasticity.
• We demonstrate that DC makes the TM capture more
unique patterns, improving its generalization performance.
• DC TM leads to competitive results to large deep neural
network models on nine benchmark datasets for NLP and
image classification. Since TM is more akin to a standard machine learning algorithm, like a decision tree,
than a deep learning model, we compare DC TM with
well-known machine learning algorithms, documenting
superior performance across all the datasets.
1
The code is available online on: https://github.com/
Anonymous-2491/Drop-Clause-Interpretable-TM.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13547

