The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Deep Manifold Attack on Point Clouds via Parameter Plane Stretching
Keke Tang1 * , Jianpeng Wu1 * , Weilong Peng1† , Yawen Shi1 , Peng Song2 ,
Zhaoquan Gu3,4 , Zhihong Tian1 , Wenping Wang5
1
Guangzhou University
Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
Texas A&M University
tangbohutbh@gmail.com, lesswu666@gmail.com, wlpeng@gzhu.edu.cn, shiyawen666@gmail.com,
peng song@sutd.edu.sg, guzhaoquan@hit.edu.cn, tianzhihong@gzhu.edu.cn, wenping@cs.hku.hk
2

Abstract
Adversarial attack on point clouds plays a vital role in evaluating and improving the adversarial robustness of 3D deep
learning models. Existing attack methods are mainly applied
by point perturbation in a non-manifold manner. In this paper, we formulate a novel manifold attack, which deforms the
underlying 2-manifold surfaces via parameter plane stretching to generate adversarial point clouds. First, we represent
the mapping between the parameter plane and underlying surface using generative-based networks. Second, the stretching
is learned in the 2D parameter domain such that the generated 3D point cloud fools a pretrained classifier with minimal
geometric distortion. Extensive experiments show that adversarial point clouds generated by manifold attack are smooth,
undefendable and transferable, and outperform those samples
generated by the state-of-the-art non-manifold ones.

Figure 1: Adversarial point clouds of category TABLE generated by non-manifold and manifold attack that mislead
a victim model to recognize as C HAIR: (a) the adversarial point cloud generated by non-manifold attacks, e.g., IFGM (Dong et al. 2020), contains clearly visible outliers,
and thus is easily defended and hardly transferable to unseen models; (b) the adversarial point cloud generated by our
manifold attack is more smooth, undefendable and transferable. Note that the adversarial point cloud in (b) can be captured if textile is put on the table in the real world, such that
humans are not aware of the attack.

Introduction
With the advance of depth sensing devices and 3D deep
learning techniques, applications of 3D point cloud perception are now booming. However, 3D deep learning models
for point clouds are vulnerable to adversarial attacks as reported in (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019), i.e., imperceptible modifications on input point clouds can lead to erroneous predictions of victim models, hindering their deployment in the
real world, especially for safety-critical scenarios. Therefore, investigating adversarial attack on point clouds is critical for evaluating and improving the adversarial robustness
of 3D deep learning models.
Due to the unstructured nature of point clouds, adversarial attack on them can be uniquely applied by dropping
salient points (Zheng et al. 2019; Wicker and Kwiatkowska
2019) or adding adversarial points, clusters and objects (Xiang, Qi, and Li 2019). Meanwhile, mainstream adversarial
attack approaches apply perturbation to point coordinates,
e.g., via extending from image-based attacks (Xiang, Qi, and
Li 2019; Liu, Yu, and Su 2019). Despite their success in attack, the generated adversarial point clouds tend to contain

clearly visible outliers (Dong et al. 2020; Xiang, Qi, and Li
2019); see Fig. 1(a). Besides non-smoothness, most adversarial attacks on point clouds can hardly transfer to different
classification models, and can be easily defended by adversarial defense techniques. Latest studies employ generativebased networks (Zhou et al. 2020), geometry-aware objectives (Wen et al. 2022), etc., to alleviate the above issues.
However, very few attack methods can generate adversarial
point clouds satisfying all three properties simultaneously,
i.e., smoothness, undefendability, and transferability, since
their perturbations are applied in non-manifold manners.
Generally, point clouds of 3D objects are assumed to
be sampled along 2-manifold surfaces embedded in 3D
Euclidean space (Gu, Gortler, and Hoppe 2002; Spanier
1989). If the perturbation is applied to a point cloud in a
non-manifold manner without modifying the underlying 2manifold surface, its adversarialness may only hold for at-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2420

