The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

VBLC: Visibility Boosting and Logit-Constraint Learning for
Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation under Adverse Conditions
†

Mingjia Li1* , Binhui Xie1* , Shuang Li1 , Chi Harold Liu1 , Xinjing Cheng2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Inceptio Technology, Shanghai, China
{mingjiali, binhuixie, shuangli, chiliu}@bit.edu.cn, cnorbot@gmail.com
Nighttime

Abstract
Generalizing models trained on normal visual conditions to
target domains under adverse conditions is demanding in the
practical systems. One prevalent solution is to bridge the domain gap between clear- and adverse-condition images to
make satisfactory prediction on the target. However, previous
methods often reckon on additional reference images of the
same scenes taken from normal conditions, which are quite
tough to collect in reality. Furthermore, most of them mainly
focus on individual adverse condition such as nighttime or
foggy, weakening the model versatility when encountering
other adverse weathers. To overcome the above limitations,
we propose a novel framework, Visibility Boosting and LogitConstraint learning (VBLC), tailored for superior normal-toadverse adaptation. VBLC explores the potential of getting rid
of reference images and resolving the mixture of adverse conditions simultaneously. In detail, we first propose the visibility boost module to dynamically improve target images via
certain priors in the image level. Then, we figure out the overconfident drawback in the conventional cross-entropy loss for
self-training method and devise the logit-constraint learning,
which enforces a constraint on logit outputs during training
to mitigate this pain point. To the best of our knowledge, this
is a new perspective for tackling such a challenging task. Extensive experiments on two normal-to-adverse domain adaptation benchmarks, i.e., Cityscapes → ACDC and Cityscapes
→ FoggyCityscapes + RainCityscapes, verify the effectiveness of VBLC, where it establishes the new state of the art.
Code is available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/VBLC.

Mixture of adverse weather conditions

Foggy

...
(a) Individual adversecondition adaptation

(b) Hybrid adverse-condition adaptation

Figure 1: Problem comparison. (a) Individual adversecondition adaptation: reference images (shown in the red
box at bottom right corner) depicting a similar scene are
leveraged as an intermediate domain to assist in a specific adverse condition, e.g., nighttime or foggy. (b) Hybrid
adverse-condition adaptation: the mixture of images from
multiple adverse conditions are used without any reference.

Van Gool 2021). But, existing studies are mostly centered
around datasets consisting of clean images, yet ignore the
challenge of driving in varying adverse weather conditions,
making them vulnerable in practice. Meanwhile, it is implausible to collect a dataset that fully reflects all situations
and then separate data into discrete domains, since the visual
appearance changes overtime and depends on the specific location, season and many other factors, all of which introduce
a natural domain shift between any training (source) and test
(target) distributions.
Accordingly, the emergence of more robust models for
adverse conditions is vital to paving the way for their realworld utility. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is an
alternative method (Ganin et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017;
Long et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020; Park et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2022) to adapt models trained with well-labeled clear
(source) images to adverse (target) images without access to
target annotations. Until now, nighttime image segmentation
and foggy scene understanding are two mainstream tasks.
Given the difficulties of both specific problems, a great deal
of works, such as (Sakaridis, Dai, and Gool 2022; Dai et al.
2020; Wu et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2022), are carefully designed
and highly customized, with the significant prior knowledge, e.g., additional clear-condition images. In Fig. 1(a),

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed predominance of deep
learning based methods in fundamental vision tasks, where
scene understanding under extreme vision conditions has
been attracting substantial research interest (Ma et al. 2022;
Sakaridis, Dai, and Gool 2022). In many outdoor applications, adverse weather conditions are frequently encountered, causing poor visibility and performance degradation.
For a safer, smoother operating environment, a desirable
perception system should be trustworthy under a wide variety of scenarios (Zhang et al. 2021b; Sakaridis, Dai, and
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8605

