The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-View MOOC Quality Evaluation via Information-Aware
Graph Representation Learning
Lu Jiang1 , Yibin Wang1 , Jianan Wang1 * , Pengyang Wang2∗ , Minghao Yin1,3∗
1

School of Computer Science and Information Technology, Northeast Normal University, China
2
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, China
3
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
{jiangl761, wangyb856,wangjn}@nenu.edu.cn, pywang@um.edu.mo, ymh@nenu.edu.cn
Abstract

Current studies in MOOC quality evaluation lie in two
aspects: (1) manual evaluation (Wang et al. 2021), which
evaluates the course quality by domain experts based on
a pre-defined rubric; and (2) automated evaluation (PérezMartı́n, Rodrı́guez-Ascaso, and Molanes-Lopez 2021; Betanzos, Costa-jussà, and Belanche 2017), which judges the
course quality automatically based on historical records in
the platform. While achieving promising results, current
works still exhibit limitations: First of all, manual-based
methods are time-consuming and labor-intensive. And, in
most of cases, the experts do not have the complete domain
knowledge to evaluate every course on the MOOC platform.
Second, most of the automated methods utilize students’
reviews as the criteria for evaluating course quality. However, students’ evaluation of the quality of MOOCs is biased
and subjective, and cannot yield unified evaluations. In fact,
course quality evaluation in the MOOC platform is a complicated process involving by multiple parties, which can be
examined from different views. Therefore, integrating semantics and opinions from different views to inform unified
representations of the course becomes the key to reasonable
MOOC quality evaluation.
However, two unique challenges arise in achieving this
goal. First, how to design an appropriate data structure for
capturing complex interactions among different types of entities in the MOOCs platform? Second, how should we guarantee the validity of the multi-view representations? Next,
we will outline how we tackle these challenges.
First, in a MOOCs platform, we observe that in addition to
the student and course, there exist multiple types of entities
and multiple types of relationships between pairs of different entities. The complex MOOC data structures are always
represented in heterogeneous information networks (MOOC
HIN) (Shi et al. 2017). Considering the participation of multiple entities on the MOOC platform and the impact of interactions between entities and courses on MOOC quality evaluation. It is difficult to obtain a comprehensive evaluation of
the MOOC quality if we merely depend on a single view.
Only utilizing a single type of interaction may overlook important relationships between courses and other entities. For
example, ”student click course” and ”teacher upload course”
have dissimilar semantics even though they are included in
the same course. These heterogeneous relationships provide
rich information from multi-view. Thus, it requires incorpo-

In this paper, we study the problem of MOOC quality evaluation which is essential for improving the course materials, promoting students’ learning efficiency, and benefiting user services. While achieving promising performances,
current works still suffer from the complicated interactions
and relationships of entities in MOOC platforms. To tackle
the challenges, we formulate the problem as a course representation learning task-based and develop an Informationaware Graph Representation Learning(IaGRL) for multiview MOOC quality evaluation. Specifically, We first build
a MOOC Heterogeneous Network (HIN) to represent the interactions and relationships among entities in MOOC platforms. And then we decompose the MOOC HIN into multiple single-relation graphs based on meta-paths to depict the
multi-view semantics of courses. The course representation
learning can be further converted to a multi-view graph representation task. Different from traditional graph representation
learning, the learned course representations are expected to
match the following three types of validity: (1) the agreement
on expressiveness between the raw course portfolio and the
learned course representations; (2) the consistency between
the representations in each view and the unified representations; (3) the alignment between the course and MOOC platform representations. Therefore, we propose to exploit mutual information for preserving the validity of course representations. We conduct extensive experiments over real-world
MOOC datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Introduction
Massive open online course (MOOC) has been prevalent for
online tutoring and self-studying in recent decades by providing numerous course materials, intermediate feedback,
and interactions between student and instructors. Among
which, MOOC course quality evaluation is one of the vital tasks in MOOC platform management for helping improve the course materials, promote students’ learning efficiency (Jiang et al. 2021), and benefit user services (e.g.,
course recommendation (Wang et al. 2022; Jiang et al.
2022a), cognitive diagnosis (Jiang et al. 2022b), etc).
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8070

