The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Nearest-Neighbor Sampling Based Conditional Independence Testing
Shuai Li1 , Ziqi Chen1∗ , Hongtu Zhu2 , Christina Dan Wang3 , Wang Wen4
1

2

School of Statistics, KLATASDS-MOE, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Departments of Biostatistics, Statistics, Computer Science, and Genetics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, USA
3
Business Division, New York University Shanghai, Shanghai, China
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Central South University, Changsha, China
shuaili.cq@foxmail.com, zqchen@fem.ecnu.edu.cn, htzhu@email.unc.edu, christina.wang@nyu.edu,
wangwen.a@foxmail.com
where ⊥⊥ denotes the independence. The high dimensionality of Z makes CIT challenging (Bellot and van der Schaar
2019; Shi et al. 2021). Our proposed method can be readily
extended to the scenario of multivariate X and Y .
Recently, many methods have been proposed to test conditional independence. See, for example, Candes et al.
(2018), Zhang et al. (2011), Zhang et al. (2017), Bellot
and van der Schaar (2019), Strobl, Zhang, and Visweswaran
(2019), Berrett et al. (2020), Shah and Peters (2020), Shi
et al. (2021), and Zhang et al. (2022). Among them, the conditional randomization test (CRT) proposed by Candes et al.
(2018) is one of the most important methods, but CRT assumes that the true conditional distribution pX|Z is known.
Conditional on {Z1 , . . . , Zn }, one can independently draw
(m)
Xi
∼ pX|Z=Zi for each i across m = 1, . . . , M such
(m)
(m)
that all X (m) := (X1 , . . . , Xn ) are independent of
X := (X1 , . . . , Xn ) and Y := (Y1 , . . . , Yn ), where M is
the number of repetitions. Thus, under the null hypothesis
d
H0 : X ⊥⊥ Y |Z, we have (X (m) , Y, Z) = (X, Y, Z) for all

Abstract
The conditional randomization test (CRT) was recently proposed to test whether two random variables X and Y are conditionally independent given random variables Z. The CRT
assumes that the conditional distribution of X given Z is
known under the null hypothesis and then it is compared to
the distribution of the observed samples of the original data. The aim of this paper is to develop a novel alternative of
CRT by using nearest-neighbor sampling without assuming
the exact form of the distribution of X given Z. Specifically,
we utilize the computationally efficient 1-nearest-neighbor to
approximate the conditional distribution that encodes the null
hypothesis. Then, theoretically, we show that the distribution
of the generated samples is very close to the true conditional
distribution in terms of total variation distance. Furthermore,
we take the classifier-based conditional mutual information
estimator as our test statistic. The test statistic as an empirical fundamental information theoretic quantity is able to well
capture the conditional-dependence feature. We show that our
proposed test is computationally very fast, while controlling
type I and II errors quite well. Finally, we demonstrate the
efficiency of our proposed test in both synthetic and real data
analyses.

d

m, where = denotes equality in distribution. A large difference between (X (m) , Y, Z) and (X, Y, Z) can be regarded
as a strong evidence against H0 . Statistically, one can consider a test statistic T (X, Y , Z) and approximate its p-value
by
PM
1 + m=1 I(T (X (m) , Y , Z) ≥ T (X, Y , Z))
,
(1)
1+M

Introduction
Conditional independence testing (CIT) has wide applications in statistics and machine learning, including causal inference (Spirtes et al. 2000; Pearl 2009; Cai, Li, and Zhang
2022) and graphical models (Lauritzen 1996; Koller and
Friedman 2009) as two well-known examples. The aim of
this paper is to develop a flexible and fast method for CIT. Specifically, we consider two univariate continuous random variables X and Y , and a set of random variables
Z ∈ RdZ , whose dimension dZ can potentially diverge to infinity, with a joint density function given by pX,Y,Z (x, y, z).
Based on n independently and identically distributed (i.i.d)
copies {(Xi , Yi , Zi ) : i = 1, . . . , n} of (X, Y, Z), we are
interested in testing whether two random variables X and Y
are conditionally independent given Z; that is,

where I(·) is the indicator function. Under H0 , the p-value
is valid and P (p ≤ α|H0 ) ≤ α holds for any α ∈ (0, 1).
Several methods have been developed based on different approximations to pX|Z , since pX|Z is rarely known in
practice. For instance, Bellot and van der Schaar (2019) developed a Generative Conditional Independence Test (GCIT) by using Wasserstein generative adversarial networks (WGANs, Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou, 2017) to approximate pX|Z . Let pbX|Z be an estimator of pX|Z based
on WGANs. Theoretically, as shown in Bellot and van der
Schaar (2019), the excess type I error over a desired level
α of their GCIT test is bounded by E{dT V (pX|Z , pbX|Z )},
where dT V denotes the total variation distance. However,
Figure 1 shows that pbX|Z approximates pX|Z very poorly in

H0 : X ⊥⊥ Y |Z versus H1 : X 6⊥
⊥ Y |Z,
∗

Corresponding author: Ziqi Chen.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8631

