The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Principled Data-Driven Decision Support for Cyber-Forensic Investigations
Soodeh Atefi 1 , Sakshyam Panda 2 , Emmanouil Panaousis 2 , Aron Laszka 3
1

University of Houston,
University of Greenwich,
3
Pennsylvania State University
2

Abstract

defences. To this end, victims of cyber incidents can launch
cyber-forensic investigations.
Since we do not know in advance which adversarial techniques the threat actors used, we have to prioritize the investigation of these techniques under uncertainty, not knowing if the investigation of a technique will waste precious
time or reveal crucial information. In prior work, Nisioti
et al. (2021a) demonstrated that one can effectively prioritize the investigation of techniques based on datasets of
prior incidents, exploiting the fact that most threat actors
follow common tactics. However, this existing data-driven
approach is based on a heuristic that does not approximate
optimal decisions, regardless of the size of the dataset or the
available computational power.
To address this limitation, we propose a principled datadriven approach for prioritization. We introduce a novel
model of cyber-forensic investigations based on Markov decision processes, which enables us to formally define the
prioritization problem. Note that this problem is inherently
challenging for multiple reasons. First, datasets of prior incidents are limited in size as many businesses are reluctant to
share detailed information about their security. Second, although threat actors follow common tactics, it is inherently
difficult to predict which particular techniques were used in
a particular incident.
In light of these challenges, we propose a computational approach for decision support that combines a nonparametric machine-learning model, based on k-nearest
neighbor, with a Monte Carlo tree search. By working directly with the data instead of training a parametric model,
we get as much “mileage” out of the limited data as possible.

In the wake of a cybersecurity incident, it is crucial to
promptly discover how the threat actors breached security
in order to assess the impact of the incident and to develop
and deploy countermeasures that can protect against further
attacks. To this end, defenders can launch a cyber-forensic
investigation, which discovers the techniques that the threat
actors used in the incident. A fundamental challenge in such
an investigation is prioritizing the investigation of particular
techniques since the investigation of each technique requires
time and effort, but forensic analysts cannot know which
ones were actually used before investigating them. To ensure
prompt discovery, it is imperative to provide decision support that can help forensic analysts with this prioritization.
A recent study demonstrated that data-driven decision support, based on a dataset of prior incidents, can provide stateof-the-art prioritization. However, this data-driven approach,
called DISCLOSE, is based on a heuristic that utilizes only a
subset of the available information and does not approximate
optimal decisions. To improve upon this heuristic, we introduce a principled approach for data-driven decision support
for cyber-forensic investigations. We formulate the decisionsupport problem using a Markov decision process, whose
states represent the states of a forensic investigation. To solve
the decision problem, we propose a Monte Carlo tree search
based method, which relies on a k-NN regression over prior
incidents to estimate state-transition probabilities. We evaluate our proposed approach on multiple versions of the MITRE
ATT&CK dataset, which is a knowledge base of adversarial
techniques and tactics based on real-world cyber incidents,
and demonstrate that our approach outperforms DISCLOSE
in terms of techniques discovered per effort spent.

1

Introduction

2

Cybersecurity is an ever growing concern for businesses and
individuals alike. While it is not always possible to prevent
cybersecurity incidents, one should always strive to mitigate
them promptly and to learn from them as much as possible. Thus, it is imperative in the aftermath of an incident to
promptly discover the techniques that the threat actors used
to breach security. By discovering how threat actors operate,
we can learn to develop more effective cyber defences and
detect—sufficiently early—cyber-attacks that bypass these

2.1

Model and Problem Formulation

Adversarial Techniques and Cyber Forensics

Adversarial Techniques We consider a forensic investigation whose objective is to discover—as soon as possible—
what techniques the threat actors used in the incident that is
under investigation. The motivation for discovering how the
threat actors breached security is to learn from the incident
and to prevent or mitigate future breaches. We let A denote
the set of all techniques that threat actors may have used in
an incident (e.g., DLL search order hijacking, spearphishing attachment, drive-by compromise). In practice, the set A

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5010

