The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AC-Band: A Combinatorial Bandit-Based Approach to Algorithm Configuration
Jasmin Brandt1 , Elias Schede2 , Björn Haddenhorst1 , Viktor Bengs3,4 ,
Eyke Hüllermeier3,4 , Kevin Tierney2
1

Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University, Germany
Decision and Operation Technologies Group, Bielefeld University, Germany
3
Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich, Germany
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany
{jasmin.brandt, bjoernha}@upb.de, {elias.schede, kevin.tierney}@uni-bielefeld.de, {viktor.bengs, eyke}@ifi.lmu.de
2

Abstract
We study the algorithm configuration (AC) problem, in which
one seeks to find an optimal parameter configuration of a
given target algorithm in an automated way. Recently, there
has been significant progress in designing AC approaches that
satisfy strong theoretical guarantees. However, a significant
gap still remains between the practical performance of these
approaches and state-of-the-art heuristic methods. To this end,
we introduce AC-Band, a general approach for the AC problem based on multi-armed bandits that provides theoretical
guarantees while exhibiting strong practical performance. We
show that AC-Band requires significantly less computation
time than other AC approaches providing theoretical guarantees while still yielding high-quality configurations.

Introduction
Algorithm configuration (AC) is concerned with the task of
automated search for a high-quality configuration (e.g., in
terms of solution quality or runtime) of a given parameterized target algorithm. Parameterized algorithms are found
in many different applications, including, for example, optimization (e.g., satisfiability (SAT) (Audemard and Simon
2018) or mixed-integer programming (MIP) solvers (IBM
2020)), simulation, and machine learning. Finding good configurations is a significant challenge for algorithm designers,
as well as for users of such algorithms who may want to adjust the algorithm to perform well on data specific to their use
case. Finding good configurations through trial and error by
hand is a daunting task, hence automated AC methods have
been developed on the basis of heuristics, such as ParamILS
(Hutter, Hoos, and Stützle 2007; Hutter et al. 2009), GGA
(Ansótegui, Sellmann, and Tierney 2009; Ansótegui et al.
2015), irace (Birattari et al. 2002; López-Ibáñez et al. 2016)
or SMAC (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2013, 2011).
While heuristic configurators have had great success at
finding good configurations on a wide variety of target algorithms, they do not come with theoretical guarantees. To this
end, the pioneering work of Kleinberg, Leyton-Brown, and
Lucier (2017) proposes the first algorithm configurator with
provable, theoretical guarantees on the (near-)optimality of
the configuration returned. Further improvements and adjustments to those guarantees have followed (Weisz, György, and
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12355

Szepesvári 2018, 2019; Kleinberg et al. 2019; Weisz et al.
2020). All of these works essentially consider the runtime
as the performance objective and provide, in particular, an
upper bound on the total runtime of the respective algorithm
configurator that is (nearly) optimal in a worst-case sense.
Despite their appealing theoretical properties and the
steady progress on their empirical performance, these approaches still cannot compete with heuristic approaches in
terms of practical performance. The main issue of these theoretical approaches is that they are conservative in the process
of discarding configurations from the pool of potential candidates, as pointed out in recent work (Weisz et al. 2020).
This is indeed a key characteristic difference compared to
the heuristic approaches, which discard configurations quite
quickly after being used only on a couple of problem instances. From a practical point of view, this makes sense,
as the risk of discarding all good configurations is generally
lower than wasting lots of time looking at bad configurations.
In an attempt to further bridge the gap between heuristic
configurators and theoretical approaches, we propose ACBand, a general algorithm configurator inspired by the popular Hyperband (Li et al. 2016) approach based on multiarmed bandits (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2020). Hyperband
is an algorithm for the hyperparameter optimization problem
(HPO) (Yang and Shami 2020; Bischl et al. 2021b), which
is essentially a subproblem of the general AC problem focusing on configuring solution quality of algorithms, with a
particular focus on machine learning methods. While using
HPO approaches for AC looks attractive at first, it is rather
uncommon in practice due to the subtle differences between
the two problems. These differences include potentially using runtime as a configuration metric and the existence of
multiple problem instances, which are different settings or
scenarios that an optimization method must solve.
Our suggested approach reconciles the basic idea behind
the mechanism of Hyperband with the key characteristics of
the AC problem and incorporates the advantageous property
of discarding configurations quickly. This is achieved by first
replacing the underlying bandit algorithm of Hyperband, Successive Halving (SH) (Karnin, Koren, and Somekh 2013), by
a more general variant, Combinatorial Successive Elimination (CSE) (Brandt et al. 2022), and then carefully adapting
the parameters of the iterative CSE calls over time. In contrast
to SH, as well as to all other multi-armed bandit algorithms

