The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Popularizing Fairness: Group Fairness and Individual Welfare
Andrew Estornell1 , Sanmay Das2 , Brendan Juba1 , Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1

Washington University in Saint Louis
2
George Mason University
{aestornell, yvorobeychik, bjuba}@wustl.edu, sanmay@gmu

Abstract

change from the status quo contentious and, consequently,
less likely. Our central question is whether it is possible to
make group-fair classifiers sufficiently popular—reducing
the prevalence of realized or perceived harm—so as to make
their adoption less contested.
We model the principal’s problem as a comparison between a conventional approach fC and a group-fair approach
fF , with the principal considering a switch from the former
to the latter. Both algorithms select a subset of individuals
from a target population to obtain a particular desirable outcome (e.g., a resource, such as admission to a college). We
examine popularity in this context through the lens of preferences of individuals in a target population over selection
outcomes (which we can encode as positive outcomes of binary classification): an individual weakly prefers fF to fC
if the probability of being selected is not lower under the
former than under the latter. Popularity of a group-fair approach fF then amounts to ensuring that a given fraction
(e.g., majority) of a target population prefers fF to fC .
To illustrate the relationship between fairness, accuracy,
and popularity, consider the following example. Let G1 and
G0 have four and two members respectively, with true labels ⟨1, 1, 1, 1⟩ and ⟨0, 0⟩. A randomized conventional classifier fC , predicts each member of G1 to be positive with
probability 0.75 and each member of G0 to be positive with
probability 0.25. Under demographic parity fairness, G1 is
advantaged as this group has a positive rate 0.5 greater than
that of G0 . Consider two choices for a fair model. fF1 predicts members of G1 to be positive with probability 0.75
and members of G0 to be positive with probability 0.55. fF2
predicts one member of G1 to be positive with probability
1, and the others with probability 32 ; it predicts one member
of G0 to be positive with probability 1 and the other with
probability 0.1. Note that both models have identical accuracy and unfairness, namely .65 and .2 respectively. However, fF1 has not decreased the score of any agent in the
population; all six prefer fF1 at least as much as the original
fC . In contrast, fF2 has decreased the scores of three agents
from G1 and one agent from G0 ; only two agents prefer fF2
at least as much as fC . This example illustrates that popularity should be viewed as a different axis than either accuracy
or fairness, and there may be space to innovate by enabling
popularity comparisons among fair(er) models.
We start this paper by asking an empirical question: Do

Group-fair learning methods typically seek to ensure that
some measure of prediction efficacy for (often historically)
disadvantaged minority groups is comparable to that for the
majority of the population. When a principal seeks to adopt a
group-fair approach to replace another, more conventional approach, the principal may face opposition from those who feel
that they have been disadvantaged as a result of the switch,
and this, in turn, may deter adoption. We propose to mitigate
this concern by ensuring that a group-fair model is also popular, in the sense that it yields a preferred distribution over
outcomes compared with the conventional model for a majority of the target population. First, we show that state of the art
fair learning approaches are often unpopular in this sense. We
then present several efficient algorithms for postprocessing an
existing group-fair learning scheme to improve its popularity
while retaining fairness. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate that the proposed postprocessing approaches are
highly effective.

Introduction
Increasing adoption of machine learning approaches in highstakes domains, such as healthcare and social assistance,
has led to increased scrutiny of their impact on vulnerable
groups. A number of studies demonstrating the disparate
impact of automation on such groups (Citron and Pasquale
2014; Angwin et al. 2016; Dastin 2018; Lee 2018; Koenecke
et al. 2020) has motivated an extensive literature that aims at
achieving group fairness of machine learning (Kearns et al.
2018; Agarwal et al. 2018; Pleiss et al. 2017; Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Chouldechova and Roth 2018; Mehrabi
et al. 2021; Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2017; Angwin
et al. 2016; Dwork et al. 2012) by imposing an explicit constraint that prediction efficacy (which can be measured in
many different ways) is similar across groups. However, a
principal contemplating a change from a conventional, and
potentially biased, prediction model to a group-fair approach
must contend with the perception that such a switch could
inadvertently harm many individuals in the process of improving fairness (for example, making them less likely to
receive a scarce resource such as a welfare benefit or admission to a college). Such perceptions could make any
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7485

