The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

An Ensemble Distillation Framework for Sentence Embeddings with Multilingual
Round-Trip Translation
Tianyu Zong* , Likun Zhang
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zongtianyu20,zhanglikun20}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

fusion of test data in a certain way so that the final result
can learn from each other’s strengths, integrate the learning
ability of each model, and improve the generalization ability
of the final model.
To further improve the state-of-the-art sentence embeddings, in this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised contrastive learning framework based on ensemble learning and
knowledge distillation. Ensemble learning solves a single
prediction problem by building several submodels. It works
by multiple submodels predicting independently. The combined prediction is strengthened by the combination of the
models to prevent overfitting, so it is better than any single
classification to make predictions. Knowledge distillation is
a model compression method based on the “teacher-student
network idea”, which is simple and efficient. Suppose the
two processes of ensemble learning and knowledge distillation can be effectively combined. In that case, it can not only
improve the prediction accuracy through model integration
but also realize model compression through distillation to
improve the accuracy without increasing the model volume.
Based on the above points, we propose a simple but efficient
sentence embedding representation for unsupervised learning of semantic similarity computation. The basic idea is that
we first combine the trained n submodels to obtain a relatively large ensemble model and then compress the model
through knowledge distillation so that the ensemble model
can be compressed without losing the sentence embedding
representation ability of the ensemble model. The volume is
compressed to the original n1 . In this process, the integrated
model combines the advantages of each submodel and improves the generalization ability. Simultaneously, constrains
each other to avoid the over-fitting phenomenon of each submodel to the greatest extent. Therefore, the actual performance of the ensemble model is better than any of the submodels. However, the ensemble model requires much computational overhead, so we compress it through knowledge
distillation to make it consistent with a submodel in volume.
Through this method, we not only achieve the ability to improve sentence embedding representation of the model but
also do not increase the computational overhead of using the
model, the best of both worlds.
In terms of data augmentation, SimCSE uses the dropout
operation that BERT itself has: by sending a sentence into
BERT twice, two different encoding vectors for the same

In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised contrastive
learning framework to improve state-of-the-art sentence embeddings. First, we train a set of contrastive submodels which
take multilingual round-trip translation(RTT) as data augmentation. The RTT naturally changes the length of the same
sentence and replaces Synonyms simultaneously. Then we incorporate them into a single model through knowledge distillation. Specifically, it takes an input sentence and predicts the
ensemble output of all submodels via a contrastive objective.
Thus we preserve nearly the same semantic expressiveness as
the ensemble model without increasing the test cost. We evaluate our framework on standard semantic textual similarity
(STS) tasks. Experimental results show the advantage of our
framework that we achieve an average of 79.27% Spearman’s
correlation, a 3.02% improvement compared to the previous
best results using BERT-base.

Introduction
In natural language processing tasks, sentence embedding
representation is an efficient and general tool to convert raw
text data into a numerical vector representation, which can
be used in a wide range of natural language processing applications such as semantic similarity computation and text
classification. Though BERT(Devlin et al. 2019) is of great
significance in natural language processing, its performance
in unsupervised semantic representation is not very well.
Based on BERT, Sentence-BERT(Reimers and Gurevych
2019) uses a contrastive learning method similar to SimCLR(Chen et al. 2020) to implement sentence embedding.
ConSERT(Yan et al. 2021) emphasizes the importance of
data augmentation, SimCSE(Gao, Yao, and Chen 2021) uses
the dropout that BERT itself has to achieve data augmentation, and DiffCSE(Chuang et al. 2022) learns sentence embeddings that are sensitive to the difference between the
original sentence and the edited sentence. However, the
above work focuses on optimizing a single model and is
prone to over-fitting. Compared with a single model, the
sentence embedding representation of the ensemble models
can avoid falling into overfitting. The ensemble model is to
combine multiple trained models and realizes multi-model
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14074

