The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical Event Grounding
Jiefu Ou, Adithya Pratapa, Rishubh Gupta, Teruko Mitamura
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{jiefuo, vpratapa, rishubhg, teruko}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

Prior work studied hierarchical relations between events
as a part of datasets and systems proposed for narrative understanding (Glavaš et al. 2014), event sequencing (Mitamura, Liu, and Hovy 2017) and schema construction (Du
et al. 2022). These works focused on hierarchical relations
between mentions (e.g., subevent). In this work, we instead
focus on hierarchical relations between grounded mentions
(i.e., events in a KB). This allows for studying hierarchy at
a coarser level and leverages information across numerous
mentions. To this end, we extend Pratapa, Gupta, and Mitamura (2022) to include hierarchical event structures from
Wikidata (Figure 1). In contrast to prior work, our formulation captures the hierarchical aspects by including nonleaf events such as ‘Operation Overlord’ and ‘Western Front
(World War II)’. Our formulation presents a challenging
variant of the event linking task by requiring systems to differentiate between mentions of child and parent events.
For the proposed hierarchical linking task, we present a
baseline that adopts the retrieve & re-rank paradigm, which
has been previously developed for entity and event linking tasks (Wu et al. 2020; Pratapa, Gupta, and Mitamura
2022). To enhance the system with hierarchy information,
we present a methodology to incorporate such information
via a hierarchy-aware loss (Murty et al. 2018) during the retrieval training. We experiment with the proposed systems
on a multilingual dataset. The dataset is constructed by collecting mentions from Wikipedia and Wikinews articles that
link to a set of events in Wikidata. Experiments on the collected dataset show the effectiveness of explicitly modeling
event hierarchies.
Finally, we present a method for zero-shot hierarchy discovery in Wikidata (§). We obtain a score for potential childparent relations between two Wikidata events by computing
the fraction of overlapping mentions from text documents.
Results on an unseen subset of event hierarchies illustrate
the effectiveness of our linking system in discovering hierarchical structures. Our key contributions are,
• We propose the hierarchical event grounding task which
requires linking mentions from documents to a set of hierarchically related events in a KB.
• We collect a large-scale multilingual dataset for this task
that consists of mentions from Wikipedia and Wikinews
articles linking to a set of events from Wikidata that are
organized into hierarchies.

Event grounding aims at linking mention references in text
corpora to events from a knowledge base (KB). Previous
work on this task focused primarily on linking to a single KB event, thereby overlooking the hierarchical aspects
of events. Events in documents are typically described at
various levels of spatio-temporal granularity. These hierarchical relations are utilized in downstream tasks of narrative understanding and schema construction. In this work,
we present an extension to the event grounding task that requires tackling hierarchical event structures from the KB. Our
proposed task involves linking a mention reference to a set
of event labels from a subevent hierarchy in the KB. We
propose a retrieval methodology that leverages event hierarchy through an auxiliary hierarchical loss. On an automatically created multilingual dataset from Wikipedia and Wikidata, our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
hierarchical loss against retrieve and re-rank baselines. Furthermore, we demonstrate the systems’ ability to aid hierarchical discovery among unseen events. Code is available at
https://github.com/JefferyO/Hierarchical-Event-Grounding

Introduction
Grounding entity and event references from documents to
a large-scale knowledge base (KB) is an important component in the information extraction stack. While entity linking
has been extensively explored in the literature (Ji and Grishman 2011), event linking is relatively unexplored.1 Recently,
Pratapa, Gupta, and Mitamura (2022) presented a dataset for
linking event references from Wikipedia and Wikinews articles to Wikidata KB. However, this work limited the grounding task to a subset of events from Wikidata, missing out on
hierarchical event structures available in Wikidata.
Text documents often describe events at varying levels of
spatio-temporal granularity. Figure 1 illustrates this through
three text snippets from English Wikipedia. The mentions
‘Falaise Gap’, ‘Normandy campaign’, and ‘western campaign’ refer to three separate events from Wikidata.2 These
three events (Q602744, Q8641370, Q216184) themselves
constitute a hierarchical event structure.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We interchangeably use the terms, grounding, and linking.
2
Mention is a text span that refers to an underlying event.

13437

