The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Certifiable Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Nanyang Ye1 * , Lin Zhu1 , Jia Wang2 , Zhaoyu Zeng1 , Jiayao Shao3 , Chensheng Peng1 , Bikang Pan4 ,
Kaican Li5 , Jun Zhu6
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
3
University of Warwick, Warwick, United Kingdom
4
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China
6
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn, zhulin sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn, jw2054@cam.ac.uk, zlatanwilliams@sjtu.edu.cn, jiayao shao@163.com,
pesiterswift@sjtu.edu.cn, panbk@shanghaitech.edu.cn, mjust.lkc@gmail.com dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Machine learning methods suffer from test-time performance
degeneration when faced with out-of-distribution (OoD) data
whose distribution is not necessarily the same as training data
distribution. Although a plethora of algorithms have been proposed to mitigate this issue, it has been demonstrated that
achieving better performance than ERM simultaneously on
different types of distributional shift datasets is challenging
for existing approaches. Besides, it is unknown how and to
what extent these methods work on any OoD datum without theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we propose a certifiable out-of-distribution generalization method that provides
provable OoD generalization performance guarantees via a
functional optimization framework leveraging random distributions and max-margin learning for each input datum. With
this approach, the proposed algorithmic scheme can provide
certified accuracy for each input datum’s prediction on the
semantic space and achieves better performance simultaneously on OoD datasets dominated by correlation shifts or
diversity shifts. Our code is available at https://github.com/
ZlatanWilliams/StochasticDisturbanceLearning.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved success in various domains, including computer vision and natural language processing.
However, traditional algorithms only exhibit human-superior
behaviors towards datasets that are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) (Silver et al. 2016), while the performance degenerates when exposed to out-of-distribution
(OoD) data. This precludes many applications, especially in
high-risk sectors, such as healthcare, autonomous driving
and securities, where the distribution shift between training
and testing data is ubiquitous, and the impact of machines’
mistakes is severe.
Many previous works have been done for OoD generalization with empirical performance improvements (Ye et al.
2021; Ahuja et al. 2020a). However, due to the complexity of
the OoD generalization problem where the model has to generalize across various unseen domains, it still remains largely

unsolved. For example, it was recently found few methods
can outperform the empirical risk minimization (ERM) with
extensive data augmentation (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz 2021).
It has also been demonstrated that the proposed OoD generalization algorithms exhibit preferences on one type of
distribution shift and fail on the other. Besides, many empirically well-performed algorithms are provided without
performance guarantees (Ye et al. 2021; Wiles et al. 2022).
All this begs the following question:
Can we have a certifiable OoD generalization algorithm
that may work well under multiple types of distribution shifts?
Previous pioneering work (Zhao et al. 2019; Ben-David
et al. 2010) proposed upper bounds for generalization performances, while the bounds are not computable. In this paper,
we propose the Stochastic Disturbance Learning (SDL) algorithm aiming to achieve SOTA performance for different
kinds of distribution shifts that certifiably provide correct
predictions within some sets around the input data in the
semantic space. To achieve this, we derive the performance
guarantee by measuring the performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) under random disturbances via a functional
optimization framework, that is not reliant on the local convexity assumption of DNNs. Our main contributions are as
follows:
1. We propose an OoD generalization algorithm that
achieves better performances than ERM on OoD datasets
dominated by correlation shifts and diversity shifts simultaneously. See Section for definitions of the mentioned
shifts.
2. We provide a certification methodology with max-margin
learning, that can provide theoretical performance guarantees. Ablation studies confirm the effectiveness of algorithmic components. The theoretical analysis also helps
explain why the commonly-used dropout method can help
improve DNN’s generalization abilities.

Preliminaries
This section briefly summarizes the literature for the OoD
generalization methods and introduces the topics that motivate the proposed algorithmic framework.

* Corresponding author. The full Appendix is available on Arxiv.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10927

