The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Generalized Scalarization Method for Evolutionary Multi-Objective
Optimization
Ruihao Zheng, Zhenkun Wang *
School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
12132686@mail.sustech.edu.cn, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com

the Tchebycheff (TCH) method are the L1 scalarization and
the L∞ scalarization, respectively. Any scalarization method
can be used in MOEA/D, and each has its own strengths and
weaknesses (Hansen 2000; Wang, Zhang, and Zhang 2016).
In MOEA/D, each subproblem is associated with one solution. For each iteration, the evolutionary operations are
conducted with respect to each subproblem to generate a
new solution; this new solution is used to replace several
neighboring subproblems’ original solutions if it is better than these solutions. As stated in (Wang et al. 2014;
Li et al. 2014), there may exist mismatches between solutions and subproblems and the above replacement strategy
can lead to severe performance degradation. Sequentially,
several MOEA/D variants with mismatch coping strategies
have been proposed, such as MOEA/D-GR (Wang et al.
2014), MOEA/D-STM (Li et al. 2014), MOEA/D-IR (Li
et al. 2015), MOEA/D-AMOSTM (Wu et al. 2017), and
MOEA/D-2TCHMFI (Ma et al. 2018). Most of these algorithms employ the TCH method to define subproblems. Because the TCH-based subproblem has a good property, i.e.,
the intersection between its direction vector and the Pareto
front is optimal for it. Nevertheless, the TCH method has
some specific weaknesses compared to other Lp scalarization methods. It is non-smooth, non-differentiable, and may
cause slow convergence of MOEA/D, making it difficult to
use in many scenarios. Therefore, it is of great significance
for MOEA/D to develop mismatch coping strategies that enable using any Lp scalarization method, even when facing
MOPs with non-convex Pareto fronts.
This paper adopts MOEA/D-GR as the backbone. It
matches the most suitable subproblem for each new solution according to the function values over all subproblems.
Our analysis first reveals that MOEA/D-GR can avoid mismatches only when the TCH method (i.e., L∞ ) is used.
When the TCH method is replaced with another Lp scalarization for any p ∈ [1, ∞), MOEA/D-GR fails to choose
the appropriate subproblem for each solution. For example,
MOEA/D-GR always chooses boundary subproblems to update if the TCH method is substituted with the WS method.
Our analysis demonstrates that these mismatches can be attributed to Lp -based (1 ≤ p < ∞) subproblems having
inconsistently large preference regions. When p is set to a
small value, the corresponding subproblems have preference
regions with extremely imbalanced sizes. The boundary sub-

Abstract
The decomposition-based multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA/D) transforms a multi-objective optimization
problem (MOP) into a set of single-objective subproblems
for collaborative optimization. Mismatches between subproblems and solutions can lead to severe performance degradation of MOEA/D. Most existing mismatch coping strategies
only work when the L∞ scalarization is used. A mismatch
coping strategy that can use any Lp scalarization, even when
facing MOPs with non-convex Pareto fronts, is of great significance for MOEA/D. This paper uses the global replacement (GR) as the backbone. We analyze how GR can no
longer avoid mismatches when L∞ is replaced by another Lp
with p ∈ [1, ∞), and find that the Lp -based (1 ≤ p < ∞)
subproblems having inconsistently large preference regions.
When p is set to a small value, some middle subproblems
have very small preference regions so that their direction vectors cannot pass through their corresponding preference regions. Therefore, we propose a generalized Lp (GLp ) scalarization to ensure that the subproblem’s direction vector passes
through its preference region. Our theoretical analysis shows
that GR can always avoid mismatches when using the GLp
scalarization for any p ≥ 1. The experimental studies on various MOPs conform to the theoretical analysis.

Introduction
The multi-objective optimization problem (MOP) can be
written as
minimize f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fm (x))⊺ ,
(1)
subject to x ∈ Ω,
where x = (x1 , . . . , xn )⊺ is a decision vector (also called
solution), and Ω ⊂ Rn denotes the decision space. f : Rn →
Rm is composed of m objective functions, and f (x) is the
objective vector corresponding to x.
The multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D) is a popular framework for dealing
with MOPs (Zhang and Li 2007). It converts an MOP into a
set of single-objective subproblems to optimize them simultaneously. The subproblem function is defined by a scalarization method, where the family of the Lp (p ≥ 1) scalarization is often used. The weighted sum (WS) method and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12518

