The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multi-Label Few-Shot ICD Coding as Autoregressive Generation with Prompt
Zhichao Yang1 , Sunjae Kwon1 , Zonghai Yao1 , Hong Yu1,2,3
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell
3
Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, Veterans Affairs Bedford Healthcare System
zhichaoyang@umass.edu

Abstract

be as clinically important as common codes for a patient.
Therefore, a multi-label classifier is required to perform with
high precision and recall for every ICD code, including infrequent ones.
Many recent studies tried self-attention BERT-based models on ICD coding (Zhang, Liu, and Razavian 2020; Ji,
Holtta, and Marttinen 2021; Pascual, Luck, and Wattenhofer
2021; Dai et al. 2022). Most existing BERT-based models
follow a common design choice: each ICD code is associated with a unique entity representation and the coding can
be transformed into a multi-label classification across ICD
codes. Specifically, previous models use bi-encoder to calculate a low-dimensional dense vector representation for an
ICD code and for a note text separately. Later, they take dot
product of the two to build a note-aware code representation for each ICD code. This design enables a multi-label
classification with binary cross-entropy loss on all code representations. However, such a design has several limitations.
First, bi-encoder may miss fine-grained interactions between target ICD codes and candidate mentions in discharge
note texts (Mullenbach et al. 2018). A discharge note contains hundreds of different candidate mentions. Take an ICD
code left heart cardiac catheterization in Figure 1 as an
example, their note encoder aims to capture two candidate
mention phrases cardiac catheterization and left heart. The
encoder also needs to repeat this process for every code and
condenses the note text into a single low-dimensional dense
vector. When pooling thousands of tokens from a note text
into a single representation, it is possible that some detailed
level of information would be lost. This detail-lost representation of note text would then miss fine-grained interactions
when cross attend to target code descriptions.
Second, note-aware code representation from crossattention is unable to generate from missing mention, because language model contains limited amount of medical
knowledge (Meng et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2022). Take ICD
code Acute posthemorrhagic anemia in Figure 1 as an example, there is no mention of anemia in this discharge note
texts. However, the model is required to infer from lab results such as low level of RBC, Hgb, Hct, which leads
to anemia. In order to fill in this knowledge gap, previous researches use additional information such as hierarchical code ontology (Tsai, Chang, and Chen 2019; Cai et al.
2022), code co-occurrence (Cao et al. 2020), code frequency

Automatic International Classification of Diseases (ICD)
coding aims to assign multiple ICD codes to a medical note
with an average of 3,000+ tokens. This task is challenging
due to the high-dimensional space of multi-label assignment
(155,000+ ICD code candidates) and the long-tail challenge
- Many ICD codes are infrequently assigned yet infrequent
ICD codes are important clinically. This study addresses the
long-tail challenge by transforming this multi-label classification task into an autoregressive generation task. Specifically, we first introduce a novel pretraining objective to generate free text diagnoses and procedures using the SOAP
structure, the medical logic physicians use for note documentation. Second, instead of directly predicting the high
dimensional space of ICD codes, our model generates the
lower dimension of text descriptions, which then infers ICD
codes. Third, we designed a novel prompt template for multilabel classification. We evaluate our Generation with Prompt
(GPsoap ) model with the benchmark of all code assignment
(MIMIC-III-full) and few shot ICD code assignment evaluation benchmark (MIMIC-III-few). Experiments on MIMICIII-few show that our model performs with a marco F1
30.2, which substantially outperforms the previous MIMICIII-full SOTA model (marco F1 4.3) and the model specifically designed for few/zero shot setting (marco F1 18.7). Finally, we design a novel ensemble learner, a cross-attention
reranker with prompts, to integrate previous SOTA and our
best few-shot coding predictions. Experiments on MIMICIII-full show that our ensemble learner substantially improves
both macro and micro F1, from 10.4 to 14.6 and from 58.2 to
59.1, respectively.

1

Introduction

In real-world tasks, there are often insufficient training
data for rare class labels (Atutxa et al. 2019; Koh et al.
2021). Taking automatic international classification of diseases (ICD) coding (Larkey and Croft 1996) as an example,
given a discharge note as input, the task is to assign multiple
ICD disease label codes associated with each note. The ICD
coding task in MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al. 2016) contains 4,075 unique ICD-9-CM codes in 3,372 testing data,
among which 1,285 (31.5%) codes occur less than 11 times
in the training split. In the clinical domain, rare codes may
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5366

