The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Continual Graph Learning in Adaptive Riemannian Spaces
Li Sun1∗ , Junda Ye2 , Hao Peng3∗ , Feiyang Wang2 , Philip S. Yu4
1

School of Control and Computer Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn; {jundaye, fywang}@bupt.edu.cn; penghao@buaa.edu.cn; psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

with Euclidean space, the zero-curvature Riemannian space
(Zhang, Song, and Tao 2022; Zhou and Cao 2021; Wang
et al. 2020). However, in continual graph learning, the curvature of a graph remains unknown until its arrival. In particular, the negatively curved Riemannian space, hyperbolic
space, is well-suited for graphs presenting hierarchical patterns or tree-like structures (Krioukov et al. 2010; Nickel
and Kiela 2017). The underlying geometry shifts to be positively curved, hyperspherical space, when cyclical patterns
(e.g., triangles or cliques) become dominant (Bachmann,
Bécigneul, and Ganea 2020). Even more challenging, the
curvature usually varies over the coming graph sequence as
shown in the case study. Thus, it calls for a smart graph encoder in the Riemannian space with adaptive curvature for
each coming graph successively.
Challenge 2: Continual graph learning without supervision. Existing continual graph learners (Cai et al. 2022;
Wang et al. 2022) are trained in the supervised fashion, and
thereby rely on abundant labels for each learning task. Labeling graphs requires either manual annotation or paying
for permission in practice. It is particularly hard and even
impossible when graphs are continuously emerging on-thefly. In this case, self-supervised learning is indeed appealing, so that we can acquire knowledge from the unlabeled
data themselves. Though self-supervised learning on graphs
is being extensively studied (Veličković et al. 2019; Qiu et al.
2020; Yin et al. 2022), existing methods are trained offline.
That is, they are not applicable for continual graph learning, and naive application results in catastrophic forgetting
in the successive learning process (Lange et al. 2022; Ke
et al. 2021). Unfortunately, self-supervised continual graph
learning is surprisingly under-investigated in the literature.
Consequently, it is vital to explore how to learn and memorize knowledge free of labels for continual graph learning
in adaptive Riemannian spaces. Thus, we propose the challenging yet practical problem of self-supervised continual
graph learning in adaptive Riemannian spaces.
In this paper, we propose a novel self-supervised
Riemannian Graph Continual Learner (RieGrace). To address the first challenge, we design an Adaptive Riemannian GCN (AdaRGCN), which is able to shift among
any hyperbolic or hyperspherical space adaptive to each
graph. In AdaRGCN, we formulate a unified Riemannian
graph convolutional network (RGCN) of arbitrary curva-

Continual graph learning routinely finds its role in a variety of real-world applications where the graph data with different tasks come sequentially. Despite the success of prior
works, it still faces great challenges. On the one hand, existing methods work with the zero-curvature Euclidean space,
and largely ignore the fact that curvature varies over the coming graph sequence. On the other hand, continual learners in
the literature rely on abundant labels, but labeling graph in
practice is particularly hard especially for the continuously
emerging graphs on-the-fly. To address the aforementioned
challenges, we propose to explore a challenging yet practical problem, the self-supervised continual graph learning
in adaptive Riemannian spaces. In this paper, we propose a
novel self-supervised Riemannian Graph Continual Learner
(RieGrace). In RieGrace, we first design an Adaptive Riemannian GCN (AdaRGCN), a unified GCN coupled with a
neural curvature adapter, so that Riemannian space is shaped
by the learnt curvature adaptive to each graph. Then, we
present a Label-free Lorentz Distillation approach, in which
we create teacher-student AdaRGCN for the graph sequence.
The student successively performs intra-distillation from itself and inter-distillation from the teacher so as to consolidate
knowledge without catastrophic forgetting. In particular, we
propose a theoretically grounded Generalized Lorentz Projection for the contrastive distillation in Riemannian space.
Extensive experiments on the benchmark datasets show the
superiority of RieGrace, and additionally, we investigate on
how curvature changes over the graph sequence.

Introduction
Continual graph learning is emerging as a hot research topic
which successively learns from a graph sequence with different tasks (Febrinanto et al. 2022). In general, it aims at
gradually learning new knowledge without catastrophic forgetting the old ones across sequentially coming tasks. Centered around fighting with forgetting, a series of methods
(Kim, Yun, and Kang 2022; Galke et al. 2021) have been
proposed recently. Despite the success of prior works, continual graph learning still faces tremendous challenges.
Challenge 1: An adaptive Riemannian representation
space. To the best of our knowledge, existing methods work
∗

Corresponding Authors: Li Sun and Hao Peng
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4633

