The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Enhancing the Antidote: Improved Pointwise Certifications
against Poisoning Attacks
Shijie Liu1 , Andrew C. Cullen1 , Paul Montague2 , Sarah M. Erfani1 , Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein1
1

School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
2
Defence Science and Technology Group, Adelaide, Australia
shijiel2@student.unimelb.edu.au, andrew.cullen@unimelb.edu.au, paul.montague@dst.defence.gov.au,
sarah.erfani@unimelb.edu.au, benjamin.rubinstein@unimelb.edu.au
Abstract

against bounded numbers of poisoned training examples. This
is known as the certified robustness, which is commonly
achieved through the addition of calibrated noise through
randomised smoothing (Lecuyer et al. 2019). While these certifications have been successfully applied to poisoning attacks
on labels and/or input features (Rosenfeld et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2020), their applicability has been limited to attacks
that modify training examples, rather than the more general
insertion/deletion operations. On the other hand, classifiers
trained with differential privacy (DP) can be shown to be
certifiably robust against poisoning attacks even against insertion/deletion operations (Ma, Zhu, and Hsu 2019; Hong et al.
2020). However, to date, such certifications do not provide
pointwise guarantees which ensures the robustness for individual samples against a finite number of poisoned training
examples. This omission still leaves a vulnerability that can
be exploited by a motivated adversary to compel the model
to misclassify a particular testing sample. Recent works (Jia,
Cao, and Gong 2020; Levine and Feizi 2021) leveraging bagging have achieved pointwise guarantees against poisoning
attacks that allow insertion/deletion. However, some of these
methods are specialized to particular learning approaches.
In this work, we establish a general framework for deriving
pointwise-certifiably robust guarantees against data poisoning attacks that can influence both the label and feature sets.
Such guarantees ensure that the predicted class of an individual sample are invariant to a finite number of changes to the
training dataset. Prior works have leveraged DP to improve
statistical properties of certification against data poisoning
across a dataset. In contrast, we are the first to extend DP to
certify individual samples. By producing an improved group
privacy for the Sampled Gaussian Mechanism, our new approach even yields certifications that hold for more changes
to the training dataset than what had been identified by prior
approaches (Ma, Zhu, and Hsu 2019; Jia, Cao, and Gong
2020; Levine and Feizi 2021). Our specific achievements can
be summarized as follows:
• A general framework providing pointwise-certified robustness guarantees for models that are trained with
differentially-private learners.
• The framework provides a general poisoning attack defence against insertion, deletion, and modification attacks
on both the label and feature sets. The defence improves
the existing differential privacy based approaches, and its

Poisoning attacks can disproportionately influence model behaviour by making small changes to the training corpus. While
defences against specific poisoning attacks do exist, they in
general do not provide any guarantees, leaving them potentially countered by novel attacks. In contrast, by examining
worst-case behaviours Certified Defences make it possible
to provide guarantees of the robustness of a sample against
adversarial attacks modifying a finite number of training samples, known as pointwise certification. We achieve this by
exploiting both Differential Privacy and the Sampled Gaussian
Mechanism to ensure the invariance of prediction for each
testing instance against finite numbers of poisoned examples.
In doing so, our model provides guarantees of adversarial robustness that are more than twice as large as those provided
by prior certifications.

Introduction
Despite the impressive performance, many modern machine
learning models have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial data perturbations (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2013;
Chen et al. 2017; Chakraborty et al. 2018). This adversarial
sensitivity is a significant concern now that machine learning
models are increasingly being deployed in sensitive applications. Of particular concern are data poisoning attacks,
where an adversary manipulates the training set to change
the decision boundary of learned models. The risk of such attacks is heightened by the prevalence of large, user-generated
datasets that are constructed without vetting. The fact that
these attacks can render a model useless further underscores
the need for robust defence mechanisms. Some examples of
models that are vulnerable to data poisoning attacks include
email spam filters and malware classifiers. These models have
been shown to be susceptible to attacks that either render the
model ineffective (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2013), or that
produce targeted misclassifications (Chen et al. 2017).
The defences intrinsically counter specific poisoning attacks means that even state-of-the-art defences (CarnereroCano et al. 2020; Paudice et al. 2018) can be vulnerable
to new attacks. To circumvent this inherent dependency
of defences on attacks, recent work has begun to consider the construction of guarantees of predictive invariance
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8861

