The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

STARS: Spatial-Temporal Active Re-sampling for Label-Efficient Learning from
Noisy Annotations
Dayou Yu1 * , Weishi Shi2 * , Qi Yu1†
1

Rochester Institute of Technology
2
University of North Texas
{dy2507, qi.yu}@rit.edu, weishi.shi@unt.edu

Accuracy

Active learning (AL) aims to sample the most informative
data instances for labeling, which makes the model fitting
data efficient while significantly reducing the annotation cost.
However, most existing AL models make a strong assumption
that the annotated data instances are always assigned correct
labels, which may not hold true in many practical settings. In
this paper, we develop a theoretical framework to formally
analyze the impact of noisy annotations in AL and show that
systematically re-sampling guarantees to reduce the noise rate,
which can lead to improved generalization capability. More
importantly, the theoretical framework demonstrates the key
benefit of conducting active re-sampling on label-efficient
learning, which is critical for AL. The theoretical results also
suggest essential properties of an active re-sampling function
with a fast convergence speed and guaranteed error reduction.
This inspires us to design a novel spatial-temporal active resampling function by leveraging the important spatial and
temporal properties of maximum-margin classifiers. Extensive
experiments conducted on both synthetic and real-world data
clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed active
re-sampling function.

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

Accuracy

Abstract

0.6

0.4
0.3
0

0.6
0.5

0.5
AL_clean
Random_clean

AL_noise
Random_noise

100
200
300
400
Number of Annotated Samples

(a)

500

0.4
0.3
0

AL_clean
STAR

No Re-sample
Random Re-sample

100
200
300
400
Number of Annotated Samples

500

(b)

Figure 1: (a) impact of noisy annotations, (b) comparison of
no re-sampling, random re-sampling, and active re-sampling

Introduction
Modern supervised learning techniques, including most deep
learning models, require a large volume of labeled data for
model training. However, annotating a large number of data
samples is both labor-intensive and time-consuming. Active
Learning (AL) provides a promising means to reduce the data
annotation cost. The key idea is to train an active sampling
model to identify most informative samples and only ask
their labels from annotators. While traditional AL methods
have demonstrated great potential in reducing the data annotation cost (Joshi, Porikli, and Papanikolopoulos 2009; Luo,
Schwing, and Urtasun 2013; Yoo and Kweon 2019; Kirsch,
Van Amersfoort, and Gal 2019), they are usually vulnerable
to the annotation noises introduced through various kinds of
human or device errors due to limitation of their knowledge
or the constraints from the environment. Thus, their effectiveness may be significantly affected when being deployed in
many practical settings.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10980

Figure 1 (a) demonstrates the major negative impacts of annotation noises to AL. It can be seen that effectiveness of AL
becomes completely diminished in the presence of a moderate level of annotation noises at 0.3. We have a few important
observations. First, AL under noise, which corresponds to the
AL noise curve in the figure, significantly under-performs
an AL model trained via clean data (i.e., AL clean). In contrast, AL clean demonstrates a clear advantage over passively
learning (i.e., Random clean), which randomly chooses data
instances for annotation and model training. Passive learning eventually still converges to the desirable generalization
performance but requires much more annotated instances as
compared with AL. Furthermore, AL noise even performs
worse than a passive learning model when being training from
noisy annotations (i.e., Random noise). This is because an
AL model tends to choose the most informative instances for
annotation and these instances can significantly impact the decision surface. When these important instances are wrongly
labeled, they could do more harm to the AL model than
randomly selected instances. Therefore, an actively trained
model could perform even worse under annotation noises.
Finally, as expected, models trained from noisy data exhibit
a much higher variance, which is undesirable.
Despite significant negative impacts as identified above,
how to effectively conduct AL from noisy annotations is still
largely unexplored. Traditional methods assume that data instances, once being sampled, can be precisely labeled. However, as discussed earlier, such a strong assumption no longer
hold true for many applications. Few existing works propose
to perform re-sampling among the annotated data instances
and relabel them to alleviate the negative impact of the annotation noises. As a representative work (Lin, Mausam, and

