The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

CoordFill: Efficient High-Resolution Image Inpainting via
Parameterized Coordinate Querying
Weihuang Liu1 , Xiaodong Cun2 * , Chi-Man Pun1 * , Menghan Xia2 , Yong Zhang2 , Jue Wang2
1

University of Macau,
2
Tencent AI Lab
mc05379@umac.mo, vinthony@gmail.com, cmpun@umac.mo,
menghanxyz@gmail.com, zhangyong201303@gmail.com, arphid@gmail.com
Abstract
Image inpainting aims to fill the missing hole of the input.
It is hard to solve this task efficiently when facing highresolution images due to two reasons: (1) Large reception
field needs to be handled for high-resolution image inpainting. (2) The general encoder and decoder network synthesizes
many background pixels synchronously due to the form of the
image matrix. In this paper, we try to break the above limitations for the first time thanks to the recent development
of continuous implicit representation. In detail, we downsample and encode the degraded image to produce the spatialadaptive parameters for each spatial patch via an attentional
Fast Fourier Convolution (FFC)-based parameter generation
network. Then, we take these parameters as the weights and
biases of a series of multi-layer perceptron (MLP), where the
input is the encoded continuous coordinates and the output
is the synthesized color value. Thanks to the proposed structure, we only encode the high-resolution image in a relatively
low resolution for larger reception field capturing. Then, the
continuous position encoding will be helpful to synthesize
the photo-realistic high-frequency textures by re-sampling
the coordinate in a higher resolution. Also, our framework
enables us to query the coordinates of missing pixels only
in parallel, yielding a more efficient solution than the previous methods. Experiments show that the proposed method
achieves real-time performance on the 2048×2048 images
using a single GTX 2080 Ti GPU and can handle 4096×4096
images, with much better performance than existing state-ofthe-art methods visually and numerically. The code is available at: https://github.com/NiFangBaAGe/CoordFill.

Figure 1: The proposed method only requires 24ms (25×
faster than state-of-the-art method LaMa (Suvorov et al.
2022) in the same resolution) to remove the red masked
regions on the resolution of a 2048×2048 image. Compared with most of the previous methods that synthesize the
full image Y by convolutional neural networks, CoordFill
queries the coordinates (x, y) in the missing mask M of the
input X only and generates the pixel-value by the implicit
representation. Thanks to the proposed decoder, CoordFill
runs faster than previous methods on the high-resolution image inpainting task.

2018, 2019; Iizuka, Simo-Serra, and Ishikawa 2017; Liu
et al. 2018) are used to synthesize the realistic textures.
Other types of image inpainting are inspired by the typical
hints (e.g. edges (Nazeri et al. 2019), semantic maps (Liao
et al. 2021)) from the original background, these methods
guess the hints in the hole region firstly, and then, they synthesize the texture by the guidance of the filled hints. However, current methods still suffer from many limitations for
real-world applications since casual images are in high resolution and on the mobile platform. We raise a question: What
makes the inpainting hard in efficiently handling the highresolution images? and we attempt to answer this question
from the following perspectives:
(i) Learning the larger reception fields is time-consuming
for high-resolution images. A larger reception field is essential in image inpainting (Suvorov et al. 2022), which means
that we need to feed the full-size images to the inpainting

Introduction
With the rapid development of digital media, the demand
for image editing, for example, filling the given hole according to the remaining background pixels or removing the unnecessary object, also increases a lot. These tasks belong to
image inpainting, which is one of the fundamental image
synthesis tasks, which requires both semantic understanding
and conditional generation.
Convolutional neural network (CNN)-based methods
dominate this field in recent years. For example, coarseto-fine network structures and generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014) based methods (Yu et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1746

