The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

HAVEN: Hierarchical Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
Dual Coordination Mechanism
Zhiwei Xu, Yunpeng Bai, Bin Zhang, Dapeng Li, Guoliang Fan
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
{xuzhiwei2019, baiyuanpeng2020, zhangbin2020, lidapeng2020, guoliang.fan}@ia.ac.cn
Coordination of the inter-level policies

Abstract
Recently, some challenging tasks in multi-agent systems have
been solved by some hierarchical reinforcement learning
methods. Inspired by the intra-level and inter-level coordination in the human nervous system, we propose a novel value
decomposition framework HAVEN based on hierarchical reinforcement learning for fully cooperative multi-agent problems. To address the instability arising from the concurrent
optimization of policies between various levels and agents,
we introduce the dual coordination mechanism of inter-level
and inter-agent strategies by designing reward functions in a
two-level hierarchy. HAVEN does not require domain knowledge and pre-training, and can be applied to any value decomposition variant. Our method achieves desirable results
on different decentralized partially observable Markov decision process domains and outperforms other popular multiagent hierarchical reinforcement learning algorithms.

Coordination of the intra-level policies

Figure 1: Inter-level and intra-level coordination in the human nervous system. We can consider the upper half of the
figure as high-level policies in hierarchical reinforcement
learning, and the lower half as low-level policies.

poral abstraction. Traditional HRL methods include hierarchical abstraction machine (HAM) (Parr and Russell
1997), MAXQ (Dietterich 2000), option (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999; Precup and Sutton 2000), and feudal architecture (Dayan and Hinton 1992). With the emergence of
deep learning, HRL has gradually evolved into two distinct
branches: subgoal-based (Vezhnevets et al. 2017; Nachum
et al. 2018) and option-based methods (Bacon, Harb, and
Precup 2017; Harb et al. 2018). Both of them have been employed in many single-agent applications.
As depicted in Figure 1, various brain regions are responsible for various organs. We view different regions of
the cerebral cortex as different high-level strategies. When
an individual performs a complex action, coordination between high-level strategies is required. Similarly, we see
the peripheral nervous system distributed in various organs
as different low-level strategies. They also need to coordinate with each other (we ignore that coordination is mainly
done through the spinal cord). Besides, high-level strategies
need to guide their respective low-level strategies. Therefore, when viewing the human body as a multi-agent system, we find that inter-level and intra-level coordination are
crucial for solving fully cooperative tasks.
Inspired by the human nervous system, we propose
a new framework for multi-agent cooperation problems,
HierArchical Value dEcompositioN (HAVEN), a hierarchically structured value decomposition method. HAVEN de-

Introduction
There has been a growing interest in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in the last few years, which plays a
vital role in various tasks such as traffic control (Kuyer et al.
2008) and recommendation systems (Choi et al. 2018). Most
MARL algorithms follow the paradigm known as centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) (Lowe
et al. 2017). Each agent can utilize all available information
during training but can only make decisions based on local
observations. According to this principle, MARL algorithms
can be divided into several categories, including those based
on centralized critics and decentralized actors (Lowe et al.
2017; Foerster et al. 2018; Iqbal and Sha 2019), communication (Sukhbaatar, Szlam, and Fergus 2016; Foerster et al.
2016; Peng et al. 2017), and value decomposition (Sunehag
et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018; Son et al. 2019; Xu et al.
2022). In a fully cooperative scenario, value decomposition
methods can significantly alleviate the credit assignment issue. Numerous value decomposition variants with significant performance have been proposed recently.
However, most previous studies on multi-agent cooperative tasks do not consider hierarchical structures. Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) is a computational approach that learns to operate on different levels of temCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11735

