The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Decision-Friendly AUC: Learning Multi-Classifier with AUCµ
Peifeng Gao 1 , Qianqian Xu 2, * , Peisong Wen 1, 2
Huiyang Shao 1, 2 , Yuan He 3 , Qingming Huang 1, 2, 4, 5,∗
2

1
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
4
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{gaopeifeng21, shaohuiyang21}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {xuqianqian, wenpeisong20z}@ict.ac.cn
heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

In this case, commonly used classification metrics like accuracy are not ideal choices to evaluate classifiers since they
might ignore the important minority categories. Hence, evaluating the model performance in the case of imbalanced data
is critical for imbalanced classification problems.
For binary classification tasks, Area Under the ROC
Curve (AUC) has been widely used as one of the standard
metrics since it is insensitivity to label distributions. Due
to its importance, researchers have made efforts to direct
AUC optimization (Rakotomamonjy 2004; Zhang, Saha,
and Vishwanathan 2012; Ying, Wen, and Lyu 2016; Liu
et al. 2020b). Since several real-world classification tasks
involve more than two classes, it is natural to extend AUC to
multiclass such that classifiers over imbalanced multiclass
datasets can be measured and optimized similarly. More related work is presented in the Appendices.
One simple extension is Multiclass AUC (MAUC), which
takes the average AUC between classes in a one-vs-one or
one-vs-all manner (Hand and Till 2001; Yang et al. 2021a).
Despite the success of the MAUC in imbalanced learning,
we argue that it is not an ideal metric for imbalanced multiclassification. Specifically, multi-classification can be solved
with two stages: scoring and decision process, where the former is predicting continuous score for each category, and
the latter is mapping scores to discrete categories. MAUC
focuses on the scoring, but leaves the decision process unconsidered. This might lead to inconsistency of MAUC w.r.t.
the same decision results, i.e., even if two scoring functions
have same predictions, MAUC might be different, while another multiclass extension AUCµ (Kleiman and Page 2019)
outputs consistent results.
As shown in Fig.1, given two examples (x1 , 1), (x2 , 2)
and a scoring function f with two components f 1 , f 2 , denote ∆1 = f 1 (x1 ) − f 1 (x2 ), ∆2 = f 2 (x1 ) − f 2 (x2 ). For
any f˜ with f˜(x1 ) = f (x1 ) + b1 , f˜(x2 ) = f (x2 ) + b2 ,
these two scoring functions output the same predictions,
and ∆1,2 might be different with b1 , b2 changing. However,
MAUC measures ∆1 , ∆2 independently, leading to different evaluation results for f and f˜. Since AUCµ measures
∆margin = ∆1 − ∆2 invariable w.r.t. b1 , b2 , it is able
to avoid this issue. To this end, we turn to explore AUCµ
(Kleiman and Page 2019) which takes both scoring and

Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is a widely used ranking
metric in imbalanced learning due to its insensitivity to label
distributions. As a well-known multiclass extension of AUC,
Multiclass AUC (MAUC, a.k.a. M-metric) measures the average AUC of multiple binary classifiers. In this paper, we argue
that simply optimizing MAUC is far from enough for imbalanced multi-classification. More precisely, MAUC only focuses on learning scoring functions via ranking optimization,
while leaving the decision process unconsidered. Therefore,
scoring functions being able to make good decisions might
suffer from low performance in terms of MAUC. To overcome this issue, we turn to explore AUCµ , another multiclass
variant of AUC, which further takes the decision process into
consideration. Motivated by this fact, we propose a surrogate
risk optimization framework to improve model performance
from the perspective of AUCµ . Practically, we propose a twostage training framework for multi-classification, where at the
first stage a scoring function is learned maximizing AUCµ ,
and at the second stage we seek for a decision function to
improve the F1-metric via our proposed soft F1. Theoretically, we first provide sufficient conditions that optimizing
the surrogate losses could lead to the Bayes optimal scoring
function. Afterward, we show that the proposed surrogate
risk
√
enjoys a generalization bound in order of O(1/ N ). Experimental results on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method in both AUCµ and F1metric.

Introduction
Over the past few decades, learning with imbalanced
data has been attracting researchers’ attention in the machine learning community (Japkowicz and Stephen 2002;
Cárdenas and Baras 2006; He and Garcia 2009; Li, Chaudhuri, and Tewari 2016; Wang et al. 2021). In some real-world
tasks like disease prediction tasks (Hao et al. 2020; Zhou
et al. 2020) and rare event detection tasks (Liu et al. 2020a,
2018; Wu et al. 2020), the data distributions are largely
skewed, i.e., a few categories occupy the vast majority of
observations, whereas the rest account for a small fraction.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7633

