The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ILSGAN: Independent Layer Synthesis
for Unsupervised Foreground-Background Segmentation
Qiran Zou, Yu Yang, Wing Yin Cheung, Chang Liu, Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University, BNRist
qiranzou@gmail.com, yang-yu16@foxmail.com, zhangyx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liuchang2022, xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised foreground-background segmentation aims at
extracting salient objects from cluttered backgrounds, where
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) approaches, especially layered GANs, show great promise. However, without human annotations, they are typically prone to produce
foreground and background layers with non-negligible semantic and visual confusion, dubbed “information leakage”,
resulting in notable degeneration of the generated segmentation mask. To alleviate this issue, we propose a simpleyet-effective explicit layer independence modeling approach,
termed Independent Layer Synthesis GAN (ILSGAN), pursuing independent foreground-background layer generation
by encouraging their discrepancy. Specifically, it targets minimizing the mutual information between visible and invisible regions of the foreground and background to spur interlayer independence. Through in-depth theoretical and experimental analyses, we justify that explicit layer independence
modeling is critical to suppressing information leakage and
contributes to impressive segmentation performance gains.
Also, our ILSGAN achieves strong state-of-the-art generation
quality and segmentation performance on complex real-world
data.

Information Leakage (w/o ILS)

Independent Synthesis (with ILS)

Figure 1: From top to bottom: synthetic background, foreground, composed image, and corresponding mask. Left:
synthetic samples with information leakage problem when
our ILS algorithm is not adopted. Right: generated samples with independent foreground and background layers
and more accurate masks when ILS is employed.

Introduction

tributes to accurate segmentation performance. Leveraging the intrinsic compositional nature of natural images,
layered GANs have made exceptional progress for unsupervised foreground-background segmentation. Specifically,
with multilayer structures of generators and corresponding inductive constraints, PerturbGAN (Bielski and Favaro
2019) considers that the foreground can be shifted to a
certain extent without affecting the image fidelity. FineGAN (Singh, Ojha, and Lee 2019) constrains the background layer with an extra background discriminator.
However, during layered GANs’ training, foreground and
background layers typically contain increasing semantic information about each other, resulting in their growing visual similarity. As shown in Fig. 1 (left), there exists semantic confusion that background contains a wheel and foreground contains trees, and visual similarity that foreground
and background have similar colors and textures. This phenomenon, termed “information leakage”, discourages the
mask layer from distinguishing the foreground and background and impairs segmentation performance severely.

Foreground-background segmentation, also called foreground extraction, targets dividing foregrounds containing
object instances from the background in an image. It is an
elementary and special case of instance segmentation (He
et al. 2017) that the ability to distinguish foregroundbackground is vital for complex scene understanding (Krishna et al. 2017; Zellers et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018). Since
it is error-prone, time-consuming, and expensive to densely
label a large quantity of data, unsupervised foregroundbackground segmentation, including GAN-based (MelasKyriazi et al. 2022; Yang et al. 2017; Bielski and Favaro
2019), VAE-based (Yu et al. 2021; Engelcke, Parker Jones,
and Posner 2021), and MI clustering-based (Ji, Henriques,
and Vedaldi 2019; Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2020) methods,
attracts growing attention in the community.
Among these approaches, GAN-based methods show significant representation disentanglement ability which conCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11488

