The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Interpretability of Deep Sequential Knowledge Tracing Models with
Question-centric Cognitive Representations
Jiahao Chen1 , Zitao Liu2 * , Shuyan Huang1 , Qiongqiong Liu1 , Weiqi Luo2
1

TAL Education Group, Beijing, China
Guangdong Institute of Smart Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
chenjiahao@tal.com, liuzitao@jnu.edu.cn, huangshuyan@tal.com, liuqiongqiong1@tal.com, lwq@jnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Knowledge tracing (KT) is a crucial technique to predict students’ future performance by observing their historical learning processes. Due to the powerful representation ability of
deep neural networks, remarkable progress has been made
by using deep learning techniques to solve the KT problem. The majority of existing approaches rely on the homogeneous question assumption that questions have equivalent contributions if they share the same set of knowledge
components. Unfortunately, this assumption is inaccurate in
real-world educational scenarios. Furthermore, it is very challenging to interpret the prediction results from the existing
deep learning based KT models. Therefore, in this paper, we
present QIKT, a question-centric interpretable KT model to
address the above challenges. The proposed QIKT approach
explicitly models students’ knowledge state variations at a
fine-grained level with question-sensitive cognitive representations that are jointly learned from a question-centric knowledge acquisition module and a question-centric problem solving module. Meanwhile, the QIKT utilizes an item response
theory based prediction layer to generate interpretable prediction results. The proposed QIKT model is evaluated on three
public real-world educational datasets. The results demonstrate that our approach is superior on the KT prediction task,
and it outperforms a wide range of deep learning based KT
models in terms of prediction accuracy with better model
interpretability. To encourage reproducible results, we have
provided all the datasets and code at https://pykt.org/.

Figure 1: A graphical illustration of the KT problem.
Recently, remarkable progress has been made by applying deep learning to solve the KT problem (Piech et al.
2015; Abdelrahman and Wang 2019; Ghosh, Heffernan, and
Lan 2020; Nakagawa, Iwasawa, and Matsuo 2019; Pandey
and Karypis 2019; Pandey and Srivastava 2020; Shen et al.
2021, 2020; Yang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2017, 2021; Wang
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2023a,b). One of the representative approaches among them is the deep sequential KT modeling,
which utilizes auto-regressive architectures, such as LSTM
and GRU, to represent student’s knowledge states (e.g., the
mastery level of the concepts) as the hidden states of recurrent units (Piech et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2018; Guo et al.
2021; Lee and Yeung 2019; Liu et al. 2019). Due to the ability to learn sequential dependencies from student interaction data, deep sequential KT models draw attention from
researchers from different communities and achieve great
success in improving prediction accuracy (Minn et al. 2018;
Nagatani et al. 2019; Su et al. 2018; Yeung and Yeung 2018).
In spite of the promising results demonstrated by previous
methods, some important limitations still exist when applying deep sequential KT models on real-world educational
data. First, most existing approaches rely on the homogeneous assumption that questions nested under a particular
set of knowledge components (KCs) are equivalent (Zhang
et al. 2017; Nagatani et al. 2019; Nakagawa, Iwasawa, and
Matsuo 2019; Lee and Yeung 2019). The homogeneous assumption is inaccurate in two perspectives: (1) it assumes
that students have the same knowledge increment after they
give the same responses to homogeneous questions1 during
the knowledge acquisition learning processes; and (2) it as-

Introduction
Knowledge tracing (KT) is the task of using students’ historical learning interaction data (e.g., responses to a series
of questions) to model their knowledge mastery over time
so as to make predictions on their future performance (e.g.,
predicting correctly on next question) (Corbett and Anderson 1994). Figure 1 gives an illustrative example of the KT
task. Such predictive capabilities can potentially help students learn better and faster when paired with high-quality
learning materials and instructions and the KT models have
been widely used to support intelligent tutoring systems and
MOOC platforms (Käser et al. 2017; Cen, Koedinger, and
Junker 2006; Lavoué et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2021a).
* The corresponding author: Zitao Liu
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14196

In this paper, we refer to questions that have the same set of

