The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Monitoring Model Deterioration with Explainable Uncertainty Estimation via
Non-parametric Bootstrap
Carlous Mougan* 1 , Dan Saattrup Nielsen* 2
1

University of Southampton, United Kingdom
2
The Alexandra Institute, Denmark
c.mougan@southampton.ac.uk, dan.nielsen@alexandra.dk

Abstract
Monitoring machine learning models once they are deployed
is challenging. It is even more challenging to decide when
to retrain models in real-case scenarios when labeled data is
beyond reach, and monitoring performance metrics becomes
unfeasible. In this work, we use non-parametric bootstrapped
uncertainty estimates and SHAP values to provide explainable
uncertainty estimation as a technique that aims to monitor
the deterioration of machine learning models in deployment
environments, as well as determine the source of model deterioration when target labels are not available. Classical methods
are purely aimed at detecting distribution shift, which can lead
to false positives in the sense that the model has not deteriorated despite a shift in the data distribution. To estimate model
uncertainty we construct prediction intervals using a novel
bootstrap method, which improves previous state-of-the-art
work. We show that both our model deterioration detection
system as well as our uncertainty estimation method achieve
better performance than the current state-of-the-art. Finally,
we use explainable AI techniques to gain an understanding
of the drivers of model deterioration. We release an open
source Python package, doubt, which implements our proposed methods, as well as the code used to reproduce our
experiments.

Introduction
Monitoring machine learning models in production is not
an easy task. There are situations when the true label of the
deployment data is available, and performance metrics can
be monitored. But there are cases where it is not, and performance metrics are not so trivial to calculate once the model
has been deployed. Model monitoring aims to ensure that a
machine learning application in a production environment
displays consistent behavior over time.
Being able to explain or remain accountable for the performance or the deterioration of a deployed model is crucial, as
a drop in model performance can affect the whole business
process (Mougan, Kanellos, and Gottron 2021), potentially
having catastrophic consequences1 . Once a deployed model
has deteriorated, models are retrained using previous and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The Zillow case is an example of consequences of model
performance degradation in an unsupervised monitoring scenario,

15037

new input data in order to maintain high performance. This
process is called continual learning (Diethe et al. 2018) and
it can be computationally expensive and put high demands on
the software engineering system. Deciding when to retrain
machine learning models is paramount in many situations.
Traditional machine learning systems assume that training
data has been generated from a stationary source, but data
is not static, it evolves. This problem can be seen as a distribution shift, where the data distributions of the training
set and the test set differ. Detecting distribution shifts has
been a longstanding problem in the machine learning (ML)
research community (Shimodaira 2000; Sugiyama, Krauledat, and Müller 2007; Sugiyama and Müller 2005; Tasche
2017; Zadrozny 2004; Stolzenberg and Relles 1997; Heckman 1990; Cortes et al. 2008; Huang et al. 2006; He et al.
2014), as it is one of the main sources of model performance
deterioration (Candela et al. 2009). Furthermore, data scientists in machine learning competitions claim that finding the
train/validation split that better resembles the test (evaluation)
distribution is paramount to winning a Kaggle competition
(Guschin et al. 2018).
However, despite the fact that a shift in data distribution
can be a source of model deterioration, the two are not identical. Indeed, if we shift a random noise feature we have caused
a change in the data distribution, but we should not expect
the performance of a model to decline when evaluated on
this shifted dataset. Thus, we emphasize here that our focus
is on model deterioration and not distribution shift, despite
the correlation between the two.
Established ways of monitoring distribution shift when the
real target distribution is not available are based on statistical
changes either the input data (Diethe et al. 2018; Rabanser,
Günnemann, and Lipton 2019) or on the model output (Garg
et al. 2021). These statistical tests correctly detect univariate
changes in the distribution but are completely independent
of the model performance and can therefore be too sensitive, indicating a change in the covariates but without any
degradation in the model performance. This can result in
false positives, leading to unnecessary model retraining. It is
worth noting that several authors have stated the clear need to
identify how non-stationary environments affect the behavior
of models (Diethe et al. 2018).
see https://edition.cnn.com/2021/11/09/tech/zillow-ibuying-homezestimate/index.html (Online accessed January 26, 2022).

