The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Multispectral Invisible Coating: Laminated Visible-Thermal Physical Attack
against Multispectral Object Detectors Using Transparent Low-E Films
Taeheon Kim, Youngjoon Yu, Yong Man Ro*
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{eetaekim, greatday, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multispectral object detection plays a vital role in safetycritical vision systems that require an around-the-clock operation and encounter dynamic real-world situations (e.g., selfdriving cars and autonomous surveillance systems). Despite
its crucial competence in safety-related applications, its security against physical attacks is severely understudied. We investigate the vulnerability of multispectral detectors against
physical attacks by proposing a new physical method: Multispectral Invisible Coating. Utilizing transparent Low-e films,
we realize a laminated visible-thermal physical attack by attaching Low-e films over a visible attack printing. Moreover,
we apply our physical method to manufacture a Multispectral Invisible Suit that hides persons from the multiple view
angles of Multispectral detectors. To simulate our attack under various surveillance scenes, we constructed a large-scale
multispectral pedestrian dataset which we release to the public. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method
effectively attacks the state-of-the-art multispectral detector
both in the digital space and the physical world.

Figure 1: Demonstration of our laminated visible-thermal
physical attack. The person covered with the Multispectral
Invisible Coating is invisible from the multispectral detector. In comparison, the other person wearing plain clothing
is successfully detected.

2020a; Kim, Park, and Ro 2021, 2022; Park et al. 2021).
Recent works show the remarkable success of multispectral
detectors in practical day-night vision applications that encounter challenging real-world scenes such as pedestrian detection in driving or surveillance scenes.
Along with the importance and remarkable achievement
in multispectral object detection, DNN-based object detectors are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial patch attacks(Liu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018; Thys, Van Ranst,
and Goedemé 2019; Lee and Kolter 2019; Wang et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020b; Kim, Yu, and Ro 2022;
Yu et al. 2022). Adversarial patches are localized perturbations intentionally crafted by malicious attackers that fool
machine learning models and lead to misprediction. It can
be physically realized as stickers, printings, laser beams,
or even wearable clothing(Li, Schmidt, and Kolter 2019;
Thys, Van Ranst, and Goedemé 2019; Duan et al. 2021;
Wu et al. 2020b). During the COVID-19 pandemic, thermal
detectors received significant attention, and thermal adversarial patches were developed using infrared stealth materials or temperature controls (Zhu et al. 2021, 2022). Kim,
Lee, and Ro (2022) designed a Multispectral Adversarial
Patch by combining visible and thermal patch attacks. Adversarial patches are developing in various forms, imposing
a notable threat to real-world detectors. For instance, a bank

Introduction
Multispectral object detection plays an important role in
safety-critical applications such as autonomous surveillance
systems and self-driving cars(Farlik et al. 2019; Choi et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Cao et al. 2021). The motivation
behind multispectral object detection is combining information obtained from multispectral cameras (e.g., visible and
thermal) to handle dynamic situations in the real world, especially low visibility conditions such as bad weather, low
illumination, and low resolution(Li et al. 2019; Zhou, Chen,
and Cao 2020). Combining thermal imaging, which leverages thermal heat emission to capture the silhouette of objects, is the most intuitive way of perceiving objects under low visibility conditions(Krišto, Ivasic-Kos, and Pobar
2020; Kieu et al. 2020). Based on this intuition, researchers
recently developed DNN-based multispectral object detectors that adequately conjugate the unique visible and thermal
characteristics. By switching the input port between visible
or thermal mode interchangeably depending on the situation,
multispectral detectors show significant performance superiority against visible-only or thermal-only detectors(Wu et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1151

