The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Safe Policy Improvement for POMDPs via Finite-State Controllers
Thiago D. Simão* , Marnix Suilen* , Nils Jansen
Department of Software Science
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
{thiago.simao, marnix.suilen, nils.jansen}@ru.nl
[(zi , ai , ri , zi′ )]

Abstract

data collection

We study safe policy improvement (SPI) for partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). SPI is an offline
reinforcement learning (RL) problem that assumes access to
(1) historical data about an environment, and (2) the so-called
behavior policy that previously generated this data by interacting with the environment. SPI methods neither require access to a model nor the environment itself, and aim to reliably improve upon the behavior policy in an offline manner.
Existing methods make the strong assumption that the environment is fully observable. In our novel approach to the SPI
problem for POMDPs, we assume that a finite-state controller
(FSC) represents the behavior policy and that finite memory
is sufficient to derive optimal policies. This assumption allows us to map the POMDP to a finite-state fully observable
MDP, the history MDP. We estimate this MDP by combining
the historical data and the memory of the FSC, and compute
an improved policy using an off-the-shelf SPI algorithm. The
underlying SPI method constrains the policy space according to the available data, such that the newly computed policy
only differs from the behavior policy when sufficient data is
available. We show that this new policy, converted into a new
FSC for the (unknown) POMDP, outperforms the behavior
policy with high probability. Experimental results on several
well-established benchmarks show the applicability of the approach, even in cases where finite memory is not sufficient.

1

z, r

πβ
a

buffer

deployment

D

z, r

πI

learning

a

πI

πI

Figure 1: Illustration of the offline reinforcement learning
problem in partially observable environments (adapted from
Levine et al. 2020). The dashed arrow indicates the setting
where the behavior policy is available during learning.
fully observable environments, e.g., (Petrik, Ghavamzadeh,
and Chow 2016; Laroche, Trichelair, and des Combes 2019).
The restriction to full observability poses a serious limitation on the applicability of SPI, as most real-world
problems are partially observable, due to, for instance,
noisy sensors (Kochenderfer 2015). Partially observable
Markov decision processes (POMDPs) are the standard
model for decision-making problems under partial observability (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). So far,
SPI for POMDPs was only studied for memoryless policies (Thomas, Theocharous, and Ghavamzadeh 2015; Yeager et al. 2022). However, POMDP policies often require a
notion of memory. In general, optimal policies for POMDPs
with infinite horizons require infinite memory, rendering this
problem undecidable (Madani, Hanks, and Condon 2003).
Nevertheless, finite memory can make good approximations
of the optimal policy (Bonet 2002) and are often used in
practice for being more explainable (Dujardin, Dietterich,
and Chadès 2017). Policies with finite memory may take the
form of finite-state controllers (FSCs; Meuleau et al. 1999a;
Junges et al. 2018; Carr, Jansen, and Topcu 2021).

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a standard approach to solve
sequential decision-making problems when the environment
dynamics are unknown (Sutton and Barto 1998). Typically,
an RL agent interacts with the environment and optimizes its
behavior according to the environment’s feedback. However,
in offline RL (Levine et al. 2020), the RL agent receives a
fixed dataset of past interactions between a behavior policy
and the environment and derives a new policy without direct
interactions with the environment. One of the challenges in
offline RL is to ensure that the new policy outperforms the
behavior policy (Cheng et al. 2022). This problem is called
safe policy improvement (SPI; Thomas, Theocharous, and
Ghavamzadeh 2015). Most of the approaches to SPI assume

Our approach. We contribute a novel SPI approach for
POMDPs. First, to account for the inherent memory requirement in partially observable domains, we consider a behavior policy represented by a FSC. To create a tractable
method, we assume that there exists a finite-memory policy for the POMDP that is optimal, also known as the
finite-history-window approach (Kaelbling, Littman, and

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15109

