The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Distributed Inference of Deep Neural Networks via Restructuring and
Pruning
Afshin Abdi, Saeed Rashidi, Faramarz Fekri, Tushar Krishna
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
{abdi, saeed.rashidi}@gatech.edu, {fekri,tushar}@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract

As an example, consider a sensor network where the inference is done on the data observed by the entire network,
i.e., each node in the network only observes part of the data.
However, transferring all data to a central powerful node to
aggregate and perform the ML task is undesirable due to the
sheer amount of data to be transferred over a band-limited
channel, or privacy concerns. Further, such a computationally
powerful node may not even exist in the network. Hence, it
is favorable to develop a distributed equivalence of a deep
model for distributed deployment over the sensors such that
the sensor network, as a whole, becomes a computing/inference engine of the original deep model.
The majority of works on distributed/parallel execution
of DNNs are concerned with algorithmic aspects of the parallel implementation (e.g., (Zinkevich et al. 2010; Chung
et al. 2014; De Grazia, Stoianov, and Zorzi 2012)). However,
in the aforementioned applications, straightforward parallel
computing algorithms are not suitable and cannot be arbitrarily scaled up for deep models with complex connectivity
structures. Hence, here, we focus on the structure of DNNs
and how we can modify it for efficient distributed inference.
Although it is possible to design deep models according
to the capability and constraints of the processing system,
following such an approach requires training a new model for
every target hardware or distributed system which is infeasible or demanding in many ML problems. Further, imposing
a possibly unnecessary structure in advance during training
a deep model would likely be limiting in terms of model
performance and accuracy. Moreover, it can be an undesirable approach for parallel implementation since a model
specifically designed for optimum implementation on a target platform or architecture may be far from optimum on
other platforms (e.g., intelligent edge devices, GPUs with
different compute capabilities, or CPU vs GPU vs sensor
network). Hence, optimizing and fixing the structure for one
particular distributed setting in advance would limit the optimal deployment on other platforms. As a result, we assume
that a deep model has already been trained with minimum or
no hardware-specific constraints. Our goal is readjusting the
model via restructuring the layers and manipulating the parameters of the neural network without changing its general
topology for more efficient parallel implementation.
For example, consider the simple neural network in
Fig. 1(a). Simply partitioning the model into two sub-models

In this paper, we consider the parallel implementation of
an already-trained deep model on multiple processing nodes
(a.k.a. workers). Specifically, we investigate as to how a deep
model should be divided into several parallel sub-models, each
of which is executed efficiently by a worker. Since latency due
to synchronization and data transfer among workers negatively
impacts the performance of the parallel implementation, it is
desirable to have minimum interdependency among parallel
sub-models. To achieve this goal, we propose to rearrange the
neurons in the neural network, partition them (without changing the general topology of the neural network), and modify
the weights such that the interdependency among sub-models
is minimized under the computations and communications
constraints of the workers while minimizing its impact on the
performance of the model. We propose RePurpose, a layerwise model restructuring and pruning technique that guarantees the performance of the overall parallelized model. To
efficiently apply RePurpose, we propose an approach based on
ℓ0 optimization and the Munkres assignment algorithm. We
show that, compared to the existing methods, RePurpose significantly improves the efficiency of the distributed inference
via parallel implementation, both in terms of communication
and computational complexity.

Introduction
In recent years, the size and complexity of deep neural
networks (DNNs) have increased significantly in terms of
model’s structure and number of parameters. Consequently,
real-time implementation and inference in many machine
learning (ML) problems has become challenging. Although
the execution time of deep neural networks can be improved
significantly by the application of parallel computing algorithms and using multiple processing units (such as GPU’s
or clusters of computing nodes), it generally requires synchronization and significant data exchange among processing
units. This is mainly due to the fact that in parallel computations, each processing unit performs a portion of the
computations, its inputs generally depend on the other units’
outputs, and the computation results should be aggregated to
yield the desired output. These co-dependencies can lead to
significant delays in computations when the deep model is
distributed across multiple processing nodes.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6640

