The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Approximating Full Conformal Prediction at Scale via Influence Functions
Javier Abad Martinez1 , Umang Bhatt2, 3 , Adrian Weller2, 3 , Giovanni Cherubin4
1
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
University of Cambridge, UK
3
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
4
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
javier.abadmartinez@ai.ethz.ch, {usb20, aw665}@cam.ac.uk, giovanni.cherubin@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

Herein, we first discuss how to approximate the full CP
objective. We focus on full CP for classification, and optimize it for ML models trained via ERM (e.g., logistic regression, neural networks). The key insight we leverage is
that, for each test point, full CP: (i) retrains the underlying
ML model on the additional test point, and (ii) performs a
LOO procedure for each training point. We observe we can
approximate both steps, and avoid retraining each time, by
using first order influence functions (Hampel 1974). We term
our method Approximate full Conformal Prediction (ACP),
and we prove finite-sample error guarantees: as the training
set grows, ACP approaches full CP. We then show that a
stronger regularization parameter for training the underlying
ML model improves the approximation quality.
We empirically demonstrate that ACP is competitive
with existing methods on MNIST (LeCun 1998), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky, Nair, and Hinton 2009), and US Census (Ding et al. 2021). Unlike full CP, ACP scales to
large datasets for real-world ML models (logistic regression,
multilayer perceptrons, and convolutional neural networks).
Performance-wise, ACP is consistently better than existing
alternatives in terms of statistical power: it attains the desired error rate ε with tighter prediction sets; Figure 1 shows
on CIFAR-10 examples where, unlike other methods, ACP
learns smaller prediction sets that still contain the true label.

Conformal prediction (CP) is a wrapper around traditional
machine learning models, giving coverage guarantees under
the sole assumption of exchangeability; in classification problems, a CP guarantees that the error rate is at most a chosen
significance level ε, irrespective of whether the underlying
model is misspecified. However, the prohibitive computational
costs of full CP led researchers to design scalable alternatives,
which alas do not attain the same guarantees or statistical
power of full CP. In this paper, we use influence functions to
efficiently approximate full CP. We prove that our method is
a consistent approximation of full CP, and empirically show
that the approximation error becomes smaller as the training
set increases; e.g., for 1, 000 training points the two methods
output p-values that are < 0.001 apart: a negligible error for
any practical application. Our methods enable scaling full CP
to large real-world datasets. We compare our full CP approximation (ACP) to mainstream CP alternatives, and observe that
our method is computationally competitive whilst enjoying
the statistical predictive power of full CP.

1

Introduction

Conformal prediction (CP) is a post-hoc approach to providing validity guarantees on the outcomes of machine learning (ML) models; in classification, an ML model wrapped
with “full” CP outputs prediction sets that contain the true
label with (chosen) probability 1 − ε, under mild distribution
assumptions. Unfortunately, full CP is notoriously computationally expensive. Many have proposed alternative methods
to avoid the full CP objective; these include: split (or “inductive”) CP (Papadopoulos et al. 2002), cross-CP (Vovk 2015),
jackknife+ (Barber et al. 2021), RAPS (Angelopoulos et al.
2020), CV+ (Romano, Sesia, and Candes 2020). While these
methods have shown practical promise, they do not attain the
same validity guarantee as full CP or its statistical power (e.g.,
prediction set size). Recent work optimized full CP for ML
models that support incremental and decremental learning
by speeding up the leave-one-out (LOO) procedure required
for the prediction set calculation (Cherubin, Chatzikokolakis,
and Jaggi 2021); however, this approach may not scale to
complex models such as neural networks.

2

Preliminaries

We describe full CP, and then introduce influence functions,
our main optimization tool.

2.1

Notation and Full CP

Consider a training set Z = (X, Y ) ∈ (X × Y)N . For a
test object x ∈ X and a chosen significance level ε ∈ [0, 1],
a CP returns a set Γεx ⊆ Y containing x’s true label with
probability at least 1 − ε. This guarantee (validity) holds
for any exchangeable distribution on Z ∪ {(x, y)}. Since the
error rate of a CP is guaranteed by validity, a data analyst only
needs to control the tightness (efficiency) of its prediction
set; average |Γεx | is a common efficiency criterion (Vovk et al.
2016). Efficiency is controlled by improving the underlying
model that CP wraps.
Underlying model. A CP can be built around virtually any
ML model θ. We assume the underlying model is trained via

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6631

