The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Low-Precision Training
for Embeddings in Click-Through Rate Prediction
Shiwei Li1 * , Huifeng Guo2 , Lu Hou2 , Wei Zhang2 , Xing Tang2 ,
Ruiming Tang2 , Rui Zhang3† , Ruixuan Li1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{d202181195, rxli}@hust.edu.cn, {rayteam}@yeah.net,
{huifeng.guo, houlu3, xing.tang, tangruiming}@huawei.com

Abstract

Neural
Network

Embedding tables are usually huge in click-through rate
(CTR) prediction models. To train and deploy the CTR models efficiently and economically, it is necessary to compress
their embedding tables. To this end, we formulate a novel
quantization training paradigm to compress the embeddings
from the training stage, termed low-precision training (LPT).
Also, we provide theoretical analysis on its convergence. The
results show that stochastic weight quantization has a faster
convergence rate and a smaller convergence error than deterministic weight quantization in LPT. Further, to reduce accuracy degradation, we propose adaptive low-precision training
(ALPT) which learns the step size (i.e., the quantization resolution). Experiments on two real-world datasets confirm our
analysis and show that ALPT can significantly improve the
prediction accuracy, especially at extremely low bit width.
For the first time in CTR models, we successfully train 8-bit
embeddings without sacrificing prediction accuracy.

1

Prediction Layer

Deep
Neural

Feature
Interaction
Layer

Network

Embedding Table

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

Figure 1: The embedding table and neural network paradigm
of click-through rate prediction models.

(e.g., user id and item id) into low-dimensional realvalued vectors (i.e., embeddings) (Guo et al. 2017). The neural network is used to model feature interactions and make
predictions. Usually, each feature has a unique embedding
stored in the embedding table E ∈ Rn×d , where n is the
number of features and d is the embedding dimension. However, since there are usually billions or even trillions of categorical features, embedding tables may take hundreds of
GB or even TB to hold (Guo et al. 2021b). For example, the
size of the embedding tables in Baidu’s advertising systems
reaches 10 TB (Xu et al. 2021).
To deploy the CTR models with huge embedding tables
in real production systems efficiently and economically, it
is necessary to compress their embedding tables. Most research on embedding compression in recommender systems
focuses on three aspects: (i) NAS-based embedding dimension search (Joglekar et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2020); (ii)
Embedding pruning (Deng et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021);
(iii) Hashing (Shi et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020). Unfortunately, these approaches are usually not practical in real recommender systems. Specifically, NAS-based approaches require additional storage and complex calculations to search
for the optimal embedding dimension. Embedding pruning
approaches usually produce unstructured embedding tables
which will cost extra effort to access. Note that the mod-

Introduction

Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is to predict the probability that a user will click on a recommended item under a
specific context (Cheng et al. 2016), which is a critical component in recommender systems. It is widely used in various
scenarios, such as online shopping (Zhou et al. 2018) and
advertising (McMahan et al. 2013). With the development
of deep neural networks, CTR models evolve from logistic regression (McMahan et al. 2013), factorization machine
models (Juan et al. 2016) to deep learning models. Various deep CTR models have been proposed and deployed in
industrial companies, such as Wide & Deep (Cheng et al.
2016) in Google, DIN (Zhou et al. 2018) in Alibaba and and
DeepFM (Guo et al. 2017) in Huawei.
Deep CTR models usually follow the embedding table and neural network paradigm (Guo et al. 2021a). As
shown in Figure 1, the embedding table transforms the highdimensional one-hot encoded vectors of categorical features
* This work was done when Shiwei Li worked as an intern at

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4435

