The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Code-Aware Cross-Program Transfer Hyperparameter Optimization
Zijia Wang, Xiangyu He, Kehan Chen, Chen Lin* , Jinsong Su
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
Xiamen, Fujian, China
chenlin@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

is expensive to evaluate. BO iteratively (1) updates a probabilistic surrogate model which measures the uncertainty of
hyperparameter performance based on previous evaluations,
and (2) computes an acquisition function based on the surrogate and sample the next hyperparameters to evaluate. Conventional BO suffers from the “cold-start” problem (Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2013), i.e., since each tuning task
searches from scratch, it needs to explore more samples (i.e.,
sample efficiency) and causes a large tuning overhead (i.e.,
time efficiency). Here a tuning task refers to hyperparameter
tuning for a specific program (e.g., an ML model or a Spark
application) on a certain dataset. To address the cold-start
problem, a major and ongoing thrust of work has attempted
to transfer information from other tuning tasks (i.e., source
tasks), under the premise that hyperparameter performances
of similar tuning tasks are likely to be similar (Bardenet et al.
2013).
However, defining similar tasks and their transfer mechanism remains an open problem. Some previous studies learn
task similarities from evaluations of each task (Swersky,
Snoek, and Adams 2013; Wistuba, Schilling, and SchmidtThieme 2016; Feurer, Letham, and Bakshy 2018; Soares and
Brazdil 2000). For these methods, providing ample evaluations to accurately estimate task similarity is a hurdle.
Other studies determine similar tasks based on manually defined meta-features of datasets (Yogatama and Mann 2014;
Feurer, Springenberg, and Hutter 2015; Schilling, Wistuba,
and Schmidt-Thieme 2016; Law et al. 2019). While these
methods are useful in tuning a same ML model on different datasets, they are sub-optimal in cross-program tuning,
e.g., tuning different ML models or Spark applications, because the hyperparameter performances are usually inconsistent for different programs. The nature of a program – the
key element in a tuning task, has been largely ignored in existing studies.
This paper presents CaTHPO, Code-aware cross-program
Transfer HyperParameter Optimization. CaTHPO makes
the following contributions. (1) Since the program code is its
most distinguishing feature, a code-aware program representation module is proposed. This module is trained with selfsupervised learning, so that it gives an off-the-shelf estimate
of program similarities based on program representations.
(2) The program similarities are used to adjust a Gaussian
Process surrogate and a neural acquisition function network.

Hyperparameter tuning is an essential task in automatic machine learning and big data management. To accelerate tuning, many recent studies focus on augmenting BO, the primary hyperparameter tuning strategy, by transferring information from other tuning tasks. However, existing studies ignore program similarities in their transfer mechanism, thus
they are sub-optimal in cross-program transfer when tuning tasks involve different programs. This paper proposes
CaTHPO, a code-aware cross-program transfer hyperparameter optimization framework, which makes three improvements. (1) It learns code-aware program representation in a
self-supervised manner to give an off-the-shelf estimate of
program similarities. (2) It adjusts the surrogate and AF in
BO based on program similarities, thus the hyperparameter
search is guided by accumulated information across similar programs. (3) It presents a safe controller to dynamically
prune undesirable sample points based on tuning experiences
of similar programs. Extensive experiments on tuning various
recommendation models and Spark applications have demonstrated that CatHPO can steadily obtain better and more robust hyperparameter performances within fewer samples than
state-of-the-art competitors.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter tuning is an important task in machine
learning and big data management. For example, hyperparameters of Machine Learning (ML) models (e.g., learning
rates and batch size) affect learning accuracy (Bergstra et al.
2011). Configuration knobs of Spark1 (e.g., the memory size
and number of cores for each executor) have a great impact on the execution time of a Spark application (Srinivasa and Muppalla 2015). Therefore, HyperParameter
Optimization (HPO) (Thornton et al. 2013) has attracted much attention in both machine learning (He, Zhao,
and Chu 2021) and database communities (Li, Zhou, and
Cao 2021).
Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Jones, Schonlau, and Welch
1998) has been successfully applied in HPO. BO treats the
hyperparameter performance as a black-box function which
* Chen Lin is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/configuration.html

10297

