The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Federated Robustness Propagation: Sharing Adversarial Robustness
in Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Junyuan Hong1 , Haotao Wang2 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Jiayu Zhou1
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Austin
{hongju12,jiayuz}@msu.edu, {htwang,atlaswang}@utexas.edu

Abstract

handled during the learning as a single model trained by
FL may fail to accommodate the differences and sacrifices
model accuracy (Yu, Bagdasaryan, and Shmatikov 2020). Another type of heterogeneity is the difference of computing
resources, named hardware heterogeneity, as different types
of hardware used by users usually result in varying computation budgets. For example, consider an application scenario
of FL from mobile phones (Hard et al. 2019), where different types of mobile phones (e.g., generations of the same
brand) may have drastically different computational power
(e.g., memory or CPU frequency). As the model size scales
with task complexities, the ubiquitous hardware heterogeneity may expel a great number of resource-limited users from
the FL process, reduces training data and therefore calls for
hardware-aware alternatives (Diao, Ding, and Tarokh 2021).
The negative impacts of the heterogeneity become aggravated when an adversarially robust model is desired but its
training is not affordable by some users. The essence of robustness comes from the unnatural vulnerability of models
against visually imperceptible noise that can significantly mislead model predictions. To gain robustness, a straightforward
extension of FL, federated adversarial training (FAT), can be
adopted (Zizzo et al. 2020; Reisizadeh et al. 2020), where
each user trains models with adversarially noised samples,
namely adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al. 2018). Despite
the robustness benefit by AT, prior studies pointed out that the
AT is data-thirsty and computationally expensive (Shafahi
et al. 2019a). Given the fact that each individual user may not
have enough data to perform AT, involving a fair amount of
users in FAT becomes essential, but may also induce higher
data heterogeneity from diverse data sources. Meanwhile,
the increasingly intensive computation can be prohibitive especially for resource-limited users, that could be 3-10 times
more costly than the standard equivalent (Shafahi et al. 2019a;
Zhang et al. 2019). As such, it is often unrealistic to enforce
all users in a FL process to conduct AT locally, despite the
fact that the robustness is indeed strongly desired or even
required for all users. This conflict raises a challenging yet
interesting question: Is it possible to propagate adversarial
robustness in FL so that resource-limited users can efficiently
benefit from robust training of resource-sufficient users even
if the latter’s data distribute differently?
Motivated by the question above, we formulate a novel
learning problem called Federated Robustness Propagation

Federated learning (FL) emerges as a popular distributed learning schema that learns a model from a set of participating users
without sharing raw data. One major challenge of FL comes
with heterogeneous users, who may have distributionally different (or non-iid) data and varying computation resources.
As federated users would use the model for prediction, they
often demand the trained model to be robust against malicious attackers at test time. Whereas adversarial training (AT)
provides a sound solution for centralized learning, extending
its usage for federated users has imposed significant challenges, as many users may have very limited training data
and tight computational budgets, to afford the data-hungry
and costly AT. In this paper, we study a novel FL strategy:
propagating adversarial robustness from rich-resource users
that can afford AT, to those with poor resources that cannot
afford it, during federated learning. We show that existing FL
techniques cannot be effectively integrated with the strategy
to propagate robustness among non-iid users and propose an
efficient propagation approach by the proper use of batchnormalization. We demonstrate the rationality and effectiveness of our method through extensive experiments. Especially,
the proposed method is shown to grant federated models remarkable robustness even when only a small portion of users
afford AT during learning. Source code can be accessed at
https://github.com/illidanlab/FedRBN.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is a learning
paradigm that trains models from distributed users or participants (e.g., mobile devices) without requiring raw training
data to be shared, alleviating the rising concern of privacy
issues when learning with sensitive data and facilitating learning deep models by enlarging the amount of data for training.
In a typical FL algorithm, each user trains a model locally
using their own data and a server iteratively aggregates users’
intermediate models, converging to a model that fuses training information from all users.
A major challenge in FL comes from two types of the user
heterogeneity. One type of heterogeneity is distributional
differences in training data collected by users from diverse
user groups, namely data heterogeneity (Fallah, Mokhtari,
and Ozdaglar 2020). The heterogeneity should be carefully
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7893

