The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Layout Generation as
Intermediate Action Sequence Prediction
Huiting Yang * 1 , Danqing Huang 2 , Chin-Yew Lin 2 , Shengfeng He 3, 1†
1

South China University of Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Singapore Management University
berylsheep@gmail.com, dahua@microsoft.com, cyl@microsoft.com, shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg
Abstract
Layout generation plays a crucial role in graphic design intelligence. One important characteristic of the graphic layouts is
that they usually follow certain design principles. For example, the principle of repetition emphasizes the reuse of similar visual elements throughout the design. To generate a layout, previous works mainly attempt at predicting the absolute
value of bounding box for each element, where such target
representation has hidden the information of higher-order design operations like repetition (e.g. copy the size of the previously generated element). In this paper, we introduce a novel
action schema to encode these operations for better modeling the generation process. Instead of predicting the bounding
box values, our approach autoregressively outputs the intermediate action sequence, which can then be deterministically
converted to the final layout. We achieve state-of-the-art performances on three datasets. Both automatic and human evaluations show that our approach generates high-quality and
diverse layouts. Furthermore, we revisit the commonly used
evaluation metric FID adapted in this task, and observe that
previous works use different settings to train the feature extractor for obtaining real/generated data distribution, which
leads to inconsistent conclusions. We conduct an in-depth
analysis on this metric and settle for a more robust and reliable evaluation setting. Code is available at this website 1 .

1

Figure 1: An example of the layout generation process. The
actions copy and margin are introduced for encoding the
design principles of repetition and white space. Given state
St−2 , our approach generates O2 using four actions: copy
the x-axis and width value from O1 for better alignment,
margin with 0.05 (normalized) white space below O1 in
the y-axis, and generate the absolute values for h2 .

Introduction

Layout refers to the arrangements (i.e. position and size)
of visual elements on a canvas, which plays an important
role in graphic design. A good layout can create a unified
composition of elements to make the design more organized
and visually appealing. There is a growing interest in the research of automatic layout generation (Li et al. 2019; Jyothi
et al. 2019; Kikuchi et al. 2021; Gupta et al. 2021). With
or without user specification (e.g. category constraint that a
layout must contain one title and two pictures), the goal is
to synthesize reasonable layouts by generating the bounding
boxes of elements. Different from real images at pixel-level,
* Work done during Huiting Yang’s internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/microsoft/KC/tree/main/papers/LayoutAction

10762

graphic layouts are more structured which require higherlevel modeling by considering attributes of the elements as
well as their inter-relations.
Across different graphic design types (e.g. mobile app,
article, slide), the creation of layouts usually follows certain design principles. For example, the repetition principle is the act of repeating the same or similar elements and
making them more aligned as a cohesive whole. Meanwhile,
margin is important to create visual distinction between important elements. These principles provide a very indicative guideline for creating good layouts. However, most of
the previous works directly generate the absolute values of
bounding boxes for elements, which hides the higher-order
design operations such as repetition and margin. Recently
several works try to incorporate beautification constraints
such as alignment and non-overlap with additional training
losses (Lee et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021) or extra penalty function in the latent space optimization (Kikuchi et al. 2021).

