The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Model-Based Offline Reinforcement Learning with Local Misspecification
Kefan Dong* , Yannis Flet-Berliac* , Allen Nie* , Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
{kefandong,yfletberliac,anie,ebrun}@stanford.edu

Abstract

behavior data generation process and the expressiveness of
the function classes employed. The work in this space typically assumes the domain satisfies the Markov assumption,
which has been recently shown in the off-policy evaluation
setting to enable provably more efficient policy value estimation (Kallus and Uehara 2020). Historically, most work
(e.g., Munos (2003); Farahmand, Munos, and Szepesvári
(2010); Xie and Jiang (2020); Chen and Jiang (2019)) assumes the batch data set has coverage on any state-action
pairs that could be visited under any possible policy. More
recent work relaxes this strong requirement using a pessimism under uncertainty approach that is model-based (Yu
et al. 2020, 2021; Kidambi et al. 2020), model-free (Liu et al.
2020) or uses policy search (Curi, Berkenkamp, and Krause
2020; van Hasselt, Hessel, and Aslanides 2019). Such work
still relies on realizability/lack of misspecification assumptions. For model-free approaches, a common assumption is
that the value function class can represent all policies. Liu
et al. (2020) assume that the value function class is closed
under (modified) Bellman backups. A recent exception is
Xie and Jiang (2020), which only requires the optimal Qfunction to be representable by the value function class.
However, their sample complexity scales non-optimally (Xie
and Jiang 2020, Theorem 2), and they also make strong
assumptions on the data coverage – essentially the dataset
must visit all states with sufficient probability. Model-based
approaches such as Malik et al. (2019); Yu et al. (2020) assume the dynamics class has no misspecification.
These two lines of work hint at possibilities in the middle: can we leverage the sample-efficient benefits of Markov
structure and allow for minimal assumptions on the datagathering process and potential model misspecification?
This can be viewed as one step towards more best-in-class
results for offline RL. Such results are relatively rare in RL,
which tends to focus on obtaining optimal or near-optimal
policies for the underlying domain. Yet in many important
applications, it may be much more practical to hope to identify a strong policy within a particular policy class.
Our insight is that the algorithm may be able to leverage misspecified models and still leverage the Markov assumption for increased data efficiency. In particular, we take
a model-based offline RL approach to leverage dynamics
models that can accurately fit the space of state-action pairs
visited under a particular policy (local small misspecifica-

We present a model-based offline reinforcement learning policy performance lower bound that explicitly captures dynamics model misspecification and distribution mismatch and we
propose an empirical algorithm for optimal offline policy selection. Theoretically, we prove a novel safe policy improvement theorem by establishing pessimism approximations to
the value function. Our key insight is to jointly consider selecting over dynamics models and policies: as long as a dynamics model can accurately represent the dynamics of the
state-action pairs visited by a given policy, it is possible to
approximate the value of that particular policy. We analyze
our lower bound in the LQR setting and also show competitive performance to previous lower bounds on policy selection across a set of D4RL tasks.

Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) could leverage historical decisions made and their outcomes to improve datadriven decision-making in areas like marketing (Thomas
et al. 2017), robotics (Quillen et al. 2018; Yu et al.
2020, 2021; Swazinna, Udluft, and Runkler 2020; Singh
et al. 2020), recommendation systems (Swaminathan and
Joachims 2015), etc. Offline RL is particularly useful when
it is possible to deploy context-specific decision policies, but
it is costly or infeasible to do online reinforcement learning.
Prior work on offline RL for large state and/or action
spaces has primarily focused on one of two extreme settings.
One line of work makes minimal assumptions on the underlying stochastic process, requiring only no confounding, and
leverages importance-sampling estimators of potential policies (e.g., Thomas, Theocharous, and Ghavamzadeh (2015);
Thomas et al. (2019)). Unfortunately, such estimators have a
variance that scales exponentially with the horizon (Liu et al.
2018b) and are often ill-suited to long horizon problems1 .
An alternative, which is the majority of work in offline
RL, is to make a number of assumptions on the domain,
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Marginalized importance sampling (MIS) methods (Liu et al.
2018a; Xie, Ma, and Wang 2019; Yin and Wang 2020; Liu, Bacon,
and Brunskill 2020) help address this but rely on the system being
Markov in the underlying state space

7423

