The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PatchNAS: Repairing DNNs in Deployment with Patched Network
Architecture Search
Yuchu Fang1 , Wenzhong Li1 ∗ , Yao Zeng1 , Yang Zheng2 , Zheng Hu2 , Sanglu Lu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
TTE Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
{fangyuchu,zengyao}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {lwz,sanglu}@nju.edu.cn, {zhengyang31,hu.zheng}@huawei.com

Abstract

ing conditions such as fog and rain could lead to thousands
of erroneous behaviors in three top performing DNNs. The
work of (Yu et al. 2021) found that adding 15 different types
of natural noises into clean images could seriously harm the
classification accuracy of deployed DNNs, where more than
40% performance degradation were reported.
Typically, DNNs were trained with a pre-collected dataset
before being deployed into real environment. Due to the fact
that the runtime environment contains potential noises and
unseen cases, the pre-trained DNNs may fail to make correct classifications or decisions. Therefore, it is important
to repair the deployed DNNs with the failure samples collected at runtime. An intuitive method was to finetune the
DNNs with the failure samples (Yun et al. 2019; Hendrycks
et al. 2020). However, since the amount of available failure
samples is usually small, finetuning DNNs with them easily
results in underfitting (the networks still focus on original
training data and neglect the faulty cases) or overfitting (the
networks learn the irrelevant information from the failure
samples). Some works proposed to repair DNNs by extracting common features from the failure samples and utilized
them as an augmentation direction to create more data samples to retrain the DNNs (Gao et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2020;
Yu et al. 2021; Ma et al. 2018; Zhang and Chan 2019; Sohn,
Kang, and Yoo 2019).
Despite the great efforts, the existing network repairing
methods encounter several drawbacks. Firstly, they required
retraining the whole DNNs and redeploying them at runtime
whenever faulty cases occur, causing a lot of overhead due
to their exceptional large sizes. Secondly, they need to retrain personalized models for individual application whose
deployment environments varies from device to device, substantially increasing the difficulty of maintenance. Thirdly,
full model update will interrupt the AI services, inevitably
influencing the service reliability and user experience.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel lightweight network repairing method called PatchNAS from
the architecture perspective, where we freeze the pretrained
DNNs (common module) and introduce a small patch network (personalized module) to handle varying faulty cases
in runtime environment. Firstly, the proposed framework introduces a neural network instrumentation method, similar
to program instrumentation in software engineering, that inserts probes into different stages of the neural network struc-

Despite being widely deployed in safety-critical applications
such as autonomous driving and health care, deep neural
networks (DNNs) still suffer from non-negligible reliability issues. Numerous works had reported that DNNs were
vulnerable to either natural environmental noises or manmade adversarial noises. How to repair DNNs in deployment with noisy samples is a crucial topic for the robustness of neural networks. While many network repairing methods based on data argumentation and weight adjustment have
been proposed, they require retraining and redeploying the
whole model, which causes high overhead and are infeasible for varying faulty cases on different deployment environments. In this paper, we propose a novel network repairing
framework called PatchNAS from the architecture perspective, where we freeze the pretrained DNNs and introduce
a small patch network to deal with failure samples at runtime. PatchNAS introduces a novel network instrumentation
method to determine the faulty stage of the network structure
given the collected failure samples. Then a small patch network structure is searched unsupervisedly using neural architecture search (NAS) technique with data samples from deployment environment. The patch network repairs the DNNs
by correcting the output feature maps of the faulty stage,
which helps to maintain network performance on normal
samples and enhance robustness in noisy environments. Extensive experiments based on several DNNs across 15 types
of natural noises show that the proposed PatchNAS outperforms the state-of-the-arts with significant improvement as
well as much lower deployment overhead.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the explosive deployment of
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in production environments.
With the wide range of applications in safety-critical tasks
such as autonomous driving and healthcare, there is an urgent need to concern the robustness and trustworthy of
DNNs. Numerous works had reported that neural networks
suffered from reliability issues (Eykholt et al. 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2018), and they were vulnerable to either natural noises (Hendrycks et al. 2021) or manmade adversarial noises (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014; Madry et al. 2017). According to the Udacity selfdriving car challenge (Tian et al. 2018), the changes in driv∗

The corresponding author is Wenzhong Li (lwz@nju.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14811

