The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PAC Learning and Stabilizing Hedonic Games: Towards a Unifying Approach.
Simone Fioravanti1 , Michele Flammini1, 4 , Bojana Kodric2, 1 , Giovanna Varricchio3
1

Gran Sasso Science Institute (GSSI), L’Aquila, Italy
2
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Venice, Italy
3
Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
4
University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
simone.fioravanti@gssi.it, michele.flammini@gssi.it, bojana.kodric@unive.it, varricchio@em.uni-frankfurt.de
Abstract

infer the whole game structure, or even directly learn solution concepts, while having only partial knowledge of the
preferences? Questions of this kind are naturally captured by
the probably approximately correct (PAC) learning framework (Valiant 1984), which formalizes the problem of learning a target concept from a limited number of samples from
any possible unknown but fixed distribution.
Sliwinski and Zick (2017) were the first to leverage the
PAC framework to study the problem of learning HGs preferences and core-stable partitions from samples. In particular, they define PAC stabilizability of a HGs class as the
property of being able to, upon seeing a limited number of
samples, either report that the core is empty or propose a partition that is unlikely to be core-blocked by further coalitions
sampled from the same distribution. In a recent paper, Lev
et al. (2021a) apply the notion of PAC stabilizability of HGs
in the context of political coalition formation. In particular,
they use the publicly available Israeli parliament voting data
to fit a Friends Appreciation HG, and compare the actual
political parties of the voters to the PAC-stable coalitions resulting from the model. This example shows how learning
concepts have the potential to create space for applications
of mainly theoretical models, as HGs.
While the work of Sliwinski and Zick (2017) and the ones
that followed considered PAC learnability and stabilizability of many specific classes of HGs, the overall picture is
still far from being complete. Most prominently, the characterization of the underlying general conditions explaining
the existing results is missing. Furthermore, PAC stabilizability seems very hard to achieve and it is natural to wonder whether some restrictions on the PAC stability definition
can yield better results. Here, we address these questions,
attempting to provide a deeper theoretical understanding of
what makes HGs learnable and stabilizable.

We study PAC learnability and PAC stabilizability of Hedonic Games (HGs), i.e., efficiently inferring preferences
or core-stable partitions from samples. We first expand the
known learnability/stabilizability landscape for some of the
most prominent HGs classes, providing results for Friends
and Enemies Games, Bottom Responsive, and Anonymous
HGs. Then, having a broader view in mind, we attempt to
shed light on the structural properties leading to learnability/stabilizability, or lack thereof, for specific HGs classes.
Along this path, we focus on the fully expressive Hedonic
Coalition Nets representation of HGs. We identify two sets
of conditions that lead to efficient learnability, and which encompass all of the known positive learnability results. On the
side of stability, we reveal that, while the freedom of choosing
an ad hoc adversarial distribution is the most obvious hurdle to achieving PAC stability, it is not the only one. First,
we show a distribution independent necessary condition for
PAC stability. Then, we focus on W-games, where players
have individual preferences over other players and evaluate
coalitions based on the least preferred member. We prove that
these games are PAC stabilizable under the class of bounded
distributions, which assign positive probability mass to all
coalitions. Finally, we discuss why such a result is not easily
extendable to other HGs classes even in this promising scenario. Namely, we establish a purely computational property
necessary for achieving PAC stability.

Introduction
Hedonic Games (HGs) (Dreze and Greenberg 1980) are a
formal model for describing selfish individuals gathering together in order to form coalitions. Both HGs and general
coalition formation games attracted considerable research
attention in the last years due to their applicability to multiagent environments. Solution concepts for HGs are usually
in the form of agent partitions with some suitable properties. The one we consider in this paper is core stability. A
partition is said to be core-stable (or in the core) if there exists no subset of players that could regroup into a so-called
core-blocking coalition, which is preferred by all of them.
The usual assumption when considering any solution concept is that the preferences of the agents are fully known,
which is arguably unrealistic. Could we instead efficiently

Our Contribution
We first extend the knowledge on PAC learnable and PAC
stabilizable classes of HGs. We start by focusing on Friends
and Enemies Games, examining whether the negative results on stabilizability of Additively Separable HGs transfer
to this simple subclass. By exploiting previous results and
proposing an algorithm stabilizing Friends and Enemies under Enemies Aversion, we deduce that Friends and Enemies
Games belong to the very few lucky HGs classes that can

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5641

