The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Random Walk Conformer: Learning Graph Representation from Long and Short
Range
Pei-Kai Yeh, Hsi-Wen Chen, Ming-Syan Chen
National Taiwan University
{pei-kai, hwchen}@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, mschen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
While graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved notable
success in various graph mining tasks, conventional GNNs
only model the pairwise correlation in 1-hop neighbors without considering the long-term relations and the high-order
patterns, thus limiting their performances. Recently, several
works have addressed these issues by exploring the motif,
i.e., frequent subgraphs. However, these methods usually require an unacceptable computational time to enumerate all
possible combinations of motifs. In this paper, we introduce a new GNN framework, namely Random Walk Conformer (RWC), to exploit global correlations and local patterns
based on the random walk, which is a promising method to
discover the graph structure. Besides, we propose random
walk encoding to help RWC capture topological information,
which is proven more expressive than conventional spatial
encoding. Extensive experiment results manifest that RWC
achieves state-of-the-art performance on graph classification
and regression tasks. The source code of RWC is available at
https://github.com/b05901024/RandomWalkConformer.

Introduction
Graph Neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Veličković et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019) serve as a promising
tool for several graph mining problems, e.g., social network
analysis (Dwivedi et al. 2020), and molecular design (Hu
et al. 2021). Specifically, GNNs derive the node (or graph)
embedding by iteratively aggregating the neighbors’ features with the uniform weight (Kipf and Welling 2017) or
the attention mechanism (Veličković et al. 2018) and utilize the learned representations for the downstream tasks.
Another line of studies argued the existence and the correctness of the given graph topology, thus generalizing the
GNN by Transformer (Rong et al. 2020; Ying et al. 2021),
which has achieved celebrated success in modeling structured
data in various domains, including natural language (Devlin
et al. 2019), speech (Gulati et al. 2020), and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021). Instead of only aggregating
the node features along with the linked nodes, Transformer
utilizes a self-attention mechanism, i.e., calculating the pairwise relation between every node, which is more powerful
than conventional GNNs (Ying et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10936

While the studies mentioned above mainly target the pairwise correlation between nodes, i.e., one-to-one, the high order pattern in graphs, i.e., many-to-many (Zhao et al. 2022),
however, have not been fully discovered. Generally, most
GNNs expressiveness is bounded by the first order WeisfeilerLeman (1-WL) isomorphism test (Xu et al. 2019), which can
not effectively solve some fundamental graph mining tasks,
e.g., counting cycles or triangles (Chen et al. 2020). Therefore, several recent works empower GNN with motifs, i.e.,
frequent subgraphs (Zhou et al. 2021). Morris et al. (Morris et al. 2019) incorporate K-WL in the design of more
powerful GNNs, and Zhao et al. (Zhao et al. 2022) leverage
star graph as subgraph patterns in their GNN framework.
However, enumerating all possible motifs is computationally
extensive, which usually grows exponentially, i.e., O(|G|k )
where |G| is the size of the graph, and k is the size of the
motif.1 Meanwhile, the random walk serves as a promising
technique to estimate the motif by checking only a tiny fraction of all the induced subgraphs (Han and Sethu 2016). In
this paper, we aim to incorporate the random walk for motif
discovery and encode these high-order patterns into GNN.
To effectively capture nodes correlation and estimate the
motifs, we propose Random Walk Conformer (RWC), including two major components, Random Walk Self Attention
Network (RW-SAN) and the Random Walk Convolution (RWConv). By processing nodes sampled by the random walk,
RW-SAN measures the long-range correlation between the
node pairs to aggregate the topological information in the
whole random walk sequence. Then, RW-Conv encodes the
short-range local structure by processing the convolutional
module on the random walk sequence, which can be regarded
as the graph kernels (Toenshoff et al. 2021).In contrast, conventional transformer ignores the high-order patterns and cannot correctly analyze the graph structure (Zhang and Li 2021;
Zhao et al. 2022). Furthermore, we propose Random Walk
Encoding to extract both topological and contextual information between two nodes based on the random walk sequences.
In contrast, several previous works employ the shortest path
to analyze the global structural information (Ying et al. 2021;
Vaswani et al. 2017) to empower the capability of Trans1
Counting all the subgraphs with size k has an upper bound of
O(|E|k ) and a lower bound of O(|V|ck−1 ), where V, E are the set
of nodes and edges in the graph, and c is the average number of
neighbors for each node (Itzhack, Mogilevski, and Louzoun 2007).

