The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

WLD-Reg: A Data-Dependent Within-Layer Diversity Regularizer
Firas Laakom1 , Jenni Raitoharju2 , Alexandros Iosifidis3 , Moncef Gabbouj1
1

Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences, Tampere University, Finland
2
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Jyväskylä, Finland
3
DIGIT, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Aarhus University, Denmark
{firas.laakom, moncef.gabbouj}@tuni.fi, jenni.k.raitoharju@jyu.fi, ai@ece.au.dk

Abstract

2020; Belkin et al. 2019; Nakkiran et al. 2020) shows that
over-parameterization does not necessarily lead to overfitting, avoiding overfitting has been extensively studied (Dziugaite and Roy 2017; Foret et al. 2020; Nagarajan and Kolter
2019; Neyshabur et al. 2018; Poggio et al. 2017; Grari et al.
2021) and various approaches and strategies, such as data
augmentation (Goodfellow et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018),
regularization (Arora et al. 2019; Bietti et al. 2019; Kukačka,
Golkov, and Cremers 2017; Ouali, Hudelot, and Tami 2021;
Han and Guo 2021), and Dropout (Hinton et al. 2012b; Lee
et al. 2019; Li, Gong, and Yang 2016; Wang et al. 2019),
have been proposed to close the gap between the empirical
loss and the expected loss.
Diversity of learners is widely known to be important in
ensemble learning (Li, Yu, and Zhou 2012; Yu, Li, and Zhou
2011) and, particularly in the deep learning context, diversity of information extracted by the network neurons has
been recognized as a viable way to improve generalization
(Xie, Liang, and Song 2017; Xie, Deng, and Xing 2015b).
In most cases, these efforts have focused on making the set
of weights more diverse (Yang, Gkatzelis, and Stoyanovich
2019; Malkin and Bilmes 2009). However, diversity of the
activations has not received much attention. Here, we argue that due to the presence of non-linear activations, diverse weights do not guarantee diverse feature representation. Thus, we propose focusing on the diversity on top of
feature mapping instead of the weights.
To the best of our knowledge, only (Cogswell et al. 2016;
Laakom et al. 2021a) have considered diversity of the activations directly in the neural network context. The work
in (Laakom et al. 2021a) studied theoretically how diversity affects generalization showing that it can reduce overfitting. The work in (Cogswell et al. 2016) proposed an additional loss term using cross-covariance of hidden activations, which encourages the neurons to learn diverse or nonredundant representations. The proposed approach, known
as DeCov, was empirically proven to alleviate overfitting
and to improve the generalization ability of neural networks.
However, modeling diversity as the sum of the pairwise
cross-covariance, it is not scale-invariant and can lead to
trivial solutions. Moreover, it can capture only the pairwise
diversity between components and is unable to capture the
”higher-order diversity”.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to encour-

Neural networks are composed of multiple layers arranged in
a hierarchical structure jointly trained with a gradient-based
optimization, where the errors are back-propagated from the
last layer back to the first one. At each optimization step, neurons at a given layer receive feedback from neurons belonging to higher layers of the hierarchy. In this paper, we propose to complement this traditional ’between-layer’ feedback
with additional ’within-layer’ feedback to encourage the diversity of the activations within the same layer. To this end,
we measure the pairwise similarity between the outputs of the
neurons and use it to model the layer’s overall diversity. We
present an extensive empirical study confirming that the proposed approach enhances the performance of several stateof-the-art neural network models in multiple tasks. The code
is publically available at https://github.com/firasl/AAAI-23WLD-Reg.

Introduction
Deep learning has been extensively used in the last decade
to solve several tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; Golan and El-Yaniv 2018; Hinton et al. 2012a). A
deep learning model, i.e., a neural network, is formed of
a sequence of layers with parameters optimized during the
training process using training data. Formally, an m-layer
neural network model can be defined as follows:
f (x; W) = ϕm (W m (ϕm−1 (· · · ϕ2 (W 2 ϕ1 (W 1 x)))),
(1)
where ϕi (.) is the non-linear activation function of the
ith layer and W = {W 1 , . . . , W m } are the model’s
weights. Given a training data {xi , yi }N
i=1 , the parameters
of f (x; W) are obtained by minimizing a loss L̂(·):
N

L̂(f ) =


1 X
l f (xi ; W), yi .
N i=1

(2)

However, neural networks are often over-parameterized,
i.e., have more parameters than data. As a result, they tend
to overfit to the training samples and not generalize well
on unseen examples (Goodfellow et al. 2016). While research on double descent (Advani, Saxe, and Sompolinsky
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8421

