The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Scalable Bayesian Meta-Learning through Generalized Implicit Gradients
Yilang Zhang, Bingcong Li, Shijian Gao, Georgios B. Giannakis
Dept. of ECE, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
{zhan7453,lixx5599,gao00379,georgios}@umn.edu

Abstract

meta-learning extracts task-invariant prior information from
a given family of correlated (and thus informative) tasks.
Domain-generic knowledge can therein be acquired as an
inductive bias and transferred to new tasks outside the set of
given ones (Thrun and Pratt 2012; Grant et al. 2018), making it feasible to learn unknown models/tasks even with minimal training samples. One representative example is that of
an edge extractor, which can act as a common prior owing to
its presence across natural images. Thus, using it can prune
degrees of freedom from a number of image classification
models. The prior extraction in conventional meta-learning
is more of a hand-crafted art; see e.g., (Schmidhuber 1993;
Bengio, Bengio, and Cloutier 1995; Schmidhuber, Zhao, and
Wiering 1996). This rather “cumbersome art” has been gradually replaced by data-driven approaches. For parametric
models of the task-learning process (Santoro et al. 2016;
Mishra et al. 2018), the task-invariant “sub-model” can then
be shared across different tasks with prior information embedded in the model weights. One typical model is that of
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), where task-learning is
captured by recurrent cells. However, the resultant blackbox learning setup faces interpretability challenges.
As an alternative to model-committed approaches, modelagnostic meta-learning (MAML) transforms task-learning
to optimizing the task-specific model parameters, while the
prior amounts to initial parameters per task-level optimization, that are shared across tasks and can be learned through
differentiable meta-level optimization (Finn, Abbeel, and
Levine 2017). Building upon MAML, optimization-based
meta-learning has been advocated to ameliorate its performance; see e.g. (Li et al. 2017; Bertinetto et al. 2019; Flennerhag et al. 2020; Abbas et al. 2022). In addition, performance analyses have been reported to better understand the
behavior of these optimization-based algorithms (Franceschi
et al. 2018; Fallah, Mokhtari, and Ozdaglar 2020; Wang,
Sun, and Li 2020; Chen and Chen 2022).
Interestingly, the learned initialization can be approximately viewed as the mean of an implicit Gaussian prior
over the task-specific parameters (Grant et al. 2018). Inspired by this interpretation, Bayesian methods have been
advocated for meta-learning to further allow for uncertainty quantification in the model parameters. Different
from its deterministic counterpart, Bayesian meta-learning
seeks a prior distribution over the model parameters that

Meta-learning owns unique effectiveness and swiftness in
tackling emerging tasks with limited data. Its broad applicability is revealed by viewing it as a bi-level optimization
problem. The resultant algorithmic viewpoint however, faces
scalability issues when the inner-level optimization relies on
gradient-based iterations. Implicit differentiation has been
considered to alleviate this challenge, but it is restricted to an
isotropic Gaussian prior, and only favors deterministic metalearning approaches. This work markedly mitigates the scalability bottleneck by cross-fertilizing the benefits of implicit
differentiation to probabilistic Bayesian meta-learning. The
novel implicit Bayesian meta-learning (iBaML) method not
only broadens the scope of learnable priors, but also quantifies the associated uncertainty. Furthermore, the ultimate
complexity is well controlled regardless of the inner-level optimization trajectory. Analytical error bounds are established
to demonstrate the precision and efficiency of the generalized
implicit gradient over the explicit one. Extensive numerical
tests are also carried out to empirically validate the performance of the proposed method.

Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning (DL) has garnered huge
attention from theory, algorithms, and application viewpoints. The underlying success of DL is mainly attributed to
the massive datasets, with which large-scale and highly expressive models can be trained. On the other hand, the stimulus of DL, namely data, can be scarce. Nevertheless, in several real-world tasks, such as object recognition and concept
comprehension, humans can perform exceptionally well
even with very few data samples. This prompts the natural
question: How can we endow DL with human’s unique intelligence? By doing so, DL’s data reliance can be alleviated
and the subsequent model training can be streamlined. Several trials have been emerging in those “stimulus-lacking”
domains, including speech recognition (Miao, Metze, and
Rawat 2013), medical imaging (yang et al. 2016), and robot
manipulation (Hansen and Wang 2021).
A systematic framework has been explored in recent years
to address the aforementioned question, under the terms
learning-to-learn or meta-learning (Thrun 1998). In brief,
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11298

