The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Prototypical Fine-Tuning: Towards Robust Performance
under Varying Data Sizes
Yiqiao Jin1 * , Xiting Wang2† , Yaru Hao2 , Yizhou Sun3 , Xing Xie2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
University of California, Los Angeles
yjin328@gatech.edu, {xitwan, yaruhao, xing.xie}@microsoft.com, yzsun@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract

low-resource settings. Achieving this goal is non-trivial due
to two major challenges. First (adaptation), how to introduce prototype modeling into large-scale language models
to jointly ensure superior performances under low-resource
scenarios while mitigating the over-reliance of prototype
learning on strong inductive biases? Second (capacity),
different datasets have diverse levels of complexity, thus
requires different volumes of prototypes and parameters
to properly represent the data distribution (Mettes, van der
Pol, and Snoek 2019). Choosing model capacity generally
requires heuristics and knowledge about the data distribution (Allen et al. 2019). How to determine the number of
prototypes automatically by jointly considering complexity
of the data distribution and the model’s inherent attributes to
ensure robust performances on datasets with varying sizes?
To solve these two challenges, we propose Prototypical
Fine-tuning (PFit). Our method represents the data within
each class as a set of prototypes, each modeled as a mixture
component, while learning the number of components automatically based on the model capacity and the complexity of
data distribution. At the initial stage of training, our method
is equivalent to ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017),
which ensures a high-quality initialization of the prototypes
and facilitates convergence towards a globally optimal
solution. As training proceeds, PFit chooses from fitting
each new example with existing prototypes or initiating a
new prototype based on the data point, according to whether
the example is in-distribution. We allow the number of
prototypes to grow and shrink dynamically with respect to
the data complexity. In all, our method ensures a hypothesis
space large enough for viable solutions to the tasks being
learned (Baxter 2000), but small enough for generalization.
Thus, our method is well-suited for both data-scarce and
data-rich tasks, especially offering substantial performance
gain under low-resource scenarios. The contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:
1) We propose Prototypical Fine-tuning (PFit), a novel
prototypical method for fine-tuning pretrained language
models by integrating the strengths of bayesian nonparametrics with parametric pretrained LMs, leading to superior predictive performance under varying data sizes.
2) We propose four principles for effectively leveraging
non-parametric methods , which are mixture prototype initialization, infinite mixture prototype creation, adaptive pro-

In this paper, we move towards combining large parametric
models with non-parametric prototypical networks. We propose prototypical fine-tuning, a novel prototypical framework
for fine-tuning pretrained language models (LM), which automatically learns a bias to improve predictive performance for
varying data sizes, especially low-resource settings. Our prototypical fine-tuning approach can automatically adjust the
model capacity according to the number of data points and the
model’s inherent attributes. Moreover, we propose four principles for effective prototype fine-tuning towards the optimal
solution. Experimental results across various datasets show
that our work achieves significant performance improvements
under various low-resource settings, as well as comparable
and usually better performances in high-resource scenarios.

Introduction
Pretrained language models (LM) have achieved substantial success on a variety of NLP applications (Brown et al.
2020). Their high discriminative power is partly attributed
to a weak inductive bias, which poses little constraints on
the model expressivity, but leads to potential overfitting and
local optimum, especially in low-resource settings (McCoy,
Pavlick, and Linzen 2019; Belinkov, Henderson et al. 2021;
Feldman 2020). On the other hand, non-parametric models,
such as prototypical networks (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel
2017; Yang et al. 2018; Shao et al. 2017), introduce strong
inductive biases and explicitly model the inter-class and
intra-class relations within the data, which is especially useful when training data is limited. These methods are promising for improving generalization and increasing sample efficiency (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Allen et al. 2019).
However, as strong inductive biases restrict the hypothesis
set of function approximators, these models introduce false
assumptions that may limit the expressivity of models as the
number of data points increases (Baxter 2000).
In this paper, we move towards combining large parametric models with non-parametric prototypical networks
so that we automatically learn a bias to improve predictive
performance on varying sizes of datasets, especially for
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Xiting Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12968

