The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Universe Points Representation Learning for Partial Multi-Graph Matching
Zhakshylyk Nurlanov1,2 , Frank R. Schmidt1 , Florian Bernard2
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
2
University of Bonn
{zhakshylyk.nurlanov, frank.r.schmidt}@de.bosch.com, fb@uni-bonn.de

Abstract

to our object-to-universe matching representation we obtain
cycle-consistent multi-matchings. Moreover, as opposed to
the previous template-based deep multi-graph matching approach (Fig. 1b), our object-to-universe matching representation does not require an explicit template shape. Instead,
we propose to learn latent representations of abstract universe points through aligning them with graph node features (Fig. 1c, Fig. 3 right). The learned embeddings encode higher-order information with the help of graph neural network processing and allow to find accurate object-touniverse matchings.
In addition, the object-to-universe formulation naturally
supports the challenging partial multi-matching setting, as
demonstrated in Fig. 1d. This is in stark contrast to a large
portion of recent deep graph matching approaches that only
tackle the full (bijective) matching problem. However, in
a real-world collection of images, not all keypoints may
be observed in each image, e.g. due to ambiguities of 2D
image projections stemming from occlusions, camera-view
change, object deformation, shape variability, etc. Hence,
these methods require a keypoint pre-filtering before matching. As such, the partial matching setting is the most natural
one and has thus the highest relevance in practical scenarios,
since it can be applied to unfiltered keypoints.
Since image keypoints represent 2D projections of 3D
points, we would like to expand the dimensionality of the
matched keypoints. Therefore, we propose to learn a third
virtual coordinate lifting (Fig. 4), and to incorporate it into
the graph neural network architecture (3D SplineCNN (Fey
et al. 2018)). The third dimension is learned with respect to
the task of graph matching, thus it is a virtual coordinate. As
we demonstrate in our ablation study in Sec. , the use of 3D
coordinates leads to an improved matching performance.
Overall, our method advances the state of the art (SOTA)
on various keypoint matching benchmarks. Namely, it
achieves a 71.7% F1-score on the Pascal VOC dataset and
a 95.1% F1-score on the CUB-200-2011 dataset on partial multi-graah matching without keypoint filtering. Additionally, it gives 81.8% accuracy on Pascal VOC dataset on
full two-graph matching with intersection-filtered keypoints.
Moreover, we show that the learned node features taken
from a model pre-trained on (reduced) Pascal VOC can be
transferred without fine-tuning to the Willow ObjectClass
dataset, yielding 98.9% accuracy. On a set of controlled ex-

Many challenges from natural world can be formulated as a
graph matching problem. Previous deep learning-based methods mainly consider a full two-graph matching setting. In this
work, we study the more general partial matching problem
with multi-graph cycle consistency guarantees. Building on
a recent progress in deep learning on graphs, we propose
a novel data-driven method (URL) for partial multi-graph
matching, which uses an object-to-universe formulation and
learns latent representations of abstract universe points. The
proposed approach advances the state of the art in semantic
keypoint matching problem, evaluated on Pascal VOC, CUB,
and Willow datasets. Moreover, the set of controlled experiments on a synthetic graph matching dataset demonstrates
the scalability of our method to graphs with large number of
nodes and its robustness to high partiality.

Introduction
Many real-world problems of finding correspondences can
be formalized as graph matching. The examples of tasks in
computer vision and graphics, where graph matching plays
a crucial role, are object tracking (Wang et al. 2015), optical flow estimation (Sun et al. 2018), shape matching (Gao
et al. 2021) and image keypoint matching (Fey et al. 2020).
Graph matching is also relevant in other domains for matching protein networks (Singh, Xu, and Berger 2008), comparing molecules (Kriege, Humbeck, and Koch 2019), or linking users in social networks (Zhang and Philip 2015).
The recent progress in end-to-end learning of graph
matching has allowed one to find the most useful graph features instead of hand-crafting them (Zanfir and Sminchisescu 2018), and also enabled the incorporation of axiomatic
graph matching solvers into learning models (Rolı́nek et al.
2020). In this work, we specifically focus on finding image
keypoint correspondences across an image collection with
the help of deep learning techniques. We consider the general setting assuming that the images in the collection depict different instances of objects from the same category,
as illustrated in Fig. 1 for the object category cat. A strong
advantage of our multi-matching approach compared to previous pairwise matching formulations (Fig. 1a) is that due
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1984

