The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

End-to-End Deep Reinforcement Learning for Conversation Disentanglement
Karan Bhukar1 , Harshit Kumar1 , Dinesh Raghu1 , Ajay Gupta* 2
1

IBM Research
2
Meta
karan.bhukar1@ibm.com, harshitk@in.ibm.com, diraghu1@in.ibm.com, guptaajay@fb.com

Abstract
Collaborative Communication platforms (e.g., Slack) support multi-party conversations which contain a large number
of messages on shared channels. Multiple conversations intermingle within these messages. The task of conversation
disentanglement is to cluster these intermingled messages
into conversations. Existing approaches are trained using loss
functions that optimize only local decisions, i.e. predicting
reply-to links for each message and thereby creating clusters
of conversations. In this work, we propose an end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) approach that directly optimizes a
global metric. We observe that using existing global metrics
such as variation of information and adjusted rand index as a
reward for the RL agent deteriorates its performance. This behaviour is because these metrics completely ignore the replyto links between messages (local decisions) during reward
computation. Therefore, we propose a novel thread-level reward function that captures the global metric without ignoring the local decisions. Through experiments on the Ubuntu
IRC dataset, we demonstrate that the proposed RL model improves the performance on both link-level and conversationlevel metrics.

Figure 1: An example of a stream of messages. The two conversations in them are color coded and the reply-to links are
illustrated using arrows.

Agarwal, and Joshi 2019; Pandey, Raghu, and Joshi 2020;
Tao et al. 2021), dialog act classification(Kumar et al. 2018),
question answering(Verma et al. 2019), etc.
Existing approaches (Ma, Zhang, and Zhao 2022; Yu and
Joty 2020; Kummerfeld et al. 2018; Pappadopulo et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2020) for conversation disentanglement follow a
two-step strategy: (1) for each message predict a parent message to which it is connected by the reply-to link, and (2)
infer conversation trees (or clusters) guided by the predicted
links from step (1). Existing approaches are trained to optimize the local decisions (i.e., reply-to link prediction) independent of each other and then use global (conversationlevel) metrics, such as Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) and Variation of information (VI), for evaluation. While it is desirable to optimize the model on global metrics, it is quite
challenging to directly optimize the model in an end-to-end
manner because global metrics cannot be computed until all
local decisions are finalized.
To address the aforementioned limitation, we propose an
end-to-end Reinforcement Learning (RL) based approach
that directly optimizes based on a global metric. Our RL
policy generates a distribution over all possible reply-to link
combinations for all messages in the input message stream.

Introduction
In recent times, particularly during the global pandemic,
there has been an unprecedented proliferation of online communication, on both professional and personal fronts, via
online collaboration platforms (Slack), forum discussions
(Stackoverflow) and social media (WhatsApp). These communication platforms allow multiple participants to engage
in concurrent conversations on shared channels. As a result,
it can be quite hard for a reader to understand the context of
an on-going chat. The task of conversation disentanglement
aims at addressing this issue by identifying separate conversations from a stream of messages. For example, consider
a stream of 7 messages in Figure 1. The goal of conversation disentanglement is to identify the 2 conversations (highlighted by red and blue color) along with the reply-to links
(indicated by arrows) between the messages in each conversation. Disentangled conversations are readily consumable
by downstream tasks, such as response prediction (Kumar,
* This work was done while Ajay Gupta was at IBM Research.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12571

