The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Deep Video Denoising with Untrained Network
Huan Zheng1 , Tongyao Pang1 , Hui Ji1
Department of Mathematics at National University of Singapore, Singapore.
huan zheng@u.nus.edu, matpt@nus.edu.sg, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Li et al. 2022). While these methods differ in terms of network architectures or training schemes, they all train their
networks using numerous paired training samples consisting of both noisy and noise-free videos. However, collecting a large-scale dataset with noise-free videos for dynamic
scenes, as well as some applications such as dynamic medical imaging and microscopy, can be both costly and challenging. Additionally, the introduction of bias from training
samples can be a concern in practice.
Recently, there has been increasing interest in studying
unsupervised methods for video denoising, which do not
require noise-free videos for training. F2F (Ehret et al.
2019) extended Noise2Noise (Lehtinen et al. 2018), a semisupervised image denoiser, to frame-to-frame video denoising. Motivated by the redundancy in adjacent frames,
MF2F (Dewil et al. 2021) imposed a loss on multiple aligned
frames for improved performance. RFR (Lee et al. 2021)
utilized a pre-trained denoiser to synthesize pseudo-clean
videos for simulating supervised learning. UDVD (Sheth
et al. 2021) extended Blind Spot (Batson and Royer 2019;
Krull, Buchholz, and Jug 2019; Laine et al. 2019), an unsupervised image denoising network architecture, to video
denoising using a bias-free network. However, unsupervised
methods for video denoising are still in their infancy, and
there is still a noticeable performance gap between existing
unsupervised methods and their supervised counterparts.
This paper aims to develop an unsupervised deep learning method for video denoising using an untrained deep network. The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance among both unsupervised and supervised video denoising methods and does not require access to any external
training samples with noise-free videos.

Deep learning has become a prominent tool for video denoising. However, most existing deep video denoising methods
require supervised training using noise-free videos. Collecting noise-free videos can be costly and challenging in many
applications. Therefore, this paper aims to develop an unsupervised deep learning method for video denoising that only
uses a single test noisy video for training. To achieve this, an
unsupervised loss function is presented that provides an unbiased estimator of its supervised counterpart defined on noisefree video. Additionally, a temporal attention mechanism is
proposed to exploit redundancy among frames. The experiments on video denoising demonstrate that the proposed unsupervised method outperforms existing unsupervised methods and remains competitive against recent supervised deep
learning methods.

Introduction
Despite advances in optical technology, noise remains a
common degradation source for images, especially when
captured by compact devices or in high-sensitivity settings
such as low lighting or high frame rates. Denoising is an important preprocessing step in many computer vision applications, as its performance can impact the accuracy of subsequent processes. Videos are a rich source of data with numerous applications, but video denoising differs from image
denoising in several aspects. Although videos can be thought
of as sequences of images, video frames often have lower
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) than individual images, due to
the faster shutter speed required for video capture. Additionally, there exist high redundancies among adjacent frames in
videos, providing multiple noisy instances of the same image pixel. As a result, effective and efficient exploitation of
temporal redundancy is a focus of video denoising to achieve
better performance than single-image denoising

Main Contribution
To develop an unsupervised deep learning method for video
denoising, there are two questions to address: (a) how to
design a loss function such that one can train the network
without calling any noise-free videos; (b) how to effectively
exploit temporal redundancy among adjacent frames in the
presence of possible misalignment errors.
Our answer to Question (a) is a self-supervised loss that
provides a good estimation of the loss function defined over
noise-free videos with mathematical justification. This loss
is inspired by the R2R method (Pang et al. 2021), a self-

Motivation
In the past few years, deep learning has emerged as a powerful tool for video denoising. The majority of existing deep
learning methods for video denoising are based on supervised learning, as seen in works such as (Davy et al. 2019;
Tassano, Delon, and Veit 2020, 2019; Maggioni et al. 2021;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3651

