The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

One Is All: Bridging the Gap between Neural Radiance Fields Architectures with
Progressive Volume Distillation
Shuangkang Fang1 * , Weixin Xu2 , Heng Wang2 , Yi Yang2 , Yufeng Wang1† , Shuchang Zhou2†
1

Beihang University
Megvii Research
{skfang, wyfeng}@buaa.edu.cn, {xuweixin02, wangheng, yangyi, zsc}@megvii.com
2

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) methods have proved effective as compact, high-quality and versatile representations
for 3D scenes, and enable downstream tasks such as editing, retrieval, navigation, etc. Various neural architectures are
vying for the core structure of NeRF, including the plain
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), sparse tensors, low-rank tensors, hashtables and their compositions. Each of these representations has its particular set of trade-offs. For example, the hashtable-based representations admit faster training and rendering but their lack of clear geometric meaning
hampers downstream tasks like spatial-relation-aware editing. In this paper, we propose Progressive Volume Distillation (PVD), a systematic distillation method that allows anyto-any conversions between different architectures, including
MLP, sparse or low-rank tensors, hashtables and their compositions. PVD consequently empowers downstream applications to optimally adapt the neural representations for the
task at hand in a post hoc fashion. The conversions are fast,
as distillation is progressively performed on different levels
of volume representations, from shallower to deeper. We also
employ special treatment of density to deal with its specific
numerical instability problem. Empirical evidence is presented to validate our method on the NeRF-Synthetic, LLFF
and TanksAndTemples datasets. For example, with PVD, an
MLP-based NeRF model can be distilled from a hashtablebased Instant-NGP model at a 10×∼20× faster speed than
being trained the original NeRF from scratch, while achieving a superior level of synthesis quality. Code is available at
https://github.com/megvii-research/AAAI2023-PVD.

Figure 1: Comparison of two models trained in the Family
and Barn scene from TanksAndTemples dataset. The left is
the results of a NeRF model distilled by PVD from an INGP
teacher within 1.5 hours. The right is the results of NeRF
trained from scratch using 25 hours. PVD improves synthesis quality and reduces training time.

of NVS. Several following developments incorporate feature tensors as complementary explicit representations to relieve the MLPs from remembering all details of the scene,
resulting in faster training speed and more flexible manipulation of geometric structure. The bloated size of the feature
tensors in turn spurs works targeting more compact representations, like TensoRF (Chen et al. 2022) that leverages
VM (vector-matrix) decomposition and canonical polyadic
decomposition (CPD), Fridovich-Keil et al. that exploits the
sparsity of the tensor, and Instant Neural Graphics Primitives
(INGP) (Müller et al. 2022) that utilizes multilevel hash tables for effective compression of feature tensors.
All these schemes have their own advantages and limitations. Generally, with implicit representations, it would
be easier to perform texture editing of a scene (such as
color, lighting changes and deformations, etc.), to the extent of artistic stylization and dynamic scene modeling (Tang
et al. 2022; Kobayashi, Matsumoto, and Sitzmann 2022;
Pumarola et al. 2021; Gu et al. 2021; Zhan et al. 2021). On
the other hand, methods with explicit or hybrid representation usually enjoy faster training due to the shallower representations and cope better with geometric-aware editing,

Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) generates photo realistic 2D
images for unknown view-ports of a 3D scene (Zhou et al.
2018; Chan et al. 2021; Sitzmann, Zollhöfer, and Wetzstein 2019a), and has wide applications in rendering, localization, and robot arm manipulations (Adamkiewicz et al.
2022; Moreau et al. 2022; Peng et al. 2021), especially
with the neural modeling capabilities offered by the recently
developed Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). Exploiting the
strong generalization capabilities of Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), NeRF can significantly improve the quality
* Work done during an internship at Megvii.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

597

