The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Weakly Supervised 3D Multi-Person Pose Estimation for Large-Scale Scenes
Based on Monocular Camera and Single LiDAR
Peishan Cong1,† , Yiteng Xu1,† , Yiming Ren1 , Juze Zhang1 ,
Lan Xu1,2 , Jingya Wang1,2 , Jingyi Yu1,2 , Yuexin Ma1,2,*
2

1
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{congpsh,xuyt1,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Depth estimation is usually ill-posed and ambiguous for
monocular camera-based 3D multi-person pose estimation.
Since LiDAR can capture accurate depth information in longrange scenes, it can benefit both the global localization of individuals and the 3D pose estimation by providing rich geometry features. Motivated by this, we propose a monocular
camera and single LiDAR-based method for 3D multi-person
pose estimation in large-scale scenes, which is easy to deploy and insensitive to light. Specifically, we design an effective fusion strategy to take advantage of multi-modal input
data, including images and point cloud, and make full use
of temporal information to guide the network to learn natural and coherent human motions. Without relying on any
3D pose annotations, our method exploits the inherent geometry constraints of point cloud for self-supervision and utilizes 2D keypoints on images for weak supervision. Extensive experiments on public datasets and our newly collected
dataset demonstrate the superiority and generalization capability of our proposed method. https://github.com/4DVLab/
FusionPose.git

Figure 1: Our sensor setting and 3D multi-person pose estimation results for large-scale scenes. Based on synchronized
images and LiDAR point clouds, we can capture continuous
global locations and local poses accurately for each person.

Introduction
3D multi-person pose estimation (3D-MPE) in the wild, especially in large-scale outdoor scenes, has become an increasingly popular research field. It is an essential technique
for human motion understanding, which can benefit many
downstream real-world applications, including action recognition, sports analysis, surveillance, augmented/virtual reality(AR/VR), autonomous driving, assistive robots, etc. The
goal is to localize semantic keypoints of human bodies in 3D
space, namely the world coordinate system.
Most of previous works (Véges and Lőrincz 2019; Wang
et al. 2020a) solve 3D-MPE based on the monocular camera, which is lightweight and convenient to be set up in
general scenarios. However, the problem of depth estimation from monocular camera is ill-posed in essence (Mallot
et al. 1991), causing many ambiguous predictions in global
localization and local pose estimation, as Figure. 2 shows.
Although researchers have proposed plenty of approaches
to alleviate the problem, such as using geometric constraints

by the prior knowledge of the height or bone length of human body (Zhang et al. 2022b), hybrid inverse kinematic
constraints (Sun et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021), and motion consistency constraints existing in videos (Zhang et al. 2022a).
These methods still perform limited due to the mathematically impossible mapping from the perspective view to 3D
space. Although the settings of multi-view cameras (Dong
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021) and RGB-D cameras (Zimmermann et al. 2018) are proposed to escape from the trouble, they are not applicable for large-scale scenes due to the
deployment difficulties or the physical limitations of sensors
(RGB-D camera is available in about 5 meters and usually
fail in outdoor scenes.).
LiDAR can provide accurate depth information and has
been widely-used on autonomous vehicles and robots to
perceive large-scale scenes. The effective range for capturing human with recognizable shape and scale could reach
about 35m by common 128-beam mechanical LiDAR, making it feasible for 3D-MPE in long-range indoor or outdoor
scenes. More importantly, unlike the sensitivity of camera
to light, LiDAR could work day and night, which is appli-

* Corresponding author, † Equal contribution
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

461

