The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Demystifying Randomly Initialized Networks for Evaluating Generative Models
Junghyuk Lee, Jun-Hyuk Kim, Jong-Seok Lee
Yonsei University, South Korea
{junghyuklee, junhyuk.kim, jong-seok.lee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Hey Random, what are you looking at?

Inception
Swin

Random

SwAV

Trained

Evaluation of generative models is mostly based on the comparison between the estimated distribution and the ground
truth distribution in a certain feature space. To embed samples
into informative features, previous works often use convolutional neural networks optimized for classification, which is
criticized by recent studies. Therefore, various feature spaces
have been explored to discover alternatives. Among them, a
surprising approach is to use a randomly initialized neural
network for feature embedding. However, the fundamental
basis to employ the random features has not been sufficiently
justified. In this paper, we rigorously investigate the feature
space of models with random weights in comparison to that
of trained models. Furthermore, we provide an empirical evidence to choose networks for random features to obtain consistent and reliable results. Our results indicate that the features from random networks can evaluate generative models
well similarly to those from trained networks, and furthermore, the two types of features can be used together in a complementary way.

Inception

Query

Abstract

Introduction

Figure 1: Five nearest neighbors among the ground truth
real images by each model for a generated query image. We
argue that the random features have different perspectives
from the trained ones.

In recent years, generative models have flourished in deep
learning literature, which can generate realistic and highquality image samples. The main objectives of generative
models are to estimate the distribution of the training data
and to generate samples that are likely to belong to the distribution. In the image domain, generated images are highly
realistic thanks to state-of-the-art deep generative models including variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Hazami, Mama,
and Thurairatnam 2022), generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019), and diffusion models (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021).
Evaluation of generative models is one of the most crucial parts to develop the models. A classical approach is to
measure the likelihood of the real data under the estimated
distribution. However, for intractable models such as GANs,
the likelihood cannot be directly computed and estimation
of the likelihood is impractical when generated samples are
high-dimensional data. Moreover, Theis, van den Oord, and
Bethge (2016) argued that the likelihood is often unrelated
to the quality of generated samples.

Various evaluation metrics have been proposed so far
other than the likelihood measure. In general, they are based
on the comparison between the learned distribution and the
ground truth distribution in certain feature spaces. Most
early metrics use classification models to embed images into
informative feature spaces (Salimans et al. 2016; Heusel
et al. 2017; Sajjadi et al. 2018; Bińkowski et al. 2018). For
instance, the Fréchet Inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al.
2017), which is the most ubiquitously used metric to this
day, uses the Inception model (Szegedy et al. 2016) trained
on the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al. 2009). These metrics
take advantage of the classification models that are regarded
as effective to capture high-level semantic information.
However, recent studies have argued that features optimized for classification may be limited for evaluating generative models. In (Naeem et al. 2020), it was shown that
the evaluation results can be underrated in domains differ-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8482

