The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

State-Conditioned Adversarial Subgoal Generation
Vivienne Huiling Wang1,2 , Joni Pajarinen2 , Tinghuai Wang3 , Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen1
1
Computing Sciences, Tampere University, Finland
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University, Finland
3
Huawei Helsinki Research Center, Finland
{huiling.wang,joni.kamarainen}@tuni.fi, joni.pajarinen@aalto.fi, tinghuaiwang@huawei.com
2

Abstract
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) proposes to solve
difficult tasks by performing decision-making and control
at successively higher levels of temporal abstraction. However, off-policy HRL often suffers from the problem of a
non-stationary high-level policy since the low-level policy is
constantly changing. In this paper, we propose a novel HRL
approach for mitigating the non-stationarity by adversarially
enforcing the high-level policy to generate subgoals compatible with the current instantiation of the low-level policy. In
practice, the adversarial learning is implemented by training a
simple state conditioned discriminator network concurrently
with the high-level policy which determines the compatibility
level of subgoals. Comparison to state-of-the-art algorithms
shows that our approach improves both learning efficiency and
performance in challenging continuous control tasks.

Introduction
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL), in which hierarchical policies learn to perform decision-making at successively higher levels of temporal and behavioral abstraction,
has long held the promise to tackle complex problems with
long-term credit assignment and sparse rewards. Among the
prevailing HRL paradigms, the goal-conditioned HRL frameworks (Dayan and Hinton 1992; Schmidhuber and Wahnsiedler 1993; Kulkarni et al. 2016; Vezhnevets et al. 2017;
Nachum et al. 2018; Levy et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2021) have achieved remarkable success. In goalconditioned HRL, a high-level policy breaks the original task
into a series of subgoals that a low-level policy is incentivized
to reach. The effectiveness and efficiency of goal-conditioned
HRL relies on reasonable and semantically meaningful subgoals providing a strong supervision signal to the low-level
policy.
Nonetheless, off-policy training of a hierarchy of policies
remains a key challenge due to the non-stationary state transitions induced by the hierarchical structure. Specifically,
the same high-level action taken under the same state in
the past may result in significantly different low-level state
transitions due to the constantly changing low-level policy
which renders the experience invalid for training. When all
policies within the hierarchy are trained simultaneously, the
high-level transition will constantly change as long as the
low-level policy continues to be updated. However, learning
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10184

hierarchical policies in parallel is still feasible as long as
the high-level policy is able to efficiently adapt itself to the
updated versions of low-level policy, and the hierarchical policy stabilizes once the low-level policy has converged to an
optimal or near optimal policy. HIRO (Nachum et al. 2018)
and HAC (Levy et al. 2019) have made attempts to address
this problem by relabeling an experience in the past with a
high-level action, i.e., subgoal, to maximize the probability
of the past lower-level actions. In other words, the high-level
action which induced a low-level behavior in the past may be
relabeled to a subgoal which is likely to induce the same lowlevel behavior with the current low-level policy. However, the
relabeling approach does not facilitate efficient training of
the high-level policy to comply with the update of low-level
policy, which consistently generates incompatible subgoals
and deteriorates the non-stationarity issue. Such unfit state
transitions in off-policy training lead to improper learning of
the high-level value function, therefore negatively affecting
high-level policy exploration.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for mitigating
the non-stationarity in goal-conditioned HRL. We aim to significantly improve the high-level policy’s knowledge of the
low-level’s ability, thus improving the overall learning efficiency and stability. Concretely, we introduce an adversarial
learning paradigm for HRL which enforces the high-level
policy to learn to generate subgoals compatible with the current instantiation of the low-level policy. This is motivated
by the assumption that the relabeled subgoals are sampled
from a distribution which is asymptotically approximating
an optimal high-level policy under stationary data distribution. Consequently the increasing divergence between the
distribution of current subgoals and relabeled subgoals is the
key indication of the non-stationarity. This suggests a conjecture that once this distribution divergence is mitigated the
high-level policy naturally achieves stationarity.
To this end, we propose a discriminator network to distinguish a generated subgoal that may not be reachable by
the low level policy from a relabeled subgoal that we know
is reachable by the low level policy. The high-level policy
plays the role of the generator network that learns to generate
subgoals following a distribution compatible with the current
low level policy.
The proposed adversarial learning thus reduces the shift
and consequently the divergence in data distribution from relabeled experience to the current high-level policy behaviour
and encourages the high level policy to generate reasonable

