The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dish-TS: A General Paradigm for Alleviating Distribution Shift in
Time Series Forecasting
Wei Fan1 , Pengyang Wang2 * , Dongkun Wang2 , Dongjie Wang1 , Yuanchun Zhou3 , Yanjie Fu1 *
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida,
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau,
3
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{weifan, wangdongjie}@knights.ucf.edu, {pywang, yc17908}@um.edu.mo, zyc@cnic.cn, yanjie.fu@ucf.edu
2

Abstract
Lookback Window

The distribution shift in Time Series Forecasting (TSF), indicating series distribution changes over time, largely hinders the performance of TSF models. Existing works towards
distribution shifts in time series are mostly limited in the
quantification of distribution and, more importantly, overlook
the potential shift between lookback and horizon windows.
To address above challenges, we systematically summarize
the distribution shifts in TSF into two categories. Regarding lookback windows as input-space and horizon windows
as output-space, there exist (i) intra-space shift, that the distribution within the input-space keeps shifted over time, and
(ii) inter-space shift, that the distribution is shifted between
input-space and output-space. Then we introduce, Dish-TS, a
general neural paradigm for alleviating distribution shifts in
TSF. Specifically, for better distribution estimation, we propose the coefficient net (C ONET), which can be any neural architectures, to map input sequences into learnable distribution
coefficients. To relieve intra-space and inter-space shift, we
organize Dish-TS as a Dual-C ONET framework to separately
learn the distribution of input- and output-space, which naturally captures the distribution difference of two spaces. In addition, we introduce a more effective training strategy for intractable C ONET learning. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on several datasets coupled with different state-ofthe-art forecasting models. Experimental results show DishTS consistently boosts them with a more than 20% improvement. Source code is at https://github.com/weifantt/Dish-TS.

1

(a)

Forecast
Horizon Window

10-minutely
Hourly
Daily

(b)

Lookback
Horizon

(c)

Figure 1: (a) given time series (weather), take lookback windows to forecast horizon windows; (b) shows distributions
(depicted by mean and std.) on different sampling frequencies towards one series; (c) shows the distribution difference
of the lookback window and horizon window of (a).
tion of series data is shifted over time, can be interpreted
as the distribution shift in time series (Brockwell and Davis
2009). Such a problem results into poor generalization, thus
largely hindering the performance of time series forecasting.
After analyzing numerous series data, we systematically
organize distribution shifts of TSF into two categories. Considering the lookback windows (‘lookbacks’ for brevity) as
input-space of models and horizon windows (‘horizons’ for
brevity) as output-space of models1 , there are (i) intra-space
shift: time series distribution changes over time, making
data within input-space (lookbacks) shifted; (ii) inter-space
shift: the distribution is shifted between input-space (lookbacks) and output-space (horizons). Existing works have
tried to alleviate distribution shift problem in TSF (Ogasawara et al. 2010; Passalis et al. 2019; Du et al. 2021; Kim
et al. 2022). However, most of them exhibit two limitations:
First, the distribution quantification for intra-space in
TSF is unreliable. Time series is ideally generated continuously from the true distribution, while the observational
data is actually sampled discretely with senors in a certain
recording frequency. Existing works always directly normalize or rescale the series (Ogasawara et al. 2010; Passalis et al.
2019; Kim et al. 2022), by quantifying true distribution with
fixed statistics (e.g., mean and std.) empirically obtained
from observational data, and then normalizing series distri-

Introduction

Time Series Forecasting (TSF) has been playing an essential
role in many applications, such as electricity consumption
planning (Akay and Atak 2007), transportation traffic flow
analysis (Ming et al. 2022), weather condition estimation
(Han et al. 2021). Following by traditional statistical methods, (e.g., (Holt 1957)), deep learning-based TSF models,
(e.g., (Salinas et al. 2020; Rangapuram et al. 2018)), have
recently achieved great performance in various areas.
Despite the remarkable success of TSF models, the nonstationarity of time series data has been an under-addressed
challenge for accurate forecasting (Hyndman and Athanasopoulos 2018). The non-stationarity, depicting the distribu* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, we use ‘lookbacks/horizons’, ‘lookback/horizon
windows’,‘input/output-space’ interchangeably.

7522

