The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

3D Human Pose Lifting with Grid Convolution
Yangyuxuan Kang1,2 * , Yuyang Liu3∗ , Anbang Yao4† , Shandong Wang4 , Enhua Wu1,2,5†
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tsinghua University
4
Intel Labs China
5
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
kyyx@ios.ac.cn, yyliu22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {anbang.yao,shandong.wang}@intel.com, ehwu@um.edu.mo

Abstract

outdoor scenarios with dramatic changes of background and
rarely seen situations with diverse occlusions. Driven by
this as well as the prevalence of effective methods to generate large amounts of 2D-to-3D human pose pairs, 2D-to3D pose lifting has become a critical research topic, and thus
has attracted increased attention recently. Many works (Fang
et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2019; Kang et al. 2020) have been
devoted to advancing 2D-to-3D pose lifting research. These
works typically represent human pose as a 1D feature vector
or a graph, and use either fully connected network or graph
convolutional network to regress 3D pose from 2D input.

Existing lifting networks for regressing 3D human poses from
2D single-view poses are typically constructed with linear
layers based on graph-structured representation learning. In
sharp contrast to them, this paper presents Grid Convolution
(GridConv), mimicking the wisdom of regular convolution
operations in image space. GridConv is based on a novel Semantic Grid Transformation (SGT) which leverages a binary
assignment matrix to map the irregular graph-structured human pose onto a regular weave-like grid pose representation
joint by joint, enabling layer-wise feature learning with GridConv operations. We provide two ways to implement SGT, including handcrafted and learnable designs. Surprisingly, both
designs turn out to achieve promising results and the learnable one is better, demonstrating the great potential of this
new lifting representation learning formulation. To improve
the ability of GridConv to encode contextual cues, we introduce an attention module over the convolutional kernel,
making grid convolution operations input-dependent, spatialaware and grid-specific. We show that our fully convolutional
grid lifting network outperforms state-of-the-art methods
with noticeable margins under (1) conventional evaluation
on Human3.6M and (2) cross-evaluation on MPI-INF-3DHP.
Code is available at https://github.com/OSVAI/GridConv.

However, we observe that a pretty successful family of
deep learning techniques, convolutional neural networks for
image recognition and editing tasks, does not attract the interest of researchers in the lifting field. A vital reason is that
graph-structured human skeleton pose having unbalanced
joint neighborhoods hinders the use of convolution operation with regular kernels. Motivated by the observation, we
address the pose lifting problem by formulating a novel gridbased representation learning paradigm, attempting to introduce a 2D coordinate system to measure joint relationships
and enable regular convolution operations and advanced design of building blocks. Regarding our goal, three critical
questions need to be considered: (1) Is it possible to transform a human skeleton pose into an image-like grid coordinate system? (2) How to preserve intrinsic joint relationships
of human skeleton during the transformation? (3) After such
transformation, can we use few modifications to convolutional networks to pursue a high-performance lifting model?

Introduction
3D human pose estimation is essential for various applications. The task aims to recover the 3D positions of human
body joints from images or videos. Benefiting from great
advances in deep learning techniques, 3D human pose estimation with a single image input has now become practical.
One mainstream solution family estimates 3D human
pose in two stages. The first stage detects 2D pose in an image, and the second stage lifts detected 2D pose to its 3D
estimate. Along with the advent of many well-designed 2D
pose detectors, such as HRNet (Sun et al. 2019), 2D human pose detection technology is gradually becoming mature, showing significantly improved performance, even in

To the first question, we propose Semantic Grid Transformation (SGT) which maps the irregular graph-structured human pose onto a regular weave-like grid pose representation
joint by joint. To the second question, we design a handcrafted layout that meanwhile preserves skeleton topology
and brings in a new kind of motion semantics. In addition,
to explore a better grid layout, we propose a learning-based
SGT called AutoGrids that automatically searches the layout conditioned on the input distribution. To the last question, SGT enables a new type of standard convolution operations on the grid pose. We call this operation paradigm
Grid Convolution (GridConv). We further enhance the learning capability of GridConv by introducing an attention mod-

* This work was done when they were interns at Intel Labs

China, supervised by Anbang Yao.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1105

