The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Dynamic Heterogeneous Graph Attention Neural Architecture Search
Zeyang Zhang1 * , Ziwei Zhang1 , Xin Wang1† , Yijian Qin1 , Zhou Qin2 , Wenwu Zhu1†
1

Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
{zy-zhang20,qinyj19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, qinzhou.qinzhou@alibaba-inc.com,
{zwzhang,xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

and temporal evolutionary patterns is critical for applications of dynamic heterogeneous graphs including the prediction of future links, node labels and properties.
Dynamic heterogeneous graph neural networks
(DHGNNs) (Hu et al. 2020; Fan et al. 2022; Xue et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020) have recently achieved remarkable
progress in mining graph dynamic and heterogeneous
information (Huang et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2021; Luo et al.
2020). Despite their success, the existing DHGNNs are all
manually designed and therefore suffer from the following
problems: (1) The designs of DHGNN architectures require
extensive human endeavors and expert knowledge. (2)
Since the hand-designed models have a fixed architecture,
they are unable to adapt to diverse dynamic heterogeneous
graph scenarios. (3) The existing DHGNN architectures
consider the heterogeneous and dynamic information rather
separately and fail to optimally model the joint and complex
interaction of heterogeneous and dynamic information.
In this paper, we propose to automate the design of
DHGNN architectures on dynamic heterogeneous graphs
using neural architecture search (NAS). NAS has attracted
considerable attention in automated machine learning and
has shown success in domains including computer vision (Wistuba, Rawat, and Pedapati 2019; Elsken, Metzen,
and Hutter 2019). However, tailoring a NAS method for dynamic heterogeneous graphs is non-trivial and faces the following two challenges:

Dynamic heterogeneous graph neural networks (DHGNNs)
have been shown to be effective in handling the ubiquitous dynamic heterogeneous graphs. However, the existing DHGNNs are hand-designed, requiring extensive human
efforts and failing to adapt to diverse dynamic heterogeneous graph scenarios. In this paper, we propose to automate the design of DHGNN, which faces two major challenges: 1) how to design the search space to jointly consider
the spatial-temporal dependencies and heterogeneous interactions in graphs; 2) how to design an efficient search algorithm in the potentially large and complex search space.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel Dynamic
Heterogeneous Graph Attention Search (DHGAS) method.
Our proposed method can automatically discover the optimal
DHGNN architecture and adapt to various dynamic heterogeneous graph scenarios without human guidance. In particular, we first propose a unified dynamic heterogeneous
graph attention (DHGA) framework, which enables each
node to jointly attend its heterogeneous and dynamic neighbors. Based on the framework, we design a localization space
to determine where the attention should be applied and a parameterization space to determine how the attention should
be parameterized. Lastly, we design a multi-stage differentiable search algorithm to efficiently explore the search space.
Extensive experiments on real-world dynamic heterogeneous
graph datasets demonstrate that our proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines for tasks including link prediction, node classification and node regression.
To the best of our knowledge, DHGAS is the first dynamic
heterogeneous graph neural architecture search method.

1

• How to design the suitable search space to jointly consider the complex spatial-temporal dependencies and
heterogeneous interactions in graphs?
• How to design a tailored efficient search algorithm in the
potentially large and complex search space for dynamic
heterogeneous graphs?

Introduction

Dynamic heterogeneous graphs are ubiquitous in real-world
applications, including social networks, e-commerce networks, academic citation networks, etc. Compared to static
homogeneous graphs, dynamic heterogeneous graphs contain richer heterogeneous information represented as node
and edge types, and dynamic information like evolving
graph structures over time. The modeling of heterogeneity

To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel Dynamic
Heterogeneous Graph Attention Search (DHGAS) method.
Our proposed method can automatically tailor an optimal
DHGNN architecture and adapt to various dynamic heterogeneous graph scenarios. In particular, we first propose
a unified dynamic heterogeneous graph attention (DHGA)
framework. We enable the model to simultaneously consider heterogeneous neighbors across different time stamps
by extending the classic neighborhood to dynamic heterogeneous neighborhood and applying attention to the neighbor-

* This

work was done during author’s internship at Alibaba
Group
†
Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11307

