The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RenewNAT: Renewing Potential Translation for Non-autoregressive Transformer
Pei Guo* , Yisheng Xiao* , Juntao Li† , Min Zhang
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
{pguolst,ysxiaoo}@stu.suda.edu.cn, {ljt,minzhang}@suda.edu.cn

Abstract

models to ‘the failure of capturing the target side dependency.’ (Gu and Kong 2021; Xiao et al. 2022). More specifically, fully NAT models learn to perform prediction without
the internal dependency of the target sentence as a result of
parallel decoding, unlike the AT models where the t-th token has previous t-1 contextual tokens’ information to help
its generation.
Significant efforts have been made to address the abovementioned obstacles for fully NAT models from different
aspects in recent years, e.g., adopting knowledge distillation (Gu et al. 2018; Zhou, Gu, and Neubig 2019), introducing latent variables (Ran et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021),
training with better criterion (Marjan et al. 2020; Du, Tu,
and Jiang 2021) or learning strategies (Qian et al. 2021; Bao
et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022). Gu and Kong also combine
these tricks for better performance. However, there still exists a performance gap with their strong autoregressive counterparts, indicating that the translation results are still relatively not reliable. Specifically, these models only introduce
effective tricks in the training process and still lack explicit
target side information to guide translation during inference.
Thus, each target token is still predicted independently, and
the well-known multi-modality problem (Gu et al. 2018) still
hurts the translation performance seriously.
Another representative method is introducing iterative refinements for NAT models during inference (Ghazvininejad et al. 2019; Huang, Perez, and Volkovs 2022), called
iterative NAT models. Iterative NAT models adopt multiple decoding steps and keep the non-autoregressive property
in each step, where the tokens generated from the last step
are fed into the model for refinements. Obviously, the result
generated from the previous iteration can provide target-side
information to help predict and do refinements in the next
iteration. Compared with fully NAT models, iterative NAT
models have achieved more exciting performance, even outperforming the vanilla Transformer. However, due to multiple decoding steps, the advantage of decoding speed will
diminish, especially in some specific scenes.
As a result, how to effectively combine the merits of the
above-mentioned two NAT paradigms needs further exploration, e.g., to refine the inferior translation results with the
help of useful target-side information without decreasing the
inference speed. In this work, we propose RenewNAT, a simple yet effective framework for non-autoregressive transla-

Non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT) models
are proposed to accelerate the inference process while maintaining relatively high performance. However, existing NAT
models are difficult to achieve the desired efficiency-quality
trade-off. For one thing, fully NAT models with efficient
inference perform inferior to their autoregressive counterparts. For another, iterative NAT models can, though, achieve
comparable performance while diminishing the advantage of
speed. In this paper, we propose RenewNAT, a flexible framework with high efficiency and effectiveness, to incorporate
the merits of fully and iterative NAT models. RenewNAT first
generates the potential translation results and then renews
them in a single pass. It can achieve significant performance
improvements at the same expense as traditional NAT models (without introducing additional model parameters and decoding latency). Experimental results on various translation
benchmarks (e.g., 4 WMT) show that our framework consistently improves the performance of strong fully NAT methods
(e.g., GLAT and DSLP) without additional speed overhead.

Introduction
Transformer-based models have been widely applied to neural machine translation (NMT) (Dehghani et al. 2018; Wu
et al. 2019; Liang et al. 2021; Takase and Kiyono 2021;
Nguyen et al. 2020; Liang et al. 2022). Despite the excellent performance of these methods, they normally adopt an
autoregressive (AR) decoding paradigm in which the tokens
are predicted one by one in a strict left-to-right order. With
such recurrent dependencies, the inference process is inevitably time-consuming, especially for long sentences. To
mitigate this problem, much attention has been paid to the
fully non-autoregressive (NAT) models (Xiao et al. 2022;
Gu et al. 2018; Ghazvininejad et al. 2019; Qian et al. 2021),
which can generate all tokens in parallel and thus accelerate the inference greatly. However, this increase in inference
efficiency is at the cost of the translation quality, and there
exists a considerable performance gap between NAT models
and their AT counterparts. Many works have explored the
potential reasons and attributed the quality decline in NAT
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12854

