The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BERT-ERC: Fine-Tuning BERT Is Enough for Emotion Recognition in
Conversation
Xiangyu Qin1,2 * , Zhiyu Wu1 * , Tingting Zhang1 , Yanran Li2 , Jian Luan2† , Bin Wang2 , Li Wang3 ,
Jinshi Cui1‡ ,
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Xiaomi AI Lab
3
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences and Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, Peking
University
2001213087@stu.pku.edu.cn, wuzhiyu@pku.edu.cn, zhangtingting3412@gmail.com, yanranli.summer@gmail.com,
luanjian78@hotmail.com, wangbin11@xiaomi.com, liwang@pku.edu.cn, cjs@cis.pku.edu.cn,
Method

Abstract
PLM

Previous works on emotion recognition in conversation
(ERC) follow a two-step paradigm, which can be summarized as first producing context-independent features via finetuning pretrained language models (PLMs) and then analyzing contextual information and dialogue structure information among the extracted features. However, we discover
that this paradigm has several limitations. Accordingly, we
propose a novel paradigm, i.e., exploring contextual information and dialogue structure information in the fine-tuning
step, and adapting the PLM to the ERC task in terms of input text, classification structure, and training strategy. Furthermore, we develop our model BERT-ERC according to
the proposed paradigm, which improves ERC performance
in three aspects, namely suggestive text, fine-grained classification module, and two-stage training. Compared to existing methods, BERT-ERC achieves substantial improvement
on four datasets, indicating its effectiveness and generalization capability. Besides, we also set up the limited resources
scenario and the online prediction scenario to approximate
real-world scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed paradigm significantly outperforms the previous
one and can be adapted to various scenes.

RoBERTa-large
RoBERTa-large

classifier
RGAT
DialogGCN
DAGNN
DialogRNN
DAG-ERC
MLP

MELD
62.80
63.02
63.12
63.61
63.65
63.39

Table 1: Pilot experiment on MELD (%).

structure information consisting of non-textual information of the conversation, such as the speaker information,
the emotion states, and the relative position of the utterances. To exploit these three kinds of information, previous
works (Ghosal et al. 2019b; Majumder et al. 2019; Ishiwatari et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2021) commonly follow a
two-step paradigm of first extracting context-independent
features via fine-tuning pretrained language models (PLMs)
and then characterizing contextual information and dialogue
structure information among the obtained features by their
classifiers (models). For example, DialogRNN (Majumder
et al. 2019) first extracts utterance features with RoBERTalarge (Liu et al. 2019) and then uses three GRUs (Chung
et al. 2014) to encode contextual information, speaker state,
and emotion state, respectively. To verify the contribution
of the contextual information and dialogue structure information analyzed in step two, we design a pilot experiment.
Specifically, baseline in the experiment uses RoBERTa-large
and MLP as the PLM and classifier respectively, suggesting that these two kinds of information remain unexplored.
Compared to the methods following the previous paradigm
in Table 1, the baseline achieves comparable performance
on MELD (Poria et al. 2018) dataset, indicating that the
two kinds of information encoded in the second step only
yields trivial improvement (e.g. DialogRNN only outperforms the baseline by 0.22%). Through analysis, the previous paradigm has two flaws. Firstly, the context-independent
features obtained by the PLM are fairly abstract, and thus
pose obstacles to analyzing contextual information and di-

Introduction
Emotion Recognition in Conversation (ERC) aims to identify the emotion of each utterance in the dialogue (Poria et al.
2019). This task has been popularly explored in the NLP research community (Ghosal et al. 2019a; Li et al. 2021; Gao
et al. 2021), which has wide applications in building automatic conversational agents and mining user opinions.
Existing ERC algorithms reveal multiple influencing factors for understanding conversation emotion. As shown in
Figure 1, we divided these factors into three groups: (1)
query utterance information including the text of the
query utterance; (2) contextual information including the
text of the surrounding utterances (contexts); (3) dialogue
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author: luanjian78@hotmail.com
Corresponding author: cjs@cis.pku.edu.cn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

13492

