The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tensorized Incomplete Multi-View Clustering with Intrinsic Graph Completion
Shuping Zhao1† , Jie Wen2† , Lunke Fei3 , Bob Zhang 1 *
2

1
PAMI Research Group, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen,
Shenzhen, 518055, China
3
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
yb77458@um.edu.mo, jiewen pr@126.com, flksxm@126.com, bobzhang@um.edu.mo

Abstract

partition and graph learning based IMVC (Li, Wan, and He
2021), and deep multiview clustering (Zhang et al. 2021).
Commonly, these MVC methods require that all views are
complete. Nevertheless, due to the fact that many reasons
can bring about the deficiency of the views, such as data
corruption, breakdown of the sensors, the privacy policies,
etc., the incomplete multi-view data causes a view-missing
challenge in MVC tasks, called incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC). The conventional MVC methods will be invalid for the IMVC tasks, since some instances from some
views are missing (Wen et al. 2020a; Xu et al. 2021; Wen
et al. 2022).
Some problems may arise in the IMVC applications, on
account of the missing view: 1) The multi-view data cannot
provide complete views for the exploration of the complementary information; 2) The broken data causes a serious
imbalance problem, owing to the fact that the views may
have several numbers of features. Some researchers have
made many efforts to tackle these demanding IMVC issues.
For instance, Wen et al. (Wen et al. 2020a) proposed an
adaptive graph completion based method, Zhao et al. (Zhao
et al. 2021) proposed an intrinsic and complete structure inferring strategy, and Xia et al. (Xia et al. 2022) proposed
a tensor completion based method. Generally, the existing
IMVC methods can be divided into two categories according to their exploited techniques, i.e., matrix factorizationbased IMVC (MF IMVC) and graph learning-based IMVC
(GL IMVC). MF IMVC seeks to learn a low-dimensional
consensus representation from the original multi-view data
adopting the matrix factorization approach. In this way,
partial MVC will learn a common latent sub-space for all
views, such that instances from different views could share
a same low-dimensional representation (Li, Jiang, and Zhou
2014). However, partial PMVC could only handle the incomplete multi-view data with two views. Different from
Partial MVC, Shao et al. (Shao, He, and Yu 2015a) filled
the absent instances with the average value of the collected
data for their corresponding view. However, this simple data
completion strategy easily leads to the over-fitting problem,
since the intrinsic structure is ignored.
Many GL IMVC based methods have also been proposed for more flexible application scenarios. Specifically,
GL IMVC desires to produce a consensus representation
from multiple graphs constructed from different views,

Most of the existing incomplete multi-view clustering
(IMVC) methods focus on attaining a consensus representation from different views but ignore the important information hidden in the missing views and the latent intrinsic
structures in each view. To tackle these issues, in this paper, a unified and novel framework, named tensorized incomplete multi-view clustering with intrinsic graph completion
(TIMVC IGC) is proposed. Firstly, owing to the effectiveness of the low-rank representation in revealing the inherent
structure of the data, we exploit it to infer the missing instances and construct the complete graph for each view. Afterwards, inspired by the structural consistency, a betweenview consistency constraint is imposed to guarantee the similarity of the graphs from different views. More importantly,
the TIMVC IGC simultaneously learns the low-rank structures of the different views and explores the correlations of
the different graphs in a latent manifold sub-space using a
low-rank tensor constraint, such that the intrinsic graphs of
the different views can be obtained. Finally, a consensus representation for each sample is gained with a co-regularization
term for final clustering. Experimental results on several realworld databases illustrates that the proposed method can outperform the other state-of-the-art related methods for incomplete multi-view clustering.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-view clustering (MVC) has become
attractive, where it has been applied to a variety of applications, i.e., image retrieval, webpage retrieval, and speech
recognition (Huang, Zhang, and Pižurica 2021; Mitra et al.
2018; Xu et al. 2022; Cui et al. 2020). Since features collected from multiple views contain more complementary information, MVC has the potential to gain a better performance than single-view clustering (Tao et al. 2018; Chao,
Sun, and Bi 2021; Wang et al. 2021a). Up to now, a variety of MVC methods have achieved significant performances, such as structured low-rank matrix factorization
based MVC (Wang et al. 2018), agglomerative neural networks for MVC (Liu et al. 2021), parameter-free consensus embedding learning based IMVC (Wu et al. 2021), joint
* indicates the corresponding author; † indicates the co-first authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11327

