The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Incomplete Multi-View Multi-Label Learning via Label-Guided Masked Viewand Category-Aware Transformers
Chengliang Liu1 , Jie Wen1∗ , Xiaoling Luo1 , Yong Xu1,2 *
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
liucl1996@163.com, jiewen pr@126.com, xiaolingluoo@outlook.com, yongxu@ymail.com

Abstract

Wan, and He 2021; Wang et al. 2022). For example, retinal
images captured at four different positions constitute a fourview retinal dataset (Luo et al. 2021; Wen et al. 2022; Luo
et al. 2023); the features extracted from the target image with
different feature extraction operators can also form a multiview dataset (Liu et al. 2022; Hu, Lou, and Ye 2021). More
typically, multi-view or multi-modal datasets composed of
multimedia data such as text, pictures, and videos have been
widely used in many applications such as web page classification (Hu, Shi, and Ye 2020; Lu et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2023). As a result, multi-view learning emerges as the times
require, and a large number of methods based on subspace
learning, matrix factorization, and graph learning have been
proposed (Zhan et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017; Wen et al.
2019). Most of these methods seek to obtain a consistent
representation of multiple views to characterize the essential attributes of objects. On the other hand, since the core of
multi-view learning is representation learning, researchers
usually combine it with downstream tasks to improve the application value and evaluate the learning effect (Chen, Wang,
and Lai 2022). That is, multi-view learning can be divided
into clustering and classification, according to whether supervised information is available. Further, in the single-label
classification task, a sample is only labeled with one category, which is obviously against the distribution of information in nature (Zhao et al. 2022). For example, a bird picture
is likely to contain the category of ‘sky’ or ‘tree’. Therefore, although multi-label classification still faces more challenges than single-label classification, its broad application
prospects are attracting a lot of research enthusiasm. Based
on this, a complex fusion task, i.e., multi-view multi-label
classification (MvMlC) is put on the agenda. Zhang et al.
proposed a matrix factorization-based MvMlC model, which
attempts to enforce alignment of different views in the kernel space to exploit multi-view complementarity and explore
more latent information (Zhang et al. 2018). A Bernoulli
mixture conditional model is proposed to model label dependencies and employ a variational inference framework
for approximate posterior estimation (Sun and Zong 2020).

As we all know, multi-view data is more expressive than
single-view data and multi-label annotation enjoys richer supervision information than single-label, which makes multiview multi-label learning widely applicable for various pattern recognition tasks. In this complex representation learning problem, three main challenges can be characterized as
follows: i) How to learn consistent representations of samples across all views? ii) How to exploit and utilize category correlations of multi-label to guide inference? iii) How
to avoid the negative impact resulting from the incompleteness of views or labels? To cope with these problems, we
propose a general multi-view multi-label learning framework
named label-guided masked view- and category-aware transformers in this paper. First, we design two transformer-style
based modules for cross-view features aggregation and multilabel classification, respectively. The former aggregates information from different views in the process of extracting
view-specific features, and the latter learns subcategory embedding to improve classification performance. Second, considering the imbalance of expressive power among views, an
adaptively weighted view fusion module is proposed to obtain
view-consistent embedding features. Third, we impose a label
manifold constraint in sample-level representation learning to
maximize the utilization of supervised information. Last but
not least, all the modules are designed under the premise of
incomplete views and labels, which makes our method adaptable to arbitrary multi-view and multi-label data. Extensive
experiments on five datasets confirm that our method has
clear advantages over other state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Since the development of representation learning methods,
data analysis technology based on simple single-view data
has become more and more difficult to meet diverse application requirements. In the past few years, data acquisition
technology has flourished, and multi-view data from various
media or with different styles are ubiquitous, providing more
possibilities for comprehensively and accurately describing
observation targets. Simply put, multiple observations, obtained from different observation angles for the same thing,
could be regarded as multi-view data (Li and He 2020; Li,

Researchers have conducted extensive researches in the
field of MvMlC, however these works assume that all views
and labels are complete, which is often violated in practice.
For example, if a web page contains only text and images,
then the video view of the page is not available. To avoid

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8816

