The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Positional Label for Self-Supervised Vision Transformer
Zhemin Zhang1 , Xun Gong1,2,3 *
1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
3
Manufacturing Industry Chains Collaboration and Information Support Technology Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China
zheminzhang@my.swjtu.edu.cn, xgong@swjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

[class]
embedding

Positional encoding is important for vision transformer (ViT)
to capture the spatial structure of the input image. General
effectiveness has been proven in ViT. In our work we propose to train ViT to recognize the positional label of patches
of the input image, this apparently simple task actually yields
a meaningful self-supervisory task. Based on previous work
on ViT positional encoding, we propose two positional labels dedicated to 2D images including absolute position and
relative position. Our positional labels can be easily plugged
into various current ViT variants. It can work in two ways:
(a) As an auxiliary training target for vanilla ViT for better
performance. (b) Combine the self-supervised ViT to provide a more powerful self-supervised signal for semantic feature learning. Experiments demonstrate that with the proposed self-supervised methods, ViT-B and Swin-B gain improvements of 1.20% (top-1 Acc) and 0.74% (top-1 Acc)
on ImageNet, respectively, and 6.15% and 1.14% improvement on Mini-ImageNet. The code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/zhangzhemin/PositionalLabel.

Classifier
0

Absolute
positional label

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
Image

8

1
2
Vision
Transformer

3
MLP
Block

4

5
6
7
8

MLP Block
Position
Classifier
position
feature vector

Linear
Dropout
GELU
Linear
Embedded
Patches

Figure 1: Our absolute positional label combined with ViTB. We split an image into fixed-size patches, each corresponding to an absolute position, and feed the sequence of
image patches to a standard ViT encoder. The full set of encoded patches output (intercept half) by the ViT is processed
by a lightweight MLP block that outputs the positional feature vector corresponding to each image patch, which is finally fed into a positional classifier for training, the same as
for vanilla classification. After training, the MLP block is
discarded.

Introduction
Vision transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Zhao,
Jia, and Koltun 2020) have recently emerged as an alternative to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in computer
vision. The design of ViT is inspired by the transformer
of natural language processing (NLP), split an image into
patches and provide the sequence of linear embeddings of
these patches as an input to a Transformer (Touvron et al.
2021). Image patches are treated the same way as tokens
(words) in NLP. The core of transformer is self-attention
(Vaswani et al. 2017), which is able to model long-range dependencies in the data. However, self-attention is fully symmetric, it cannot capture the ordering of input tokens, which
is undesirable for modeling structured data. Therefore, incorporating positional encoding is especially important for
ViT.
There are mainly two classes of methods to add positional
information for ViT. One is absolute and the other is relative.
Absolute positional encoding (Gehring et al. 2017; Li et al.
2018): each absolute position of the input token sequence

from 1 to maximum sequence length has a separate encoding
vector. The encoding vector is then combined with the input
tokens, usually element-wise add, to incorporate positional
information into the ViT’s input tokens. On the other hand,
relative positional encoding (Dai et al. 2019; Shaw, Uszkoreit, and Vaswani 2018) calculates the relative position between tokens based on the absolute position of each input
token, and establishes a look-up table. Each relative position
corresponds to a learnable parameter of the table to learn
the pairwise relations of tokens. The parameters in the table
interact with the self-attention weights. Relative positional
encoding has been verified to be effective in ViT (Wu et al.
2021). Different from the previous explicit incorporation of
positional information, we use the positional information as
a supervision signal for ViT self-supervised training, making
each encoded patch implicitly contains its positional information, as shown in Figure 1.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3516

