The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Electrophysiological Brain Source Imaging via Combinatorial Search
with Provable Optimality
Guihong Wan1 , Meng Jiao2 , Xinglong Ju3 , Yu Zhang4 , Haim Schweitzer5 , Feng Liu2 *
1

Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School
School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute of Technology
3
Division of Management Information Systems, The University of Oklahoma
4
Department of Bioengineering, Lehigh University
5
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas
gwan@mgh.harvard.edu, mjiao@stevens.edu, xinglong.ju@ou.edu
yuzi20@lehigh.edu, hschweitzer@utdallas.edu, fliu22@stevens.edu
2

Abstract

measures electrical firing patterns between neurons. In contrast, fMRI, another important non-invasive brain imaging modality, measures the blood-oxygen-level-dependent
(BOLD) signal that is a secondary metabolic signal (Liu
et al. 2022). EEG/MEG provides uniquely high temporal
resolution at the millisecond scale for underlying brain activities and contains rich information about brain function
and dysfunction, making EEG/MEG studies highly valuable
for clinical, cognitive, and behavioral brain investigations.
Electrophysiological Source Imaging (ESI), also known
as EEG/MEG Source Localization, is a non-invasive neuroimaging technology used to reconstruct the brain source
activation from EEG/MEG measurements, utilizing a head
model to characterize the effect of volume conduction or
field propagation (He and Ding 2013; Yang et al. 2016; Liu
et al. 2017; He et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2022). In some eventrelated experimental designs, a reasonable assumption is
that only a small fraction of the brain sources is consistently
activated (Gramfort et al. 2013), implying that ESI solutions
for such experiments are spatially sparse (Babadi et al. 2014;
Costa et al. 2015). In addition, the brain source activation
has a temporal structure that can be exploited to improve
ESI performance, such as using a state-space model (Pirondini et al. 2017) or a temporal smooth regularization (Qin
et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018).
The accurate estimation of the activated area, including
the sources and their extents, is crucial for detecting the location and size of the epileptogenic zone (Ding, Wilke, and
et al. 2007; Sohrabpour and He 2021; Sun et al. 2022). To
improve the accuracy and spatial smoothness of ESI, many
studies leveraged the spatial structure of the source signal,
such as using the total variation (TV) defined in the source
space (Ding and He 2008) and using a predefined Gaussian
kernel (Haufe et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2020). The TV regularization defined on the irregular 3D brain mesh can help
render an extended source activation pattern. However, the
transformation matrix can regulate the activation pattern of
the source signal; for example, it promotes the same signal
magnitude in the neighboring source space. As a result, using a TV regularization provides a sub-optimal solution and
is not flexible to capture the complicated activation pattern.

Electrophysiological Source Imaging (ESI) refers to reconstructing the underlying brain source activation from noninvasive Electroencephalography (EEG) and Magnetoencephalography (MEG) measurements on the scalp. Estimating the source locations and their extents is a fundamental
tool in clinical and neuroscience applications. However, the
estimation is challenging because of the ill-posedness and
high coherence in the leadfield matrix as well as the noise
in the EEG/MEG data. In this work, we proposed a combinatorial search framework to address the ESI problem with a
provable optimality guarantee. Specifically, by exploiting the
graph neighborhood information in the brain source space, we
converted the ESI problem into a graph search problem and
designed a combinatorial search algorithm under the framework of A∗ to solve it. The proposed algorithm is guaranteed
to give an optimal solution to the ESI problem. Experimental results on both synthetic data and real epilepsy EEG data
demonstrated that the proposed algorithm could faithfully reconstruct the source activation in the brain.

Introduction
Neuronal firing and interactions between neural circuits
at different brain regions serve as a fundamental mechanism for brain sensory and cognitive functions. The brain
physiological and cognitive behaviors generate electromagnetic and metabolic signals that can be measured with different neuroimaging modalities. Typically, these modalities are classified into two categories: (i) invasive measurement modalities, such as stereoelectroencephalography
(sEEG) (Iida and Otsubo 2017) and electrocorticography
(ECoG) (Keene, Whiting, and Ventureyra 2000); (ii) noninvasive measurement modalities, such as Electroencephalogram (EEG) and Magnetoencephalogram (MEG) (Cuffin
and Cohen 1979; Phillips, Rugg, and Friston 2002), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Huettel et al.
2004), positron emission tomography (PET) (Muehllehner
and Karp 2006), and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) (He et al. 2018). EEG/MEG directly
* Corresponding author.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12491

