The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Causal Recurrent Variational Autoencoder for Medical Time Series Generation
Hongming Li1 , Shujian Yu2 * , Jose Principe1
1

University of Florida
UiT - The Arctic University of Norway
hongmingli@ufl.edu, yusj9011@gmail.com, principe@cnel.ufl.edu
2

Abstract

number of (labeled) samples are required during training
before their practical deployment. Unfortunately, in some
sensitive applications, especially those involving medical
and healthcare domains, collecting and exchanging real data
from patients requires a long administrative process or is
even prohibited. This in turn may inhibit research progress
on model comparison and reproducibility.
A good generative model for time series is expected to
model both the joint distribution p(x1:T ) and the transition
dynamics p(xt |x1:t−1 ) for any t. Although most of popular
predictive models, such as autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), kernel adaptive filters (KAF) (Liu,
Pokharel, and Principe 2008) and deep state-space models
(SSMs) (Rangapuram et al. 2018), provide different ways
to capture p(xt |x1:t−1 ) or p(xt |xt−τ :t−1 ) in the window of
length τ , they are deterministic mappers, rather than generative. In other words, these models are incapable of inferring unobserved latent factors (such as trend and seasonality) from observational data, and generating new time series
values by sampling from a tractable latent distribution.
On the other hand, causal inference from time series data
has also attracted increasing attention. Taking the functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data as an example, it
is of paramount importance to identify causal influences between brain activated regions (Deshpande et al. 2009). This
causal graph may also provide insights into brain networkbased psychiatric disorder diagnosis (Wang et al. 2020).
Given the urgent need for a reliable time series generative
model and the modern trend of causal inference, one question arises naturally: can we develop a new generative model
for time series such that it can also be used for causal discovery? In this paper, we give an explicit answer to this question. To this end, we develop causal recurrent variational
autoencoder (CR-VAE), which, to the best of our knowledge, is the first endeavor to integrate the concept of Granger
causality within a recurrent VAE framework. Specifically,
given a M -variate time series x = (x1 , x2 , · · · , xM ), our
CR-VAE consists of an encoder and a multi-head decoder,
in which the p-th head is responsible for generating the pth dimension of x (i.e., xp ). We impose a sparsity penalty
on the weight matrix that connects input and hidden state
(in the decoder), thereby encouraging the model to learn a
sparse matrix A ∈ RM ×M to encode the Granger causality
between pairwise dimensions of x. Such design also makes

We propose causal recurrent variational autoencoder (CRVAE), a novel generative model that is able to learn a Granger
causal graph from a multivariate time series x and incorporates the underlying causal mechanism into its data generation process. Distinct to the classical recurrent VAEs, our
CR-VAE uses a multi-head decoder, in which the p-th head
is responsible for generating the p-th dimension of x (i.e.,
xp ). By imposing a sparsity-inducing penalty on the weights
(of the decoder) and encouraging specific sets of weights
to be zero, our CR-VAE learns a sparse adjacency matrix
that encodes causal relations between all pairs of variables.
Thanks to this causal matrix, our decoder strictly obeys the
underlying principles of Granger causality, thereby making
the data generating process transparent. We develop a twostage approach to train the overall objective. Empirically,
we evaluate the behavior of our model in synthetic data and
two real-world human brain datasets involving, respectively,
the electroencephalography (EEG) signals and the functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. Our model consistently outperforms state-of-the-art time series generative
models both qualitatively and quantitatively. Moreover, it also
discovers a faithful causal graph with similar or improved
accuracy over existing Granger causality-based causal inference methods. Code of CR-VAE is publicly available at
https://github.com/hongmingli1995/CR-VAE.

Introduction
Multivariate time series data are ubiquitous in numerous real-world applications. e.g., the electroencephalogram
(EEG) signals (Isaksson, Wennberg, and Zetterberg 1981),
the climate records (Runge et al. 2019), and the stellar light curves in astronomy (Huijse et al. 2012). Traditional machine learning tasks on time series data include
anomaly detection, segmentation, forecasting, classification,
etc. Among them, the time series forecasting or prediction,
which uses past or historical observations to predict future
values, is perhaps the most popular one.
In recent years, the design of generative models for time
series data emerged as a challenge. One reason is that most
of existing machine learning models, especially deep neural networks, are data-hungry, which means that a sufficient
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8562

