The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

BEVStereo: Enhancing Depth Estimation in Multi-View 3D Object Detection with
Temporal Stereo
Yinhao Li1, 3 , Han Bao2, 3 , Zheng Ge4 , Jinrong Yang5 , Jianjian Sun4 , Zeming Li4
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
MEGVII Technology
5
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
liyinhao20@mails.ucas.edu.cn, baohan20s@ict.ac.cn
{gezheng, yangjinrong, sunjianjian, lizeming}@megvii.com
Abstract

Given that monocular depth estimation has reached its
limit and that time series input images are available in autonomous driving scenarios, it makes sense to use temporal
stereo approaches to multi-view 3D object detection. However, if we incorporate the temporal stereo method into the
multi-view 3D detector, there are two limitations:

Restricted by the ability of depth perception, all Multi-view
3D object detection methods fall into the bottleneck of depth
accuracy. By constructing temporal stereo, depth estimation
is quite reliable in indoor scenarios. However, there are two
difficulties in directly integrating temporal stereo into outdoor
multi-view 3D object detectors: 1) The construction of temporal stereos for all views results in high computing costs.
2) Unable to adapt to challenging outdoor scenarios. In this
study, we propose an effective method for creating temporal
stereo by dynamically determining the center and range of
the temporal stereo. The most confident center is found using
the EM algorithm. Numerous experiments on nuScenes have
shown the BEVStereo’s ability to deal with complex outdoor
scenarios that other stereo-based methods are unable to handle. For the first time, a stereo-based approach shows superiority in scenarios like a static ego vehicle and moving objects.
BEVStereo achieves the new state-of-the-art in the cameraonly track of nuScenes dataset while maintaining memory efficiency. Codes have been released1 .

1. Large memory cost. When we replace the depth module
in BEVDepth with a basic temporal stereo method (Yao
et al. 2018), the memory cost grows to 3.5 times that of
BEVDepth despite bringing a 1.6 percent promotion on
NDS, making it tremendous burden to apply it to a detection task;
2. Unable to tackle complex outdoor scenarios. As discussed in DFM (Wang, Pang, and Lin 2022), temporal
stereo approaches are unable to handle situations like
a static ego vehicle and moving objects. However, over
10% of the frames’ego vehicles are static in nuScenes,
while approximately 25% of the objects are moving.
These two circumstances are also crucial to the security
of an autonomous system in real-world autonomous scenarios.

Introduction
Due to its stability and inexpensive cost, multi-view 3D
object detection has received a lot of interest lately. The
field of 3D object detection has seen significant progress
with numerous camera-based techniques (Wang et al. 2022b;
Huang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2022a; Li et al. 2022b; Huang
and Huang 2022; Liu et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2022a). However, there is still a substantial gap between them and
LiDAR-based approaches. When examining camera-based
approaches, it is obvious to see that depth accuracy is still
the main limitation of these methods.
Delving into depth-based multi-view object detection approaches, their depth module is a mono-depth estimation
module due to the rarity of multi-view camera overlap. Dijk
et.al (Dijk and Croon 2019) shows that monocular depth estimation is based on the object’s connection with the ground
and contextual information. These two cues let neural networks understand depth to some extent, but this degree of
precision is hardly adequate for 3D object detection.

In this study, we present BEVStereo, a stereo-based multiview 3D object detector that uses our dynamic temporal
stereo method to improve memory efficiency while being
able to adapt to challenging outdoor conditions. Reviewing
stereo-based approaches (Wang, Pang, and Lin 2022; Wang
et al. 2022a), it is clear that the majority of the computational
memory cost is associated with constructing stereo. How to
reduce the cost of building stereo is the key to saving memory. To achieve this, we apply a dynamic way to build temporal stereo. As opposed to employing all candidates along the
depth axis, we construct it using the projected depth center
(µ) and depth range (σ). This drastically reduces the number
of candidates while eliminating the need for us to manually
select sample density. Sharing the similar thoughts, MaGNet (Bae, Budvytis, and Cipolla 2022) achieves great success in indoor scenarios. However, its iteration mechanism
is unable to deal with complex outdoor situations and introducing learnable parameters to update µ and σ also brings
addition computational cost. Therefore, we apply the EM
approach to update µ and σ rather than using addition network. Meanwhile, to avoid unnecessary situations brought

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/Megvii-BaseDetection/BEVStereo

1486

