The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-transductive Learning for Generalized Zero-Shot Sketch-Based Image
Retrieval
Ce Ge* , Jingyu Wang* , Qi Qi, Haifeng Sun† , Tong Xu, Jianxin Liao†
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 100876, China
{nwlgc, wangjingyu, qiqi8266, hfsun}@bupt.edu.cn, xutong@ebupt.com, jxlbupt@gmail.com
Abstract

of hand-drawn sketches. Unlike photos that are easily accessible on the Internet, the acquisition of sketches relies
heavily on manual drawing. With the explosive growth of
multimedia content in daily life, the existing sketch datasets
are always insufficient in scale and variety. Deployed retrieval systems trained on a limited number of classes (only
a few hundred) most likely receive query sketches from new
classes. The zero-shot SBIR (ZS-SBIR) (Shen et al. 2018)
has emerged with the vision of generalizing the trained retrieval model to unseen classes, thereby bypassing the need
to collect sketches for every novel category to work with.
ZS-SBIR shares the same challenges as conventional
SBIR. As a cross-modal learning task, the main difficulty
lies in bridging the domain gap between sketch and image. Freehand sketches are abstract and sparse line drawings,
which require a feature extraction flow different to colorful
images. Additionally, “zero-shot” means that no examples
of test classes are available in the training phase. The retrieval model should have the ability to learn ranking property from seen classes and transfer the knowledge to unseen
classes. Zero-shot learning itself is a non-trivial task and the
introduction of sketch modality makes ZS-SBIR harder due
to the high inter- and intra-class variances.
The usual solution for ZS-SBIR is to shape a crossmodal embedding space through deep metric learning. Both
the query sketch and the candidate images are mapped to
the high-dimensional feature space and the retrieval is performed by finding the nearest neighbors. However, since no
data of unseen classes is available, the learned feature mapping likely overfits, and the embedding space biases toward
the clusters of seen classes (Chao et al. 2016). Since ZSSBIR is only evaluated on unseen classes, most retrieval
models are deceived by the idealized setting and exhibit
overestimated performance. Recently, the more realistic and
challenging generalized ZS-SBIR (GZS-SBIR) is attracting
more attention. Sketches and images from both the seen and
unseen classes are mixed to form a new generalized test set.
GZS-SBIR imposes higher requirements on preventing overfitting and balancing the semantic distribution.
It has been explored that generalized zero-shot learning
can not be implemented without knowing any information
about unseen classes (Liu et al. 2018). Side information, like
attribute vectors or word embeddings in the semantic space,
is needed to bridge the seen and unseen classes. Generally,

Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is an attractive research
area where freehand sketches are used as queries to retrieve relevant images. Existing solutions have advanced the
task to the challenging zero-shot setting (ZS-SBIR), where
the trained models are tested on new classes without seen
data. However, they are prone to overfitting under a realistic scenario when the test data includes both seen and unseen classes. In this paper, we study generalized ZS-SBIR
(GZS-SBIR) and propose a novel semi-transductive learning paradigm. Transductive learning is performed on the image modality to explore the potential data distribution within
unseen classes, and zero-shot learning is performed on the
sketch modality sharing the learned knowledge through a
semi-heterogeneous architecture. A hybrid metric learning
strategy is proposed to establish semantics-aware ranking
property and calibrate the joint embedding space. Extensive
experiments are conducted on two large-scale benchmarks
and four evaluation metrics. The results show that our method
is superior over the state-of-the-art competitors in the challenging GZS-SBIR task.

Introduction
With the prevalence of touchscreen devices, hand-drawn input has been widely adopted and is infiltrating into every
aspect of everyday life. Sketching therefore, as a simple, intuitive, and informative means of communication, is showing great potential in human-computer interaction. Sketchbased image retrieval (SBIR) is a representative multimedia retrieval application that aims to retrieve relevant images
with freehand sketches. It has attracted wide attention in recent years and brought to various fruition in computer vision
(Li et al. 2014; Saavedra and Barrios 2015; Liu et al. 2017;
Song et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2017; Li, Zhou, and Yang 2019;
Pang et al. 2019), computer graphics (Eitz et al. 2010, 2011;
Shrivastava et al. 2011; Eitz, Hays, and Alexa 2012; Xu et al.
2013; Chen, Wang, and Liu 2020), and human-computer
interaction (Huang, Canny, and Nichols 2019; Huang and
Canny 2019).
The main difficulty in the SBIR community is the scarcity
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7678

