The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Strategic Facility Location with Clients That Minimize Total Waiting Time
Simon Krogmann1 , Pascal Lenzner1 , Alexander Skopalik2
1

Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Twente
simon.krogmann@hpi.de, pascal.lenzner@hpi.de, a.skopalik@utwente.nl
2

Abstract

ket, called the “main street”. Later, this model was refined by
Downs (1957) and used for the placement of political candidates in a political left-right spectrum. In the HotellingDowns model, competing but otherwise identical facilities
strategically select a placement in some underlying space,
e.g., on the line, to attract as many clients as possible. The
clients are modeled in a very simple way: clients are assumed to patronize their nearest opened facility. However,
while such simplistic clients are still considered in a wide
range of models and recent works, such basic client agents
do not seem to convincingly capture the behavior of realworld clients. Abstracting away from more complex aspects
like pricing, product quality, or social influences, realistic
clients would not only consider the distance to a facility but
also the incurred waiting time at the facility. Interestingly,
this waiting time depends on the number of other clients
that also patronize the same facility. Thus, in a more realistic
setting we have that not only the facilities act strategically,
but also the clients base their behavior on the behavior of
the other clients instead of myopically minimizing distances.
Such more realistic clients have first been considered in the
work of Kohlberg (1983), who studied clients that minimize
a convex combination of distance and waiting time. However, this enhanced realism comes at a cost: while for the
original Hotelling-Downs model equilibrium states always
exist, except for exactly 3 facilities, equilibria only exist for
extreme cases of Kohlberg’s model.

We study a non-cooperative two-sided facility location game
in which facilities and clients behave strategically. This is in
contrast to many other facility location games in which clients
simply visit their closest facility. Facility agents select a location on a graph to open a facility to attract as much purchasing
power as possible, while client agents choose which facilities to patronize by strategically distributing their purchasing
power in order to minimize their total waiting time. Here, the
waiting time of a facility depends on its received total purchasing power. We show that our client stage is an atomic
splittable congestion game, which implies existence, uniqueness and efficient computation of a client equilibrium. Therefore, facility agents can efficiently predict client behavior and
make strategic decisions accordingly. Despite that, we prove
that subgame perfect equilibria do not exist in all instances of
this game and that their existence is NP-hard to decide. On
the positive side, we provide a simple and efficient algorithm
to compute 3-approximate subgame perfect equilibria.

Introduction
Facility location problems are a classical and popular object
of study in AI, Operations Research, Economics, and Theoretical Computer Science. These problems encompass natural problems like placing facilities in a socially optimal way,
e.g., the placement of hospitals, fire stations, or schools, or
determining the locations of competing facilities, e.g., bars,
shops, or gas stations. While the former type of problems are
typically modeled as optimization problems and solved with
a rich toolbox of combinatorial graph algorithms, this cannot be done for the latter problems, due to the strategic setting. Instead, models and methods from (Algorithmic) Game
Theory are necessary to cope with facility location in competitive environments. The focus of this paper will be one
such model that explicitly considers strategic behavior by
the facilities as well as by the clients that want to patronize these facilities. Most importantly, we thereby consider a
very natural type of client behavior that has, to the best of
our knowledge, not yet been studied.
The study of strategic facility location models dates back
almost a century to the works of Hotelling (1929) who considered how to place two competing shops in a linear mar-

But, as demonstrated by Feldman, Fiat, and Obraztsova
(2016), these negative results can be circumvented by considering a natural and interesting variant of the HotellingDowns model. In this model, instead of minimizing the distance, every client has a threshold of how far she would
travel to a facility and chooses to patronize a facility uniformly at random whose distance is below the threshold.
So essentially, the clients uniformly split their purchasing
power among all facilities that are close enough. Besides being more realistic than clients committing to a single facility, this model variant always has equilibrium facility placements. However, it also has a downside: it considers simplistic clients that do not take waiting times into consideration.
Very recently, this downside was removed in a model proposed by Krogmann et al. (2021). In their two-stage facility location game, a given graph encodes which locations
can reach other locations. Clients with a certain purchas-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5714

