The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Parameterized Complexity of Network Microaggregation
Václav Blažej1 , Robert Ganian2 , Dušan Knop1 , Jan Pokorný1 , Šimon Schierreich1 , Kirill Simonov3
1

Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czechia
2
Algorithms and Complexity Group, Technische Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria
3
Hasso Plattner Institute, University of Potsdam, Postdam, Germany
blazeva1@fit.cvut.cz, rganian@gmail.com, {dusan.knop,pokorj54,schiesim}@fit.cvut.cz, kirill.simonov@hpi.de

Abstract

ily happen that two data points in the microaggregated data
represent sets of highly disproportionate sizes.
While microaggregation has obvious connections to clustering, the addition of size control restrictions is not compatible with most clustering approaches which typically aim
at maximizing the sizes of coherent clusters. By now, there
is an extensive body of research studying typical network
clustering models from an empirical (Rattigan, Maier, and
Jensen 2007; Mukherjee, Sarkar, and Lin 2017) as well
as complexity-theoretical perspective (Orecchia and Zhu
2014; Micha and Shah 2020). However, research on microaggregation of networks has so far focused on empirical aspects (Sun et al. 2012; Iftikhar, Wang, and Lin 2020)
or (to a much smaller extent) on approximation specifically in the Euclidean space (Domingo-Ferrer, Sebé, and
Solanas 2008; Domingo-Ferrer and Sebé 2006), while very
little was known about the precise boundaries of tractability for optimal network microaggregation. In fact, we are
aware of only a single paper that touched on this topic to
date (Thaeter and Reischuk 2021), albeit the related topic
of lower bounded clustering has been explored in two other
works (Abu-Khzam et al. 2018; Casel 2019).
While formal definitions are provided in the Preliminaries later, for the upcoming discussions it will be useful to
already concretize the N ETWORK M ICROAGGREGATION
problem (hereinafter NMA). On the input, we receive a
network (modeled as an edge-weighted graph G), a lower
bound ℓ, a distance bound d, and an upper bound u1 . The
task is then to partition the vertices of G into clusters such
that each cluster (1) has size between ℓ and u, and (2) admits a center (vertex) whose distance to every vertex in the
cluster is at most d. We remark that, in view of the aim of
anonymizing G, the center need not be part of the cluster
and that a center can be reused for multiple clusters. Moreover, in connection to previous research on network clustering (Deligkas et al. 2022; Macgregor and Sun 2021; van
Bevern et al. 2015), in some settings it is sensible to add a
third requirement which avoids the creation of completely
disconnected clusters: (3) each cluster must be connected
in G. We denote this variant C ONNECTED N ETWORK M I -

Microaggregation is a classical statistical disclosure control
technique which requires the input data to be partitioned
into clusters while adhering to specified size constraints. We
provide novel exact algorithms and lower bounds for the
task of microaggregating a given network while considering both unrestricted and connected clusterings, and analyze
these from the perspective of the parameterized complexity paradigm. Altogether, our results assemble a complete
complexity-theoretic picture for the network microaggregation problem with respect to the most natural parameterizations of the problem, including input-specified parameters
capturing the size and homogeneity of the clusters as well as
the treewidth and vertex cover number of the network.

Introduction
In view of the rising importance of user anonymity and privacy, it is of paramount importance to ensure that release of
data about relations in social or other networks does not lead
to the disclosure of individual information, while also preserving the informational content. Such tasks lie at the heart
of statistical disclosure control, and are typically tackled by
creating synthetic data from the available real-world network (Das et al. 2022; Belhajjame et al. 2020; Kim, Venkatesha, and Panda 2022).
One of the most classical approaches used to create such
data is microaggregation (Domingo-Ferrer 2009; Yan et al.
2022), which typically aggregates available data into small
homogeneous clusters and releases the centers of these clusters instead of the original data points. While it is always
desirable to have a lower bound for the size of these clusters in order to achieve anonymity, depending on the context in which microaggregation is used it may either be useful to allow for clusters of variable size (so-called dataoriented microaggregation) or to require all the clusters to
have roughly the same size (referred to as fixed-size microaggregation) (Domingo-Ferrer and Mateo-Sanz 2002;
Solé, Muntés-Mulero, and Nin 2012). The advantage of the
former is that one can achieve more homogeneous clusters,
while the latter ensures that each synthetic data point represents roughly the same amount of original data points. Indeed, without an upper bound on the cluster size, it may eas-

1

Setting u to a value slightly above or equal to ℓ models fixedsize microaggregation, while setting u to the size of the input data
set captures data-oriented microaggregation.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6262

