The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Equivariant Message Passing Neural Network for Crystal Material Discovery
Astrid Klipfel1,2,3 * , Zied Bouraoui1 , Olivier Peltre1,3 , Yaël Fregier3 ,
Najwa Harrati2 , Adlane Sayede2
1

Univ. Artois, UMR 8188, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Lens (CRIL), F-62300 Lens, France.
2
Univ. Artois, UMR 8181, Unité de Catalyse et de Chimie du Solide (UCCS), F-62300 Lens, France.
3
Univ. Artois, UR 2462, Laboratoire de Mathématiques de Lens (LML), F-62300 Lens, France.

Abstract

material discovery. Recently, several works have been introduced to manipulate crystal structures, e.g. (Ren et al.
2022; Long et al. 2021). Most notably, models based on
geometrically equivariant ML techniques such as Message
Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) have shown good performance in theoretical chemistry, in particular, on supervised tasks such as property predictions on both organic and
crystalline structures, e.g. (Xie et al. 2021; Klicpera, Becker,
and Günnemann 2022). However, the majority of existing
models are not fully equivariant, making them unsuitable
for unsupervised tasks such as generation or representation
learning. For example, the method from (Klicpera, Becker,
and Günnemann 2022) is only equivariant to SO(3) (rotation
group), making it not suitable for crystal lattice deformation
where the shape of the structure is unknown in advance. To
this end, some methods have been proposed to approximate
Density Functional Theory (DFT) simulation using MPNNs
for unsupervised tasks, e.g. (Ekström Kelvinius, Armiento,
and Lindsten 2022; Gibson, Hire, and Hennig 2022). They
rely on self-simulations to gather information about the interaction forces of a few specific structures to perform generation. However, discovering new materials requires a consequent amount of data to obtain out-of-distribution generalization, i.e. knowledge needed to generalise to unknown
structures and perform arbitrary lattice deformation.

Automatic material discovery with desired properties is a fundamental challenge for material sciences. Considerable attention has recently been devoted to generating stable crystal
structures. While existing work has shown impressive success
on supervised tasks such as property prediction, the progress
on unsupervised tasks such as material generation is still hampered by the limited extent to which the equivalent geometric representations of the same crystal are considered. To address this challenge, we propose EMPNN a periodic equivariant message-passing neural network that learns crystal lattice
deformation in an unsupervised fashion. Our model equivalently acts on lattice according to the deformation action that
must be performed, making it suitable for crystal generation,
relaxation and optimisation. We present experimental evaluations that demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Discovering thermodynamic stable materials with desired
properties is a fundamental challenge for material sciences.
Considerable attention has recently been devoted to crystalline (crystal) material generation. Crystals are involved
everywhere in our modern society from metal alloys to
semiconductors. Contrarily to organic molecules which are
mostly composed of wide carbon chains with a limited variety of atoms, crystals are three-dimensional periodic structures composed of a wider variety of chemical bonds and
atoms. The periodic structure is often represented as a parallelepiped tiling, a.k.a crystal lattice or unit cell.
Within the broad aim of automated stable (crystal) material discovery, various strategies mainly based on simulation or Machine Learning (ML) can be explored. Simulation
allows the properties of a given structure to be predicted
by applying physics laws while ML consists of modelling
and predicting the physical properties. Notice that simulation can also be used for material relaxation, i.e. modifying a structure to improve its stability. The success of ML
has led to a paradigm shift in materials science. In particular, ML techniques are used for performing molecule design, modelling physical properties or at the early stage of

We propose EMPNN an equivariant MPNN that acts on
crystal lattice without any label from the interaction forces
and stress tensors. Previous works already showed the advantage of using MPNN acting on atomic position for both
organic molecules and crystals. But acting on crystal lattices without explicit stress tensors remains a challenging
problem. Our model enforces a structuring bias adapted to
crystals using group actions incorporated by the equivariance property of MPNN layers. To illustrate intuition, given
a pair of atoms, if we know their interaction force in a given
state, we can generalize this interaction to any other orientation as long as the state and the relative distance remain the
same. Hence, we can take advantage of this property, and
the equivariant representation to enhance the generalisation
capability. This allows our model to equivalently act on crystal lattice according to the deformation action that needs to
be performed. We consider equivariance with respect to the
Euclidean group Euc(3) and SL3 (Z) group. To the best of
our knowledge, our model is the first general framework that

* corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14304

