The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Semi-random Impossibilities of Condorcet Criterion
Lirong Xia
RPI, Troy, NY, USA
xialirong@gmail.com

Abstract

relative to other alternatives does not change the winner (Maskin 1999)), as a special case of the MullerSatterthwaite theorem (1977); or
• CC and strategy-proofness (SP for short, which requires
that no agent has incentive to lie), as a special case of the
Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem (1973; 1975).

The Condorcet criterion (CC) is a classical and well-accepted
criterion for voting. Unfortunately, it is incompatible with
many other desiderata including participation (PAR), halfway monotonicity (HM), Maskin monotonicity (MM), and
strategy-proofness (SP). Such incompatibilities are often
known as impossibility theorems, and are proved by worstcase analysis. Previous work has investigated the likelihood
for these impossibilities to occur under certain models, which
are often criticized of being unrealistic.
We strengthen previous work by proving the first set of semirandom impossibilities for voting rules to satisfy CC and the
more general, group versions of the four desiderata: for any
sufficiently large
√ number of voters n, any size of the group
1 ≤ B ≤ n, any voting rule r, and under a large class
of semi-random models that include Impartial Culture, the
likelihood for r to satisfy CC and PAR, CC and HM, CC
and MM, or CC and SP is 1 − Ω( √Bn ). This matches existing lower bounds√for CC&PAR (B = 1) and CC&SP and
CC&HM (B ≤ n), showing that many commonly-studied
voting rules are already asymptotically optimal in such cases.

1

The four combinations of axioms are therefore denoted
by CC&PAR, CC&HM, CC&MM, and CC&SP, respectively. Proofs for these impossibility theorems are based on
worst-case analysis, by identifying a single instance of violation. Therefore, they do not preclude the possibility that
such violations are rare in practice. Indeed, if so, “then one
need not be unduly worried” (Pattanaik 1978).
Studying how rare such impossibilities are in practice has
been a popular and active field of research (Gehrlein and Lepelley 2011; Diss and Merlin 2021). Recently, the topic was
investigated using smoothed analysis (Spielman and Teng
2009; Baumeister, Hogrebe, and Rothe 2020; Xia 2020),
which can be viewed as a worst average-case analysis under semi-random models (Feige 2021), following the frequentists’ principle: the likelihood of violation of axioms
is estimated under an adversarially chosen (i.e., worst-case)
distribution for the votes from a given set of distributions.
For example, the likelihood for CC or PAR to be violated
is Θ( √1n ) for many voting rules for n voters, under a large
class of semi-random models (Xia 2021b).
While this is good news, as violations vanish at a Θ( √1n )
rate, they are not rare enough when the cost of violation is
high. For example, if a violation of CC or PAR leads to a
revote, whose
√ social cost is Θ(n), then the expected social
cost is Θ( n), which is non-negligible. As another example, if everyone complaints on social media about the violation and gets −1 utility every time when seeing a complaint, then the social cost can be as high as Θ(n2 ), meaning
that√the expected social cost is Ω(n1.5 ), or in other words,
Ω( n) per person. In such situations, voting rules with rarer
violations are desirable.
But can any voting rule do better, and if so, by how
much? The answer lies in the lower bound on the likelihood of violations (under all rules), or equivalently, the upper bound on the likelihood of satisfying the axioms. In this
paper, we address this question for the four combinations of
axioms involving CC mentioned earlier, by proving semi-

Introduction

The Condorcet criterion of voting (Condorcet 1785) is
a classical desideratum that has “nearly universal acceptance” (Saari 1995, p. 46). It requires a voting rule to choose
the Condorcet winner—the alternative who beats other alternatives in head-to-head competitions—whenever it exists.
Unfortunately, it is well-known that the Condorcet criterion (CC for short) is incompatible with many other desiderata (a.k.a. axioms) when the number of alternatives m is at
least 3. Such incompatibilities are often called impossibility
theorems. For example, no voting rule satisfies
• CC and participation (PAR for short, which requires that
no voter has incentive to abstain from voting), when m ≥
4 (Moulin 1988);
• CC and half-way monotonicity (HM for short, which
requires that no voter has incentive to reverse his/her
vote (Sanver and Zwicker 2009));
• CC and Maskin monotonicity (MM for short, which requires that any voter raising the position of the winner
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5867

