The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Domain Adaptation for Machine Reading Comprehension
Liang Jiang∗1 , Zhenyu Huang∗2 , Jia Liu1 , Zujie Wen1 , Xi Peng2†
1

Ant Group
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
{tianxuan.jl, jianiu.lj, zujie.wzj}@antgroup.com, {zyhuang.gm, pengx.gm}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

the available documents in the target domain. Then they finetune the pre-trained MRC model by using the constructed
pairs.
Although these methods have achieved promising results,
almost all of them ignore the mismatched QA pairs, i.e., the
irrelevant QA pairs which are wrongly treated as positive.
In the scenario of MRC, such a so-called noisy correspondence (NC) issue (Huang et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2021, 2022)
is caused by the following reasons. First, the domain adaptation methods for MRC often construct pseudo QA pairs
by using the documents in the target domain which does not
contain natural questions. As a result, the generated questions will be probably irrelevant to the answers. Second, the
QA construction model is pre-trained in the source domain
and then directly applied to the target domain without finetuning. In consequence, such a domain shift issue will lead
to noisy correspondence. A toy example of NC is shown in
Fig. 1(a), and more real-world samples generated by the existing works refer to Fig. 4. Notably, the NC problem is remarkably different from the well-studied noisy labels. To be
specific, noisy labels generally refer to the category-level annotation errors of a given data point, whereas here NC refers
to the mismatched relationship between two data points. Undoubtedly, NC will degenerate the performance of the MRC
model, which is however neglected so far as we know.
To sum up, domain adaptation methods for MRC will face
the NC challenge caused by i) the unavailable QA pairs in
the target documents, and ii) domain shift during applying
the QA construction model to the target domain. In this paper, we propose to construct more credible QA pairs by additionally using document-associated dialogues to fill the vacancy of the natural question information in the document.
In addition, our method will fine-tune the QA construction
model in the target domain with the help of the MRC model
feedback. For clarity, we summarize the major differences
between our MRC method and the existing ones in Fig. 1(b)
by taking the customer service as a showcase without loss
of generality. As shown, in real-world applications, the customer service usually answers customers’ questions by referring to the documents, forming an associated dialogue.
Existing works only use the sole document for QA construction and do not further fine-tune the QA construction
model in the target domain. In contrast, our work leverages
both documents and the associated dialogues for QA con-

Most domain adaptation methods for machine reading comprehension (MRC) use a pre-trained question-answer (QA)
construction model to generate pseudo QA pairs for MRC
transfer. Such a process will inevitably introduce mismatched
pairs (i.e., Noisy Correspondence) due to i) the unavailable
QA pairs in target documents, and ii) the domain shift during applying the QA construction model to the target domain.
Undoubtedly, the noisy correspondence will degenerate the
performance of MRC, which however is neglected by existing
works. To solve such an untouched problem, we propose to
construct QA pairs by additionally using the dialogue related
to the documents, as well as a new domain adaptation method
for MRC. Specifically, we propose Robust Domain Adaptation for Machine Reading Comprehension (RMRC) method
which consists of an answer extractor (AE), a question selector (QS), and an MRC model. Specifically, RMRC filters
out the irrelevant answers by estimating the correlation to the
document via the AE, and extracts the questions by fusing the
candidate questions in multiple rounds of dialogue chats via
the QS. With the extracted QA pairs, MRC is fine-tuned and
provides the feedback to optimize the QS through a novel
reinforced self-training method. Thanks to the optimization
of the QS, our method will greatly alleviate the noisy correspondence problem caused by the domain shift. To the best of
our knowledge, this could be the first study to reveal the influence of noisy correspondence in domain adaptation MRC
models and show a feasible solution to achieve the robustness
against the mismatched pairs. Extensive experiments on three
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
In recent, a number of domain adaptation (DA) methods (Cao et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019; Lewis, Denoyer, and
Riedel 2019) for machine reading comprehension (MRC)
have been proposed, which usually pre-train an MRC model
in a high-resource domain and then transfer it to a lowresource domain. Specifically, most existing methods (Cao
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019; Lewis, Denoyer, and Riedel
2019) consist of two steps. First, they construct some pseudo
QA pairs by using a pre-trained QA construction model from
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8060

