The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Text-DIAE: A Self-Supervised Degradation Invariant Autoencoder for Text
Recognition and Document Enhancement
Mohamed Ali Souibgui* 1 , Sanket Biswas* 1 , Andres Mafla* 1 , Ali Furkan Biten* 1 , Alicia Fornés1 ,
Yousri Kessentini2 , Josep Lladós1 , Lluis Gomez1 , Dimosthenis Karatzas1
1

Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
2
Digital Research Center of Sfax, SM@RTS Laboratory, Sfax, Tunisia

Abstract

et al. 2021) using auto-encoders have been used to learn representations in the feature space through image patches and
visual tokens.
Closely related to our work, some contributions in visual representation learning were addressing text recognition (HTR) (Aberdam et al. 2021; Bhunia et al. 2021;
Liu et al. 2022) and Scene-Text Recognition (STR) (Aberdam et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022)) and image enhancement (Liang et al. 2022). Despite the performance gains,
there are some drawbacks of such models: (1) independent
sequences of tokens are treated as single data points, which
can cause misalignment of similar sequences among a batch,
(2) considerable batch size requirements to define negative
contrastive pairs, (3) considerably slow convergence rates.
For humans, reading text in noisy scenarios is possible because of the ability or reconstructing the degraded regions
and predicting the missing/blurry content (Howard et al.
1998; Dehaene 2014). Incorporating such an ability in a
model could immensely help in restoration, recognition and
understanding of characters and symbols, considering that
text carries rich linguistic information that allow humans to
reason explicitly according to context. In order to endow this
human-specific skill to our models, we present in this paper
a new self-supervised framework called Text-Degradation
Invariant Auto-Encoders (Text-DIAE) inspired by the principle of denoising autoencoders (Vincent et al. 2008). Our
model focuses on exploring the dynamics of learning representations under different degradation scenarios. Specifically, we propose the usage of a robust self-supervised
auto-encoder along with customized pretext tasks (masking, blur and background noise) that are designed to specifically tackle two different downstream tasks: text recognition
(HTR and STR) and document image enhancement (document binarization, document deblurring). As a consequence,
the choice of the proxy tasks have been realized to learn
useful representations for solving these specific downstream
tasks using unlabeled data.
The benefits of employing such approach are: we do not
define sequences at the feature level. Rather, by employing a transformer-based (Vaswani et al. 2017) approach,
similar to BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) we utilize the selfattention layers to attend among patches which does not
require big batches of negative samples. Also, the combination of these pre-training tasks result in a significantly

In this paper, we propose a Text-Degradation Invariant
Auto Encoder (Text-DIAE), a self-supervised model designed to tackle two tasks, text recognition (handwritten or
scene-text) and document image enhancement. We employ
a transformer-based architecture that incorporates three pretext tasks as learning objectives to be optimized during pretraining without the usage of labelled data. Each of the pretext objectives is tailored for the final downstream tasks. We
conduct several ablation experiments that confirm the design
choice of the selected pretext tasks. Importantly, the proposed
model does not exhibit limitations of previous state-of-the-art
methods based on contrastive losses, while at the same time
requiring substantially fewer data samples to converge. Finally, we demonstrate that our method surpasses the state-ofthe-art in existing supervised and self-supervised settings in
handwritten and scene text recognition and document image
enhancement. Our code and trained models will be made publicly available at https://github.com/dali92002/SSL-OCR.

1

Introduction

In recent times, self-supervised learning paradigms have
gained a lot of attention due to its ability of benefiting from
massive unlabelled data which is easily accessible from different sources. However, applying these approaches remain
quite limited in the domains of optical character recognition
(OCR), handwritten text recognition (HTR) and document
image enhancement, which motivate us to tackle the problem in this study.
Common computer vision pipelines using self-supervised
frameworks employ a pretext-task (e.g. relative position prediction of patches (Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015), contrastive views (Chen et al. 2020), image inpainting (Pathak
et al. 2016), etc.) to learn visual representations for solving
down-stream tasks like classification, object detection and
so on. Current self-supervised paradigms (Caron et al. 2021;
Chen et al. 2020; Chen, Xie, and He 2021) have adapted
transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) to learn visual representations from unlabelled images which are semantically
meaningful. More recently, generative self-supervised approaches (He et al. 2021; Bao, Dong, and Wei 2021; Dong
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2330

