The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Temporal-Ordered Representation for Spike Streams Based on Discrete
Wavelet Transforms
Jiyuan Zhang* 1 , Shanshan Jia* 1, 2 , Zhaofei Yu†1, 2 , Tiejun Huang1, 2
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{jyzhang,jiashsh}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn
2

CNN

Abstract
Spike camera, a new type of neuromorphic visual sensor that
imitates the sampling mechanism of the primate fovea, can
capture photons and output 40000 Hz binary spike streams.
Benefiting from the asynchronous sampling mechanism, the
spike camera can record fast-moving objects and clear images can be recovered from the spike stream at any specified timestamps without motion blurring. Despite these, due
to the dense time sequence information of the discrete spike
stream, it is not easy to directly apply the existing algorithms of traditional cameras to the spike camera. Therefore, it is necessary and interesting to explore a universally
effective representation of dense spike streams to better fit
various network architectures. In this paper, we propose to
mine temporal-robust features of spikes in time-frequency
space with wavelet transforms. We present a novel WaveletGuided Spike Enhancing (WGSE) paradigm consisting of
three consecutive steps: multi-level wavelet transform, CNNbased learnable module, and inverse wavelet transform. With
the assistance of WGSE, the new streaming representation
of spikes can be learned. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of WGSE on two downstream tasks, achieving state-of-theart performance on the image reconstruction task and getting
considerable performance on semantic segmentation. Furthermore, We build a new spike-based synthesized dataset
for semantic segmentation. Code and Datasets are available
at https://github.com/Leozhangjiyuan/WGSE-SpikeCamera.

Only CNN

Spike Stream
DWT

PSNR: 37.47 dB

Wavelet Coefficients

WGSE

PSNR: 15.16 dB
CNN

CNN
IDWT

Ours

Only Wavelet

New Representation

PSNR: 38.38 dB

Figure 1: Three technical routes on image reconstruction.
Top line: The method using CNN-based model (Zhao et al.
2021); Middle line: The method using integrated features of
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) on spikes (Ours). Bottom
line: The method using WGSE module. The WGSE firstly
performs DWT on spikes, learns effective wavelet components combining with CNN, and outputs the new representation for spikes after inverse DWT. Finally, the downstream
CNN recovers the image (Ours).

and high dynamic range. In contrast, the traditional camera
collects dozens of images per second, inevitably having a
time-domain blind area.
Many researchers have begun to develop computer vision
algorithms suitable for the spike camera, including image reconstruction (Zhu et al. 2020, 2021; Zheng et al. 2021; Nie
et al. 2020; Zhao, Xiong, and Huang 2020; Zhao et al. 2021,
2022a; She and Qing 2022), denoising (Xu et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2022), detection (Li et al. 2022a), tracking and recognition of high-speed moving objects (Huang et al. 2022;
Zhao et al. 2022b), depth estimation and optical flow estimation (Hu et al. 2022a). Despite these, due to the dense time
sequence information and discrete data of the spike camera, it is not easy to directly apply the existing algorithms
of traditional cameras to the spike camera. Therefore, mining a general and universal representation for dense spike
streams that contain temporal-ordered sequential information and more explicit features of spike data, so that it can
properly apply the existing ecology, has become an exciting
and necessary exploration direction.
When receiving external stimuli, the photoreceptor accumulates photon energy and converts them into the spike

Introduction
Inspired by the sampling mechanism of the fovea retina,
a new type of neuromorphic sensor named spike camera (Huang et al. 2022; Dong, Huang, and Tian 2017) has
been developed and achieves a sampling rate of 40000 Hz.
Different from the event camera (Gallego et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2011; Brandli et al. 2014; Lichtsteiner, Posch, and Delbruck 2008; Moeys et al. 2018; Posch, Matolin, and Wohlgenannt 2011; Huang, Guo, and Chen 2017) that records the
relative light intensity difference, the spike camera encodes
the absolute light intensity information. The asynchronous
firing mechanism of the spike camera brings the distinctive
properties of high-speed sampling, low energy consumption,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

137

