The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast and Interpretable Dynamics for Fisher Markets
via Block-Coordinate Updates
Tianlong Nan, Yuan Gao, Christian Kroer
Columbia University, New York, USA
{tianlong.nan, gao.yuan, christian.kroer}@columbia.edu

Abstract

1974). Recent work has also established close connections
between market equilibria and important solution concepts
in the context of large-scale Internet markets, such as pacing
equilibria in repeated auctions (Conitzer et al. 2018, 2019;
Kroer and Stier-Moses 2022). Motivated by the classical and
emerging applications described above, we are interested in
developing efficient equilibrium computation algorithms for
large-scale market instances. In general, computing a ME
is a hard problem (Chen and Teng 2009; Vazirani and Yannakakis 2011; Othman, Papadimitriou, and Rubinstein 2016).
However, for the case of Fisher markets and certain classes
of utility functions, efficient algorithms are known (Devanur
et al. 2008; Zhang 2011; Gao and Kroer 2020), often based
on solving a specific convex program—whose solutions are
ME and vice versa—using an optimization algorithm. In this
paper, we focus on two well-known such convex programs,
namely, the Eisenberg-Gale (EG) (Eisenberg and Gale 1959;
Eisenberg 1961) and Shmyrev convex programs (Shmyrev
2009; Cole et al. 2017).
Most existing equilibrium computation literature studies
the case of a static market where all buyers and items are
present in every time step of the equilibrium computation
process. In contrast, we study a setting where only a random
subset of buyer-item pairs show up at each time step. Such a
setting is well-motivated from a computational perspective,
since stochastic methods are typically more efficient for extremely large problems. Secondly, our model allows us to
model new types of market dynamics. We make use of recent
advances in stochastic first-order optimization, more specifically, block-coordinate-type methods, to design new equilibrium computation algorithms for this setting. The resulting
equilibrium computation algorithms have strong convergence
guarantees and consistently outperform deterministic fullinformation algorithms in numerical experiments. In addition,
many of the optimization steps not only give efficient update
formulas for market iterates, but also translate to interpretable
market dynamics.

We consider the problem of large-scale Fisher market equilibrium computation through scalable first-order optimization methods. It is well-known that market equilibria can
be captured using structured convex programs such as the
Eisenberg-Gale and Shmyrev convex programs. Highly performant deterministic full-gradient first-order methods have been
developed for these programs. In this paper, we develop new
block-coordinate first-order methods for computing Fisher
market equilibria, and show that these methods have interpretations as tâtonnement-style or proportional response-style
dynamics where either buyers or items show up one at a time.
We reformulate these convex programs and solve them using proximal block coordinate descent methods, a class of
methods that update only a small number of coordinates of the
decision variable in each iteration. Leveraging recent advances
in the convergence analysis of these methods and structures of
the equilibrium-capturing convex programs, we establish fast
convergence rates of these methods.

Introduction
In a market equilibrium (ME) a set of items is allocated
to a set of buyers via a set of prices for the items and an
allocation of items to buyers such that each buyer spends
their budget optimally, and all items are fully allocated. Due
to its rich structural properties and strong fairness and efficiency guarantees, ME has long been used to develop fair
division and online resource allocation mechanisms (Gao
and Kroer 2021; Aziz and Ye 2014; Barman, Krishnamurthy,
and Vaish 2018; Arnsperger 1994). Market model and corresponding equilibrium computation algorithms have been
central research topics in market design and related areas in
economics, computer science and operations research with
practical impacts (Scarf et al. 1967; Kantorovich 1975; Othman, Sandholm, and Budish 2010; Daskalakis, Goldberg,
and Papadimitriou 2009; Cole et al. 2017; Kroer et al. 2019).
More specifically, many works in market design rely on the
assumption that ME can be computed efficiently for largescale market instances. For example, the well-known fair
division mechanism without money competitive equilibrium
from equal incomes (CEEI) requires computing a ME of a
Fisher market under uniform buyer budgets (Varian et al.

Summary of contribution. We propose two stochastic algorithms for computing large-scale ME: (proximal) blockcoordinate descent on EG (BCDEG) and block-coordinate
proportional response (BCPR). These algorithms are derived
by applying stochastic block-coordinate-type algorithms on
reformulated equilibrium-capturing convex programs. More

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5832

