The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Audio-Visual Representation Learning with Relaxed Cross-Modal
Synchronicity
Pritam Sarkar1, 2 , Ali Etemad1
1

Queen’s University, Canada
2
Vector Institute
{pritam.sarkar, ali.etemad}@queensu.ca

Abstract

The common and standard practice in self-supervised
audio-visual representations learning is to learn intra-modal
and cross-modal relationships between the audio and visual streams by maintaining tight temporal synchronicity between the two modalities (Alayrac et al. 2020; Korbar, Tran,
and Torresani 2018; Alwassel et al. 2020; Asano et al. 2020).
Yet, the impact of learning temporally asynchronous crossmodal relationships in the context of self-supervised learning has not been explored. This notion deserves deeper exploration as learning such temporally asynchronous crossmodal relationships may in fact result in increased invariance and distinctiveness in the learned representations.
In this study, in an attempt to explore the notion above,
we present CrissCross, a self-supervised framework to
learn robust generalized audio-visual representations from
videos. CrissCross is built upon SimSiam (Chen and He
2021) to jointly learn self-supervised audio-visual representations through a mixture of intra- and cross- modal optimizations. In addition to learning intra-modal and standard synchronous cross-modal relations, CrissCross introduces the novel idea of learning cross-modal representations
through relaxing time-synchronicity between corresponding audio and visual segments. We refer to this as ‘asynchronous cross-modal’ optimization, a concept that has not
been explored in prior works. We use 3 datasets of different
sizes: Kinetics-Sound (Arandjelovic and Zisserman 2017),
Kinetics400 (Kay et al. 2017), and AudioSet (Gemmeke
et al. 2017), to pretrain CrissCross. We evaluate CrissCross
on different downstream tasks, namely action recognition,
sound classification, and action retrieval. We use 2 popular
benchmarks UCF101 (Soomro, Zamir, and Shah 2012) and
HMDB51 (Kuehne et al. 2011) to perform action recognition and retrieval, while ESC50 (Piczak 2015) and DCASE
(Stowell et al. 2015) are used for sound classification.
The key contributions of this work are as follows:
• We present a novel framework for multi-modal selfsupervised learning by relaxing the audio-visual temporal synchronicity to learn effective generalized representations. Our method is simple, data efficient and less resource intensive, yet learns robust multi-modal representations for a variety of downstream tasks.
• We perform an in-depth study to explore the performance
of the proposed framework and its major concepts. Moreover, we perform thorough analyses, both quantitatively

We present CrissCross, a self-supervised framework for
learning audio-visual representations. A novel notion is introduced in our framework whereby in addition to learning
the intra-modal and standard ‘synchronous’ cross-modal relations, CrissCross also learns ‘asynchronous’ cross-modal
relationships. We perform in-depth studies showing that by
relaxing the temporal synchronicity between the audio and
visual modalities, the network learns strong generalized representations useful for a variety of downstream tasks. To
pretrain our proposed solution, we use 3 different datasets
with varying sizes, Kinetics-Sound, Kinetics400, and AudioSet. The learned representations are evaluated on a number of downstream tasks namely action recognition, sound
classification, and action retrieval. Our experiments show that
CrissCross either outperforms or achieves performances on
par with the current state-of-the-art self-supervised methods
on action recognition and action retrieval with UCF101 and
HMDB51, as well as sound classification with ESC50 and
DCASE. Moreover, CrissCross outperforms fully-supervised
pretraining while pretrained on Kinetics-Sound.

1

Introduction

In recent years, self-supervised learning has shown great
promise in learning strong representations without humanannotated labels (Chen et al. 2020; Chen and He 2021;
Caron et al. 2018), and emerged as a strong competitor for
fully-supervised pretraining. There are a number of benefits
to such methods. Firstly, they reduce the time and resources
required for expensive human annotations and allow researchers to directly use large uncurated datasets for learning
meaningful representations. Moreover, the models trained
in a self-supervised fashion learn more abstract representations, which are useful for a variety of downstream tasks
without needing to train the models from scratch. Given
the abundance of videos, their spatio-temporal informationrich nature, and the fact that in most cases they contain
both audio and visual streams, self-supervised approaches
are strong alternatives to fully-supervised methods for video
representation learning. Moreover, the high dimensionality
and multi-modal nature of videos make them difficult to annotate, further motivating the use of self-supervision.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9723

