The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neural Integro-Differential Equations
Emanuele Zappala* ,1 , Antonio H. de O. Fonseca* ,1 , Andrew H. Moberly1 , Michael J. Higley1 ,
Chadi Abdallah2 , Jessica A. Cardin1 , David van Dijk1
1

Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
emanuele.zappala@yale.edu, antonio.fonseca@yale.edu, andrew.moberly@yale.edu, m.higley@yale.edu,
chadi.abdallah@bcm.edu, jess.cardin@yale.edu, david.vandijk@yale.edu
2

Abstract

tegral operators epitomize such functionals, and the corresponding theory of IDEs has become central, for instance,
in kinetic theory (Grigoriev et al. 2010). Examples of such
applications are the Boltzmann kinetic equation, the Vlasov
equation, and the Landau kinetic equation. In contrast, differential operators such as time derivatives are local operators in that the notion of derivative at one point requires information from the “immediate vicinity” of the point. This
is formalized through the concept of limit.
The theory of IDEs stems from the necessity of modeling
systems that present spatio-temporal relations which transcend local modeling, and works of Volterra on population
dynamics have motivated this since as early as the beginning
of the 1900’s (Volterra 1913, 1932). Consequently, IDEs
present several properties that are unique to their purely nonlocal behavior (Grigoriev et al. 2010; Trenogin 2020). Despite their importance, no approach for learning IDE systems from data exists. Motivated by this, we develop a deep
learning method called Neural Integro-Differential Equation
(NIDE), which learns an IDE whose solution approximates
data sampled from given non-local dynamics. A schematic
representation of the functioning of NIDE is given in Figure 1A. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first deep
learning framework for modeling of non-local continuous
dynamics.

Modeling continuous dynamical systems from discretely
sampled observations is a fundamental problem in data science. Often, such dynamics are the result of non-local processes that present an integral over time. As such, these systems are modeled with Integro-Differential Equations (IDEs);
generalizations of differential equations that comprise both an
integral and a differential component. For example, brain dynamics are not accurately modeled by differential equations
since their behavior is non-Markovian, i.e. dynamics are in
part dictated by history. Here, we introduce the Neural IDE
(NIDE), a novel deep learning framework based on the theory of IDEs where integral operators are learned using neural networks. We test NIDE on several toy and brain activity
datasets and demonstrate that NIDE outperforms other models. These tasks include time extrapolation as well as predicting dynamics from unseen initial conditions, which we
test on whole-cortex activity recordings in freely behaving
mice. Further, we show that NIDE can decompose dynamics
into their Markovian and non-Markovian constituents via the
learned integral operator, which we test on fMRI brain activity recordings of people on ketamine. Finally, the integrand
of the integral operator provides a latent space that gives insight into the underlying dynamics, which we demonstrate
on wide-field brain imaging recordings. Altogether, NIDE is
a novel approach that enables modeling of complex non-local
dynamics with neural networks.

Introduction

Contributions

Integro-differential equations (IDEs) are a class of functional differential equations that are non-local in time. IDEs
naturally describe many dynamical systems, including population dynamics, nuclear reactor physics, and visco-elastic
fluids, as considered in detail in Lakshmikantham (1995).
Further examples are models of brain dynamics (Martin
et al. 2018; Wilson and Cowan 1972; Amari 1977), as well
as infectious disease spreading (Medlock and Kot 2003).
Functional differential equations, and IDEs in particular,
are equations determined by non-local operators. These are
mappings, or functionals, from a space of functions into itself that require knowledge of the input function at noninfinitesimal neighbourhoods in order to be computed. In-

The main contributions of this article are as follows:
• We implement an IDE solver fully supported by PyTorch.
• We introduce a deep learning method for modeling IDEs,
namely Neural IDE, which learns an integral operator
from a space of functions into itself.
• We derive the adjoint state of NIDEs and use this for
backpropagation during training.
• We present a method for decomposing dynamics into local and non-local components.
• Finally, we use our method to model brain dynamics, including wide-field calcium imaging in mice and fMRI
recordings of people on ketamine.

* Co-first authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11104

