The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Feature-Space Bayesian Adversarial Learning Improved Malware Detector
Robustness
Bao Gia Doan1 , Shuiqiao Yang2 , Paul Montague4 , Olivier De Vel3 , Tamas Abraham4 , Seyit Camtepe3 ,
Salil S. Kanhere2 , Ehsan Abbasnejad1 , Damith C. Ranasinghe1
1
The University of Adelaide, Australia
The University of New South Wales, Australia
3
Data61, CSIRO, Australia
4
Defence Science and Technology Group, Australia
{giabao.doan, ehsan.abbasnejad, damith.ranasinghe}@adelaide.edu.au, {shuiqiao.yang, salil.kanhere}@unsw.edu.au,
seyit.camtepe@data61.csiro.au, olivierdevel@yahoo.com.au, {paul.montague, tamas.abraham}@defence.gov.au
2

Abstract

financial—in billions of dollars (Anderson et al. 2019)—and
human costs in loss of life (Eddy and Perlroth 2020). According to statistics from Kaspersky Lab, at the end of 2020,
there were an average of 360,000 pieces of malware detected
per day (KasperskyLab 2020). The battle against such large
incidents of malware remains an ongoing challenge and the
need for automated and effective malware detection systems
is a research imperative.
Advances in Machine Learning (ML) have led to stateof-the-art malware detectors (Arp et al. 2014; Peng et al.
2012; Harang and Rudd 2020; Raff et al. 2018; Anderson and
Roth 2018). But, ML-based models are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples; here, seemingly benign inputs
with small perturbations can successfully evade detectors.
Although adversarial examples were shown initially in the
computer vision domain (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Madry et al. 2018; Biggio and
Roli 2018), malware is no exception. Recent attacks have
crafted adversarial examples in the malware domain—socalled adversarial malware; now, a carefully crafted malware
sample with minimal changes to malware code but still able to
preserve the realism and functionality of the malware is able
to fool ML-based malware detectors to misclassify them as
benign-ware. These attacks pose an emerging threat against
ML-based malware detectors (Grosse et al. 2017; Kolosnjaji
et al. 2018; Kreuk et al. 2018; Suciu, Coull, and Johns 2019;
Pierazzi et al. 2020; Demetrio et al. 2021).
Problem. In general, adversarial learning (Athalye, Carlini,
and Wagner 2018) or training with adversarial examples is an
effective method to build models robust against adversarial
examples. However, generating adversarial malware samples
for training, especially at the production scale necessary for
deployable models, is non-trivial. Because:

We present a new algorithm to train a robust malware detector.
Malware is a prolific problem and malware detectors are a
front-line defense. Modern detectors rely on machine learning
algorithms. Now, the adversarial objective is to devise alterations to the malware code to decrease the chance of being
detected whilst preserving the functionality and realism of
the malware. Adversarial learning is effective in improving
robustness but generating functional and realistic adversarial
malware samples is non-trivial. Because: i) in contrast to tasks
capable of using gradient-based feedback, adversarial learning
in a domain without a differentiable mapping function from
the problem space (malware code inputs) to the feature space
is hard; and ii) it is difficult to ensure the adversarial malware is realistic and functional. This presents a challenge for
developing scalable adversarial machine learning algorithms
for large datasets at a production or commercial scale to realize robust malware detectors. We propose an alternative;
perform adversarial learning in the feature space in contrast
to the problem space. We prove the projection of perturbed,
yet valid malware, in the problem space into feature space
will always be a subset of adversarials generated in the feature
space. Hence, by generating a robust network against featurespace adversarial examples, we inherently achieve robustness
against problem-space adversarial examples. We formulate a
Bayesian adversarial learning objective that captures the distribution of models for improved robustness. To explain the
robustness of the Bayesian adversarial learning algorithm, we
prove that our learning method bounds the difference between
the adversarial risk and empirical risk and improves robustness.
We show that Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) achieve stateof-the-art results; especially in the False Positive Rate (FPR)
regime. Adversarially trained BNNs achieve state-of-the-art
robustness. Notably, adversarially trained BNNs are robust
against stronger attacks with larger attack budgets by a margin
of up to 15% on a recent production-scale malware dataset of
more than 20 million samples. Importantly, our efforts create
a benchmark for future defenses in the malware domain.

Introduction
We are amidst a meteoric rise in malware incidents worldwide. Malware is responsible for significant damages, both
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14783

• Generation of adversarial examples in the malware domain is confronted with the inverse feature-mapping problem where the function mapping from the problem space
(the discrete space of software code binaries) to the feature space (vectorized features) is non-differentiable (Biggio et al. 2013; Biggio, Fumera, and Roli 2013; Quiring, Maier, and Rieck 2019). Hence, fast, gradient-driven
methods to derive useful information to craft adversarial
samples in the problem space are not suitable.

