The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ERASER: Adversarial Sensitive Element Remover for Image Privacy Preservation
Guang Yang1,2,3 , Juan Cao2,3 , Danding Wang2 , Peng Qi2,3 , Jintao Li2
1
Zhongguancun Laboratory
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
yangguang@zgclab.edu.cn, {caojuan, wangdanding, qipeng, jtli}@ict.ac.cn
2

Original
Mask

Original

Original
Mask

Abstract

Mask
Inpainting [48]

Inpainting [48]
ERASER [Ours]

ERASER [Ours]

Inpainting [48]
ERASER [Ours]

The daily practice of online image sharing enriches our lives,
but also raises a severe issue of privacy leakage. To mitigate the privacy risks during image sharing, some researchers
modify the sensitive elements in images with visual obfuscation methods including traditional ones like blurring and
pixelating, as well as generative ones based on deep learning.
However, images processed by such methods may be recovered or recognized by models, which cannot guarantee privacy. Further, traditional methods make the images very unnatural with low image quality. Although generative methods
produce better images, most of them suffer from insufficiency
in the frequency domain, which influences image quality.
Therefore, we propose the AdvERsArial Sensitive Element
Remover (ERASER) to guarantee both image privacy and
image quality. 1) To preserve image privacy, for the regions
containing sensitive elements, ERASER guarantees enough
difference after being modified in an adversarial way. Specifically, we take both the region and global content into consideration with a Prior Transformer and obtain the corresponding
region prior and global prior. Based on the priors, ERASER is
trained with an adversarial Difference Loss to make the content in the regions different. As a result, ERASER can reserve
the main structure and change the texture of the target regions for image privacy preservation. 2) To guarantee the image quality, ERASER improves the frequency insufficiency
of current generative methods. Specifically, the region prior
and global prior are processed with Fast Fourier Convolution to capture characteristics and achieve consistency in both
pixel and frequency domains. Quantitative analyses demonstrate that the proposed ERASER achieves a balance between
image quality and image privacy preservation, while qualitative analyses demonstrate that ERASER indeed reduces the
privacy risk from the visual perception aspect.

Figure 1: Samples of images (first row), sensitive elements
masked by black blocks (second row), images edited with
image inpainting (Wan et al. 2021) (third row), and images
edited with ERASER (bottom row). (Zoom in for details)

and indirect information can be recognized by data analysis models (Hu et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018). The sensitive
information leaked by images has been documented to be
used maliciously (Solsman 2020) and caused severe consequences like fraud and cyber violence (Equifax 2020). As
an urgent issue that is close to our daily life, image privacy
preservation is attracting increasing concerns.
Although social media platforms allow users to show their
images only to specific people for privacy preservation, the
images may be saved and forwarded. In addition, some platforms by default will analyze and recommend the image to
people who may be interested. Such situations will make
the content seen by undesirable people. Completely avoiding image sharing will be a safe choice but fail to meet the
requirement of daily social life. Such phenomena and the
potential harms make it urgent to design methods to achieve
the balance between image sharing and privacy preservation.

Introduction
People record and share their lives with a large number of
images on social media platforms like Facebook and Instagram.
Sharing images is very convenient due to smartphones
and mobile Internet, but such convenience brings the risk
of privacy leakage at the same time. The shared images contain various types of sensitive information like income, disease, and home address (Orekondy, Schiele, and Fritz 2017),
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14584

