The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast and Accurate Binary Neural Networks based on Depth-Width Reshaping
Ping Xue1 , Yang Lu1,2,3 * , Jingfei Chang1 , Xing Wei1,2,4 , Zhen Wei1,2,3
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
2
Anhui Mine IOT and Security Monitoring Technology Key Laboratory, Hefei, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Safety Critical Industrial Measurement and Control Technology, Ministry of Education,
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
4
Intelligent Manufacturing Institute of HeFei University of Technology, Hefei, China
{xueping, cjfhfut}@mail.hfut.edu.cn, luyang.hf@126.com, weixing@hfut.edu.cn, weizhen@gocom.cn
width

Abstract
Network binarization (i.e., binary neural networks, BNNs)
can efficiently compress deep neural networks and accelerate model inference but cause severe accuracy degradation.
Existing BNNs are mainly implemented based on the commonly used full-precision network backbones, and then the
accuracy is improved with various techniques. However, there
is a question of whether the full-precision network backbone
is well adapted to BNNs. We start from the factors of the performance degradation of BNNs and analyze the problems of
directly using full-precision network backbones for BNNs:
for a given computational budget, the backbone of a BNN
may need to be shallower and wider compared to the backbone of a full-precision network. With this in mind, DepthWidth Reshaping (DWR) is proposed to reshape the depth
and width of existing full-precision network backbones and
further optimize them by incorporating pruning techniques
to better fit the BNNs. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the analytical result and the effectiveness of the proposed
method. Compared with the original backbones, the DWR
backbones
√ constructed by the proposed method result in close
to O( s) decrease in activations, while achieving an absolute accuracy increase by up to 1.7% with comparable computational cost. Besides, by using the DWR backbones, existing methods can achieve new state-of-the-art (SOTA) accuracy (e.g., 67.2% on ImageNet with ResNet-18 as the original backbone). We hope this work provides a novel insight
into the backbone design of BNNs. The code is available at
https://github.com/pingxue-hfut/DWR.

1

Pruned
filters

reshaping

shallower

depth

wider
pruning

Figure 1: Overview of Depth-Width Reshaping
.

loss, and reduces the network representational capability; in
the backward propagation, the derivative of the sign function is zero almost everywhere, which makes it incompatible with the backward propagation algorithm, and therefore gradient approximation is required to train BNNs, such
as ”Straight-Through Estimator” (STE) (Bengio, Léonard,
and Courville 2013), which inevitably introduces the gradient error. In addition, inaccurate gradients may bias the
optimization direction, causing difficulties in training BNNs
and further degradation of the task performance. Therefore,
existing studies on BNNs either proceed from the forward
propagation to minimize the quantization error, reduce information loss, and enhance the representational capability
of networks (Rastegari et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2020; Xue et al.
2022); or start with the backward propagation to improve
the gradient approximation method and then the BNN training (Tung and Mori 2020; Martı́nez et al. 2020; Kim et al.
2020); or consider a combination of both the forward and
backward propagation (Liu et al. 2020a; Qin et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2020b). All these approaches have improved the
task performance of BNNs to some extent. However, existing BNNs are mainly implemented based on the commonly
used full-precision network backbones, and then studied for
optimization on this basis, but very few studies have considered whether the full-precision network backbones are appropriate for BNNs.
Network depth refers to the number of layers of a network, while the width represents the number of channels per
layer. It is well-known that without considering overfitting,
increasing either the width or the depth of a full-precision

Introduction

The pioneering study of network binarization dates back
to BinaryNet (Hubara et al. 2016). BinaryNet (Hubara
et al. 2016) constrains both weights and activations to {1, +1} and exhibits high computational and storage efficiency. However, its drawback is also obvious that binarization may cause severe performance degradation. The performance degradation of binary neural networks (BNNs)
can be analyzed from two perspectives: forward propagation and backward propagation. In the forward propagation, the floating-point weights and activations are binarized,
which introduces the quantization error, causes information
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10684

