The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

ROIFormer: Semantic-Aware Region of Interest Transformer for Efficient
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Daitao Xing1 * , Jinglin Shen2 , Chiuman Ho2 , Anthony Tzes3
1

New York University, USA
OPPO US Research Center, USA
3
New York University Abu Dhabi and Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, UAE
daitao.xing@nyu.edu, jinglin.shen, chiuman.ho@oppo.com, anthony.tzes@nyu.edu
2

Abstract
The exploration of mutual-benefit cross-domains has shown
great potential toward accurate self-supervised depth estimation. In this work, we revisit feature fusion between depth
and semantic information and propose an efficient local adaptive attention method for geometric aware representation enhancement. Instead of building global connections or deforming attention across the feature space without restraint, we
bound the spatial interaction within a learnable region of
interest. In particular, we leverage geometric cues from semantic information to learn local adaptive bounding boxes to
guide unsupervised feature aggregation. The local areas preclude most irrelevant reference points from attention space,
yielding more selective feature learning and faster convergence. We naturally extend the paradigm into a multi-head
and hierarchic way to enable the information distillation in
different semantic levels and improve the feature discriminative ability for fine-grained depth estimation. Extensive
experiments on the KITTI dataset show that our proposed
method establishes a new state-of-the-art in self-supervised
monocular depth estimation task, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach over former Transformer variants.

Figure 1: Depth prediction (top two rows) from a single image on KITTI with semantic guidance shows geometry consistency preservation in local uncertainty areas. ROI Former
overview (bottom row) shows that the depth of the red star
requires attention from various semantic regions.

Introduction

depth and pose networks. Despite the notable achievement,
self-supervised methods, which only rely on similarity constraints, still have large performance gaps with the supervised methods. (Lyu et al. 2021) shows that the bottlenecks
come from the inaccurate depth estimation, especially at object boundaries due to the moving objects, ambiguity in lowtexture regions, reflective surfaces, occlusion, and the uncertainty of pose estimation. However, the sole consistency
constraints of RGB images are insufficient to reduce those
effects, which instead require external modalities to provide
stronger geometric information.
Recent works, instead, leverage semantic information
to improve monocular depth predictions via incorporating
geometric guidance. While most of those works incorporate the semantics information explicitly, fewer works focus on designing cross-domain feature aggregation strategies to optimize the intermediate depth representations. Recently, Transformer based attention methods demonstrated
their superiority over traditional CNNs in many vision tasks.
(Jung, Park, and Yoo 2021) proposes a cross-modality attention module to refine depth features progressively on
multi-scales and obtains significant improvement. However,

Accurate depth estimation is critical for many applications
in computer vision and robotics fields such as perception,
navigation, and path planning. The advancements in deep
learning have brought significant breakthroughs in the accuracy of depth estimation methods in recent years. While supervised learning-based methods like (Ranftl, Bochkovskiy,
and Koltun 2021a) achieved remarkable performance on
pixel-wise dense predictions of monocular images, the requirement of a large number of dense labels for training
and the excessive spending for acquiring those datasets using LiDAR constraint their usage in real-world applications.
Instead, self-supervised depth estimation methods, which
learn the depth values using only monocular or stereo image sequences, have become more popular.
Monocular self-supervised depth estimation utilizes the
photometric loss and smoothness constraints of consecutive frames in image sequences to simultaneously learn the
* Corresponding author.The work was done when Xing was an
intern with OPPO
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2983

