The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Identifying Selection Bias from Observational Data
David Kaltenpoth, Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
david.kaltenpoth@cispa.de, vreeken@cispa.de

Abstract

tially, as this leads to covariate shift between training and
test samples [Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2009]. Methods that correct for this shift [Sugiyama, Krauledat, and
Müller 2007, Gretton et al. 2009, Mallick et al. 2022] rely
heavily on the availability of independent training and test
datasets which can be matched with each other to correct
for such distribution shifts. Therefore, they cannot tell us
whether selection bias might be affecting our sample when
we have access only to a single dataset.
In contrast, in this work, we study conditions under which
selection bias is identifiable, given only a single dataset. We
provide identifiability results for both parametric and nonparametric distributions when the selection effect is linear.
For the former, we provide results for exponential families both when the selection is a deterministic function of
observed covariates as well as when additive Gaussian noise
may influence the selection of data points. For the latter, we
show identifiability under the general assumption that the
distribution is subject to certain subsets of invariances, such
as rotational symmetries or quantile inversions.
Based on these theoretical results, we propose two practical methods to tell whether data from only a single dataset
has been subjected to selection bias, as well as how strong
this bias is. That is, we can estimate where the selection
boundary lies and how much of the original distribution has
been lost to selection bias.
Through an extensive set of experiments, including case
studies on penguin and exoplanet data, we show that our
methods provide useful and novel insight as well as significantly outperform baselines that measure distribution shifts
or model confounding factors.
Our contributions are as follows:

Access to a representative sample from the population is an
assumption that underpins all of machine learning. Unfortunately, selection effects can cause observations to instead
come from a subpopulation, by which our inferences may be
subject to bias. It is therefore essential to know whether or
not a sample is affected by selection effects. We study under which conditions we can identify selection bias and give
results for both parametric and non-parametric families of
distributions. Based on these results, we develop two practical methods to determine whether or not an observed sample
comes from a distribution subject to selection bias. Through
extensive evaluation on synthetic and real-world data, we verify that our methods beat the state of the art both in detecting
as well as characterizing selection bias.

Introduction
In order to draw valid conclusions about the underlying
probability distribution, statistical learning theory assumes
that we have access to a representative sample from the
population. Selection effects, induced by preferential inclusion of some data based on unknown factors causally downstream of the observed variables, violate this assumption and
cause what is known as selection bias.
As an example, consider the study by Kovács and Sharkey
[2014] on Goodreads book ratings. In a sample of 32 books,
they found that the average ratings for individual books went
down after winning an award. This is explained by the fact
that there are two kinds of readers. Those who read a book
before it won an award did so because they were predisposed
to like it and therefore more likely to give good ratings in the
first place. Meanwhile, those who read books after they won
an award were not predisposed to like the book and are likely
to be more representative of the population as a whole.
Similar and less benign issues occur in other empirical sciences, such as case-control studies in epidemiology [Glymour and Greenland 2008], studies using hospitaladmission data [Berkson 1946, Herbert et al. 2020], genetics [Mefford and Witte 2012], economics [Angrist 1997] and
in statistics [Kuroki and Cai 2006].
In machine learning, predictive performance suffers from
selection bias when training samples are collected preferen-

1. Identifiability of selection bias: We provide theoretical
results on the identifiability of selection bias in both parametric and non-parametric model families.
2. Learning orthogonal symmetries: We provide a
method that learns special orthogonal symmetries of the
data-generating distribution in an unsupervised manner
by using the Cayley transform.
3. Detecting selection bias from a single dataset: We provide two algorithms to recover the selection boundary
given a single dataset and estimate the strength and effect of the selection bias.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8177

