The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reinforcement Learning for Branch-and-Bound Optimisation
Using Retrospective Trajectories
Christopher W. F. Parsonson1 * , Alexandre Laterre2 , Thomas D. Barrett2
1

2

UCL
InstaDeep

Abstract

tics which increasingly tighten the bounds in which an optimal solution can reside (see Section 3). Among the most important of these heuristics is variable selection or branching
(which variable to use to partition the chosen node’s search
space), which is key to determining B&B solve efficiency
(Achterberg and Wunderling 2013).
State-of-the-art (SOTA) learning-to-branch approaches
typically use the imitation learning (IL) paradigm to predict the action of a high quality but computationally expensive human-designed branching expert (Gasse et al. 2019).
Since branching can be formulated as a Markov decision
process (MDP) (He, Daumé, and Eisner 2014), reinforcement learning (RL) seems a natural approach. The long-term
motivations of RL include the promise of learning novel policies from scratch without the need for expensive expert data,
the potential to exceed expert performance without human
design, and the capability to maximise the performance of
a policy parameterised by an expressivity-constrained deep
neural network (DNN).
However, branching has thus far proved largely intractable
for RL for reasons we summarise into three key challenges.
(1) Long episodes: Whilst even random branching policies
are theoretically guaranteed to eventually find the optimal
solution, poor decisions can result in episodes of tens of thousands of steps for the 500 constraint 1000 variable MILPs
considered by Gasse et al. 2019. This raises the familiar
RL challenges of reward sparsity (Trott et al. 2019), credit
assignment (Harutyunyan et al. 2019), and high variance returns (Mao et al. 2019). (2) Large state-action spaces: Each
branching step might have hundreds or thousands of potential
branching candidates with a huge number of unique possible
sub-MILP states. Efficient exploration to discover improved
trajectories in such large state-action spaces is a well-known
difficulty for RL (Agostinelli et al. 2019; Ecoffet et al. 2021).
(3) Partial observability: When a branching decision is made,
the next state given to the brancher is determined by the
next sub-MILP visited by the node selection policy. Jumping
around the B&B tree without the brancher’s control whilst
having only partial observability of the full tree makes the
future states seen by the agent difficult to predict. Etheve et al.
2020 therefore postulated the benefit of keeping the MDP
within a sub-tree to improve observability and introduced
the SOTA fitting for minimising the sub-tree size (FMSTS)
RL branching algorithm. However, in order to achieve this,

Combinatorial optimisation problems framed as mixed integer
linear programmes (MILPs) are ubiquitous across a range of
real-world applications. The canonical branch-and-bound algorithm seeks to exactly solve MILPs by constructing a search
tree of increasingly constrained sub-problems. In practice, its
solving time performance is dependent on heuristics, such
as the choice of the next variable to constrain (‘branching’).
Recently, machine learning (ML) has emerged as a promising
paradigm for branching. However, prior works have struggled
to apply reinforcement learning (RL), citing sparse rewards,
difficult exploration, and partial observability as significant
challenges. Instead, leading ML methodologies resort to approximating high quality handcrafted heuristics with imitation
learning (IL), which precludes the discovery of novel policies
and requires expensive data labelling. In this work, we propose retro branching; a simple yet effective approach to RL
for branching. By retrospectively deconstructing the search
tree into multiple paths each contained within a sub-tree, we
enable the agent to learn from shorter trajectories with more
predictable next states. In experiments on four combinatorial
tasks, our approach enables learning-to-branch without any expert guidance or pre-training. We outperform the current stateof-the-art RL branching algorithm by 3-5× and come within
20% of the best IL method’s performance on MILPs with
500 constraints and 1000 variables, with ablations verifying
that our retrospectively constructed trajectories are essential
to achieving these results.

1

Introduction

A plethora of real-world problems fall under the broad category of combinatorial optimisation (CO) (vehicle routing
and scheduling (Korte and Vygen 2012); protein folding
(Perdomo-Ortiz et al. 2012); fundamental science (Barahona
1982)). Many CO problems can be formulated as mixed integer linear programmes (MILPs) whose task is to assign
discrete values to a set of decision variables, subject to a mix
of linear and integrality constraints, such that some objective function is maximised or minimised. The most popular
method for finding exact solutions to MILPs is branch-andbound (B&B) (Land and Doig 1960); a collection of heuris*Work undertaken during internship at InstaDeep.
Corresponding email: cwfparsonson@gmail.com
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4061

