The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Loan Fraud Users Detection in Online Lending Leveraging Multiple Data Views
Sha Zhao1,2∗ , Yongrui Huang1∗ , Ling Chen3 , Chunping Wang3 , Shijian Li1,2 ,
Lei Chen3 , Gang Pan1,2†
1

Department of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
State Key Laboratory of Brain Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 311121, China
3
FinVolution Group (FINV), Shanghai 201203, China
{szhao, yrhuang, shijianli, gpan}@zju.edu.cn, {chenling03, wangchunping02, chenlei04}@xinye.com
2

Abstract

Moreover, the fact that the loans are usually uncollateralized
and there are not rigorous rules for borrowers, increases the
risk. Thus, risk forecasting is very important for such online
lending finance platforms.
Detecting fraud users (Hu et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2018;
Wang et al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2020; Jiang, Ni, and Wang
2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2019; Zhan and Yin
2018; Qian et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Tolstyakov and
Mamedova 2021; Yang et al. 2022) is a crucial part of risk
forecasting. The purpose of fraud user detection is to predict whether one user will fail to make required payments at the stipulated repayment time. From the viewpoint of machine learning, the problem can be transformed
into a binary classification one. Traditional fraud user detection relies heavily on borrowers’ historical loan records. But,
a large portion of borrowers miss such information (Yang
et al. 2019b), especially for the new borrowers which could
result in cold-start issues. Fortunately, there are some other
data sources available, which reveal clues regarding one customer’s fraud probability. They compensate for the lack of
historical loan records, and benefit to fraud users detection.
In this work, we attempt to detect loan fraud users from
cross domain heterogeneous data views. In particular, there
are different data sources related to each user, including user
attributes (age, gender, income level, etc.), installed app lists
(what apps installed on a smartphone), app installation behaviors (when one updates/ installs/ uninstalls apps on a
smartphone), and app-in logs (interaction logs in a specific
loan app). Such multiple views reflect users’ fraud probability from different perspectives. For example, the fraud probability differs among users with different income levels. Installed app lists or app installation behaviors reflect users’
consumption level to a degree (Zhao et al. 2019) that is related to the fraud probability. Moreover, the multiple views
contain complementary information among each other. For
instance, users with different attributes prefer to install different apps (Zhao et al. 2019). By exploiting the complementary characteristics among the multiple data views, multiview leaning brings about a more comprehensive description of users that is helpful for fraud user detection.
However, identifying fraud users from multiple views is
nontrivial. First of all, for some user samples, one or even
more data views are missing. A straightforward way is to
remove the samples missing views, but it usually results in

In recent years, online lending platforms have been becoming
attractive for micro-financing and popular in financial industries. However, such online lending platforms face a high risk
of failure due to the lack of expertise on borrowers’ creditworthness. Thus, risk forecasting is important to avoid economic loss. Detecting loan fraud users in advance is at the
heart of risk forecasting. The purpose of fraud user (borrower) detection is to predict whether one user will fail to
make required payments in the future. Detecting fraud users
depend on historical loan records. However, a large proportion of users lack such information, especially for new users.
In this paper, we attempt to detect loan fraud users from
cross domain heterogeneous data views, including user attributes, installed app lists, app installation behaviors, and
app-in logs, which compensate for the lack of historical loan
records. However, it is difficult to effectively fuse the multiple heterogeneous data views. Moreover, some samples miss
one or even more data views, increasing the difficulty in fusion. To address the challenges, we propose a novel end-toend deep multiview learning approach, which encodes heterogeneous data views into homogeneous ones, generates the
missing views based on the learned relationship among all the
views, and then fuses all the views together to a comprehensive view for identifying fraud users. Our model is evaluated
on a real-world large-scale dataset consisting of 401,978 loan
records of 228,117 users from January 1, 2019, to September
30, 2019, achieving the state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
In recent years, emergence of online lending has been attractive option for micro-financing and becoming popular
in financial industries. By such lending finance platforms,
users (borrowers) obtain small loans without any collateral
over the internet. Borrowers easily process loan procedures
by specific applications, and obtain loans in a much shorter
period than that from traditional financial service providers
(e.g., bank). Such platforms have attracted massive number of users, and have rapidly gained market share in financial industries. However, they face a high risk of failure due
to the lack of expertise on the borrowers’ creditworthness.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5428

