The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fast Regularized Discrete Optimal Transport with Group-Sparse Regularizers
Yasutoshi Ida1 , Sekitoshi Kanai1 , Kazuki Adachi1 , Atsutoshi Kumagai1 , Yasuhiro Fujiwara2
1

NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
2
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
yasutoshi.ida@ieee.org, {sekitoshi.kanai.fu, kazuki.adachi.xy, atsutoshi.kumagai.ht, yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

When we construct two distributions from data samples
of two different domains on which we want to use regularized discrete OT, in some cases the sampled data from
only one of the domains will have class labels, e.g., samples in the target domain are unlabeled, but labeled samples in similar domains can be observed. Such situations
are frequently encountered in unsupervised/semi-supervised
domain adaptation, which has received much attention in the
machine-learning community (Courty et al. 2017). Although
it is expected that utilizing not only data samples but also
their class labels to obtain the transportation plan will improve the performance of such applications, the plain regularized discrete OTs, such as entropy regularized OT (Cuturi 2013), cannot handle class labels. To incorporate the
information of the class labels into the transportation plan,
a group-sparse regularizer is frequently used as a regularization term (Courty, Flamary, and Tuia 2014; Courty et al.
2017; Redko, Habrard, and Sebban 2017; Blondel, Seguy,
and Rolet 2018; Das and Lee 2018a,b; Alaya et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2021). In this approach, one groupsparse regularization term corresponds to one class label and
the regularizer induces group-sparsity in the transportation
plan. Specifically, this regularizer considers data samples
with the same label as one group and restricts the transportation plan so that the samples tend to be transported to the
same data sample on another domain (Figure 1). Since this
approach preserves the structure of the label information on
the data samples during the transportation, the group-sparse
regularizer can effectively handle the problem of discrete OT
with class labels.

Regularized discrete optimal transport (OT) is a powerful tool
to measure the distance between two discrete distributions
that have been constructed from data samples on two different domains. While it has a wide range of applications in machine learning, in some cases the sampled data from only one
of the domains will have class labels such as unsupervised
domain adaptation. In this kind of problem setting, a groupsparse regularizer is frequently leveraged as a regularization
term to handle class labels. In particular, it can preserve the
label structure on the data samples by corresponding the data
samples with the same class label to one group-sparse regularization term. As a result, we can measure the distance
while utilizing label information by solving the regularized
optimization problem with gradient-based algorithms. However, the gradient computation is expensive when the number
of classes or data samples is large because the number of regularization terms and their respective sizes also turn out to be
large. This paper proposes fast discrete OT with group-sparse
regularizers. Our method is based on two ideas. The first is
to safely skip the computations of the gradients that must be
zero. The second is to efficiently extract the gradients that are
expected to be nonzero. Our method is guaranteed to return
the same value of the objective function as that of the original
method. Experiments show that our method is up to 8.6 times
faster than the original method without degrading accuracy.

Introduction
Regularized discrete optimal transport (OT) is a powerful
tool to compute the distance between two discrete probability distributions that have been constructed from data samples on two different domains. It seeks a map, called a transportation plan, for moving the probability mass of one distribution to that of another distribution with the cheapest cost.
Once the transportation plan is obtained, the data samples
on one domain can be transported to those on another domain, and their distance can be computed as the cost based
on the transportation plan. Owing to its theoretical foundations and desirable properties, it has received much attention
in various fields, including shape recognition (Gangbo and
McCann 2000), color transfer (Pitié, Kokaram, and Dahyot
2007), domain adaptation (Courty et al. 2017), and human
activity recognition (Lu et al. 2021).

While the discrete OT with a group-sparse regularizer is
crucial for handling class labels, it incurs a high computation
cost when solving the regularized optimization problem with
a gradient-based algorithm, especially when there are large
numbers of class labels (Russakovsky et al. 2015) or data
samples in each class (Venturini, Baralis, and Garza 2017).
This is because the gradient-based algorithm must compute
gradient vectors corresponding to the regularization terms.
Namely, when the numbers of class labels and number of
data samples in each class increase, the number of gradient vectors and their sizes also increase. In addition, since
the existing algorithms, such as L-BFGS (Blondel, Seguy,
and Rolet 2018), need to iteratively compute these gradient
vectors to update parameters until convergence, the compu-

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7980

