The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tagging before Alignment: Integrating Multi-Modal Tags for Video-Text Retrieval
Yizhen Chen1 , Jie Wang1 , Lijian Lin2 , Zhongang Qi2 * , Jin Ma1 , Ying Shan2
1

IPS Search, Tencent PCG
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
{grayyzchen, zhongangqi, yingsshan}@tencent.com, photonicsjay@163.com, ljlin@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
majin01@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Tagging

Vision-language alignment learning for video-text retrieval
arouses a lot of attention in recent years. Most of the existing
methods either transfer the knowledge of image-text pretraining model to video-text retrieval task without fully exploring
the multi-modal information of videos, or simply fuse multimodal features in a brute force manner without explicit guidance. In this paper, we integrate multi-modal information in
an explicit manner by tagging, and use the tags as the anchors
for better video-text alignment. Various pretrained experts are
utilized for extracting the information of multiple modalities,
including object, person, motion, audio, etc. To take full advantage of these information, we propose the TABLE (TAgging Before aLignmEnt) network, which consists of a visual encoder, a tag encoder, a text encoder, and a tag-guiding
cross-modal encoder for jointly encoding multi-frame visual
features and multi-modal tags information. Furthermore, to
strengthen the interaction between video and text, we build a
joint cross-modal encoder with the triplet input of [vision, tag,
text] and perform two additional supervised tasks, Video Text
Matching (VTM) and Masked Language Modeling (MLM).
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the TABLE
model is capable of achieving State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) performance on various video-text retrieval benchmarks, including MSR-VTT, MSVD, LSMDC and DiDeMo.

woman

bowl, bottle,
cup

…
marinating a
chicken …
washed …
cleaned
…

cooking

kitchen

Alignment

···

pure visual embedding

joint video embedding

two ladies in a
cookery show
explain how to
marinate
chicken already
cleaned and
ready with salt
and cilantro
sprigs.

caption embedding

Figure 1: The multi-modal information is able to motivate
the video-text alignment in an explicit manner, i.e., tagging.

Most of the existing video-text retrieval models use multilayer transformers to learn generic representations from
massive video-text pairs, which can be roughly divided into
two categories. The first category uses only frame features
to transfer the knowledge of image-text pretrained model to
video-text retrieval task without fully exploring the multimodal information of videos (Lei et al. 2021; Luo et al.
2021; Fang et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2021; Cao et al. 2022). A
representative method is CLIP4Clip (Luo et al. 2021), which
utilizes the knowledge of the CLIP (Contrastive LanguageImage Pretraining) (Radford et al. 2021) model to visually
encode multi-frame information. The model achieves good
performance on multiple benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of the knowledge transferring. The second category is to jointly encode the information of various modalities in the video, such as objects, actions, scenes, audio,
etc. (Gabeur et al. 2020; Dzabraev et al. 2021; Wang, Zhu,
and Yang 2021; Hao et al. 2021). A typical representative
method is MMT (Multi-Modal Transformer) (Gabeur et al.
2020), which uses multiple pretrained experts to obtain embeddings of different modalities, and builds a multi-modal
transformer for feature fusion. The performance of this
model demonstrates the advantage of using multi-modal information over using single visual information of the video.
However, most of these methods simply fuse multi-modal
features in a brute force manner without explicit guidance,
which increases the difficulty of the learning process.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach which not
only transfers image-text knowledge, but also fully exploits
multi-modal information in an explicit manner. A set of pre-

Introduction
Vision-language alignment learning for video-text retrieval
becomes an emerging requirement with the increasing of
videos and short videos uploaded online, and has attracted
great attention in recent years. In the research field, it returns the most relevant videos for a given text query to
facilitate large-scale videos searching and management. In
the recommendation field, it recommends the most relevant text queries for the video that the user is watching to
prompt more searching and browsing. Although a lot of recent works (Zhu and Yang 2020; Gabeur et al. 2020; Dzabraev et al. 2021; Lei et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Luo
et al. 2021; Fang et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2021; Chen, Liu,
and Albanie 2021; Cao et al. 2022) have made remarkable
progress, the cross-modal alignment between video and text
remains a challenging task.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

396

