The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Topological Pooling on Graphs
Yuzhou Chen1 , Yulia R. Gel2,3
1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University
2
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas
3
National Science Foundation
yuzhou.chen@temple.edu, ygl@utdallas.edu

Abstract

feature representations. Some of the most recent results on
graph pooling in this direction include integration of (self)attention mechanisms (Huang et al. 2019; Lee, Lee, and
Kang 2019), advanced clustering approaches (Bianchi, Grattarola, and Alippi 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Bodnar, Cangea,
and Liò 2021), and hierarchical graph representation learning (Yang et al. 2021). Nevertheless, these existing pooling
techniques still remain limited in their ability to simultaneously extract and systematically integrate intrinsic structural
information on the graph, including its node feature representations, at both local and global levels.
We address these limitations by introducing the concepts
of shape, landmarks, and witnesses to graph pooling. In particular, our key idea is based on the two interlinked notions
from computational topology: persistent homology and witness complexes, neither of which has ever been considered
in conjunction with graph pooling. First, we propose a local topological score which measures each node importance
based on how valuable shape information of its local vicinity is and which then results in a topological pooling layer.
Second, inspired by the notion of landmarks in computer
vision, we learn the most intrinsic global topological properties of the graph, using only a subset of the most representative nodes (or landmarks). The remaining nodes act as
witnesses that govern which higher-order graph structures
(or simplices) are to be included into the learning process.
In computational topology, this approach is associated with
a witness complex which enjoys competitive computational
costs. The resulting new model Wit-TopoPool exhibits capabilities to learn rich discriminative topological characteristics of the graph as well as to extract essential information
from node features. Significance of our contributions are the
following:
• We propose a novel topological perspective to graph pooling by introducing the concepts of persistence, landmarks,
and witness complexes.
• We develop a new model Wit-TopoPool which systematically and simultaneously integrates the most essential
discriminative topological characteristics of the graph, including its node feature representations, at both local and
global levels.
• We validate Wit-TopoPool in conjunction with graph clas-

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated a significant success in various graph learning tasks, from graph classification to anomaly detection. There recently has emerged
a number of approaches adopting a graph pooling operation
within GNNs, with a goal to preserve graph attributive and
structural features during the graph representation learning.
However, most existing graph pooling operations suffer from
the limitations of relying on node-wise neighbor weighting
and embedding, which leads to insufficient encoding of rich
topological structures and node attributes exhibited by realworld networks. By invoking the machinery of persistent homology and the concept of landmarks, we propose a novel
topological pooling layer and witness complex-based topological embedding mechanism that allow us to systematically
integrate hidden topological information at both local and
global levels. Specifically, we design new learnable local and
global topological representations Wit-TopoPool which allow
us to simultaneously extract rich discriminative topological
information from graphs. Experiments on 11 diverse benchmark datasets against 18 baseline models in conjunction with
graph classification tasks indicate that Wit-TopoPool significantly outperforms all competitors across all datasets.

Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful
machinery for various graph learning tasks, such as link prediction, node and graph classification (Zhou et al. 2020; Xia
et al. 2021). In case of graph classification tasks, both graphlevel and local-level representation learning play a critical
role for GNNs success. Since pooling operators have shown
an important role in image recognition and 3D shape analysis (Boureau, Ponce, and LeCun 2010; Shen et al. 2018), it
appeared natural to expand the idea of pooling to graphs (Yu
and Koltun 2016; Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016). The earlier pooling techniques within GNN architectures achieved promising results but failed to capture graph
structural information and to learn hidden node feature representations. These limitations have stimulated development
of new families of graph pooling which simultaneously account for both the structural properties of graphs and node
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7096

