The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SPRING: Situated Conversation Agent Pretrained with
Multimodal Questions from Incremental Layout Graph
Yuxing Long1 , Binyuan Hui2 , Fulong Ye1 , Yanyang Li2 , Zhuoxin Han1 ,
Caixia Yuan1 , Yongbin Li2 , Xiaojie Wang1 *
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Independent Researcher
{longyuxing, fulong ye, hanzhuoxin, yuancx, xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn, lyb821@gmail.com
Abstract
Existing multimodal conversation agents have shown impressive abilities to locate absolute positions or retrieve attributes
in simple scenarios, but they fail to perform well when complex relative positions and information alignments are involved, which poses a bottleneck in response quality. In this
paper, we propose a Situated Conversation Agent PRetrained
with Multimodal Questions from INcremental Layout Graph
(S PRING) with abilities of reasoning multi-hops spatial relations and connecting them with visual attributes in crowded
situated scenarios. Specifically, we design two types of Multimodal Question Answering (MQA) tasks to pretrain the
agent. All QA pairs utilized during pretraining are generated from novel Incremental Layout Graphs (ILG). QA pair
difficulty labels automatically annotated by ILG are used
to promote MQA-based Curriculum Learning. Experimental results verify the S PRING’s effectiveness, showing that it
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on both
S IMMC 1.0 and S IMMC 2.0 datasets. We release our code
and data at Github LYX0501/SPRING repository.

1

User

Do you have any clothes match my new
bought jeans ?
Agent

How about the black jacket on the leftmost floor rack or the
grey jacket on the top row of the shelf near the entrance ?
User

Anything else ? I prefer some fashion t-shirs.
Agent
The purple t-shirt on the back middle shelf may meet your
criteria.

Figure 1: An example of a virtual scene and a fragment of
dialogue in S IMMC 2.0. Since there are many clothes with
similar visual attributes, it is difficult to talk about a asset
only by its visual attributes.
A number of works have been established on S IMMC
2.0. Based on different multi-modal Visual-Language pretraining Models (VLM), previous researchers pay more attention to learning the visual attributes of assets. QS Goal
Diggers (Kottur et al. 2021a) and Kakao Enterprise (Lee and
Han 2021) directly insert visual attributes into models input,
while Sogang University (Kottur et al. 2021b) and A-STAR
(Nguyen et al. 2021) build a set of visual attributes prediction tasks in pre-training stage. KAIST (Lee et al. 2022) designs an auxiliary task to predict visual attributes. However,
less attention has been paid to building spatial relations between assets. All existing models only use the coordinates of
asset bounding boxes as positional information, which cannot capture spatial relations in the scenes.
As a result, the models can accurately generate ”the black
jacket” but fail to describe more natural referring expressions like ”the black jacket on the leftmost floor rack”. It is
obvious that the later expression is more useful in a scene
including lots of clothes with similar attributes. The combination of attributes and spatial relations helps people locate
assets quickly. To generate this type of expression, a model
needs to learn not only the visual attributes of each asset but
also spatial relations between different items.
To address above problem, we propose Situated Conver-

Introduction

Building multi-modal conversation agents that can communicate with people in visual situations is an attractive goal
for the AI community. Lots of specific tasks and datasets
for visual dialog, like VisDial (Das et al. 2017), GuessWhat
(De Vries et al. 2017), GuessWhich (Chattopadhyay et al.
2017), are proposed in recent years. Among them, the Situated Interactive Multi-modal Conversation (S IMMC 1.0)
(Moon et al. 2020) aims to study task-oriented dialogues that
encompass a situated multi-modal user context in the form
of a virtual reality (VR) environment. The updated dataset
S IMMC 2.0 (Kottur et al. 2021b) provides a more challenging test bed for multi-modal conversation agents. There are
many assets with a complex layout in each image. Figure
1 gives an example of a scene and a fragment of dialogue
in S IMMC 2.0. There are dozens of clothes in the image.
Each cloth is a digit asset with a unique asset ID and a set of
attributes (e.g. type, color) in the metadata. But there is no
information on the scene layout except for a few labels on
four relations (up, down, left, and right) between the assets.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13309

