The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Flexible Budgets in Restless Bandits:
A Primal-Dual Algorithm for Efficient Budget Allocation
Paula Rodriguez-Diaz1 , Jackson A. Killian1 , Lily Xu1
Arun Sai Suggala2 , Aparna Taneja2 , Milind Tambe1,2
1

Harvard University
2
Google Research
{prodriguezdiaz, jkillian, lily xu}@g.harvard.edu
{arunss,aparnataneja}@google.com, milind tambe@harvard.edu
Abstract

in flexible-budget real-world settings may result in policies
that either do not make efficient use of resources or lead to
sub-optimal rewards.
We consider a general class of RMABs which we call
flexible budget restless multi-armed bandits, or F-RMABs.
In an F-RMAB instance, rather than the standard per-round
budget constraint, the total resources that can be used is budgeted over some time window. The classic RMAB is a special case of the F-RMAB where the flexible window is a single timestep, so a planner may act on some subset of the N
arms such that the total cost of acting is less than or equal to
B. In the F-RMAB class, the per-round budget may be flexible over a time window of length F within the horizon H,
where F ≤ H, but the total cost of all actions over that flexible window must be less than or equal to F B, to preserve
the per-round budget constraint on average.
Solving an RMAB is PSPACE-hard in general (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1999). To overcome this complexity,
a common approach is to consider the Lagrangian relaxation of the problem in which the budget constraint is dualized (Hawkins 2003). Solving the relaxed problem gives
Lagrange multipliers which act as a greedy index heuristic, known as the Whittle index, to solve the original problem. We show that introducing per-round budget variables
bt and total budget limit of F B over a flexible time window
F and performing Lagrangian relaxation results in a minmax problem that upper bounds the original problem, can
be solved efficiently using primal-dual algorithms that we
provide, and performs well in practice.
To summarize, our key contributions in this paper are:
(i) We define the F-RMAB model; (ii) we provide an algorithm to compute well-performing F-RMAB policies;
(iii) we introduce heuristics that trade off solution quality
for efficiency; and (iv) we experimentally compare different
F-RMAB solution approaches and show that our approach
achieves an increase in reward of up to 24%, 72%, and 11%
respectively for the three synthetic domains tested.

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs) are an important
model to optimize allocation of limited resources in sequential decision-making settings. Typical RMABs assume the
budget — the number of arms pulled — to be fixed for each
step in the planning horizon. However, for realistic real-world
planning, resources are not necessarily limited at each planning step; we may be able to distribute surplus resources in
one round to an earlier or later round. In this paper we define a
general class of RMABs with flexible budget, which we term
F-RMABs, and provide an algorithm to optimally solve for
them. We derive a min-max formulation to find optimal policies for F-RMABs and leverage gradient primal-dual algorithms to solve for reward-maximizing policies with flexible
budgets. We introduce a scheme to sample expected gradients to apply primal-dual algorithms to the F-RMAB setting
and make an otherwise computationally expensive approach
tractable. Additionally, we provide heuristics that trade off
solution quality for efficiency and present experimental comparisons of different F-RMAB solution approaches.

1

Introduction

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs), a model for constrained resource allocation among N evolving and independent processes, are gaining increased attention, in part
for their ability to capture challenging real-world planning
problems. Salient examples include scheduling (Bagheri
and Scaglione 2015; Yu, Xu, and Tong 2018; Yang et al.
2018), machine replacement (Ruiz-Hernández, Pinar-Pérez,
and Delgado-Gómez 2020), aerial vehicle routing (Zhao,
Krishnamachari, and Liu 2008), anti-poaching patrol planning (Qian et al. 2016), and healthcare (Lee, Lavieri, and
Volk 2019; Mate et al. 2020; Killian et al. 2021; Biswas et al.
2021).
Most previous literature in RMABs assumes that resource
constraints are fixed at each step in the planning horizon, i.e.,
there are a fixed maximum number of arms we can pull in
each round. In some real-world settings, resources are not
strictly constrained at each planning round but rather over
multiple time steps. Existing RMAB planning techniques
are therefore unable to take advantage of such flexibility in
planning. Accordingly, applying the classic RMAB model

2

Related Work

Restless multi-armed bandits, introduced by Whittle (1988),
are known to be PSPACE-hard in their full generality (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1994), but have a well-studied
heuristic solution known as the Whittle index policy, which
is asymptotically optimal (Weber and Weiss 1990). Many

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12103

