The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Complexity of Safety and coSafety Fragments of Linear Temporal Logic
Alessandro Artale1 , Luca Geatti2 * , Nicola Gigante1 , Andrea Mazzullo1 * , Angelo Montanari2
1

Free University of Bozen-Bolzano
2
University of Udine
artale@inf.unibz.it, luca.geatti@uniud.it, gigante@inf.unibz.it, mazzullo@inf.unibz.it, angelo.montanari@uniud.it

ones in such a way to satisfy the formula. LTL realizability
is 2EXPTIME-complete, on both infinite (Rosner 1992) and
finite (De Giacomo and Vardi 2015) traces.
Despite the complexity of these problems, several LTL
tools have been developed, including model checkers and
translators to automata. However, some applications (such
as in runtime verification) do not always require the full
expressivity of LTL, and would rather benefit instead from
computational efficiency. Several fragments considered in
the literature address these aspects. Two notable ones are the
safety and cosafety fragments (Sistla 1994): they are a subclass of ω-regular languages where a finite prefix suffices to
establish the membership of an infinite word to a language,
thus allowing one to reason over finite traces. This is very
helpful in practice, e.g., it allows one to avoid Safra’s determinization algorithm (Safra 1988) in favor of the classical subset construction. However, despite their usefulness, a
systematic complexity analysis of reasoning in these fragments, over both infinite and finite traces, is missing.
In this paper, we study the complexity of the satisfiability,
validity, and realizability problems for safety and cosafety
LTL fragments, over both infinite and finite traces. We focus
on three cosafety fragments and the dual safety ones, some
of which are expressively complete with respect to the set of
LTL-definable (co)safety properties.
We first prove that the complexity of the satisfiability and
validity problems for the majority of the considered fragments (both safety and cosafety) is the same as full LTL,
that is, PSPACE-complete.
As for cosafety fragments, we prove a general theorem
that allows us to transfer all complexity results for satisfiability, validity, and realizability from infinite to finite trace
semantics. On the contrary, the difference in complexity
when passing from infinite to finite traces is not negligible
for safety fragments. We prove a small (bounded) model
property for all safety regular languages of finite words,
which states that if a language is not empty, then it contains a
word of length 1. By exploiting this result, we show that the
complexity of satisfiability (resp., realizability) of all safety
fragments drops to NP-complete (resp., ΠP
2 -complete) when
considering finite traces.
Finally, we show that some of the fragments, although being expressively equivalent, have different complexities for
realizability. In particular, for fragments that use past modal-

Abstract
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is the de-facto standard temporal logic for system specification, whose foundational properties have been studied for over five decades. Safety and
cosafety properties define notable fragments of LTL, where a
prefix of a trace suffices to establish whether a formula is true
or not over that trace. In this paper, we study the complexity of the problems of satisfiability, validity, and realizability over infinite and finite traces for the safety and cosafety
fragments of LTL. As for satisfiability and validity over infinite traces, we prove that the majority of the fragments have
the same complexity as full LTL, that is, they are PSPACEcomplete. The picture is radically different for realizability:
we find fragments with the same expressive power whose
complexity varies from 2EXPTIME-complete (as full LTL)
to EXPTIME-complete. Notably, for all cosafety fragments,
the complexity of the three problems does not change passing from infinite to finite traces, while for all safety fragments
the complexity of satisfiability (resp., realizability) over finite
traces drops to NP-complete (resp., ΠP
2 -complete).

1

Introduction

Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is arguably the most renowned
temporal logic, with applications in a variety of branches
of computer science (Pnueli 1977; Vardi and Wolper 1986,
1994). LTL is usually interpreted over infinite state sequences (or traces); recently, the finite-trace semantics has
received attention as well, especially in artificial intelligence (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013, 2015; De Giacomo, De
Masellis, and Montali 2014; Fionda and Greco 2018; Artale,
Mazzullo, and Ozaki 2019).
The satisfiability (resp., validity) problem of LTL consists
of deciding whether, given an LTL formula, it is satisfied by
at least one state sequence (resp., by all state sequences). It is
known that satisfiability and validity of LTL, interpreted over
both infinite and finite traces, are PSPACE-complete (Sistla
and Clarke 1985; De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). Realizability (Pnueli and Rosner 1989) is more complex than satisfiability: it asks, for a given formula over a set of variables partitioned into controllable and uncontrollable ones, whether
there exists a strategy such that, for any value of the uncontrollable variables, chooses the value of the controllable
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6236

