The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Feature Rectification of Pretrained Vision Models for Object Recognition
Shengchao Zhou1,2 , Gaofeng Meng1,2,3 * , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 , Richard Yi Da Xu4
and Shiming Xiang1,2
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
CAIR, HK Institute of Science and Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
4
FSC1209, Kowloon Tong Campus, Hong Kong Baptist University
{zhoushengchao2021, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {gfmeng, smxiang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xuyida@hkbu.edu.hk
2

Image

Abstract

Label
Cheetah

P

Shower
Curtain

O

Cheetah

P

VGG19-B

VGG19-A

...

Degradation

Degradation

Pretrained vision models for object recognition often suffer a dramatic performance drop with degradations unseen
during training. In this work, we propose a RObust FEature
Rectification module (ROFER) to improve the performance
of pretrained models against degradations. Specifically, ROFER first estimates the type and intensity of the degradation
that corrupts the image features. Then, it leverages a Fully
Convolutional Network (FCN) to rectify the features from
the degradation by pulling them back to clear features. ROFER is a general-purpose module that can address various
degradations simultaneously, including blur, noise, and low
contrast. Besides, it can be plugged into pretrained models
seamlessly to rectify the degraded features without retraining the whole model. Furthermore, ROFER can be easily extended to address composite degradations by adopting a beam
search algorithm to find the composition order. Evaluations
on CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet demonstrate that the accuracy of ROFER is 5% higher than that of SOTA methods
on different degradations. With respect to composite degradations, ROFER improves the accuracy of a pretrained CNN by
10% and 6% on CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet respectively.

Feature

Robust
Feature
Rectification

Figure 1: Illustration of feature rectification. Pretrained on
clear images, a VGG19 predicts the correct label of a clear
cheetah image. When the image is blurred, the feature map
is degraded and the prediction fails. Our proposed “Robust
Feature Rectification” rectifies the degraded feature to correct the wrong prediction.

positely degraded images is required to deal with various
composite degradations.
Only requiring unlabeled degraded images during training, existing methods commonly adopt unsupervised strategies, most of which can be divided into three categories,
namely enhancement-based, restoration-based, and domain
adaptation-based (DA-based) methods. Enhancement-based
methods train an image enhancement module and perform
recognition after enhancement to mitigate the influence of
degradations (Pei et al. 2021; Li et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2016).
Restoration-based methods train a plugging-in module to restore the features of degraded images, making them resemble clear features (Wang et al. 2020). DA-based methods
transfer the model to degraded images by training it on generated pseudo labels or pseudo images (Rusak et al. 2021;
Schneider et al. 2020; Russo et al. 2018; Motiian et al. 2017).
Despite their effectiveness on recognition with degradations, existing methods have deficiencies as follows: (1)
Aiming at improving the visual quality, the image enhancement module in enhancement-based methods can introduce
artifacts interfering with the recognition. (2) Most methods
are designed to address only one single degradation during
testing, not versatile enough to deal with different degradations simultaneously. (3) Methods designed for composite

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a remarkable advancement
of object recognition with the help of convolutional neural network (CNN) models (Brock et al. 2021; He et al.
2016; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). However,
the models often suffer a performance drop with degradations unseen during training (Hendrycks and Dietterich
2019; Dodge and Karam 2016). As illustrated in Figure 1,
a VGG19 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) trained on clear
images predicts the correct label of a clear cheetah image,
while the prediction on the blurred image fails. Worse still,
as a ubiquitous situation, many images are affected by composite degradations, making the problem even more severe.
Retraining the models on degraded images is a direct solution, however, it is time-consuming and error-prone to annotate degraded images. Moreover, since degradations can
compound in numerous orders, a large-scale dataset of com* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3796

