The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Truncate-Split-Contrast: A Framework for Learning from Mislabeled Videos
Zixiao Wang1 * , Junwu Weng2 , Chun Yuan1 , Jue Wang2
1

Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab
zx-wang19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, WE0001WU@e.ntu.edu.sg
yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, arphid@gmail.com

Abstract

much less explored problem of applying LNL methods in
the video domain.
Depending on whether noisy instances are detected in
training, the existing LNL methods can be roughly divided
into two types. One is to directly train a noise-robust model
in the presence of noisy labels (Patrini et al. 2017; Wang
et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2020; Lyu and Tsang 2019; Zhou
et al. 2021; Gao, Gouk, and Hospedales 2021). The other
one is to explicitly detect the potential noisy instances, and
then learns a model by simply excluding them (Huang et al.
2019), or re-using the potential noisy data by estimating the
pseudo labels of them (Zhang et al. 2018b; Li, Socher, and
Hoi 2019; Li, Xiong, and Hoi 2021; Ortego et al. 2021). This
detection strategy is widely adopted in the industry as it not
only learns a robust model, but provides a clean dataset as
well. Following this strategy, we learn video representations
from potentially-mislabeled data with two steps, Noise Detection and Unlabelled Data Utilization.
Noise Detection. The loss-based method (Han et al. 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018b; Huang et al. 2019; Li, Socher, and
Hoi 2019) is the common solution for noisy label detection. These methods treat instances with smaller classification losses as clean ones during training, which easily leads
to confirmation bias (Li, Socher, and Hoi 2019). Compared
with a single loss value, video latent representations naturally contains multi-channel signals, which provide adequate
clues for noise detection.
The existing feature-based noisy label detection methods (Lee et al. 2018; Han, Luo, and Wang 2019) commonly conduct binary clustering (clean/noisy) on the fulldimensional features before the classification layer. However, we argue that to detect clean/noisy instances, utilizing
all channels of a feature learned from classification supervision is not a must. The reason is that the instance feature
learned with label supervision may perform well on differentiating categories, but the extra feature dimensions for delicate boundary shaping are not suitable for an unsupervised
binary clustering task in label noise detection, especially under the video domain. We find that the extra dimensions
are redundant and weaken the performance in noise detection and therefore in final classification. (Sec. 4.4 - Table. 3)
Designing a compact network may help reduce the redundancy of feature channels for noise detection, but the limited network capacity will inevitably hurt the classification,

Learning with noisy label (LNL) is a classic problem that has
been extensively studied for image tasks, but much less for
video in the literature. A straightforward migration from images to videos without considering the properties of videos,
such as computational cost and redundant information, is not
a sound choice. In this paper, we propose two new strategies for video analysis with noisy labels: 1) A lightweight
channel selection method dubbed as Channel Truncation for
feature-based label noise detection. This method selects the
most discriminative channels to split clean and noisy instances in each category; 2) A novel contrastive strategy
dubbed as Noise Contrastive Learning, which constructs the
relationship between clean and noisy instances to regularize model training. Experiments on three well-known benchmark datasets for video classification show that our proposed
truNcatE-split-contrAsT (NEAT) significantly outperforms
the existing baselines. By reducing the dimension to 10% of
it, our method achieves over 0.4 noise detection F1-score and
5% classification accuracy improvement on Mini-Kinetics
dataset under severe noise (symmetric-80%). Thanks to Noise
Contrastive Learning, the average classification accuracy improvement on Mini-Kinetics and Sth-Sth-V1 is over 1.6%.

1

Introduction

Training deep networks requires large-scale datasets with
high-quality human annotations. However, acquiring largescale clean-annotated data is costly and time-consuming,
forcing people to seek low-cost but imprecise alternative
labeling. Such labeling inevitably introduce noises: a large
number of instances could be annotated with incorrect labels. Recent studies (Zhang et al. 2017; Arpit et al. 2017)
have shown that deep neural networks have a high capacity to fit data even under randomly assigned labels, which
harms the generalization on unseen data. Therefore, how to
train a robust deep learning model in the presence of noisy
labels is challenging and is of increasing significance in the
industry. To date, the existing LNL approaches mainly focus
on image tasks. With the rapidly growing amount of video
data on the Internet, designing a noise-robust training strategy for video models becomes imperative. Motivated by the
previous success of LNL methods on images, we study the
* This work is done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2751

