The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fully-Dynamic Decision Trees
Marco Bressan1 , Gabriel Damay2 , Mauro Sozio2
1

University of Milan,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Télécom Paris
marco.bressan@unimi.it, gabriel.damay@telecom-paris.fr, sozio@telecom-paris.fr
2

Abstract

Recently, there have been significant efforts to adapt machine learning algorithms to a fully dynamic setting, where
the algorithm is asked to process an arbitrary list of insertions
or deletions. Insertions are typically the result of new data being collected or revealed, while deletions can be the result of
noise removal, removal of personal data for privacy concerns,
data becoming obsolete, etc. It might not be desirable to make
any assumption on such a list of update operations, which motivates the design of fully dynamic algorithms. Most works
in fully-dynamic machine learning algorithms have focused
on unsupervised tasks such as clustering (Cohen-Addad et al.
2019; Henzinger and Kale 2020; Bateni et al. 2021; Chan,
Guerqin, and Sozio 2018) or graph mining (Sawlani and
Wang 2020; Bhattacharya et al. 2015; Epasto, Lattanzi, and
Sozio 2015; De Stefani et al. 2017).
For decision trees, however, only incremental algorithms
are known, which handle insertions but not deletions.1
The state of the art in this case is given by Hoeffding
Trees (Domingos and Hulten 2000) and their evolutions such
as EFDT or HAT (see (Manapragada et al. 2022) for a survey).
Not only are these algorithms incapable of handling deletions,
but no good bound on their amortized cost is known, while
guarantees hold only if the insertions are i.i.d. from some
distribution. Our work represents one of the first studies on
fully-dynamic supervised machine learning which has been
mostly unexplored so far, to the best of our knowledge.
Defining what kind of decision tree a dynamic algorithm
should maintain requires some care. The first natural attempt
is to maintain the very same decision tree that the greedy
approaches above (ID3, C4.5, etc.) would produce from the
current set of examples. Thus, at any time, every node should
use a split with maximal gain with respect to the set of examples held by its subtree. The problem with this goal is that,
at some point, the gains of the best and second-best splits
may differ by just O(1/n) where n is the total number of
examples. In that case, O(1) updates can turn the second-best
split into the best one, possibly forcing a reconstruction of
the whole tree. The same happens if one wants splits within
multiplicative factors of the best one, as the latter may be in
O(1/n). Hence, in those cases it is unclear whether there is
an efficient fully-dynamic algorithm. The next natural goal
is maintaining a tree with -optimal splits, that is, within an

We develop the first fully dynamic algorithm that maintains
a decision tree over an arbitrary sequence of insertions and
deletions of labeled examples. Given  > 0 our algorithm
guarantees that, at every point in time, every node of the decision tree uses a split with Gini gain within an additive  of
the optimum. For real-valued features the algorithm has an

3
n
amortized running time per insertion/deletion of O d log
,
2

2
d log n
which improves to O
for binary or categorical fea
tures, while it uses space O(nd), where n is the maximum
number of examples at any point in time and d is the number of features. Our algorithm is nearly optimal, as we show
that any algorithm with similar guarantees requires amortized
e
running time Ω(d) and space Ω(nd).
We complement our theoretical results with an extensive experimental evaluation on
real-world data, showing the effectiveness of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are a cornerstone of machine learning, and
an essential tool in any machine learning library. Given a
feature domain X and a label domain Y, a decision tree is
a function f : X 7→ Y that assigns to each x ∈ X a label
y ∈ Y by traversing a tree T from its root node to a leaf. At
each node of the tree, an example x is evaluated by some
rule that determines which successor should receive x — for
instance, a common rule is a simple threshold on some feature.
Every leaf is associated with a label, which is the result of
the prediction when such a leaf is reached. The problem
of constructing an optimal decision tree is NP-hard w.r.t.
to several natural objective functions (Shalev-Shwartz and
Ben-David 2014). This has led to the introduction of several
heuristic approaches, such as ID3, C4.5, C5.0 and CART,
which have proven very effective and are now considered
state of the art. Typically, those approaches proceed in a
greedy fashion by selecting for each node a feature and a
splitting value (we shall call such a pair a split) that optimize
some measure of improvement such as the Gini gain or the
information gain. This is repeated until a stopping condition
is met, such as the tree reaching a certain height or the number
of examples at every leaf falling below some threshold.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6842

These algorithms are also called online decision tree algorithms

