The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Simultaneously Updating All Persistence Values in Reinforcement Learning
Luca Sabbioni1 , Luca Al Daire1 , Lorenzo Bisi2 , Alberto Maria Metelli1 , Marcello Restelli1
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
2
ML cube, Milan, Italy
luca.sabbioni@polimi.it

the selected actions. In the limit for time discretization δ → 0,
the advantage of each action collapses to zero, preventing the
agent from finding the best action (Baird 1994; Tallec, Blier,
and Ollivier 2019). Even policy gradient methods are shown
to fail in this (near-)continuous-time setting, and the reason
is related to the divergent variance of the gradient (Park, Kim,
and Kim 2021). The consequences of each action might be
detected if the dynamics of the environment has the time to
evolve, hence with an agent acting with higher frequencies
lead to higher sample complexity.
Another consequence of the use of high frequencies is related to the difficulty of exploration. A random uniform policy
played at high frequency may not be adequate, as in some
classes of environments, including the majority of real-world
control problems, it tends to visit only a local neighborhood
of the initial state (Amin et al. 2021; Park, Kim, and Kim
2021; Yu, Xu, and Zhang 2021). This is problematic, especially in goal-based or sparse rewards environments, where
the most informative states may never be visited. On the other
hand, large time discretizations benefit from a higher probability of reaching far states, but they also deeply modify the
transition process, hence a possibly large subspace of states
may not be reachable.
One of the solutions to achieve the advantages related to
exploration and sample complexity, while keeping the control
opportunity loss bounded, consists in action persistence or
action repetition (Schoknecht and Riedmiller 2003; Braylan
et al. 2015; Lakshminarayanan, Sharma, and Ravindran 2017;
Metelli et al. 2020), which is equivalent to acting at lower frequencies. Thus, the agent can achieve, in some environments,
a more effective exploration, better capture the consequences
of each action, and fasten convergence to the optimal policy.
In this work, we propose a value-based approach in which
the agent does not only choose the action, but also its persistence, with the goal of making the most effective use of
samples collected at different persistences. The main contribution of this paper is a general approach in which information collected from the interaction with the environment
at one persistence is used to improve the action value function estimates of all the considered possible persistences. On
one hand, the κ-step transitions can be decomposed in many
sub-transitions of reduced length and used to update lower
persistence k ≤ κ value functions. On the other hand, they
represent partial information for the estimation of the effects

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, the performance of learning agents
is highly sensitive to the choice of time discretization. Agents
acting at high frequencies have the best control opportunities,
along with some drawbacks, such as possible inefficient exploration and vanishing of the action advantages. The repetition
of the actions, i.e., action persistence, comes into help, as
it allows the agent to visit wider regions of the state space
and improve the estimation of the action effects. In this work,
we derive a novel All-Persistence Bellman Operator, which
allows an effective use of both the low-persistence experience,
by decomposition into sub-transition, and the high-persistence
experience, thanks to the introduction of a suitable bootstrap
procedure. In this way, we employ transitions collected at any
time scale to update simultaneously the action values of the
considered persistence set. We prove the contraction property of the All-Persistence Bellman Operator and, based on
it, we extend classic Q-learning and DQN. After providing a
study on the effects of persistence, we experimentally evaluate
our approach in both tabular contexts and more challenging
frameworks, including some Atari games.

Introduction
In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and
Barto 2018) methods have proven to be successful in a wide
variety of applications, including robotics (Kober and Peters 2014; Gu et al. 2017; Haarnoja et al. 2019; Kilinc, Hu,
and Montana 2019), autonomous driving (Kiran et al. 2021)
and continuous control (Lillicrap et al. 2016; Schulman et al.
2017). These sequential decision-making problems are typically modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP, Puterman 2014), a formalism that addresses the agent-environment
interactions through discrete-time transitions. Continuoustime control problems, instead, are usually addressed by
means of time discretization, which induces a specific control frequency f , or, equivalently, a time step δ = f1 (Park,
Kim, and Kim 2021). This represents an environment hyperparameter, which may have dramatic effects on the process of
learning the optimal policy (Metelli et al. 2020; Kalyanakrishnan et al. 2021). Indeed, higher frequencies allow for greater
control opportunities, but they have significant drawbacks.
The most relevant one is related to the toned down effect of
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9668

