The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Semi-parametric Model for Decision Making in High-Dimensional Sensory
Discrimination Tasks
Stephen Keeley1 2 , Benjamin Letham2 , Craig Sanders2 , Chase Tymms2 , Michael Shvartsman 2
1

Department of Natural Sciences, Fordham University, USA
2
Meta
skeeley1@fordham.edu, {bletham,tymms,craigsanders,mshvarts}@meta.com

Abstract

as color or pitch. To understand sensory sensitivity in these
settings, univariate parameterized models require densely
sampling the entire stimulus feature domain; i.e. creating
a single psychometric function for each value of any nonintensity stimulus feature.
Recent work overcomes these limitations and extends the
classical densely-sampled univariate psychophysical curve
in terms of both modeling and experimental design. On the
modeling front, recent work captures correlations in psychometric functions across stimulus dimensions, either using prespecified multidimensional parametric models (Watson 2017), or using nonparametric Gaussian processes (GPs)
(Gardner et al. 2015a,b; Owen et al. 2021). For experimental design, dense sampling of the entire multidimensional
input space has been replaced with efficient active learning schemes (Houlsby et al. 2011; Settles 2009; Gardner
et al. 2015a,b; Watson 2017). Together, flexible psychometric models and multidimensional adaptive sampling methods
have led to improvements in estimating psychometric tuning in multivariate stimulus settings (Gardner et al. 2015a;
Owen et al. 2021; Letham et al. 2022).
However, existing high-dimensional psychometric models suffer from some limitations. The fully parametric approach, while interpretable, is constrained in practice, requiring an a priori model for all dimensions, with parameters
learned using an inefficient grid-search (Watson 2017). On
the other hand, the more flexible, nonparametric models that
leverage the power of GPs are not regularized to have sensible tuning properties, such as positive monotonicity in stimulus intensity. Moreover, they do not afford an experimenter
with interpretable parameters like those given in the classical
univariate context (Gardner et al. 2015b; Owen et al. 2021).
To address these limitations, we propose a semiparametric model of the psychometric field well-suited for
high-dimensional stimuli. Over the intensity dimension, our
psychometric model is governed by a characteristic function
that has a sigmoidal shape with identifiable slope and offset parameters. Each of these parameters, however, is governed by a GP across context (non-intensity) stimulus dimensions, admitting a flexible characterization of the psychometric field in a high-dimensional continuous stimulus
space. While the posterior of our model is intractable, we develop two approximations, each with different benefits. The
first, the full semi-parametric model, uses a semi-parametric

Psychometric functions typically characterize binary sensory
decisions along a single stimulus dimension. However, reallife sensory tasks vary along a greater variety of dimensions
(e.g. color, contrast and luminance for visual stimuli). Approaches to characterizing high-dimensional sensory spaces
either require strong parametric assumptions about these additional contextual dimensions, or fail to leverage known
properties of classical psychometric curves. We overcome
both limitations by introducing a semi-parametric model of
sensory discrimination that applies traditional psychophysical models along a stimulus intensity dimension, but puts
Gaussian process (GP) priors on the parameters of these
models with respect to the remaining dimensions. By combining the flexiblity of the GP with the deep literature
on parametric psychophysics, our semi-parametric models
achieve good performance with much less data than baselines on both synthetic and real-world high-dimensional psychophysics datasets. We additionally show strong performance in a Bayesian active learning setting, and present
a novel active learning paradigm for the semi-parametric
model.

Introduction
Understanding the mappings from physical stimuli to mental percepts is an important goal of perceptual neuroscience
and psychophysics. A popular experimental technique is to
measure behavioral responses to varying levels of a single
stimulus feature, such as contrast of an image or volume of
a sound, and generate a behavioral response curve. The average response probabilities are then often fit to a functional
form that is sigmoidal in shape, for example using the probit,
logit, or Weibull functions (Strasburger 2001). These parametric models tend to have specific interpretable parameters
that are of use to practitioners, such as thresholds and slopes
(Brand and Kollmeier 2002).
Improving the accuracy and sample efficiency of parameter estimation for these psychometric functions remains an
area of active research (Schütt et al. 2016; Shen and Richards
2012). However, much of the existing work focuses on a single stimulus feature, ignoring the fact that stimuli continuously vary in important dimensions other than intensity, such
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

40

