The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Revisiting the Spatial and Temporal Modeling for Few-Shot Action Recognition
Jiazheng Xing, Mengmeng Wang* , Yong Liu† , Boyu Mu
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{jiazhengxing,mengmengwang, muboyu}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

taking a ring
riding or walking
out of the box high jump with horse

Abstract
Spatial and temporal modeling is one of the most core aspects of few-shot action recognition. Most previous works
mainly focus on long-term temporal relation modeling based
on high-level spatial representations, without considering the
crucial low-level spatial features and short-term temporal relations. Actually, the former feature could bring rich local semantic information, and the latter feature could represent motion characteristics of adjacent frames, respectively. In this
paper, we propose SloshNet, a new framework that revisits
the spatial and temporal modeling for few-shot action recognition in a finer manner. First, to exploit the low-level spatial
features, we design a feature fusion architecture search module to automatically search for the best combination of the
low-level and high-level spatial features. Next, inspired by the
recent transformer, we introduce a long-term temporal modeling module to model the global temporal relations based on
the extracted spatial appearance features. Meanwhile, we design another short-term temporal modeling module to encode
the motion characteristics between adjacent frame representations. After that, the final predictions can be obtained by
feeding the embedded rich spatial-temporal features to a common frame-level class prototype matcher. We extensively validate the proposed SloshNet on four few-shot action recognition datasets, including Something-Something V2, Kinetics,
UCF101, and HMDB51. It achieves favorable results against
state-of-the-art methods in all datasets.

Time

(a)
Riding unicycle
Time

Video
Frames

TRX

Ours:
SloshNet

(b)

Figure 1: (a): Some examples in few-shot action recognition
(b): Visualization of the attention map from the recent work
TRX (Perrett et al. 2021) and our proposed SloshNet.
Therefore, the attention on few-shot learning methods is increasing daily. The task of few-shot action recognition aims
to classify an unlabeled query video into one of the action
categories in the support set (usually five categories) with
limited samples per action class.
Inspired by few-shot image recognition (Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017; Doersch, Gupta, and Zisserman 2020;
Elsken et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2020), existing few-shot video
action recognition methods mainly focus on comparing the
similarity of different videos in the feature space for recognition. However, videos have an extra temporal dimension
compared to images, so that it is insufficient to represent
the whole video as a single feature vector. Therefore, the
spatial-temporal feature modeling becomes one of the core
problems of few-shot action recognition. Specially, spatial
feature aims to express spatial semantic information for every single frame. In some cases, a video could be recognized with only a single frame like the example of the first
row in Fig. 1(a). Current approaches (Bishay, Zoumpourlis,
and Patras 2019; Kumar and Narang 2021; Li et al. 2022b)

Introduction
With the development of deep learning, a large amount of
excellent work has emerged in the field of action recognition (Li et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2022b; Wang et al. 2022;
Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2018). Most studies use large amounts of labeled data to perform video understanding or classification tasks to learn video representations. Such approaches are unsatisfactory in industrial applications because of the massive time-consuming and laborconsuming data annotation. On the contrary, the core assumption of few-shot learning is using only a handful of
labeled training samples from numerous similar tasks as a
surrogate for large quantities of labeled training samples.
* Co-corresponding author.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3001

