The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Sample-Dependent Adaptive Temperature Scaling
for Improved Calibration
Tom Joy1,3 , Francesco Pinto1 , Ser-Nam Lim2 , Philip H. S. Torr1 , Puneet K. Dokania1,3
1

University of Oxford,
2
Meta AI,
3
Five AI
tom.joy@five.ai

Abstract

the calibration error (in expectation) over the entire validation set, and since neural networks are overconfident on average, practically speaking, the effect of temperature scaling
is to reduce the confidence for every prediction. However,
as we will discuss, different samples contribute by varying
amounts to the calibration error.
This issue can be seen in Fig. 1, which shows the histogram of the individual contributions to the calibration errors; i.e. the distribution of p(y|pi ) − pi , where p(y|pi ) is
the accuracy and pi is the softmax probability for the data
point i, the calibration error can be obtained by taking the
weighted average over all the values.1 Here the mismatch between per data-point confidence and accuracy is not constant
across all the data-points, and hence miscalibration cannot
be fixed by scaling the logits by a single fixed value, a key
assumption in vanilla temperature scaling. The calibration
error varies significantly, with a small (but not insignificant)
number of samples on which the network is overconfident.
Consequently, scaling the predictions with a single temperature value will adjust all of the errors in the same way. Typically, the temperature values obtained are greater than 1,
resulting in a reduction of confidence of all predictions, regardless of whether they are correct with low confidence or
incorrect with high confidence.
To combat this, we propose a method which produces perdata-point predictions of the temperature, permitting an adequate decrease in the confidence on samples which the classifier is likely to get wrong, and an increase in the confidence
on predictions it is likely to get correct. As a result, we obtain better test Expected Calibration Error (ECE)(Guo et al.
2017) both on in-distribution sets (i.e. the test set is i.i.d.
with respect to the training set) and under covariate-shifted
sets (i.e. the test set shares the same set of labels of the training set, but the inputs are not i.i.d. with respect to the training
set).
Like temperature scaling, our method is applied posthoc and is very fast to train and test. We extensively test
the calibration of ResNet50 (He et al. 2016) and WideResNet28 (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016) when using our
method on CIFAR10/CIFAR100 and TinyImageNet, in-

It is now well known that neural networks can be wrong with
high confidence in their predictions, leading to poor calibration. The most common post-hoc approach to compensate for
this is to perform temperature scaling, which adjusts the confidences of the predictions on any input by scaling the logits by a fixed value. Whilst this approach typically improves
the average calibration across the whole test dataset, this improvement typically reduces the individual confidences of
the predictions irrespective of whether the classification of
a given input is correct or incorrect. With this insight, we
base our method on the observation that different samples
contribute to the calibration error by varying amounts, with
some needing to increase their confidence and others needing
to decrease it. Therefore, for each input, we propose to predict a different temperature value, allowing us to adjust the
mismatch between confidence and accuracy at a finer granularity. Our method is applied post-hoc, enabling it to be
very fast with a negligible memory footprint and is applied
to off-the-shelf pre-trained classifiers. We test our method
on the ResNet50 and WideResNet28-10 architectures using
the CIFAR10/100 and Tiny-ImageNet datasets, showing that
producing per-data-point temperatures improves the expected
calibration error across the whole test set.

1

Introduction

For neural networks (NNs) to be employed in real-world
safety-critical applications, we do not only require them to
produce correct predictions, but also provide reliable confidence estimates in their predictions (i.e. they are calibrated).
Limiting our scope to neural classifiers, using the maximum probability of the predictive distribution as a confidence measure, literature has established that a mismatch
exists between such notion of confidence and the expected
accuracy. Indeed, such models generally suffer from being
on average overconfident over the test set.
A simple approach to rectify this issue is to perform temperature scaling (Guo et al. 2017), a post-hoc method which
scales the logits by a single scalar value, obtained through
cross validation. This approach improves the classifier’s performance on standard calibration metrics across a test set.
However, from a per-sample point of view there are significant issues. Since the temperature is found by minimising

1

Here p(y|pi ) is obtained through histogram binning and represents the accuracy of each bin, and the weights are proportional
to the number of samples in each bin.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14919

