The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Incremental-DETR: Incremental Few-Shot Object Detection via Self-Supervised
Learning
Na Dong1,2 * , Yongqiang Zhang2 , Mingli Ding2 , Gim Hee Lee1
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
School of Instrument Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
{dongna1994, zhangyongqiang, dingml}@hit.edu.cn, gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

available (McCloskey and Cohen 1989; Ratcliff 1990). Additionally, these deep learning-based detectors also suffer
from the severe over-fitting problem when large amounts of
annotated training data that are costly and tedious to obtain
becomes scarce. In contrast, humans are much better than
machines in continually learning novel concepts without forgetting previously learned knowledge despite the absence of
previous examples and the availability of only a few novel
examples. This gap between humans and machine learning
algorithms fuels the interest in incremental few-shot object
detection, which aims at continually extending the model to
novel classes without forgetting the base classes with only a
few samples per novel class.
In this paper, we focus on solving the problem of incremental few-shot object detection. To this end, we propose
the Incremental-DETR that does incremental few-shot object
detection via fine-tuning and self-supervised learning on the
recently proposed DETR object detector (Zhu et al. 2020).
We are inspired by the fine-tuning technique commonly used
in few-shot object detectors (Wang et al. 2020; Wu et al.
2020; Sun et al. 2021) based on the two-stage Faster R-CNN
framework with class-agnostic feature extractor and Region
Proposal Network (RPN). In the first stage, the whole network is trained on abundant base data. In the second stage,
the class-agnostic feature extractor and RPN are frozen, and
only the prediction heads are fine-tuned on a balanced subset
that consists of both base and novel classes. However, many
few-shot object detectors focus on detecting the novel classes
but fail to preserve the performance of the base classes. In
contrast, we consider the more challenging and practical
incremental few-shot object detection which is capable of
detecting both the novel and base classes. Furthermore, the
data of the base classes are no longer accessible when the
novel classes are introduced in incremental few-shot object
detection. However, the training data of base classes are still
accessible when training the novel model in few-shot object
detection by which the novel model is easier to maintain the
performance of the base classes.
The state-of-the-art DETR object detector consists of a
CNN backbone that extracts features from input images, a
projection layer that reduces the channel dimension of features, an encoder-decoder transformer that transforms the
features into features of a set of object queries, a 3-layer feed
forward network that acts as the regression head, and a linear

Incremental few-shot object detection aims at detecting novel
classes without forgetting knowledge of the base classes with
only a few labeled training data from the novel classes. Most
related prior works are on incremental object detection that
rely on the availability of abundant training samples per novel
class that substantially limits the scalability to real-world setting where novel data can be scarce. In this paper, we propose
the Incremental-DETR that does incremental few-shot object
detection via fine-tuning and self-supervised learning on the
DETR object detector. To alleviate severe over-fitting with few
novel class data, we first fine-tune the class-specific components of DETR with self-supervision from additional object
proposals generated using Selective Search as pseudo labels.
We further introduce an incremental few-shot fine-tuning strategy with knowledge distillation on the class-specific components of DETR to encourage the network in detecting
novel classes without forgetting the base classes. Extensive
experiments conducted on standard incremental object detection and incremental few-shot object detection settings show
that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by a large margin. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/dongnana777/Incremental-DETR.

Introduction
In the past decade, many impressive general object detectors
have been developed due to the huge success of deep learning (Girshick et al. 2014a; Uijlings et al. 2013; Girshick 2015;
Lin et al. 2017a; Redmon et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; Lin
et al. 2017b; Carion et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020). However,
most deep learning-based object detectors can do detection
on objects only from a fixed set of base classes that are seen
during training. The extension of the object detector to additional unseen novel classes without losing performance on
the base classes requires further training on large amounts
of training data from both novel and base classes. A naive
fine-tuning with training data only from the novel classes
can lead to the notorious catastrophic forgetting problem,
where knowledge of the base classes is quickly forgotten
when the training data from the base classes are no longer
*Work fully done while first author is a visiting PhD student at
the National University of Singapore.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

543

