The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Lifelong Compression Mixture Model via Knowledge Relationship Graph
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract

cremental classes and the model can access the task descriptor during training (Chaudhry et al. 2019). In this study,
we consider a more realistic scenario in CL, called TaskFree Continual Learning (TFCL) (Aljundi, Kelchtermans,
and Tuytelaars 2019; Ye and Bors 2022f), where task identities and descriptors are not available during training. An efficient and simple approach to reduce forgetting in TFCL is
to manage a small fixed capacity memory buffer (De Lange
and Tuytelaars 2021; Jin et al. 2021; Bang et al. 2021) that
aims to store and replay past samples during training, called
the memory-based approach. Such an approach is suitable
for learning a fixed-length data stream and cannot handle infinite data streams. Recently, the Dynamic Expansion Model
(DEM) (Lee et al. 2020; Rao et al. 2019; Ye and Bors
2022f,a) has shown impressive results on TFCL due to its
scalability and generalisation performance. DEM is enabled
with an architecture expansion mechanism, which increases
the model’s capacity to address the data distribution shift.
However, these approaches only focus on addressing forgetting and ignore the model’s architecture optimization, limiting their applicability in practical systems.

Task-Free Continual Learning (TFCL) represents a challenging scenario for lifelong learning because the model, under
this paradigm, does not access any task information. The Dynamic Expansion Model (DEM) has shown promising results in this scenario due to its scalability and generalisation
power. However, DEM focuses only on addressing forgetting
and ignores minimizing the model size, which limits its deployment in practical systems. In this work, we aim to simultaneously address network forgetting and model size optimization by developing the Lifelong Compression Mixture
Model (LGMM) equipped with the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) based expansion criterion for model expansion.
A diversity-aware sample selection approach is proposed to
selectively store a variety of samples to promote information
diversity among the components of the LGMM, which allows
more knowledge to be captured with an appropriate model
size. In order to avoid having multiple components with similar knowledge in the LGMM, we propose a data-free component discarding mechanism that evaluates a knowledge relation graph matrix describing the relevance between each
pair of components. A greedy selection procedure is proposed to identify and remove the redundant components from
the LGMM. The proposed discarding mechanism can be performed during or after the training. Experiments on different
datasets show that LGMM achieves the best performance for
TFCL.

In this paper, we aim to simultaneously address catastrophic forgetting and model’s architecture minimization for
DEM through two goals : (1) Firstly, we want to promote
the learnt knowledge diversity among trained components
to avoid missing previously seen information; (2) Secondly,
to compress DEM’s architecture by removing superfluous
components from DEM in order to ensure good performance
with a minimal architecture. To realise these objectives, we
propose a diversity-aware sample selection approach that
selectively stores the different samples with respect to the
knowledge stored in each learned component of DEM. Then,
we introduce a new expansion criterion that evaluates the
difference between the current memory buffer and the previously learned knowledge. We propose to estimate the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) on the feature space between the memory buffer and each trained component as the
expansion signal. By choosing MMD in the expansion criterion can avoid substantial computational costs and enables
unsupervised learning. Second, to compress DEM’s architecture, we introduce a new mixture component discarding
mechanism that selectively removes components from DEM
without compromising its performance. The proposed discarding mechanism identifies those components that have

Introduction
Continual learning (CL) represents an innate ability of humans that enables them to adapt to an evolving environment. Due to its natural property of acquiring new knowledge and skills without forgetting CL has become an important direction of research in deep learning. CL enable tackling real-world online problems such as autonomous driving
and streaming services. However, existing Deep Learning
models do not fulfil CL requirements as they tend to quickly
forget the previously learnt knowledge when trying to learn
a new task. Therefore, conventional models suffer from massive degeneration on previous tasks and this phenomenon is
called catastrophic forgetting, (Parisi et al. 2019).
Most existing studies assume a sequence of multiple
tasks, where each task is assigned by sampling multiple inCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10900

