The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PUPS: Point Cloud Unified Panoptic Segmentation
Shihao Su * 1 , Jianyun Xu * 2 , Huanyu Wang 1 ,
Zhenwei Miao 2 , Xin Zhan 2 , Dayang Hao 2 , Xi Li 1, 3, 4†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba Group
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang University
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
shihaocs@zju.edu.cn, xujianyun.xjy@alibaba-inc.com, huanyuhello@zju.edu.cn,
{zhenwei.mzw, zhanxin.zx}@alibaba-inc.com, haodayang@gmail.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
POINTS

Point cloud panoptic segmentation is a challenging task that
seeks a holistic solution for both semantic and instance segmentation to predict groupings of coherent points. Previous
approaches treat semantic and instance segmentation as surrogate tasks, and they either use clustering methods or bounding boxes to gather instance groupings with costly computation and hand-crafted designs in the instance segmentation task. In this paper, we propose a simple but effective
point cloud unified panoptic segmentation (PUPS) framework, which use a set of point-level classifiers to directly predict semantic and instance groupings in an end-to-end manner. To realize PUPS, we introduce bipartite matching to our
training pipeline so that our classifiers are able to exclusively
predict groupings of instances, getting rid of hand-crafted designs, e.g. anchors and Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS).
In order to achieve better grouping results, we utilize a transformer decoder to iteratively refine the point classifiers and
develop a context-aware CutMix augmentation to overcome
the class imbalance problem. As a result, PUPS achieves 1st
place on the leader board of SemanticKITTI panoptic segmentation task and state-of-the-art results on nuScenes.

1

Instance
Segmentation

NMS/Clustering

fusion

Semantic
Segmentation

POINT
Panoptic
Result

Previous methods
POINTS

Unified Panoptic
Segmentation
Ours

POINT
Panoptic
Result

Figure 1: Illustration of previous framework and PUPS.

proposal-based methods rely on proposals generated by an
object detection head to get instance segmentation and employ an extra semantic branch for semantic segmentation.
Besides their cascaded structure, this stream of methods involves lots of hand-crafted components such as proposals
and non-maximum suppression (NMS). As for proposal-free
methods, they introduce clustering-based methods in their
instance branch based on the predicted offsets to instance
centers. Similarly, an extra semantic branch is attached for
semantic segmentation. Although outstanding results have
been achieved by these methods on different benchmarks,
there are two main drawbacks as shown in the upper part
of Figure 1: 1) they treat semantic and instance segmentation as surrogate tasks, which does not truly solve panoptic
segmentation holistically; 2) their instance branch involves
many hand-crafted components and post-processing, which
is complicated and time-consuming.
Inspired by recent developments in image segmentation (Cheng, Schwing, and Kirillov 2021; Wang et al. 2021;
Li et al. 2022c; Zhang et al. 2021), we propose PUPS, a simple but effective point cloud unified panoptic segmentation
framework to solve the challenges above. In essence, the aim
of point cloud panoptic segmentation is to predict groupings
of coherent points. PUPS unifies point cloud instance and semantic segmentation as a classifier-assigning problem. More
specifically, PUPS allocates a set of point-level classifiers,
learning to assign them to exclusive instances or semantic
classes. By utilizing bipartite matching in the training phase,
we achieve PUPS in an end-to-end manner and it is able to
predict exclusive groupings with no hand-crafted design or
post-processing as shown in Figure 1.

Introduction

As one of the most challenging problems in computer vision, panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2019b) seeks a
holistic solution to both semantic segmentation and instance
segmentation. Shortly after the researchers proposed the
question in image data, two LiDAR datasets (Behley, Milioto, and Stachniss 2020; Fong et al. 2021) for autonomous
driving extend the research area to point cloud data. These
emerging challenges aim at assigning points with groupings
of countable thing instances and uncountable stuff classes,
revealing that perception system of autonomous vehicles demands understanding of the environment in terms of both semantic level and instance level through point cloud sensors.
To solve point cloud panoptic segmentation, previous efforts can be divided into two streams: proposal-based methods and proposal-free methods. As the name indicates,
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2339

