The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Reactive Synthesis of Dominant Strategies
Benjamin Aminof1,3 , Giuseppe De Giacomo2, 3 , Sasha Rubin4
1
TU Wien
University of Oxford
3
Università degli Studi di Roma “La Sapienza”
4
University of Sydney
aminof@forsyte.at, giuseppe.degiacomo@cs.ox.ac.uk, degiacomo@diag.uniroma1.it, sasha.rubin@sydney.edu.au
2

Abstract

strong policy in FOND planning), i.e., an agent strategy that
achieves the goal against all the environment strategies that
conform to the environment specification. However, often
an enforcing strategy does not exist, leading to the introduction of other solution concepts, including strong-cyclic
policies, which exploit the fact that often the environment
resolves nondeterminism stochastically (Daniele, Traverso,
and Vardi 1999; Cimatti et al. 2003), and more recently besteffort strategies, i.e., those that achieve the goal against a
maximal set of environment strategies that conform to the
specification (Berwanger 2007; Faella 2009; Aminof et al.
2020, 2021; Aminof, De Giacomo, and Rubin 2021).
In this work we study dominant agent strategies, i.e., those
that achieve the goal against the maximum set of environment strategies that conform to the specification. Clearly,
enforcing strategies are dominant, and dominant strategies
are best-effort. However, while best-effort strategies always
exist, neither dominant nor enforcing strategies always exist. Intuitively, an enforcing strategy ensures getting the best
imaginable outcome, a best-effort strategy ensures that one
has made the best possible decision (given that the decision
has to be made before the exact environment is known), and
a dominant strategy ensures that one will always get the best
possible outcome. Our contributions are as follows:

We study the synthesis under environment specifications
problem for LTL/LTLf which, in particular, generalizes
FOND (strong) planning with these temporal goals. We consider the case where the agent cannot enforce its goal —
for which the argument for using best-effort strategies has
been made — and study the intermediate ground, between
enforcing and best-effort strategies, of dominant strategies.
Intuitively, such strategies achieve the goal against any environment for which it is achievable. We show that dominant strategies may exist when enforcing ones do not, while
still sharing with the latter many desirable properties such as
being interchangeable with each other, and being monotone
with respect to tightening of environment specifications. We
give necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of
dominant strategies, and show that deciding if they exist is
2EXPTIME-complete — the same as for enforcing strategies.
Finally, we give a uniform, optimal, game-theoretic algorithm
for simultaneously solving the three synthesis problems of
enforcing, dominant, and best-effort strategies.

Introduction
In Reasoning about Actions, the agent has an explicit representation of the environment, corresponding to what it
knows about the behavior of the environment it is operating
in (McCarthy and Hayes 1969; Green 1969). Nondeterministic environments are often represented as nondeterministic
domains, e.g., in Planning on Fully Observable Nondeterministic Domains (FOND) (Geffner and Bonet 2013).
Planning on nondeterministic domains can be seen as a
prominent case of Reactive Synthesis (Church 1963) under environment specifications (Aminof et al. 2018, 2019),
which is the problem of automatically constructing a reactive system from a logical specification. That is, environments can be specified as sets of environment strategies that
enforce a given temporal logic formula and the computed reactive system is the sought after plan. In this paper, we consider specifications expressed in linear-time temporal logic
over infinite traces (LTL) and finite traces (LTLf ), c.f. (Pnueli
and Rosner 1989; De Giacomo and Vardi 2015).
The standard solution concept in Reactive Synthesis is
that of an enforcing strategy (Pnueli and Rosner 1989) (cf.

1. We show that dominant strategies, like enforcing ones,
are (i) interchangeable with each other and (ii) monotone
with respect to tightening of environment specifications.
2. We provide a local characterization of the dominant
strategies in terms of what the strategy should achieve
from any given history. The characterization is inspired
by a similar characterization of the best-effort strategies (Berwanger 2007; Aminof et al. 2020).
3. We study the problem of finding a dominant strategy
given goals and environments specified in LTL/LTLf .
We prove that the corresponding realizability problem
is 2EXPTIME-complete, the same as that for enforcing
strategies. Based on the local characterization, we give a
uniform, optimal, game-theoretic algorithm for simultaneously solving the three synthesis problems of enforcing, dominant, and best-effort strategies. The algorithm
generalizes the one for best-effort strategies (Aminof, De
Giacomo, and Rubin 2021).

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6228

