The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Shielding in Resource-Constrained Goal POMDPs
Michal Ajdarów, Šimon Brlej, Petr Novotný
Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University
{xajdarow,xbrlej,petr.novotny}@fi.muni.cz

Abstract

use in the current situation without risking violation of its
safety specification in the future. The shielding process then
forces the agent to only consider, in a situation described
by available information X, the allowed actions in the list
σ(X). Shields are typically computed via formal methods
approaches, and hence they can guarantee that the shielded
algorithm satisfies the desired safety specification.

We consider partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) modeling an agent that needs a supply of a certain resource (e.g., electricity stored in batteries) to operate
correctly. The resource is consumed by the agent’s actions
and can be replenished only in certain states. The agent aims
to minimize the expected cost of reaching some goal while
preventing resource exhaustion, a problem we call resourceconstrained goal optimization (RSGO). We take a two-step
approach to the RSGO problem. First, using formal methods
techniques, we design an algorithm computing a shield for a
given scenario: a procedure that observes the agent and prevents it from using actions that might eventually lead to resource exhaustion. Second, we augment the POMCP heuristic search algorithm for POMDP planning with our shields
to obtain an algorithm solving the RSGO problem. We implement our algorithm and present experiments showing its
applicability to benchmarks from the literature.

Consumption Models and RSGO Problem. In this paper, we focus on safe decision making in agents that require
some uninterrupted supply of a resource (such as electricity) to operate correctly. Such agents can be encountered,
e.g., in robotics (Notomista, Ruf, and Egerstedt 2018), and
we model them via the consumption paradigm (Brázdil et al.
2012), where the available amount of the resource is represented by an integer from the set {0, 1, . . . , ca}, the number
ca denoting the agent’s battery capacity. Each action of the
agent consumes some amount of the resource (i.e., decreases
the resource level), and the resource can be replenished to
the full capacity only in special reload states (e.g., charging stations). The safety specification is that the agent must
never run out of the resource. A crucial property of consumption models (such as consumption MDPs (Blahoudek
et al. 2020)) is that the resource levels are not encoded in
the model’s states (since this would blow up the state space
by a factor exponential in the bit-size of ca). Instead, the
amount of resource consumed is specified for each stateaction pair, and the agent then tracks its resource level itself.
To account for the fact that, apart from preventing resource
exhaustion, the agent aims to do something useful, we study
the resource-safe goal optimization (RSGO) problem in the
consumption setting: the agent aims to reach a given set of
goal states with probability 1 (i.e., almost-surely) at the minimal expected cost, while preventing resource exhaustion.

Introduction
Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
are the standard model for decision making under uncertainty. While POMDPs are computationally demanding to
solve, advances in heuristic search (Silver and Veness 2010)
and reinforcement learning (Bhattacharya et al. 2020) allowed for tackling large POMDP models. Recently, increasing attention is being paid to safety aspects of autonomous
decision making as opposed to pure optimization of the expected rewards or costs (Garcı́a and Fernández 2015). Indeed, heuristic and learning techniques can be susceptible to
leading the decision-making agent into dangerous situations,
and additional care must be taken to formally guarantee the
absence of such a risky behavior.
Shielding. A promising approach to obtaining such safety
guarantees is offered by the concept of permissive controller
synthesis (Dräger et al. 2015; Junges et al. 2016), which was
later distilled into the concept of shielding (Alshiekh et al.
2018). Intuitively, a shield σ is a function which inputs the
agent’s current information X (in a POMDP, this would be
the whole history of the agent’s actions and observations)
and outputs a list of allowed actions which the agent can

Limitations of Previous Work. The previous approaches
to consumption models for resource-constrained decision
making under uncertainty suffer from two key limitations:
First, they consider only perfectly observable setting, i.e.,
consumption MDPs. Second, they only consider computing
policies satisfying qualitative criteria: avoiding resource exhaustion and almost-surely reaching a goal state; optimization of quantitative criteria, such as the expected cost of
achieving a goal, was not considered.

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14674

