The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

PGSS: Pitch-Guided Speech Separation
Xiang Li, Yiwen Wang, Yifan Sun, Xihong Wu, Jing Chen
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
chenj@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

In the above ASA process, pitch plays an important role.
Pitch, often corresponds to the fundamental frequency (F0)
of harmonics. In the psychoacoustics aspect, a series experiments using from alternating pure tones (Shamma, Elhilali,
and Micheyl 2011), synthetic vowels (Broadbent and Ladefoged 1957) to natural continuous speech (i.e., multi-speaker
scenario) (Glasberg and Moore 1986; Darwin and Hukin
2000; Darwin, Brungart, and Simpson 2003) showed the F0
difference substantially contributed to the perceptual segregation. Other groups of research find that priming listeners
with perceptual cues (e.g., pitch) of the target speaker could
help them attend to the target speaker when competing speakers are present (Brungart 2001; Freyman, Balakrishnan, and
Helfer 2004; Kidd Jr, Mason, and Gallun 2005). Church and
Schacter (Church and Schacter 1994) showed there was a
significant priming effect when the words were spoken with
the same fundamental frequency at study and test, which
means presenting listeners with the priming word spoken at
the same pitch as the target test word can improve the identification performance. In the aspect of computational models,
the most representative work is computational auditory scene
analysis (CASA) (Brown and Cooke 1994; Wang and Brown
2008), where pitch as a discriminative cue, can be used to
improve the speech separation performance (Hu and Wang
2010, 2013; Wang, Soong, and Xie 2019).

Monaural speech separation aims to separate concurrent speakers from a single-microphone mixture recording. Inspired by
the effect of pitch priming in auditory scene analysis (ASA)
mechanisms, a novel pitch-guided speech separation framework is proposed in this work. The prominent advantage of
this framework is that both the permutation problem and the
unknown speaker number problem existing in general models
can be avoided by using pitch contours as the primary means
to guide the target speaker. In addition, adversarial training is
applied, instead of a traditional time-frequency mask, to improve the perceptual quality of separated speech. Specifically,
the proposed framework can be divided into two phases: pitch
extraction and speech separation. The former aims to extract
pitch contour candidates for each speaker from the mixture,
modeling the bottom-up process in ASA mechanisms. Any
pitch contour can be selected as the condition in the second
phase to separate the corresponding speaker, where a conditional generative adversarial network (CGAN) is applied. The
second phase models the effect of pitch priming in ASA. Experiments on the WSJ0-2mix corpus reveal that the proposed
approaches can achieve higher pitch extraction accuracy and
better separation performance, compared to the baseline models, and have the potential to be applied to SOTA architectures.

Introduction
The human auditory system shows the extraordinary ability
at selectively attending to the target speech in the presence
of interference, which is described as the so-called cocktail
party problem (Cherry 1953). Bregman attributes this ability to "auditory scene analysis" (ASA) (Bregman 1994), a
process of auditory stream formation and segregation. Specifically, the formation stage aims to form a single auditory
stream from an incoming mixture, by successive auditory
periphery analysis, perceptual features extraction (e.g., pitch,
timbre, spatial location) (Middlebrooks et al. 2017) and temporal coherence analysis (Shamma, Elhilali, and Micheyl
2011). In the segregation stage, attention mechanism (Bey
and McAdams 2002), as well as prior experience (e.g., familiarity, priming) (Snyder et al. 2008, 2009a,b; Snyder and
Weintraub 2011; Riecke et al. 2009, 2011; McClelland, Mirman, and Holt 2006) would serve to enhance the perception
of a particular stream (foreground), while suppressing others
(background).
13130

Due to the robustness of the auditory system in the complex acoustic scene, the computational model for the ASA
process has been explored a lot, in order to extract target
speech from competing inferences, i.e, speech separation.
Recently, the development of deep learning brings opportunities to tackle this task. A supervised learning framework was
proposed to learn a mapping from mixture to separated speakers through neural networks. Most existing models separate
each speaker simultaneously, which suffers from permutation
problem (Kolbaek et al. 2017) and output dimension mismatch problem (Hershey et al. 2016). The former is related
to how the output layers are tied to the underlying speakers.
The latter arises from an unfixed number of speakers in the
mixture, leading to unfixed output layers. Although permutation invariant training (PIT) (Yu et al. 2017; Kolbaek et al.
2017) and deep clustering (DC) (Hershey et al. 2016) are
proposed successively to address these two problems, respectively, both of them cannot deal with the problem of unknown
number of speakers.

