The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RADIANT: Radar-Image Association Network for 3D Object Detection
Yunfei Long1 , Abhinav Kumar1 , Daniel Morris1 , Xiaoming Liu1 ,
Marcos Castro2 , Punarjay Chakravarty2
1

Michigan State University
2
Ford Motor Company
{longyunf, kumarab6, dmorris, liuxm}@msu.edu, {mgerard8, pchakra5}@ford.com

24

Abstract

20

As a direct depth sensor, radar holds promise as a tool to
improve monocular 3D object detection, which suffers from
depth errors, due in part to the depth-scale ambiguity. On the
other hand, leveraging radar depths is hampered by difficulties
in precisely associating radar returns with 3D estimates from
monocular methods, effectively erasing its benefits. This paper
proposes a fusion network that addresses this radar-camera
association challenge. We train our network to predict the
3D offsets between radar returns and object centers, enabling
radar depths to enhance the accuracy of 3D monocular detection. By using parallel radar and camera backbones, our
network fuses information at both the feature level and detection level, while at the same time leveraging a state-of-the-art
monocular detection technique without retraining it. Experimental results show significant improvement in mean average precision and translation error on the nuScenes dataset
over monocular counterparts. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/longyunf/radiant.

16
12
−16 −12

(a) Pixel Offset

−8

−4

0

4

(b) BEV Offset

Figure 1: Predicted radar-offsets (cyan arrows) from radar
points (dots) to object centers (orange plus) in (a) pixel space
and (b) bird’s-eye view (BEV) in meters. RADIANT trains
a network to predict these offsets and improves monocular
3D detection. Orange boxes represent the ground truth (GT)
bounding boxes, and dashed lines denote borders of the camera field of view.

achieving 16.9% 3D mAP of cars on KITTI. The lower 3D
performance of monocular detection comes largely from poor
depth estimation (Ma et al. 2021; Kumar et al. 2022). This
is expected as image projection removes depth, and recovering object depth from an image suffers from the depth scale
ambiguity (Tang, Dorn, and Savani 2020), and is therefore
error-prone. Indeed, when (Xu et al. 2021) uses precise depth
from LiDAR, mAP of cars increases to over 90%. Typically
LiDAR is a specialized sensor that is relatively expensive
(Kumar, Brazil, and Liu 2021) and only available on a small
fraction of vehicles. On the other hand, radar is small (Lien
et al. 2016), inexpensive, and widely available on existing vehicles so we choose to use radar for the broader impact. Thus,
this paper explores the fusion of direct depth measurements
available from the radar with a 3D monocular detector.
The choice to use automotive radar rather than LiDAR
presents several challenges. At first glance, one might consider using a similar 3D object-detector on radar points as
for LiDAR (Wang et al. 2021f). However, that does not work
because the radar data has completely different characteristics from the LiDAR point cloud (Wang et al. 2021f). First,
each radar-point sweep is much sparser than a typical LiDAR
measurement in azimuth (Yang et al. 2020) and has a single
row in elevation, leaving radar coordinates without height information. Thus, differing from LiDAR, radar cannot acquire
accurate shapes with dense point clouds. Additionally, the
radar point positions have significant azimuth errors (Yang

Introduction
Three-dimensional object detection is a core vision problem
where the task is to infer 3D position, orientation, and classification of objects in a scene. Applications that rely on this
include robotics (Saxena, Driemeyer, and Ng 2008), gaming
(Rematas et al. 2018), and automotive safety (Simonelli et al.
2020). In the latter application, Advanced Driver Assistance
Systems can move beyond automated braking and use precise location and orientation of nearby vehicles and other
objects to perform collision avoidance maneuvers. However,
a key limiting factor is the relatively poor accuracy of 3D object detection, both in current systems and in state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods that rely on widely used sensors, namely
cameras (Park et al. 2021; Lu et al. 2021) and radars (Yang
et al. 2020). Thus, there is a significant need for improved
3D object detection, which is the goal of this paper.
Image-based object detection achieves high 2D accuracy
(Brazil and Liu 2019b); for instance, DD3D (Park et al. 2021)
achieves 94% 2D mean average precision (mAP) for cars on
KITTI (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012). However, the performance of these same SOTA methods drops precipitously
on 3D object detection with DD3D (Park et al. 2021) only
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1808

