The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Extraction of EL-Ontology Deductive Modules*
Hui Yang, Yue Ma, Nicole Bidoit
LISN, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay
yang@lisn.fr, ma@lisn.fr, nicole.bidoit@lisn.fr

Abstract

like ontology debugging (Arif et al. 2016), re-use (JiménezRuiz et al. 2008), and forgetting (Koopmann and Schmidt
2013).
We can distinguish two classes of deductive modules. The
first class is syntactical locality-based modules such as ⊥⊤∗ modules (Sattler, Schneider, and Zakharyaschev 2009) and
AMEX-modules (Gatens, Konev, and Wolter 2014). Those
modules can be computed efficiently, but usually, they contain many unnecessary terms. The second class is subsetminimal modules such as minimal modules (Chen et al.
2017). They do not contain any redundant terms but suffer
from high complexity and are time-consuming in practice.
In this work, we propose a new method for computing
deductive modules for EL ontologies to balance the computation cost and the result quality. Our method is inspired by
the SAT-based approach (Arif, Mencı́a, and Marques-Silva
2015; Manthey, Peñaloza, and Rudolph 2016) developed to
compute justifications, which are minimal sub-ontologies
that derive a given entailment. The main idea of these SATbased methods is to encode the derivations of a given entailment as a set of Horn-clauses, then it enumerates all the
justifications of this entailment by SAT tools or resolution
(Kazakov and Skočovskỳ 2018). However, the computation
of deductive modules is much more complex: First, the input is a vocabulary instead of an entailment and it could be
complicated to generate all the entailments over the given
vocabulary; Second, there may exist (even infinitely) many
entailments over a given vocabulary. Therefore, instead of
using justifications of the entailments directly, one has to
find other proper ways to tackle the computation of deductive modules.
Our contribution is twofold: (i) We associate a forest with
each given ontology and vocabulary to efficiently capture
the entailments over the vocabulary. The definition of forest is inspired by the regular tree grammar developed in
(Nikitina and Rudolph 2014). We can regard the forest and
the regular tree grammar as a set of derivation trees and
derivation rules that generate entailments over a given vocabulary, respectively. Moreover, we are able to deal with
the case of infinitely many entailments by considering a finite subset of trees from our forest. (ii) We introduce two
novel notions of deductive modules called pseudo-minimal
modules and complete modules, and we develop an efficient
SAT-based algorithm to compute them based on the notion

Because widely used real-world ontologies are often complex and large, one important challenge has emerged: designing tools for users to focus on sub-ontologies corresponding to their specific interests. To this end, various modules
have been introduced to provide concise ontology views. This
work concentrates on extracting deductive modules that preserve logical entailments over a given vocabulary. Existing
deductive module proposals are either inefficient from a computing point of view or unsatisfactory from a quality point of
view because the modules extracted are not concise enough.
For example, minimal modules guarantee the most concise results but their computation is highly time-consuming, while
⊥⊤∗ -modules are easy to compute but usually they contain
many redundant items. To overcome computation cost and
lack of quality, we propose to compute two different kinds of
deductive modules called pseudo-minimal modules and complete modules for EL-ontology. Our deductive module definitions rely on associating a tree representation with an ontology, and their computation is based on SAT encoding. Our
experiments on real-world ontologies show that our pseudominimal modules are indeed minimal modules in almost all
cases (98.9%), and computing pseudo-minimal modules is
more efficient (99.79 times faster on average) than the stateof-the-art method Zoom for computing minimal modules.
Also, our complete modules are more compact than ⊥⊤∗ modules, but their computation time remains comparable. Finally, note that our proposal applies to EL-ontologies while
Zoom only works for EL-terminologies.

Introduction
Description logic-based ontologies have been widely studied and used in many areas. However, real-world ontologies
are often too big to be handled by humans. The most evident approach for overcoming this problem is to extract subontologies related to user interests. For example, the wellknown biomedical ontology Snomed CT contains more than
300,000 axioms. By extracting deductive modules, we could
provide doctors with small sub-ontologies of Snomed CT
based on symptoms to establish a diagnosis. Extracting deductive modules has been used for various different areas,
* This work is funded by the BPI-France (PSPC AIDA: 2019PSPC-09).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6575

