The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Tree Learning: Optimal Sample Complexity and Algorithms
Dmitrii Avdiukhin‡1 , Grigory Yaroslavtsev‡2 , Danny Vainstein‡3 , Orr Fischer‡4 , Sauman Das5 ,
Faraz Mirza5
1

Indiana University, Department of Computer Science
George Mason University, Department of Computer Science *
3
Tel-Aviv University, Blavatnik School of Computer Science
4
Weizmann Institute of Science, Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics †
5
Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology
davdyukh@iu.edu, orr.fischer@weizmann.ac.il, dannyvainstein@gmail.com, grigory@grigory.us, 2023sdas@tjhsst.edu,
2023fmirza@tjhsst.edu
2

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a hierarchical tree representation of data from labeled samples, taken from an arbitrary
(and possibly adversarial) distribution. Consider a collection
of data tuples labeled according to their hierarchical structure. The smallest number of such tuples required in order to
be able to accurately label subsequent tuples is of interest for
data collection in machine learning. We present optimal sample complexity bounds for this problem in several learning
settings, including (agnostic) PAC learning and online learning. Our results are based on tight bounds of the Natarajan
and Littlestone dimensions of the associated problem. The
corresponding tree classifiers can be constructed efficiently
in near-linear time.

1

a

b

b

b
a

d

e

c

c

d

c

a

a

b

b

d

e

e

d

(a) Triplet labelings (top) and
a tree consistent with the labelings (bottom)

c
a

d

e

b

(b) 4-tuple labelings and a tree
consistent with the labelings

Figure 1: An example for the triplet and k-tuple setting,
where two labeled queries and a tree consistent with the
queries are shown. The tree satisfies all hierarchical relations
of both labeled queries. For example, in Figure 1a, the lowest
common ancestor of a and b (denoted LCA(a, b)) is below
LCA(a, c) and LCA(b, c), as in its first labeled query.

Introduction

The algorithmic problem of constructing hierarchical data
representations has been of major importance for many
decades, due to its applications in statistics (Ward Jr 1963;
Gower and Ross 1969), entomology (Michener and Sokal
1957), plant biology (Sorensen 1948), genomics (Eisen et al.
1998) and other domains. Efficient collection of labeled data
is a problem of key importance for construction of hierarchical data representations. In this paper we consider the problem of constructing tree representations of data from labeled
samples, focusing on understanding the optimal number of
samples required for this task.
The most basic type of a label that allows one to construct a tree representation consists of a triplet of points
(x, y, z) labeled according to the induced hierarchical structure within the triplet. For example, given images of a cat,
a dog, and a plane, the label would describe the cat and the

dog as being more similar to each other than to the plane.
This “odd one out” type of label is the simplest one to collect in a crowdsourcing setting. In this paper, we focus on
understanding the number of such labeled samples required
in order to construct a tree representation of the underlying
data, which enables one to accurately predict subsequent labels in the future. This is then further generalized to include
larger labeled subsets of data. Figure 1 shows examples of
possible trees consistent with certain tuple labelings.

1.1

Our Results

Let n be the number of points in the dataset. We present
results in two settings: PAC learning and online learning. In
both cases, our objective is to build a classifier that given
access to labeled tuples can predict labels for the subsequent
tuples with high probability.

* Supported

by NSF CCF-1657477 and Facebook Faculty
Award.
†
This project is partially funded by the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 949083).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡
These authors contributed equally to this work

PAC learning In the Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) learning setting (Valiant 1984), the tuples are gen6701

