The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Provable Framework of Learning Graph Embeddings via Summarization
Houquan Zhou1, 2 , Shenghua Liu1, 2 * , Danai Koutra3 , Huawei Shen1, 2 , Xueqi Cheng1, 2
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Michigan
{zhouhouquan18z, liushenghua, shenhuawei, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, dkoutra@umich.edu.cn

Abstract

Method

Given a large graph, can we learn its node embeddings from
a smaller summary graph? What is the relationship between
embeddings learned from original graphs and their summary
graphs? Graph representation learning plays an important
role in many graph mining applications, but learning embeddings of large-scale graphs remains a challenge. Recent
works try to alleviate it via graph summarization, which typically includes the three steps: reducing the graph size by
combining nodes and edges into supernodes and superedges,
learning the supernode embedding on the summary graph and
then restoring the embeddings of the original nodes. However, the justification behind those steps is still unknown.
In this work, we propose GELSumm, a well-formulated
graph embedding learning framework based on graph summarization, in which we show the theoretical ground of learning from summary graphs and the restoration with the three
well-known graph embedding approaches in a closed form.
Through extensive experiments on real-world datasets, we
demonstrate that our methods can learn graph embeddings
with matching or better performance on downstream tasks.
This work provides theoretical analysis for learning node embeddings via summarization and helps explain and understand the mechanism of the existing works.

Kernel matrix

Restoration

Embeddings

M

K(G)

R(i, p), vi ∈
Sp 1

E

DeepWalk
LINE
GCN

(D−1 A)τ D−1

General
form

D−c AD−1+c
D1−2c

1

1
1
r

D−1 AD−1
1

1

D̃− 2 ÃD̃− 2

di

REs

(s)
dp

τ



di

1−c

(s)

dp

vi : Node i in original graphs, Sp : Supernode p in summary
graphs.

Table 1: The closed-form solutions for learning original graph embeddings from smaller summary graphs by
DeepWalk, LINE, and GCN, using restoration matrix R.
E is embeddings on original graph G, and Es is embeddings on summary graph Gs .
2018), MILE (Liang, Gurukar, and Parthasarathy 2018), and
GraphZoom (Deng et al. 2020).
A key limitation of the existing summarization-based solutions is the lack of theoretical analysis. Existing methods summarize the input graph in a heuristic way and then
empirically restore the embeddings of the original nodes
from the supernode embeddings, without deeply exploring
the connection between them. Thus, there are no theoretical studies of the underlying mechanism. Due to the lack of
theoretical study, the following questions arise naturally:

Introduction
Graph representation learning has attracted much research
interest in recent years due to its success in various applications including biology, computer vision, text classification,
and more. However, learning node representations of large
graphs still remains a problem due to high computational
complexity and memory usage.
To overcome this problem, some researchers resort to
graph summarization methods. They first summarize (some
may use the term “coarsening”) the input graph into a
smaller summary graph by grouping subsets of nodes into
supernodes, and then learn supernode embeddings of the
summary graph. After that, these embeddings are projected back to the original nodes embeddings with an additional refinement step. Since the size of the graph is decreased, the running time and memory cost are largely reduced. Representative works include HARP (Chen et al.

• What is the theoretical mechanism behind learning node
embedding via summarization?
• What is the connection between node embeddings of
original graphs and summary graphs?
• Which summarization method should we use, and how
should we restore embeddings correspondingly with the
theoretical ground?
In this work, we aim to answer the above questions and
fill the theoretical gap. Specifically, we theoretically show
that applying three node embedding methods (DeepWalk,
LINE, and GCN) on summary graphs is equivalent to applying them on a reconstructed graph based on the configuration model. As a result, original node embeddings can be ap-

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4946

