The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Probably Approximate Shapley Fairness with Applications in Machine Learning
Zijian Zhou1 * , Xinyi Xu12 * , Rachael Hwee Ling Sim1 , Chuan Sheng Foo23 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{zhou zijian, xinyi.xu, rachael.sim}@u.nus.edu, foo chuan sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

where π is a permutation of the N training examples and Π
denotes the set of all possible permutations. The SV for the ith example is its average marginal contribution, σi (π), across
all permutations. The marginal contribution σi (π) measures
the improvement in utility (e.g., test accuracy) when the i-th
example is added to the predecessor set Piπ containing all
training examples j preceding i in π.
The wide adoption of SV is often justified through its
fairness axiomatic properties (recalled in Sec. 2). In data
valuation, SV is desirable as it ensures that any two training
example that improves the ML model performance equally
when added to any data subset (i.e., all marginal contributions are equal) are assigned the same value (known as symmetry). However, a key downside of SV is that the exact
calculation of ϕi in Equ. (1) has exponential time complexity and is intractable when valuing more than hundreds of
training examples (Ghorbani and Zou 2019; Jia et al. 2019).
Existing works address this downside by viewing the SV
definition in Equ. (1) as an expectation over the uniform
distribution U over Π, ϕi = Eπ∼U [σi (π)], and applying
Monte Carlo (MC) approximation (Castro, Gómez, and Tejada 2009) with m
randomly sampled permutations, thus
Pi m
i
ϕi ≈ φi := 1/mi t=1
σi (π t ), π t ∼ U (Ghorbani and Zou
2019; Jia et al. 2019; Song, Tong, and Wei 2019).
However, this approximation creates an important issue —
(i) do the fairness axioms that justify the use of Shaplay value
still hold after approximation (Sundararajan and Najmi 2020;
Rozemberczki et al. 2022)? The answer is unfortunately no
as we empirically demonstrate that the symmetry axiom does
not hold after approximations in Fig. 2. For two identical
training examples, their (approximated) SVs used in data
pricing are not guaranteed to be equal. We address this unresolved important issue by proposing the notion of probably
approximate Shapley fairness for SV estimates φi , for every
i ∈ N . As the original fairness axioms are too restrictive, in
Sec. 3, we relax the fairness axioms to approximate fairness
and consider how they can be satisfied with high probability.
We introduce a fidelity score (FS) to measure the approximation quality of φi w.r.t. ϕi for each example i and provide
a fairness guarantee dependent on the worst/lowest fidelity
score across all training examples.
In data valuation, computing the marginal contribution of
an i ∈ N in any sampled permutation is expensive as it involves training model(s). (ii) How do we achieve probably

Abstract
The Shapley value (SV) is adopted in various scenarios in machine learning (ML), including data valuation, agent valuation,
and feature attribution, as it satisfies their fairness requirements. However, as exact SVs are infeasible to compute in
practice, SV estimates are approximated instead. This approximation step raises an important question: do the SV estimates
preserve the fairness guarantees of exact SVs? We observe
that the fairness guarantees of exact SVs are too restrictive
for SV estimates. Thus, we generalise Shapley fairness to
probably approximate Shapley fairness and propose fidelity
score, a metric to measure the variation of SV estimates, that
determines how probable the fairness guarantees hold. Our
last theoretical contribution is a novel greedy active estimation (GAE) algorithm that will maximise the lowest fidelity
score and achieve a better fairness guarantee than the de facto
Monte-Carlo estimation. We empirically verify GAE outperforms several existing methods in guaranteeing fairness while
remaining competitive in estimation accuracy in various ML
scenarios using real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

The Shapley value (SV) is widely used in machine learning (ML), to value and price data (Agarwal, Dahleh, and
Sarkar 2019; Ohrimenko, Tople, and Tschiatschek 2019;
Ghorbani and Zou 2019; Ghorbani, Kim, and Zou 2020;
Xu et al. 2021b; Kwon and Zou 2022; Sim, Xu, and Low
2022; Wu, Shu, and Low 2022), value data contributors in
collaborative machine learning (CML) (Sim et al. 2020; Tay
et al. 2022; Agussurja, Xu, and Low 2022; Nguyen, Low,
and Jaillet 2022) and federated learning (FL) (Song, Tong,
and Wei 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2021a) to decide
fair rewards, and value features’ effects on model predictions for interpretability (Covert and Lee 2021; Lundberg and
Lee 2017). We consider data valuation as our main example.
Given a set N of n training examples and a utility function v
that maps a set P of training examples to a real-valued utility
(e.g., test accuracy of an ML model trained on P ), the SV ϕi
of the i-th example is
P
ϕi = ϕi (N, v) := 1/(n!) π∈Π σi (π)
(1)
σi (π) := v(Piπ ∪ {i}) − v(Piπ )
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5910

