The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

For the Underrepresented in Gender Bias Research: Chinese Name Gender
Prediction with Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network
Zihao Pan* , Kai Peng* , Shuai Ling, Haipeng Zhang †
ShanghaiTech University
{panzh, pengkai, lingshuai, zhanghp}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

resented in such research, though there is abundant comparable data in Chinese. One possible reason is the lack of
reliable Chinese name-gender guessing tools that suit the
standard of scientific purposes, compared with their English
counterparts.
Ngender1 is a basic tool for Chinese name-gender guessing, based on Naı̈ve Bayes. It calculates the probability of a
first name, often consisting of one or two Chinese characters,
being a female name, by multiplying such probabilities of
individual characters. Though straightforward, Ngender has
two limitations. One is associated with Naı̈ve Bayes itself –
it does not work for out-of-sample characters that the classifier has never seen. Furthermore, it overlooks the knowledge from the combination of characters as well as the character components. The Ngender training data also deepens
both limitations – it only contains the numbers of times each
available character appears in names of females and names
of males, instead of the frequencies of complete first names
under both genders. Existing studies have proved that word
representations from neural network language models such
as BERT and GloVe have a gender tendency and convey gender information (Jia and Zhao 2019; Yang and Feng 2020;
Lauscher et al. 2020; Matthews, Hudzina, and Sepehr 2022).
Among them, Jia and Zhao (2019) propose a BERT-based
model in which each character, whether in or out of the
sample, gets a representation from a pre-trained BERT that
handles the ‘character-out-of-sample’ problem for namegender prediction. Besides, by concatenating the character
embedding with the pronunciation embedding, their model,
Pinyin BERT (PBERT), also proves that pronunciations deliver gender information.
However, beyond semantics from characters themselves
and their pronunciations, the semantics arisen from character components are overlooked in current gender guessing
tools. A large portion of Chinese characters consists of components, and these components help shape the meanings of
the characters (Yu et al. 2017). Following this lead, studies utilize the component-level internal semantic features
for Chinese character representation learning in a word2vec
fashion (Sun et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2019). In this direction, Wang et al. (2021) takes a step
forward, capturing the semantic relationships between char-

Achieving gender equality is an important pillar for humankind’s sustainable future. Pioneering data-driven gender
bias research is based on large-scale public records such as
scientific papers, patents, and company registrations, covering female researchers, inventors and entrepreneurs, and so
on. Since gender information is often missing in relevant
datasets, studies rely on tools to infer genders from names.
However, available open-sourced Chinese gender-guessing
tools are not yet suitable for scientific purposes, which may
be partially responsible for female Chinese being underrepresented in mainstream gender bias research and affect their
universality. Specifically, these tools focus on character-level
information while overlooking the fact that the combinations of Chinese characters in multi-character names, as well
as the components and pronunciations of characters, convey
important messages. As a first effort, we design a Chinese
Heterogeneous Graph Attention (CHGAT) model to capture
the heterogeneity in component relationships and incorporate the pronunciations of characters. Our model largely surpasses current tools and also outperforms the state-of-theart algorithm. Last but not least, the most popular Chinese
name-gender dataset is single-character based with far less
female coverage from an unreliable source, naturally hindering relevant studies. We open-source a more balanced multicharacter dataset from an official source together with our
code, hoping to help future research promoting gender equality.

Introduction
Recently, there have been increasing gender-equality studies, regarding female researchers (Larivière et al. 2013;
Huang et al. 2020), inventors (Jensen, Kovács, and Sorenson 2018; Koning, Samila, and Ferguson 2021), entrepreneurs (Ritter-Hayashi, Vermeulen, and Knoben 2019;
van den Oever 2021), and STEM students (Cimpian, Kim,
and McDermott 2020), based on large-scale public records
such as scientific papers, patents, and company registrations.
Given the fact that many of these datasets do not contain
gender information, genders are usually inferred from individual names. Surprisingly, Chinese females are underrep* These authors contributed equally.
†

*Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14436

https://github.com/observerss/ngender

