The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Beam Search Optimized Batch Bayesian Active Learning
Jingyu Sun1 , Hongjie Zhai2 , Osamu Saisho3 , Susumu Takeuchi1
1

NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
2
NTT Software Innovation Center
3
NTT Social Informatics Laboratories
jingyu.sun.pu@hco.ntt.co.jp, hongjie.zhai.wv@hco.ntt.co.jp, osamu.saisho.vm@hco.ntt.co.jp,
susumu.takeuchi.sp@hco.ntt.co.jp
Abstract

ation from the pool of unlabeled data (Huang, Jin, and Zhou
2010). As a surrogate model in active learning, acquisition
functions are responsible for detecting these samples. Multiple information theoretic heuristics can be used to design
the acquisition functions that need to be both computationally efficient and accurate in judging the samples’ informativeness. Some of them concern the samples that can reduce
the model uncertainty most (Seung, Opper, and Sompolinsky 1992), while others take the data distribution into account when selecting the most representative samples (Yu
et al. 2018). Recently, attempts have been made by (Kirsch,
Rainforth, and Gal 2021) to combine the samples’ informativeness and the evaluation dataset’s distribution to achieve
better performance with noisy data.
Within these heuristics, Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD) (Houlsby et al. 2011) performs extraordinarily well by using the mutual information between the
model prediction and the model parameters to estimate samples’ acquisition scores. However, even though BALD performs well when a single sample is acquired for every training iteration, retraining the model after adding every single
labeled sample is undesired due to the expensive computational cost. Instead, batch acquisition that can also achieve a
comparable predictive accuracy as single sampling is ideal.
BatchBALD (Kirsch, Van Amersfoort, and Gal 2019) selects a batch of multiple informative samples jointly using
a greedy algorithm that adds samples into the batch one by
one. In BatchBALD, joint mutual information representing
the joint informativeness of samples in the batch is calculated after every sample is added to the batch. This approach
suffers from two problems. First, as a greedy acquisition algorithm, it selects only one best candidate sample for labeling at each time step. Choosing only one candidate may
be suitable for the current time step. However, eventually,
another beam, instead of the initial candidate may become
the best choice for the whole optimization process. Second, jointly estimating the informativeness of all the combinations of the remaining pool set and existing samples
in the batch for every time step of batch construction can
be very computationally expensive. Adaptively escaping the
near duplicate samples in the unlabeled pool is desirable.
We introduce a diverse beam search algorithm for BALD
that selects alternative samples of a predetermined number
(beam width) at each time step of batch construction. Ap-

Active Learning is an essential method for label-efficient
deep learning. As a Bayesian active learning method,
Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD) successfully selects the most representative samples by maximizing
the mutual information between the model prediction and
model parameters. However, when applied to a batch acquisition mode, like batch construction with greedy search,
BALD suffers from poor performance, especially with noises
of near-duplicate data. To address this shortcoming, we propose a diverse beam search optimized batch active learning
method, which explores a graph for every batch construction
by expanding the highest scored samples of a predetermined
number. To avoid near duplicate beam branches (very similar beams generated from the same root and similar samples),
which is undesirable for lacking diverse representations in the
feature space, we design a self-adapted constraint within candidate beams. The proposed method is able to acquire data
that can better represent the distribution of the unlabeled pool,
and at the same time, be significantly different from existing
beams. We observe that the proposed method achieves higher
batch performance than the baseline methods on three benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Supervised learning performs well under the scenarios with
access to a training set of high quality and quantity. However, as training models have grown more and more complicated in recent years, enormous training data has become
required. However, obtaining a sufficient labeled set can be
extremely difficult since the annotation processes are usually
time-consuming and thus expensive, especially when expertise is required (Settles 2009). A promising way for solving
this problem is active learning by iteratively selecting a minimal set of samples for oracles to label and then retraining
the model (Ren et al. 2021). This ensures that with this minimized training set, the model can still maintain an acceptable prediction accuracy. Active learning has made a lot of
practical impact in various tasks, such as object detection (Li
et al. 2021), image classification (Wu et al. 2020), and natural language processing(NLP) tasks (Saisho et al. 2021).
According to the definition of active learning, the most informative samples should be selected for each training iterCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6084

