The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FedABC: Targeting Fair Competition in Personalized Federated Learning
Dui Wang1,2,3 * , Li Shen 3 , Yong Luo1,2 , Han Hu 4 , Kehua Su1† , Yonggang Wen5 , Dacheng Tao 3
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China,
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China,
3
JD Explore Academy, China,
4
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China,
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
{wangdui, luoyong, skh}@whu.edu.cn, mathshenli@gmail.com, hhu@bit.edu.cn, ygwen@ntu.edu.sg, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Federated learning aims to collaboratively train models without accessing their client’s local private data. The data may
be Non-IID for different clients and thus resulting in poor
performance. Recently, personalized federated learning (PFL)
has achieved great success in handling Non-IID data by enforcing regularization in local optimization or improving the
model aggregation scheme on the server. However, most of
the PFL approaches do not take into account the unfair competition issue caused by the imbalanced data distribution and
lack of positive samples for some classes in each client. To
address this issue, we propose a novel and generic PFL framework termed Federated Averaging via Binary Classification,
dubbed FedABC. In particular, we adopt the “one-vs-all” training strategy in each client to alleviate the unfair competition
between classes by constructing a personalized binary classification problem for each class. This may aggravate the class
imbalance challenge and thus a novel personalized binary classification loss that incorporates both the under-sampling and
hard sample mining strategies is designed. Extensive experiments are conducted on two popular datasets under different
settings, and the results demonstrate that our FedABC can
significantly outperform the existing counterparts.

Number

Number

Abstract

Label ID

Label ID
(b)

Number

Number

(a)

Label ID
(c)

Label ID
(d)

Figure 1: An illustration of different situations of data distributions in FL: (a) ideal i.i.d; (b) long-tail; (c) and (d) lack of
positive samples for some classes.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging machine learning
paradigm that trains an algorithm across multiple decentralized clients (such as edge devices) or servers without exchanging local data samples (McMahan et al. 2017). In this big data
era, large-scale data are becoming increasingly popular, but
also suffer the risk of data leakage. FL aims at addressing this
issue by letting the clients update models using private data
and the server periodically aggregate these models for multiple communication rounds. Such decentralized learning has
shown its great potential to facilitate real-world applications,
including healthcare (Xu et al. 2021), user verification (Hosseini et al. 2021) and the Internet of Things (IoT) (Zheng
et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2022a).
* This work was done when Dui Wang was a research intern at

JD Explore Academy.
†
Corrsponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10095

A key challenge in federated learning is the training
given non-independent and identically distributed (non-i.i.d.)
data (Hsieh et al. 2020). Due to the varied data distributions among different clients, the single global model (GM)
obtained by simple averaging is hard to cater for all heterogeneous clients. Besides, clients update the global model on
their local dataset, making local model misaligned and leading to weight divergence (Zhao et al. 2018). These issues have
been found to result in unstable and slow convergence (Li
et al. 2020) and even extremely poor performance (Li et al.
2021a).
To deal with heterogeneity in FL, numerous solutions have
been proposed, such as the ones that constrain the direction of
local model update to align the local and global optimization
objectives (Li et al. 2020; Karimireddy et al. 2020; Acar et al.
2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022). Personalized federated learning (PFL) (Smith et al. 2017; Huang et al. 2022b;
Dai et al. 2022) is a promising solution to addresses this
challenge by jointly learning multiple personalized models
(PMs), one for each client. For instance, references (Collins
et al. 2021; Liang et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021) exploit flexible

