The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

COCA: COllaborative CAusal Regularization for Audio-Visual Question
Answering
Mingrui Lao1 , Nan Pu1 * , Yu Liu2 , Kai He1 , Erwin M. Bakker1 , Michael S. Lew1
1

2

LIACS Media Lab, Leiden University
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
{m.lao, n.pu, k.he, e.m.bakker, m.s.k.lew}@liacs.leidenuniv.nl, liuyu8824@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

Multimodal Understanding?

V

Audio-Visual Question Answering (AVQA) is a sophisticated
QA task, which aims at answering textual questions over
given video-audio pairs with comprehensive multimodal reasoning. Through detailed causal-graph analyses and careful
inspections of their learning processes, we reveal that AVQA
models are not only prone to over-exploit prevalent language
bias, but also suffer from additional joint-modal biases caused
by the shortcut relations between textual-auditory/visual cooccurrences and dominated answers. In this paper, we propose a COllabrative CAusal (COCA) Regularization to remedy this more challenging issue of data biases. Specifically,
a novel Bias-centered Causal Regularization (BCR) is proposed to alleviate specific shortcut biases by intervening biasirrelevant causal effects, and further introspect the predictions
of AVQA models in counterfactual and factual scenarios.
Based on the fact that the dominated bias impairing model
robustness for different samples tends to be different, we introduce a Multi-shortcut Collaborative Debiasing (MCD) to
measure how each sample suffers from different biases, and
dynamically adjust their debiasing concentration to different shortcut correlations. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness as well as backbone-agnostic ability of our
COCA strategy, and it achieves state-of-the-art performance
on the large-scale MUSIC-AVQA dataset.

A

Accuracy of AV questions

Q

Where is the first sounding instrument?

A
V
Q
A

G

Left
(a)

Q->G:
60

What…instrument…

Piano

40

V&Q->G:
How many…+
A&Q->G:

Two

Is … from... +

Yes

20
0

AVST

-V

-A -(V+A) -Q

Modality-removing training

(b)

Superficial correlations

(c)

Figure 1: (a) AVQA requires a comprehensive multimodal
reasoning to answer the textual question over video-audio
information. (b) Exploratory experiments by removing one
or two modalities at one time for AVQA training. (c) Illustration of the examples from three types of shortcut biases.
a group of exploratory experiments based on the state-ofthe-art model (Li et al. 2022a). Concretely, we remove one
or two modalities in the training process on MUSIC-AVQA
dataset (Li et al. 2022a). Fig. 1(b) shows that there is no significant accuracy drop when deleting ether visual or audio
modality. It is also surprising that only exploiting question
can achieve a decent accuracy of 55% for open-ended questions. Undoubtedly, excluding textual information would remarkably impair the performance on audio-visual questions.
In this paper, by thoroughly analyzing the AVQA model
with a causal-effect retrospection (Yao et al. 2021) and carefully inspecting its learning process, we find that the biases hindering robustness are mainly caused by three shortcut correlations: 1) Q→G: directly reasoning from question
patterns and words to statistically frequent ground-truth answers G. 2) V&Q→G: over-exploiting the co-occurrence
of questions and some specific visual objects to deduce
related answers. 3) A&Q→G: only focusing on question
patterns accompanied with certain audio waves to predict corresponding answers. Some illustrated examples for
the aforementioned superficial correlations are in Fig. 1
(c). Compared with VQA or AQA tasks with uni-modal
bias (Agrawal et al. 2018), the debiasing strategies for

Introduction
AVQA is an emerging yet sophisticated QA task stemming from Visual-QA (Antol et al. 2015), Video-QA (Zhu
et al. 2017) and Audio-QA (Fayek and Johnson 2020). Beyond these conventional QA tasks that concern reasoning
from single- or cross-modality data, AVQA requires models to comprehensively understand multimodal data and perform spatio-temporal reasoning over audio-visual scenes (Li
et al. 2022a). The additional core challenge in AVQA is
that reasoning the answer necessarily needs to jointly understand the audio and the video as depicted in Fig. 1(a),
which is easily hindered by data biases. Although there are
many studies that focus on the data bias in VQA tasks,
there has no research work on addressing the bias issue
for AVQA. To reveal this problem and discover its potential over-dependences on different modalities, we conduct
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12995

