The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rich Event Modeling for Script Event Prediction
Long Bai1,2 , Saiping Guan1,2 , Zixuan Li1,2 , Jiafeng Guo1,2 , Xiaolong Jin1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{bailong18b,guansaiping,lizixuan,guojiafeng,jinxiaolong,cxq}@ict.ac.cn

participant

Abstract

verb

Script is a kind of structured knowledge extracted from texts,
which contains a sequence of events. Based on such knowledge, script event prediction aims to predict the subsequent
event. To do so, two aspects should be considered for events,
namely, event description (i.e., what the events should contain) and event encoding (i.e., how they should be encoded).
Most existing methods describe an event by a verb together
with only a few core arguments (i.e., subject, object, and indirect object), which are not precise. In addition, existing event
encoders are limited to a fixed number of arguments, which
are not flexible to deal with extra information. Thus, in this
paper, we propose the Rich Event Prediction (REP) framework for script event prediction. Fundamentally, it is based on
the proposed rich event description, which enriches the existing ones with three kinds of important information, namely,
the senses of verbs, extra semantic roles, and types of participants. REP contains an event extractor to extract such information from texts. Based on the extracted rich information,
a predictor then selects the most probable subsequent event.
The core component of the predictor is a transformer-based
event encoder to flexibly deal with an arbitrary number of arguments. Experimental results on the widely used Gigaword
Corpus show the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

Existing event description
fall prep_into
subj
Jack

sea

subj

push prep_onto
obj
Rose panel

Jack

subj
Jack

board

obj

panel

Jack lived

semantic role

Text
Jack and
Rose fell into
sea
Jack pushed
Rose onto a
wooden panel
Jack did not
board the
wooden panel

temporal order

Rich event description
arg1
Jack
(person)

fall.01
arg1 arg4
sea
Rose
(sea)
(person)

Jack
(person)

push.01 arg2
arg1
Rose
Panel
(person) (panel)

arg0
Jack
(person)

board.03
arg1
polarity
Panel
(panel)

arg0

Jack died

Figure 1: An example of events under existing event description and rich event description. The enriched information
is highlighted in red. “Jack lived” is more likely to happen
under existing event description, while “Jack died” is more
likely to happen under rich event description. From the texts,
“Jack died” is more likey to happen.
and event encoding. The former is about what the events
should contain, while the latter concerns how they should
be encoded into machine-computable representations.
With respect to event description, in the existing methods, each event is represented by a verb and three arguments.
Each argument contains a semantic role (i.e., subject, object, or indirect object) 1 and the corresponding participant (Granroth-Wilding and Clark 2016). Each participant
is usually represented by the most salient headword of coreferred participant mentions to induce the generalized semantic knowledge among mentions (Chambers and Jurafsky
2009). However, such event description faces three limitations. (1) The verb is ambiguous, which leads to a misunderstanding of the event. For example, in Figure 1, the verb
“fall” can be explained as “move downward” or “be defeated”. This event description is hard to distinguish different
meanings. (2) In some situations, the current three participants are insufficient to precisely describe an event. Existing methods are not able to relate a role type to multiple

Introduction
Script is a typical kind of knowledge to describe daily scenarios (Abelson and Schank 1977), which is usually in
the form of event sequence. Recently, a kind of scripts extracted from texts, called narrative event chain (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008), has attracted much attention, where
events sharing a common participant (called protagonist) are
temporally ordered into a sequence. Script Event Prediction
(SEP) task aims to predict the subsequent event based on the
historical narrative event chain. It is helpful for a number of
natural language processing tasks, such as coreference resolution (Bean and Riloff 2004), discourse understanding (Lee
and Goldwasser 2019), and story generation (Chaturvedi,
Peng, and Roth 2017).
In this task, the essential element, i.e., the event, consists of a verb and multiple arguments. Such a complex structure brings challenges to the SEP task. Specifically, the challenges come from two aspects, namely, event description

1
Precisely, they are grammar roles. In this paper, we use the
word “semantic role” for convenience.

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12553

