The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Black-Box Adversarial Attack on Time Series Classification
Daizong Ding1 , Mi Zhang1 , Fuli Feng2 , Yuanmin Huang1 , Erling Jiang1 , Min Yang1 *
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China
{17110240010@, mi zhang@, yuanminhuang21@m., eljiang21@m., m yang@}fudan.edu.cn
fulifeng93@gmail.com

Abstract

and Szegedy 2014). The adversary can construct adversarial
examples by adding small perturbations on a natural example, leading to wrong prediction and severe loss (e.g., approval on risky loan applications and evasion of network
flow anomaly detection) (Cartella et al. 2021).
Existing work on investigating the adversarial attack on
TSC models (Karim, Majumdar, and Darabi 2020) focuses
on the construction of confusing adversarial examples. For
instance, the work (Fawaz et al. 2019) proposes to create adversarial examples by the fast gradient sign method
(FGSM). Despite achieving a high attack success rate, existing researches mainly have two limitations. On one hand,
they typically adopt a white-box setting, which assumes the
leakage of model details, including the model structure and
parameters, to adversaries (Meng et al. 2019). This assumption is unrealistic in TSC applications where adversaries
can only access model prediction (Gupta et al. 2020). On
the other hand, the existing research largely emphasizes the
attack success rate but ignores attack stealthiness, leading
to easily identifiable adversarial examples (Belkhouja and
Doppa 2020). For instance, a simple auto-encoder can filter
out more than 95% adversarial examples (Wang et al. 2020).
In light of these limitations, we investigate a more rigorous black-box setting with two constraints on the construction of adversarial examples: (1) using only model predictions; and (2) evading the common attack detection. Despite
the success of black-box attacks in other applications (Dong
et al. 2019; Wei, Yan, and Li 2022), e.g., the substitute model
and score-based approaches in image classification (Guo
et al. 2019), they cannot satisfy the two constraints in TSC.
The reasons are twofold: (1) diversity and non-convexity of
TSC models, on one side, the target model can be a CNN,
RNN or self-attention model (Vaswani et al. 2017) with
largely different classification behaviors, making it difficult
to train a substitute model that mimics the behaviors of the
target one. On the other hand, through theoretical and empirical study, we find that the non-convexity of RNN and
self-attention model often makes the score-based black-box
gradient approximation inaccurate. (2) The low-dimensional
data manifold: sequential data typically lies in a low dimensional manifold (Rodrigues, Congedo, and Jutten 2018),
making it sensitive to minor feature changes. That is, a very
small perturbation will push the sequence far away from the
natural example manifold (see Fig. 1), resulting in the de-

With the increasing use of deep neural networks (DNN) in
time series classification (TSC), recent work reveals the threat
of adversarial attack, where the adversary can construct adversarial examples to cause model mistakes. However, existing research on the adversarial attack of TSC typically adopts
an unrealistic white-box setting with model details transparent to the adversary. In this work, we study a more rigorous black-box setting with attack detection applied, which
restricts gradient access and requires the adversarial example to be also stealthy. Theoretical analyses reveal that the
key lies in: estimating black-box gradient with diversity and
non-convexity of TSC models resolved, and restricting the
ℓ0 norm of the perturbation to construct adversarial samples.
Towards this end, we propose a new framework named BlackTreeS, which solves the hard optimization issue for adversarial example construction with two simple yet effective modules. In particular, we propose a tree search strategy to find
influential positions in a sequence, and independently estimate the black-box gradients for these positions. Extensive
experiments on three real-world TSC datasets and five DNN
based models validate the effectiveness of BlackTreeS, e.g.,
it improves the attack success rate from 19.3% to 27.3%, and
decreases the detection success rate from 90.9% to 6.8% for
LSTM on the UWave dataset.

1

Introduction

Time series classification has become one of the central
themes of modern data mining with the increase in temporal data availability. It aims to classify sequential data
into different categories (Yang and Wu 2006; Esling and
Agon 2012; Gupta et al. 2020), e.g., forecasting the direction of stock market movement (Zhan et al. 2018) or detecting whether an electronic health record is anomalous (Che
et al. 2017). DNNs such as convolutional neural networks
(CNN) (Cui, Chen, and Chen 2016), recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Smirnov and Nguifo 2018) and self-attention
network (Zerveas et al. 2021) shows superior performance
on TSC. This is because DNN can capture complex temporal
patterns with the aid of its deep non-linear structure (Gamboa 2017; Wang, Yan, and Oates 2017). However, DNN is
also vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens,
* Corresponding authors: Mi Zhang and Min Yang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7358

