The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Fair Incentive Scheme for Community Health Workers
Avinandan Bose1 , Tracey Li2 , Arunesh Sinha3 , Tien Mai4
1

University of Washington
2
D-Tree International
3
Rutgers University
4
Singapore Management University
avibose@cs.washington.edu, tli@d-tree.org, arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu, atmai@smu.edu.sg
Abstract

their work. The catchment areas vary in terms of population
size and demographic distribution.
As part of a broader study, via informal discussion and
feedback we gained an understanding of how the CHWs
perceive their current monetary payment, as well as other aspects of their general working conditions. The main observations related to monetary compensation, were that (1) monetary compensation plays a significant role in motivating
CHWs to complete their tasks, and (2) CHWs are aware that
they don’t always have the opportunity to earn as much as
some of their colleagues. This second point can be attributed
to geographic and temporal variation of population demographics which means that some CHWs sometimes have the
opportunity to enroll and visit more clients than other CHWs
and therefore have the opportunity to earn more. However,
consultation with CHWs and other relevant stakeholders indicates that the optimal situation, from the CHWs’ perspective, is for all CHWs to have equal opportunity to earn. We
interpret this requirement to mean that each CHW must have
the opportunity to earn roughly the same total payment over
a given T month period, if the CHW reacts to the incentive scheme almost rationally. We allow some bounded rational behavior as the ground situation is challenging and
perfect rationality is often not observed, especially in lowincome settings, for a number of reasons (Matúŝ and Martonĉik 2017). This mechanism design problem has unique
technical characteristics, as we describe next.
Our first technical contribution is a Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation for the problem where states track
the current number of enrolled clients nt . The CHW chooses
the number of clients to enroll (xe,t ) and number of visits to
complete (xs,t ) in time step t. We design an immediate reward scheme that pays fe (xe,t ) and fs (xs,t ) where fe , fs
are parameterized by θe , θs respectively. There is a need for
the mechanism to be simple so that it is understood by the
CHWs, hence we explore two classes of functions for fe , fs :
linear and piecewise linear. The CHWs respond to the reward scheme, but as observed from past performance, the
response is not always rational. Thus, assuming a bounded
rational (quantal responding (McFadden 1976)) myopic response, we formulate the whole problem as a T horizon
MDP, in which the designer chooses the immediate reward
and the CHWs choose a policy in response. However, the
fairness criteria to optimize is that the long term return Vθ

Community health workers (CHWs) play a crucial role in
the last mile delivery of essential health services to underserved populations in low-income countries. Many nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) provide training and
support to enable CHWs to deliver health services to their
communities, with no charge to the recipients of the services. This includes monetary compensation for the work that
CHWs perform, which is broken down into a series of welldefined tasks. In this work, we partner with a NGO D-Tree
International to design a fair monetary compensation scheme
for tasks performed by CHWs in the semi-autonomous region of Zanzibar in Tanzania, Africa. In consultation with
stakeholders, we interpret fairness as the equal opportunity
to earn, which means that each CHW has the opportunity to
earn roughly the same total payment over a given T month
period, if the CHW reacts to the incentive scheme almost rationally. We model this problem as a reward design problem
for a Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation for the
CHWs’ earning. There is a need for the mechanism to be
simple so that it is understood by the CHWs, thus, we explore linear and piecewise linear rewards in the CHWs’ measured units of work. We solve this design problem via a novel
policy-reward gradient result. Our experiments using two real
world parameters from the ground provide evidence of reasonable incentive output by our scheme.

1

Introduction

Community health workers (CHWs) play a crucial role in
the delivery of essential health services to under-served populations in low-income countries. Many non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) provide training and support to
CHWs, as well as monetary compensation for the work
they perform (Kok et al. 2015), in order that CHWs can
serve their local communities free of charge. In this work,
we partner with a NGO D-Tree International to design a
fair monetary compensation scheme for tasks performed by
2200 CHWs in Zanzibar in Tanzania, Africa serving about
37,000 pregnant women and 200,000 children. In particular, the tasks performed by CHWs in this work are to enroll clients (pregnant women and young children) and visit
enrolled clients at specified frequencies. Each CHW is assigned to a catchment area within which he or she conducts
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14127

