The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Personalized Dialogue Generation with Persona-Adaptive Attention
Qiushi Huang1,2 , Yu Zhang2 * , Tom Ko3 , Xubo Liu1 , Bo Wu4 , Wenwu Wang1 , H Tang1*
1
University of Surrey
Southern University of Science and Technology
3
ByteDance AI Lab
4
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{qiushi.huang,xubo.liu,w.wang,h.tang}@surrey.ac.uk,{yu.zhang.ust,tomkocse}@gmail.com, bo.wu@ibm.com
2

Hello what are
doing today?

Abstract
Persona-based dialogue systems aim to generate consistent
responses based on historical context and predefined persona.
Unlike conventional dialogue generation, the persona-based
dialogue needs to consider both dialogue context and persona, posing a challenge for coherent training. Specifically,
this requires a delicate weight balance between context and
persona. To achieve that, in this paper, we propose an effective framework with Persona-Adaptive Attention (PAA),
which adaptively integrates the weights from the persona and
context information via our designed attention. In addition,
a dynamic masking mechanism is applied to the PAA to not
only drop redundant information in context and persona but
also serve as a regularization mechanism to avoid overfitting. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed PAA framework compared to the strong baselines
in both automatic and human evaluation. Moreover, the proposed PAA approach can perform equivalently well in a lowresource regime compared to models trained in a full-data setting, which achieve a similar result with only 20% to 30% of
data compared to the larger models trained in the full-data
setting. To fully exploit the effectiveness of our design, we
designed several variants for handling the weighted information in different ways, showing the necessity and sufficiency
of our weighting and masking designs.

I am good, I just got
off work and tired, I
have two jobs.
I prefer Mojitos or
Watermelon.
Those are really
yummy too, but not
my favorite .

System's Persona
I'm a stunt double as my second
job.
I only eat Kosher.
I was raised in a single parent
household.
My favorite drink is Cuba Libre.

Figure 1: An example from the ConvAI2 dataset.
workers to chat with each other based on provided persona profiles, building such quality datasets is expensive and
time-consuming, which in turn restricts the size of those
datasets. For example, the ConvAI2 dataset (Dinan et al.
2019) only contains 131k utterances with less than 5k unique
personas, much smaller than open-domain dialogue datasets
such as Pushshift.io Reddit (Baumgartner et al. 2020) with
roughly 1.2B utterances.
Another challenge is to choose the weights between the
persona and context. Unlike open-domain dialogue models
that generate responses by considering the dialogue context
alone, persona-based dialogue generation systems need to
additionally take personalized background descriptions into
account along with the dialogue context. The weights between context and persona should be dynamically adjusted
by the dialogue system under different situations. For example, given a user utterance “How are you?”, the contextpreferred answer is likely to be “I am fine.”, which is safe but
bland. Meanwhile, a persona-preferred answer would fuse
persona information to the response, such as “I am spending
time with my four sisters”. Under such circumstances, the
persona-preferred answer would be more informative and
meaningful. On the other hand, sometimes, the system needs
to focus on context to make the conversation interactive and
engaging. For instance, if the user says: “I have two greyhounds. Their names are Tom and Jerry.”, then the system
would focus on the context and answer: “That’s cute! How
old are they?”, which encourages the user to chat with the
dialogue system. From the above two scenarios, it can be

Introduction
Persona is essential for building a trustful and confident conversational system. Recently, there has been an increasing
interest in incorporating explicit persona into dialogue generation models (Wolf et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020; Song et al.
2021) since the release of the publicly available datasets
(Zhang et al. 2018; Dinan et al. 2019). Typically, persona information consists of several sentences describing the facts
or background of the interlocutor. An example taken from
the ConvAI2 dataset (Dinan et al. 2019) is shown in Figure 1. In this example, the system should consider the information in the persona sentences and generate consistent
responses based on both persona and dialogue history.
One challenge in persona-based dialogue generation is
that the related datasets are usually small. As collecting dialogues in persona-based dialogue datasets requires crowd* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12916

