The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Dynamic HDR Imaging with Fusion Transformer
Rufeng Chen1 , Bolun Zheng1 * , Hua Zhang1* , Quan Chen1 ,
Chenggang Yan1 , Gregory Slabaugh2 , Shanxin Yuan2
1

Hangzhou Dianzi University, Xiasha No.2 Street, Hangzhou, 310018, Zhejiang, China
2
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
{chenrufeng, blzheng, zhangh, chenquan, cgyan}@{hdu.edu.cn}
{g.slabaugh, shanxin.yuan}@{qmul.ac.uk}
Our Result

EV=4.0

Abstract
Reconstructing a High Dynamic Range (HDR) image from
several Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images with different
exposures is a challenging task, especially in the presence
of camera and object motion. Though existing models using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made great
progress, challenges still exist, e.g., ghosting artifacts. Transformers, originating from the field of natural language processing, have shown success in computer vision tasks, due to
their ability to address a large receptive field even within a
single layer. In this paper, we propose a transformer model
for HDR imaging. Our pipeline includes three steps: alignment, fusion, and reconstruction. The key component is the
HDR transformer module. Through experiments and ablation
studies, we demonstrate that our model outperforms the stateof-the-art by large margins on several popular public datasets.

EV=2.0

EV=0.0

Input LDRs

Sen

Kalantari

GT

DeepHDR

Patches

GT and Our Result

AHDR

HDRRNN

HDR-GAN

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Three LDR images with different exposures are
located on the left side. The image in the middle is our result
and ground-truth (GT). EV denotes exposure value, which is
determined by the exposure time, ISO and f-number.

Introduction
Dynamic range is used to define the ability of the camera
to capture a range of brightness, usually between the lowest and highest values of the same image. Scenes with a
large differences in lighting may pose a challenge to capture.
If the dynamic range is not large enough and the illumination is too bright, an overexposed image will be produced;
and if the scene is too dark, the image will appear underexposed. Both over- and under-exposure will lead to loss of
details in the image. While most sensors can record 8-bit,
10-bit, or slightly higher depth images, those that can record
16-bit depth images are too expensive to be widely used in
everyday devices, and standard displays only support 8 bit
prompting the need for HDR imaging (Meylan, Daly, and
Süsstrunk 2006; Dong et al. 2021).
Initial work performing high dynamic range restoration
using a single LDR image (An, Ha, and Cho 2012; Akyüz
et al. 2007; Banterle et al. 2007; Huo et al. 2014; Rempel
et al. 2007; Eilertsen et al. 2017; Endo, Kanamori, and Mitani 2017; Lee, An, and Kang 2018; Zheng et al. 2022b)
showed the dynamic range of the image can be extended,
but the under- or over-exposed regions are unrecoverable.
Therefore researchers began to explore using multiple LDR
images at different exposures (e.g. short, medium, long).

The task is to synthesize a single HDR image that preserves
the details of the scene using multiple LDR images (Debevec and Malik 2008; Jacobs, Loscos, and Ward 2008;
Reinhard et al. 2010; Sen et al. 2012; Dai et al. 2021; Li
et al. 2022).
However, capturing multiple low dynamic range images
at different exposures poses some challenges. This typically
requires capturing multiple exposures at different times using a single sensor. However motion due to the camera or objects in the scene will result in misalignment between LDR
images. If unaddressed, this misalignment will result in obvious ghosting artifacts (Bogoni 2000; Li et al. 2020; Ma
et al. 2017; Zheng et al. 2019) in the merged HDR image.
To solve this problem, many recurrent networks and
lightweight networks have been proposed, such as AHDRNet, HDRRNN, Kalantari, NHDRRNet (Yan et al. 2019;
Prabhakar, Agrawal, and Babu 2021; Kalantari, Ramamoorthi et al. 2017; Yan et al. 2020). All of these models aim
to build higher-performing architecture, and follow a similar design of LDR CNN-based alignment and fusion to reconstruct the HDR image. At present, the proposed methods
are aimed at the alignment between images, the reconstruction of HDR images, and the use of various model structures
of recurrent neural networks through attention orientation,

* Corresponding author: Bolun Zheng and Hua Zhang.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

340

