The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Losses over Labels: Weakly Supervised Learning via Direct Loss Construction
Dylan Sam1 , J. Zico Kolter1,2
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
dylansam@andrew.cmu.edu, zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

matic weak supervision (Zhang et al. 2022a), which we will
refer to as weak supervision throughout this paper.
In the setting of weak supervision, we assume the presence of weak labelers that are commonly hand-engineered
heuristics (we use the terms weak labeler and heuristic interchangeably, although weak labelers are more general and
can have more varied structures). As an example, consider a
sentiment classification task for restaurant reviews; a heuristic might associate the word “delicious” with a positive label, although this is clearly an imperfect label. Most recent advancements in weak supervision propose approaches
that aggregate the outputs of multiple such heuristics to
produce pseudolabels, typically through a graphical model
(Ratner et al. 2017). These pseudolabels are used in combination with unlabeled data to optimize a downstream model,
commonly referred to as an end model. This line of work
has demonstrated its widespread applicability and efficiency
(Bach et al. 2019) to learn from noisy information.
In this paper, we question this fundamental approach to
weak supervision: specifically, why is there any need to produce pseudolabels at all? This standard approach distills the
heuristics, which are rich sources of information, entirely
into a single pseudolabel, to fit into a standard supervised
learning pipeline. Instead, we propose to directly transform
heuristics into loss functions and train a network to minimize a combination of these loss functions (Figure 1). We
refer to our method as Losses over Labels (LoL), as we produce a combination of loss functions rather than intermediate pseudolabels. The simplest form of these losses is a
smoothed variant of the number of times our model’s prediction differs from the heuristic’s prediction; this is similar to a
form of “soft” pseudolabels. Building on this, our losses incorporate additional information from the heuristics, such as
which features are used in their decisions. We add a penalty
term to each loss, penalizing a model when its gradients do
not match the heuristics’ gradients on these important features. Incorporating this gradient information improves feature selection during optimization, which has not been previously considered in weak supervision and which indeed
cannot be naturally performed with pseudolabels alone. Intuitively, this gradient information constrains our hypothesis
space, removing lots of incorrect hypotheses that do not use
correct features. Since our method uses the same heuristics
as other weakly supervised algorithms, it does not require

Owing to the prohibitive costs of generating large amounts
of labeled data, programmatic weak supervision is a growing paradigm within machine learning. In this setting, users
design heuristics that provide noisy labels for subsets of the
data. These weak labels are combined (typically via a graphical model) to form pseudolabels, which are then used to
train a downstream model. In this work, we question a foundational premise of the typical weakly supervised learning
pipeline: given that the heuristic provides all “label” information, why do we need to generate pseudolabels at all? Instead, we propose to directly transform the heuristics themselves into corresponding loss functions that penalize differences between our model and the heuristic. By constructing
losses directly from the heuristics, we can incorporate more
information than is used in the standard weakly supervised
pipeline, such as how the heuristics make their decisions,
which explicitly informs feature selection during training. We
call our method Losses over Labels (LoL) as it creates losses
directly from heuristics without going through the intermediate step of a label. We show that LoL improves upon existing weak supervision methods on several benchmark text and
image classification tasks and further demonstrate that incorporating gradient information leads to better performance on
almost every task.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning are enabled by the availability of large labeled datasets. However, expertly labeled
data can be very costly to obtain, causing a bottleneck in
many deep learning applications. Fortunately, in the absence of labeled data, we can leverage domain knowledge
or auxiliary information for a given task. Many subfields
of machine learning have tackled this problem, including
semi-supervised learning, weakly supervised learning, and
self-supervised learning. Although the specific methods employed by these approaches are quite distinct, many of
them operate under a common theme. These approaches often work by generating pseudolabels (Lee 2013; CascanteBonilla et al. 2020; Pham et al. 2021), which can be plugged
into a standard supervised learning pipeline to optimize a
model on large amounts of unlabeled data. This paper focuses on their particular use in the paradigm of programCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9695

