The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

3D-TOGO: Towards Text-Guided Cross-Category 3D Object Generation
Zutao Jiang1, 6 *, Guansong Lu 2 *, Xiaodan Liang 3, 4 ,
Jihua Zhu 1 †, Wei Zhang 2, Xiaojun Chang 5, Hang Xu 2 †
1

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Sun Yat-sen University
4
MBZUAI
5
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
6
PengCheng Laboratory
taozujiang@gmail.com, luguansong@huawei.com, xdliang328@gmail.com,
zhujh@xjtu.edu.cn, wz.zhang@huawei.com, xiaojun.chang@uts.edu.au, chromexbjxh@gmail.com
Abstract

of their wanted 3D object, and leverage such a model to
generate the corresponding 3D object, providing a flexible
path for visualizing what we imagined.

Text-guided 3D object generation aims to generate 3D objects described by user-defined captions, which paves a flexible way to visualize what we imagined. Although some works
have been devoted to solving this challenging task, these
works either utilize some explicit 3D representations (e.g.,
mesh), which lack texture and require post-processing for
rendering photo-realistic views; or require individual timeconsuming optimization for every single case. Here, we make
the first attempt to achieve generic text-guided cross-category
3D object generation via a new 3D-TOGO model, which integrates a text-to-views generation module and a views-to-3D
generation module. The text-to-views generation module is
designed to generate different views of the target 3D object
given an input caption. prior-guidance, caption-guidance
and view contrastive learning are proposed for achieving better view-consistency and caption similarity. Meanwhile, a
pixelNeRF model is adopted for the views-to-3D generation
module to obtain the implicit 3D neural representation from
the previously-generated views. Our 3D-TOGO model generates 3D objects in the form of the neural radiance field with
good texture and requires no time-cost optimization for every
single caption. Besides, 3D-TOGO can control the category,
color and shape of generated 3D objects with the input caption. Extensive experiments on the largest 3D object dataset
(i.e., ABO) are conducted to verify that 3D-TOGO can better generate high-quality 3D objects according to the input
captions across 98 different categories, in terms of PSNR,
SSIM, LPIPS and CLIP-score, compared with text-NeRF and
Dreamfields.

Along with the success of image generation models
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Vaswani et al. 2017; Ho, Jain,
and Abbeel 2020), plenty of works have been devoted for
text-to-image generation (Reed et al. 2016; Zhang et al.
2017, 2018a; Xu et al. 2018; Dong et al. 2017; Ramesh et al.
2021; Ding et al. 2021, 2022; Nichol et al. 2021; Ramesh
et al. 2022), which shows appealing text-guided generation
results. However, there are still few works for text-guided
3D object generation. Some prior works generate 3D shapes
from natural language descriptions in the form of meshes
(Michel et al. 2022), voxels (Chen et al. 2018), point clouds
(Zhou, Du, and Wu 2021), and implicit functions (Liu
et al. 2022). While they provide promising results, the
issue is that they require tedious post-processing steps,
e.g. unwrapping a UV map in Blender, due to the lack of
texture when used for multimedia applications. Recently,
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF (Mildenhall et al. 2020)) has
been successfully applied to the novel view synthesis task.
Compared with other 3D representations, neural radiance
fields can be sampled at high spatial resolutions and is easy
to optimize. Empowered with the visual-language alignment
capability of the pre-trained CLIP model, Dreamfields (Jain
et al. 2022) leverages a given input text to guide the training
of neural radiance fields. The shortcoming of Dreamfields
is that it requires individually optimizing a network for
each input text, which is time-consuming and computation
expensive. Built on the disentangled conditional NeRF
(Schwarz et al. 2020) and CLIP model, CLIP-NeRF (Wang
et al. 2022) designs two code mappers to edit the shape and
color of existing 3D objects with a text or image prompt.
However, it only allows editing objects in the same category.

Introduction
Automatic 3D object generation has significant application
values for many practical application scenarios, including
games, movies, virtual reality, etc. In this paper, we study
a challenging yet interesting and valuable task, called
text-guided 3D object generation. With a text-guided 3D
object generation model, one can give a textual description

In this paper, we make the first attempt to achieve the
generic text-guided cross-category 3D object generation
and propose our 3D-TOGO model, standing on the progress
of text-to-image generation models and Neural Radiance
Fields. Our 3D-TOGO model consists of two modules:
a) a view-consistent text-to-views generation module that

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1051

