The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

MCL: Multi-Granularity Contrastive Learning Framework for Chinese NER
Shan Zhao1 , ChengYu Wang1,2 * , Minghao Hu3 , Tianwei Yan2 , Meng Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, HeFei University of Technology, HeFei, China
2
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
Information Research Center of Military Science, PLA Academy of Military Science, Beijing, China
2022800040@hfut.edu.cn, {chengyu99a, huminghao16, augusyan57, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com

Abstract

a variant of LSTM. Soon, the lattice structure becomes a
paradigm of following-up works (Liu et al. 2019; Gui et al.
2019a,b; Li et al. 2020; Ma et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2021).
Most existing lattice-based studies focus on incorporating word information into the general encoder framework.
For example, Gui et al. (2019a) design a convolutional neural network (CNN) with a rethinking mechanism to encode
matched words at different window sizes. Liu et al.(2019)
and Ma et al.(2020) exploit word-character LSTM to encode
concatenation of character and word embeddings. Moreover,
Gui et al. (2019b) introduce a lexicon-based graph neural
network (GNN) that achieves Chinese NER as a node classification task. The whole-sentence semantics and word ambiguities can be effectively tackled. After that,Transformerbased models (Li et al. 2020) propagate lexicon information
by relative position encoding. DCSAN (Zhao et al. 2021) integrates separate features, character representation, and lexicon information by a shallow fusion layer (cross-attention)
for Chinese NER. Although these approaches have achieved
promising results, they solely integrate character representations and lexicon features into a character-based model by
different variants of encoders, and fail to fully exploit the
multi-granularity features (e.g., character feature and word
feature). Thus, their performance relies heavily on the quality of a well-designed encoder, and the further interaction
of cross-granularity and important word information from
the lexicon are not fully grasped. Therefore, our focus is on
how to make the initial lattice framework efficient enough to
leverage lexicon information at a multi-granularity level.
Inspired by the work about contrastive learning (He et al.
2020; Misra and Maaten 2020; Li et al. 2021b), we propose
a Multi-Granularity Contrastive Learning (MCL) method
to help the lattice framework learn efficiently. To achieve
this, we first design cross-granularity contrastive learning
(CCL) , which minimizes the distance of representations of
the character and corresponds to matched word, and maximize that of non-paired character and word. Then, we further construct bi-granularity contrastive learning (BCL) that
aims to emphasize word information through pulling positive samples (a subset of original embedding concatenation
of character-word pairs) closer and pushing apart negative
ones (individual character embeddings), as shown in Figure
2. The key insight of CCL is to close the representation gap
between different granularity to encourage character-word

Recently, researchers have applied the word-character lattice
framework to integrated word information, which has become
very popular for Chinese named entity recognition (NER).
However, prior approaches fuse word information by different variants of encoders such as Lattice LSTM or Flat-Lattice
Transformer, but are still not data-efficient indeed to fully
grasp the depth interaction of cross-granularity and important word information from the lexicon. In this paper, we
go beyond the typical lattice structure and propose a novel
Multi-Granularity Contrastive Learning framework (MCL),
that aims to optimize the inter-granularity distribution distance and emphasize the critical matched words in the lexicon. By carefully combining cross-granularity contrastive
learning and bi-granularity contrastive learning, the network
can explicitly leverage lexicon information on the initial lattice structure, and further provide more dense interactions of
across-granularity, thus significantly improving model performance. Experiments on four Chinese NER datasets show that
MCL obtains state-of-the-art results while considering model
efficiency. The source code of the proposed method is publicly available at https://github.com/zs50910/MCL

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) mainly involves determining entity boundaries and categories and aims to identify
important entities in the text. It plays an important role in
many downstream natural language processing (NLP) tasks,
such as relation extraction (Bunescu and Mooney 2005) and
knowledge base population (Zhang et al. 2017).
Due to the additional word segmentation process of Chinese (Duan and Zheng 2011), Chinese NER is more difficult compared to English NER. One intuitive way to perform Chinese NER is a pipeline task: word segmentation
and word sequence labeling (Yang et al. 2017). The major disadvantage of such a framework is error propagation:
word segmentation errors negatively impact the identification of named entities (Peng and Dredze 2015). With awareness of the existing word segmentation errors, Zhang et
al.(2018) firstly introduces a lattice structure to incorporate word boundary information for character sequences by
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14011

