The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neighbor Auto-Grouping Graph Neural Networks for Handover Parameter
Configuration in Cellular Network
Mehrtash Mehrabi1,2 , Walid Masoudimansour1 , Yingxue Zhang1 , Jie Chuai1 , Zhitang Chen1 ,
Mark Coates3 , Jianye Hao1, 4 , Yanhui Geng1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montreal, Canada
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
3
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
4
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{mehrtash.mehrabi, walid.masoudimansour, yingxue.zhang, chuaijie, chenzhitang2, haojianye, geng.yanhui}@huawei.com,
mark.coates@mcgill.ca
2

Abstract

The performance of a cellular network relies heavily on
its parameter configurations and it is becoming more crucial, as the number of mobile users continues to grow rapidly
(statista 2022). These parameters govern access control,
handover, and resource management (Dahlman, Parkvall,
and Skold 2013; Bhat et al. 2012). One of the parameters that
has a significant impact on the quality of service (QoS) in
such networks is the handover (Tekinay and Jabbari 1991).
Optimizing handover parameters is one of the most common approaches to guarantee minimum service delay or
interruption and improve coverage and throughput (Mu,
Barco, and Fortes 2014). However, with the massive increase
in both the size and complexity of cellular networks, parameter configuration is becoming complicated. The current
practice, which relies largely on experts’ prior knowledge,
is inadequate, requiring many domain experts and leading to
high maintenance costs.
One of the key challenges in the network parameter optimization problem is the complex spatial and temporal dependencies in the cellular network. Any employed algorithm
should be capable of tracking the non-stationary changes in
the environment, i.e., the fluctuations of user number, network load, etc. (Agiwal, Roy, and Saxena 2016). Also, due
to the diverse characteristics of cells across the network, the
best parameter configuration for one cell may not be optimal
for another and parameter configuration of one cell not only
affects its own performance, but also affects its neighbors’
(Dahlman, Parkvall, and Skold 2013). Therefore, there are
strong interactions between neighboring cells which become
extremely complicated in heterogeneous network. Consequently, developing an algorithm that can adapt to the temporal dynamics and cell diversity in real networks is essential for parameter configuration (Jiang et al. 2016).
The current cellular network deployments rely heavily on
human-designed rules and analytical models based on limited network states and parameters, which cannot fully capture the complex relationships and non-stationary changes
in network dynamics. These models may also be too simplified, leading to degraded performance, and unable to deal
with the diverse cells in the network, making them suboptimal (Imran, Zoha, and Abu-Dayya 2014).
Recently, data-driven approaches based on machine learn-

The mobile communication enabled by cellular networks is
the one of the main foundations of our modern society. The
configuration of network parameters is crucial for optimizing the performance of cellular networks and providing better user experience, but it’s becoming complicated with the
increasing size and complexity of the networks. The current
practice relies on experts’ prior knowledge, which is not adequate and requires a lot of maintenance costs. We propose
a learning-based framework for handover parameter configuration, which addresses the complicated dependencies between neighboring cells and optimizes the whole network.
We introduce a novel approach called auto-grouping graph
convolutional network (AG-GCN), which imitates how the
network responds to different network states and parameter values. Our framework uses a local multi-objective optimization strategy to balance the performance of each cell
and its neighbors during the parameter configuration stage. It
achieves better average network throughput compared to experts’ recommendations and alternative baselines and has the
potential to reduce costs arising from human expert intervention and maintenance.

Introduction
The rapid growth in the number of devices that need real
time, high quality connection to the internet (e.g., internet
of things (IoT) devices, health monitoring equipment, devices used for online education and remote working, autonomous vehicles, etc.) makes it essential to improve cellular network performance. Unsatisfactory user experience
and network interruption have negative impacts in our modern society. Thus, improving the cellular network has both
economic and social impact towards achieving United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs) (United
Nations 2015; World Economic Forum 2020). Moreover, it
can highly contribute to enhancing infrastructure, promoting
sustainable industrialization, fostering innovation, responsible consumption, enabling sustainable cities and communities, and promoting decent work and economic growth (Gohar and Nencioni 2021; Rao and Prasad 2018; Siriwardhana
et al. 2021).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14400

