The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning Interpretable Temporal Properties from Positive Examples Only
Rajarshi Roy1 , Jean-Raphaël Gaglione2 , Nasim Baharisangari3 ,
Daniel Neider4, 5∗ , Zhe Xu3 , Ufuk Topcu2
1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Kaiserslautern, Germany
2
University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA
3
Arizona State University, Arizona, USA
4
TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
5
Center for Trustworthy Data Science and Security, University Alliance Ruhr, Germany
Abstract

and intuitive semantics. The latter properties make them particularly suitable as interpretable models with many applications, e.g., as task knowledge for robotic agents (Kasenberg and Scheutz 2017; Memarian et al. 2020), as a formal
specification for verification (Lemieux, Park, and Beschastnikh 2015), as behavior classifier for unseen data (Shvo et al.
2021), and several others (Camacho and McIlraith 2019).
The area of learning DFAs and LTL formulas is wellstudied with a plethora of existing works (see related work).
Most of them tackle the typical binary classification problem (Gold 1978) of learning concise DFAs or LTL formulas
from a finite set of examples partitioned into a positive and
a negative set. However, negative examples are hard to obtain in my scenarios. In safety-critical areas, often observing
negative examples from systems (e.g., from medical devices
and self-driving cars) can be unrealistic (e.g., by injuring patients or hitting pedestrians). Further, often one only has access to a black-box implementation of the system and thus,
can extract only its possible (i.e., positive) executions.
In spite of being relevant, the problem of learning concise
DFAs and LTL formulas from positive examples, i.e., the
corresponding one class classification (OCC) problem, has
garnered little attention. The primary reason, we believe, is
that, like most OCC problems, this problem is an ill-posed
one. Specifically, a concise model that classifies all the positive examples correctly is the trivial model that classifies all
examples as positive. This corresponds to a single state DFA
or, in LTL, the formula true. These models, unfortunately,
convey no insights about the underlying system.
To ensure a well-defined problem, Avellaneda and Petrenko (2018), who study the OCC problem for DFAs, propose the use of the (accepted) language of a model (i.e., the
set of allowed executions) as a regularizer. Searching for a
model that has minimal language, however, results in one
that classifies only the given examples as positive. To avoid
this overfitting, they additionally impose an upper bound on
the size of the model. Thus, the OCC problem that they state
is the following: given a set of positive examples P and a
size bound n, learn a DFA that (a) classifies P correctly,
(b) has size at most n, and (c) is language minimal. For language comparison, the order chosen is set inclusion.
To solve this OCC problem, Avellaneda and Petrenko
(2018) then propose a counterexample-guided algorithm.

We consider the problem of explaining the temporal behavior
of black-box systems using human-interpretable models. Following recent research trends, we rely on the fundamental yet
interpretable models of deterministic finite automata (DFAs)
and linear temporal logic (LTLf ) formulas. In contrast to most
existing works for learning DFAs and LTLf formulas, we consider learning from only positive examples. Our motivation
is that negative examples are generally difficult to observe,
in particular, from black-box systems. To learn meaningful
models from positive examples only, we design algorithms
that rely on conciseness and language minimality of models
as regularizers. Our learning algorithms are based on two approaches: a symbolic and a counterexample-guided one. The
symbolic approach exploits an efficient encoding of language
minimality as a constraint satisfaction problem, whereas the
counterexample-guided one relies on generating suitable negative examples to guide the learning. Both approaches provide us with effective algorithms with minimality guarantees
on the learned models. To assess the effectiveness of our algorithms, we evaluate them on a few practical case studies.

1

Introduction

The recent surge of complex black-box systems in Artificial
Intelligence has increased the demand for designing simple
explanations of systems for human understanding. Moreover, in several areas such as robotics, healthcare, and transportation (Bundy et al. 2019; Gunning et al. 2019; Molnar
2022), inferring human-interpretable models has become the
primary focus to promote human trust in systems.
To enhance the interpretability of systems, we aim to explain their temporal behavior. For this purpose, models that
are typically employed include, among others, finite state
machines and temporal logics (Weiss, Goldberg, and Yahav 2018; Roy, Fisman, and Neider 2020). Our focus is
on two fundamental models: deterministic finite automata
(DFAs) (Rabin and Scott 1959); and formulas in the de facto
standard temporal logic: linear temporal logic (LTL) (Pnueli
1977). These models not only possess a host of desirable
theoretical properties, but also feature easy-to-grasp syntax
∗
Part of this work has been conducted when the author was at
the Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Germany
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6507

