The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Interpretability via Explicit
Word Interaction Graph Layer
Arshdeep Sekhon, Hanjie Chen, Aman Shrivastava, Zhe Wang, Yangfeng Ji, Yanjun Qi
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
as5cu@virginia.edu, hc9mx@virginia.edu, as3ek@virginia.edu, zw6sg@virginia.edu, yj3fs@virginia.edu, yanjun@virginia.edu

Abstract
Recent NLP literature has seen growing interest in improving model interpretability. Along this direction, we propose
a trainable neural network layer that learns a global interaction graph between words and then selects more informative
words using the learned word interactions. Our layer, we call
W I G RAPH, can plug into any neural network-based NLP text
classifiers right after its word embedding layer. Across multiple SOTA NLP models and various NLP datasets, we demonstrate that adding the W I G RAPH layer substantially improves
NLP models’ interpretability and enhances models’ prediction
performance at the same time.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
results in the field of natural language processing (NLP)
(Zhang, Zhao, and LeCun 2015; Miwa and Bansal 2016;
Wu et al. 2016; Wolf et al. 2020). Trustworthy real-world
deployment of NLP models requires models to be not only
accurate but also interpretable (Xie et al. 2020). Literature has
included a growing focus on providing posthoc explanations
or rationales for NLP models’ predictions (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Murdoch, Liu,
and Yu 2018; Singh, Murdoch, and Yu 2018; Chen, Zheng,
and Ji 2020). However, explaining DNNs using a posthoc
manner cannot improve a model’s intrinsic interpretability.
As shown in (Chen and Ji 2020), two NLP models may
have the same prediction behavior but different interpretation
ability. This concept of "intrinsic interpretability" motivates a
compelling research direction to improve the interpretability
of NLP models. A few recent studies used user-specified
priors as domain knowledge to guide model training (Camburu et al. 2018; Du et al. 2019; Chen and Ji 2019; Erion
et al. 2019; Molnar, Casalicchio, and Bischl 2019), hence
improving model interpretability. Such information priors,
however, may not be available in many tasks. Several other
studies proposed to develop inherently interpretable models (Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola 2018a; Rudin 2019), but
these require intensive engineering efforts. More recently,
Chen and Ji (2020) proposed to add a variational word mask,
VMASK, to improve the interpretability of NLP neural classifiers.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13528

The aforementioned literature on improving NLP models’ intrinsic interpretability have mostly focused on highlighting important words. Strategies like VMASK just select
important words unilaterally, without accounting for how
one word influences other words regarding interpretability.
Studies have shown that word interactions are critical in explaining how NLP models make decisions (Halford, Wilson,
and Phillips 2010). For instance, for a sentiment classification task, when without a context, it is hard to conclude if the
word ‘different’ by itself is vital for sentiment? However, if
we find ‘different’ highly relates to the word ‘refreshingly’, it
will likely contribute substantially to the model’s sentiment
prediction (see Table 1 1 ).
Along this direction, we propose a novel neural network
layer, we call W I G RAPH, to improve NLP models’ intrinsic interpretability. W I G RAPH is a plug-and-play layer and
uses a graph-oriented neural network design: (1) It includes
a stochastic edge discovery module that can discover significant interaction relations between words for a target prediction task; (2) It then uses a neural message passing module to
update word representations by using information from their
interacting words; and (3) It designs a variational information
bottleneck based loss objective to suppress irrelevant word interactions (regarding target predictions). We call such a loss:
VIB-WI loss. To improve a target text classifier’s intrinsic
interpretability, we propose to add the proposed W I G RAPH
layer right after the word embedding layer and fine-tune such
an augmented model using a combination of the original
objective and VIB-WI loss objective.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We design W I G RAPH to augment neural text classifiers
to improve these models’ intrinsic interpretability. W I G RAPH does not require external user priors or domain
knowledge. W I G RAPH can plug-and-play into any neural
NLP models’ architectures, right after the word embedding layer.
• We provide extensive empirical results showing that
adding W I G RAPH layer into SOTA neural text classifiers
results in better explanations (locally, globally as well as
regarding interactions) and better model predictions at the
1

These attribution interpretations were generated by LIME
(Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and use BERT-base model
on SST-2 dataset to explain two models’ predictions.

