The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Bi-directional Feature Reconstruction Network for Fine-Grained
Few-Shot Image Classiﬁcation
Jijie Wu1 , Dongliang Chang2 , Aneeshan Sain3 ,
Xiaoxu Li1 * , Zhanyu Ma2 , Jie Cao1 , Jun Guo2 , and Yi-Zhe Song3
1

School of Computer and Communications, Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou, China
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
{jijie, lixiaoxu, caoj}@lut.edu.cn, {changdongliang, mazhanyu, guojun}@bupt.edu.cn, {a.sain, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
2

Class 1

Abstract
The main challenge for ﬁne-grained few-shot image classiﬁcation is to learn feature representations with higher
inter-class and lower intra-class variations, with a mere few
labelled samples. Conventional few-shot learning methods
however cannot be naively adopted for this ﬁne-grained setting – a quick pilot study reveals that they in fact push for the
opposite (i.e., lower inter-class variations and higher intraclass variations). To alleviate this problem, prior works predominately use a support set to reconstruct the query image and then utilize metric learning to determine its category. Upon careful inspection, we further reveal that such
unidirectional reconstruction methods only help to increase
inter-class variations and are not effective in tackling intraclass variations. In this paper, we for the ﬁrst time introduce
a bi-reconstruction mechanism that can simultaneously accommodate for inter-class and intra-class variations. In addition to using the support set to reconstruct the query set
for increasing inter-class variations, we further use the query
set to reconstruct the support set for reducing intra-class
variations. This design effectively helps the model to explore more subtle and discriminative features which is key
for the ﬁne-grained problem in hand. Furthermore, we also
construct a self-reconstruction module to work alongside the
bi-directional module to make the features even more discriminative. Experimental results on three widely used ﬁnegrained image classiﬁcation datasets consistently show considerable improvements compared with other methods. Codes
are available at: https://github.com/PRIS-CV/Bi-FRN.

Class 2

Class 3

Class 4

Figure 1: Visualization of the localized regions returned
from Eigen-CAM (Muhammad and Yeasin 2020) based
on a ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017) model
(trained on CUB-200-211 dataset) optimized by the traditional method, the FRN (Wertheimer, Tang, and Hariharan
2021), and the proposed method. The higher energy region
denotes the more discriminative part in the image.

ﬁne-grained visual differences amongst class instances.
It is therefore not surprising that traditional few-shot
methods, when applied to the ﬁne-grained problem, can no
longer hold their promises. This is clearly seen in Figure 1,
where we apply ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017)
on the “birds” dataset (Wah et al. 2011) – the model tends
to encourage lower inter-class variations and higher intraclass variations, which is the very opposite of our goal of
ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation.
Attempts have been made on adapting traditional fewshot learning methods to the ﬁne-grained scenario. Early
attempts (Huang et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2020; Zhu, Liu,
and Jiang 2020) have however focused on devising complex architectural designs which resulted in marginal gains
over their vanilla counterparts. It was not until very recently
that reconstruction-based methods have gained popularity (Wertheimer, Tang, and Hariharan 2021; Doersch, Gupta,
and Zisserman 2020) and consequently achieved state-ofthe art performance. Through speciﬁcally engineering for
support-query feature alignment, they naturally encourage
ﬁne-grained transfer. Effects of this can be observed in Figure 1, where feature regions learned by FRN (Wertheimer,
Tang, and Hariharan 2021) tend to be more ﬁne-grained
when compared with ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel

Introduction
Few-shot ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation (Huang et al.
2021; Li et al. 2021a) has emerged very recently as an important means to tackle the data scarcity problem widely facing ﬁne-grained analysis (Wei et al. 2021). As per the conventional few-shot setting, it asks for effective model transfer given just a few support samples. The differences however lies in the unique characteristics brought by the ﬁnegrained nature of the problem – the model needs to focus
on learning subtle and discriminative features to discriminate not only on the category level (as per conventional fewshot), but importantly also on intra-class level differentiating
* indicates corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2821

