The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Simultaneous Machine Translation with Monolingual Data
Hexuan Deng1 * , Liang Ding2 , Xuebo Liu1† , Meishan Zhang1 , Dacheng Tao2 , Min Zhang1
1

Institute of Computing and Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
JD Explore Academy, JD.com Inc.
22s051030@stu.hit.edu.cn, dingliang1@jd.com, liuxuebo@hit.edu.cn,
zhangmeishan@hit.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com, zhangmin2021@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Although Seq-KD narrows the gap between full-sentence
NMT teachers and SiMT students, the performance gap is
still significant. Techniques like self-training (Zhang and
Zong 2016; Jiao et al. 2021) are known to effectively improve machine translation performance by using large-scale
monolingual data. However, to the best of our knowledge,
improving SiMT through semi-supervised learning has not
been well validated yet.
To this aim, we leverage the monolingual data to perform
Seq-KD and train the SiMT student model on the combination of distilled monolingual and bilingual data. Exploiting monolingual data for SiMT provides appealing benefits.
First, the monolingual data and bilingual data in machine
translation are generally complementary to each other (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2016a; Zhang and Zong 2016;
Zhou and Keung 2020; Ding et al. 2022). Accordingly, using
monolingual for SiMT transfers both the knowledge of the
bilingual data (implicitly encoded in the full-sentence NMT
teacher) and that of monolingual data, maintaining the merit
of Seq-KD to reduce the complexity of the bilingual data.
Secondly, the amount of available monolingual data is several orders of magnitude larger than that of bilingual data,
offering great potential to enjoy attractive expandability.
However, unlike NMT, it is difficult for SiMT to handle
long-distance reordering (Zhou and Keung 2020). Therefore, the pseudo-targets generated by the full-sentence NMT
teacher model are not always suitable for SiMT. Inspired
by strategies used in human simultaneous interpretation,
e.g., finer segments and monotonic alignments (He, BoydGraber, and Daumé III 2016), we propose novel strategies
for sampling monolingual data suitable for SiMT, considering both the chunk lengths and monotonicity. We validate
our strategy on several large-scale datasets of news domain
(En⇒Zh and En⇒Ja). Our contributions are as follows:
• We empirically demonstrate that using monolingual data
is beneficial to SiMT systems.
• Our monolingual data sampling strategy for SiMT significantly outperforms the random sampling and conventional NMT monolingual sampling strategies, especially
evaluating at low latency.
• Our strategy effectively alleviates the key issue of SiMT,
i.e., hallucination problem, and has high expandability,
e.g., enlarging the scale of monolingual data consistently
improves performance.

Simultaneous machine translation (SiMT) is usually done via
sequence-level knowledge distillation (Seq-KD) from a fullsentence neural machine translation (NMT) model. However,
there is still a significant performance gap between NMT
and SiMT. In this work, we propose to leverage monolingual data to improve SiMT, which trains a SiMT student
on the combination of bilingual data and external monolingual data distilled by Seq-KD. Preliminary experiments on
En⇒Zh and En⇒Ja news domain corpora demonstrate that
monolingual data can significantly improve translation quality (e.g., +3.15 BLEU on En⇒Zh). Inspired by the behavior of human simultaneous interpreters, we propose a novel
monolingual sampling strategy for SiMT, considering both
chunk length and monotonicity. Experimental results show
that our sampling strategy consistently outperforms the random sampling strategy (and other conventional typical NMT
monolingual sampling strategies) by avoiding the key problem of SiMT – hallucination, and has better scalability. We
achieve +0.72 BLEU improvements on average against random sampling on En⇒Zh and En⇒Ja. Data and codes can
be found at https://github.com/hexuandeng/Mono4SiMT.

Introduction
Simultaneous machine translation (SiMT) (Gu et al. 2017;
Ma et al. 2019; Arivazhagan et al. 2019; Zheng et al.
2020) has been proposed to generate real-time translation
by starting decoding before the source sentence ends. However, generation conditioned on the partial source sentence
prevents a model from properly capturing the whole semantics, especially for distant languages, e.g., English and
Japanese (He et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2021). In response
to this problem, motivated by the recent success of nonautoregressive translation, sequence-level knowledge distillation (Seq-KD, Kim and Rush 2016) becomes the preliminary step for training SiMT models, with a full-sentence
neural machine translation (NMT) model as the teacher (Ren
et al. 2020; Zhang, Feng, and Li 2021), which helps to generate monotonous knowledge by reducing data complexity (Zhou, Gu, and Neubig 2020).
* Work was done when Hexuan was interning at JD Explore

Academy.
†
Corresponding author: Xuebo Liu.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12728

