The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

COLA: Improving Conversational Recommender Systems by
Collaborative Augmentation
Dongding Lin* , Jian Wang* , Wenjie Li
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{dongding88.lin, jian-dylan.wang}@connect.polyu.hk, cswjli@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021), contrastive learning (Zhou
et al. 2022), and so forth. However, these studies still suffer
from several limitations. First, they mainly learn item representations based on individual conversations, ignoring the
attribute of item popularity embodied among many conversations (users). It causes the system not effective enough to
distinguish between popular items and others that may be
only favored by a small group of users. Second, they still
struggle to capture user preferences efficiently since the information in a single conversation that can reflect the user’s
interests in potential items is limited. To alleviate the above
drawbacks, we expect to learn item representations and model
user preferences collaboratively by considering their mutual
impact. However, it is non-trivial since user-item interaction
data is not directly available in CRS.
In this work, we propose a COLlaborative Augmentation
(COLA) method to improve CRS, inspired by collaborative
filtering (Schafer et al. 2007). Here, the item representations
are augmented with user-aware information, i.e., the popularity embodied among all conversations. Similarly, the user
representations are augmented with item-aware information
that may reveal the user’s potential interests. In particular, we
first construct an interactive user-item graph by extracting the
user-item pairs with liked or disliked relations involved in all
conversations from the training corpus. The graph is encoded
by an R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018), where each item
node aggregates liked and disliked information (i.e., item popularity) from different user nodes through message passing.
We adopt the encoded output to augment item representations with an add operation. In light of the fact that in CRS,
similar users converse with the system and provide similar
feedback about items and attributes, we use the current conversation to retrieve similar conversations (i.e., similar users)
from the training corpus using BM25 (Manning, Raghavan,
and Schütze 2008). Then, the contained items and related
attributes in the top-n conversations that reveal the user’s
potential interests are aggregated through a self-attention
mechanism. We employ the aggregated output to enhance the
user representations with gate control.
Based on user-item collaboratively-augmented representations, we make recommendations by matching the user with
candidate items and selecting the top-k items as the recommended set. In the end, we adopt a widely-used backbone
conversation generation model, following existing works (Liu

Conversational recommender systems (CRS) aim to employ
natural language conversations to suggest suitable products to
users. Understanding user preferences for prospective items
and learning efficient item representations are crucial for CRS.
Despite various attempts, earlier studies mostly learned item
representations based on individual conversations, ignoring
item popularity embodied among all others. Besides, they
still need support in efficiently capturing user preferences
since the information reflected in a single conversation is
limited. Inspired by collaborative filtering, we propose a collaborative augmentation (COLA) method to simultaneously
improve both item representation learning and user preference
modeling to address these issues. We construct an interactive
user-item graph from all conversations, which augments item
representations with user-aware information, i.e., item popularity. To improve user preference modeling, we retrieve similar
conversations from the training corpus, where the involved
items and attributes that reflect the user’s potential interests are
used to augment the user representation through gate control.
Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Our code and data are
available at https://github.com/DongdingLin/COLA.

Introduction
With the rapid development of conversational systems, it
is expected that recommender systems can employ natural
language conversations to provide high-quality recommendations, namely Conversational Recommender Systems (CRS)
(Christakopoulou, Radlinski, and Hofmann 2016; Li et al.
2018). Many researchers (Liao et al. 2019; Lei et al. 2020;
Gao et al. 2021; Jannach et al. 2021; Ren et al. 2021; Zhou
et al. 2022) have been attracted to explore CRS due to its
high impact on e-commerce.
In the area of CRS, tremendous studies (Zhang et al. 2019a;
Zhou et al. 2020a; Lu et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2021; Chen et al.
2019; Wang et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022) focus on how to
learn good item representations and capture user preferences
effectively expressed in natural language conversations. The
proposed approaches include reinforcement learning (Zhang
et al. 2019a; Deng et al. 2021), pretraining-finetuning (Chen
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4462

