The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improving Uncertainty Quantification of Deep Classifiers via Neighborhood
Conformal Prediction: Novel Algorithm and Theoretical Analysis
Subhankar Ghosh* , Taha Belkhouja* , Yan Yan, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{subhankar.ghosh, taha.belkhouja, yan.yan1, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

Abstract

reflect the difficulty of testing inputs: size of the prediction
set will be large for difficult inputs and small for easy inputs.
There are two key steps in CP. First, in the prediction step,
we use a trained model (e.g., deep neural network) to compute
conformity scores which measure similarity between calibration examples and a testing input. Second, in the calibration
step, we use the conformity scores on a set of calibration
examples to find a threshold to construct prediction set which
meets the coverage constraint (e.g., α=90%). The efficiency
of UQ from CP (Sadinle, Lei, and Wasserman 2019) is measured in terms of size of the prediction set (the smaller the
better). There is an inherent trade-off between coverage and
efficiency. For example, it is easy to achieve high coverage
with low efficiency (i.e., large prediction set) by including all
or most candidate labels in the prediction set. CP for classification is relatively under-studied. Recent work has proposed
conformity scores based on ordered probabilities (Romano,
Sesia, and Candes 2020; Angelopoulos et al. 2021) for UQ
based on CP for classification and do not come with theoretical guarantees about efficiency. The main research question
of this paper is: how can we improve CP to achieve provably higher efficiency by satisfying the marginal coverage
constraint for (pre-trained) deep classifiers?
To answer this question, this paper proposes a novel algorithm referred to as Neighborhood Conformal Prediction
(NCP) that is inspired by the framework of localized CP
(LCP) (Guan 2021). The key idea behind LCP is to assign
higher importance to calibration examples in the local neighborhood of a given testing input. This is in contrast to the
standard CP, which assigns equal importance to all calibration
examples. However, there is no theoretical analysis of LCP to
characterize the necessary conditions for reduced prediction
set size and no empirical evaluation on real-world classification tasks. The effectiveness of NCP critically depends
on the localizer and weighting function. The proposed NCP
algorithm specifies a concrete localizer and weighting function using the learned input representation from deep neural
network classifiers. For a given testing input, NCP identifies
k nearest neighbors and assigns them importance weights
proportional to their distance defined using the learned representation of deep classifier.
We theoretically analyze the expected threshold of NCP,
which is typically used to measure the efficiency of CP algorithms, i.e., a smaller expected threshold indicates smaller

Safe deployment of deep neural networks in high-stake realworld applications requires theoretically sound uncertainty
quantification. Conformal prediction (CP) is a principled
framework for uncertainty quantification of deep models in
the form of prediction set for classification tasks with a userspecified coverage (i.e., true class label is contained with high
probability). This paper proposes a novel algorithm referred
to as Neighborhood Conformal Prediction (NCP) to improve
the efficiency of uncertainty quantification from CP for deep
classifiers (i.e., reduce prediction set size). The key idea behind NCP is to use the learned representation of the neural
network to identify k nearest-neighbors calibration examples
for a given testing input and assign them importance weights
proportional to their distance to create adaptive prediction sets.
We theoretically show that if the learned data representation
of the neural network satisfies some mild conditions, NCP will
produce smaller prediction sets than traditional CP algorithms.
Our comprehensive experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and ImageNet datasets using diverse deep neural networks
strongly demonstrate that NCP leads to significant reduction
in prediction set size over prior CP methods.

Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have allowed us to build
models with high accuracy. However, to safely deploy these
deep models in high-stake applications (e.g, medical diagnosis) for critical decision-making, we need theoretically-sound
uncertainty quantification (UQ) to capture the deviation of
the prediction from the ground-truth output. The UQ could
take the form of a prediction set (a subset of candidate labels) for classification tasks. For example, in medical diagnosis, such prediction sets will allow a doctor to rule out
harmful diagnoses such as stomach cancer even if the most
likely diagnosis is a stomach ache. Conformal prediction
(CP) (Vovk, Gammerman, and Saunders 1999; Vovk, Gammerman, and Shafer 2005; Shafer and Vovk 2008) is a principled framework for UQ that provides formal guarantees for
a user-specified coverage: ground-truth output is contained
in the prediction set with a high probability α (e.g., 90%) for
classification. Additionally, UQ from CP is adaptive and will
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7722

