The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Opposite Online Learning via Sequentially Integrated Stochastic Gradient
Descent Estimators
Wenhai Cui1 * , Xiaoting Ji1 * , Linglong Kong3 , Xiaodong Yan124†
1

Zhongtai Securities Institute for Financial Studies, Shandong University
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta
3
Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Financial Risk
4
Shandong National Center for Applied Mathematics
{cuiwenhai, jixiaoting}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, lkong@ualberta.ca, yanxiaodong@sdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

ent of the objective function and recursively updates the parameter estimates. This is also tremendously appealing and
particularly useful in online update settings, such as streaming data, where storing the entire dataset in memory may
not even be feasible. The asymptotic properties of SGD estimators, such as consistency and asymptotic normality, have
been well established; see, for example, Ruppert (1988),
Polyak and Juditsky (1992). We can refer to various online
methods, including stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and
its variants (Chen et al. 2020; Zhu, Chen, and Wu 2021;
Liu, Yuan, and Shang 2022). In detail, Langford, Li, and
Zhang (2009) proposed a variant of the truncated SGD in
online settings. Except for SGD updates, other online learning methods is referred by aggregated estimating equation
(Lin and Xi 2011), cumulatively updating estimating equation (Schifano et al. 2016a), renewable estimator (Luo and
Song 2019), diffusion approximation approach (Fan et al.
2018). However, the above online algorithms are enlightened by statistical estimation, and there are rare methods that
argue hypothesis test.

The stochastic gradient descent algorithm, often depicted as
SGD, has been widely employed in various fields of artificial intelligence and is a prototype of online learning algorithms. In the article, we propose a novel and general framework of one-sided testing for streaming data based on SGD.
The proposed method constructs an online-updated test statistic sequentially by integrating the selected batch-specific estimators or its opposite, which is referred to as opposite online learning. Notably, the batch-specific online estimators are
chosen strategically according to the proposed sequential tactics designed by the two-armed bandit process. Theoretical
results prove the strategy’s advantage, ensuring that the test
statistic distribution is optimal under the null hypothesis. We
also supply the theoretical evidence of power enhancement
compared with classical test statistics. In application, the proposed method is appealing for statistical inference of twosided testing and it is scalable and adaptable for any model.
Finally, the superior finite-sample performance is evaluated
by simulation studies.

Introduction

Therefore, this work was motivated by the issue of statistical inference for streaming data, and we have explored that
online updates are closely related to the two-armed bandit
(TAB) process which is the prototype of a slot TAB machine (Bellman 1956) with two arms L(left) and R(right),
which behaves like obtaining the batch-specific online estimators sequentially. Specifically, at each step with a batch of
data set, we play arm L(left) to derive a batch-specific online
estimator or obtain its opposite form by using arm R(right),
and this procedure is referred to as the opposite online learning. At last, we integrate all batch-specific estimators based
on the formation of Chen, Feng, and Zhang (2022) because they have established the central limit theorem (CLT)
for the TAB model, which is the primary theoretical result for our considered statistical inference. Although Shi,
Song, Lu, and Li (2021) developed an inference procedure
for high-dimensional generalized linear models based on recursive online-score estimation, Deshpande, Javanmard, and
Mehrabi (2021) considered the high-dimensional linear regression and Han, Luo, Lin, and Huang (2021) proposed an
online statistical inference procedure in high-dimensional
linear models with streaming data, their established inference procedures are based on conventional theoretical re-

In recent years, advanced data collection technologies can
record streaming data set in clinical, financial, and sociological studies, which promotes the development of some
emerging online learning procedure to deal with sequential
batches. For the reason that the computer does not have
enough memory to store the entire data set, the conventional offline-based methods have been less attractive and
no longer applicable.
Online learning procedure, intensively argued in some
advanced machine learning methods, has been popularly
used to update the population parameter of interest. Among
online learning procedures, the stochastic gradient descent
(Robbins and Monro 1951) is a scalable algorithm for parameter estimation and has recently drawn a great deal of
attention. Unlike other classical methods involving the evaluation of an entire dataset for an objective function, the SGD
method uses one data point at a time to compute the gradi* These authors contributed equally.
†

Xiaodong Yan is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7270

