The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

EASAL: Entity-Aware Subsequence-Based Active Learning
for Named Entity Recognition
Yang Liu1,2 , Jinpeng Hu1,2† ,Zhihong Chen1,2 ,Xiang Wan1,3† , Tsung-Hui Chang1,2
1
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China
{yangliu5, jinpenghu, zhihongchen}@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
wanxiang@sribd.cn, changtsunghui@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Active learning is a critical technique for reducing labelling
load by selecting the most informative data. Most previous
works applied active learning on Named Entity Recognition
(token-level task) similar to the text classification (sentencelevel task). They failed to consider the heterogeneity of uncertainty within each sentence and required access to the entire
sentence for the annotator when labelling. To overcome the
mentioned limitations, in this paper, we allow the active learning algorithm to query subsequences within sentences and propose an Entity-Aware Subsequences-based Active Learning
(EASAL) that utilizes an effective Head-Tail pointer to query
one entity-aware subsequence for each sentence based on
BERT. For other tokens outside this subsequence, we randomly
select 30% of these tokens to be pseudo-labelled for training
together where the model directly predicts their pseudo-labels.
Experimental results on both news and biomedical datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. The
code is released at https://github.com/lylylylylyly/EASAL.

Figure 1: Three percentage values, including the percentage
of tokens in each probability segment to the total token number (Blue), the percentage of tokens with entity labels in each
probability segment to the total token number (Orange), the
percentage of tokens with entity labels in each probability
segment to the segment token number (Red).

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is a fundamental task for
text analysis, which aims to identify named entities (NEs),
such as person, location, organization, etc., in general text
or diseases, chemicals, genes, etc., in biomedical text and is
essential in many downstream natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. In recent years, there has been a maintained
enthusiasm in the NER task (Yoon et al. 2019; Cho and Lee
2019; Hakala and Pyysalo 2019; Lee et al. 2020; Kocaman
and Talby 2021; Wang et al. 2021; Hu et al. 2022a,b). Most
of these models require a large amount of annotated data to
achieve high performance, while constructing such datasets
is usually high-costing and time-consuming, which motivates
the idea of how to achieve higher model performance with
the least amount of data.
As a straightforward solution to the mentioned problem,
Active Learning (AL) is a critical technique to effectively select the most informative data for training the model by some
specific query functions, e.g., Least Confidence (Felder and
Brent 2009) (LC), or Maximum Normalized Log-Probability
(Siddhant and Lipton 2018) (MNLP). AL methods have been

demonstrated to be effective in classification problems in
Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing
(NLP) fields such as image classification or text classification.
Thanks to these successes, follow-up work applies AL to the
task of sequence labelling paradigm, e.g., NER, by treating
one sentence as one query object (Shen et al. 2017; Zhang,
Yu, and Zhang 2020; Radmard, Fathullah, and Lipani 2021;
Hazra et al. 2021; Naseem et al. 2021).
However, one big difference between the NER task and the
image classification or text classification task is that NER is
a token-level task, not a sentence-level task since the model
has to give each token a label in sentences. Budget wasting
may arise from the heterogeneity of uncertainty across each
sentence; a sentence can contain multiple subsequences (of
tokens), where the model is certain on some and uncertain
on others. In this case, if the model still queries the entire
sentence, it will not maximize the amount of information
that can be queried each time, which is also described in
Radmard, Fathullah, and Lipani (2021). In order to prove
that budget wasting does exist in full-sentence-based query
method, we take an intuitive analysis on Conll2003 (Sang and
De Meulder 2003) dataset. Specially, we first randomly select

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Corresponding author.

8897

