The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Online Random Feature Forests for Learning in Varying Feature Spaces
Christian Schreckenberger1,2* , Yi He3 , Stefan Lüdtke2 , Christian Bartelt2 , Heiner Stuckenschmidt1
1

Chair for Artificial Intelligence, University of Mannheim, Germany
Institute for Enterprise Systems, University of Mannheim, Germany
3
Department of Computer Science, Old Dominion University, USA
{christian.schreckenberger, stefan.luedtke, christian.bartelt, heiner.stuckenschmidt}@uni-mannheim.de, yihe@cs.odu.edu
2

Abstract

sensing effort, their devices (e.g., cellphones, sensor kits)
may sense the ambience with upgraded or totally new sensors, thereby generating new features; on the other hand,
any user can leave the sensing network (or some devices
fail to commit data due to networking issues) over different time spans, making old features become unobservable.
Data streams generated from such scenarios are more likely
to be described by a varying feature space (VFS), where
new features emerge and old features vanish flexibly. Learning with VFS data streams has drawn extensive attention
recently (Zhang et al. 2016; Hou, Zhang, and Zhou 2017;
Beyazit, Alagurajah, and Wu 2019; He et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020) because of its wide application prospects.
Unfortunately, most existing studies restrict their interests, for the sake of analytical simplicity, in the family of
linear classifiers, which can suffer from two limitations.
First, linear classifiers possess very limited learning capacity and thus fail to generalize well on VFS data streams
with complex and non-linear classification boundaries. Second, to restrict the dimension of feature space that incrementally grows with newly emerging features, several studies proposed to learn linear classifiers on an extracted latent
space (Hou, Zhang, and Zhou 2021; He et al. 2021a; Lian
et al. 2022), which sacrifices model interpretability, a critical property for sensitive domains such as finance, medicare,
and security. Alas, no effort has been undertaken to build interpretable and highly-capable online VFS learners.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel online learner tailored to VFS data streams based on tree ensembles, termed
Online Random Feature Forests for Feature space Variabilities (ORF3 V). Specifically, each feature in ORF3 V is independently represented by a random feature forest, an ensemble of shallow decision trees (i.e., decision stumps), where
each tree keeps track of the statistics and discriminant power
of a feature in an online fashion. To restrict the model size
with respect to VFS, pruning is conducted at both forest and
tree levels. In particular, the Hoeffding bound (Hoeffding
1994) is leveraged to determine when to drop the learned
forest of an unobserved feature with its statistics turning insufficient. A randomized algorithm is used in each forest to
dynamically drop the oldest tree which may perceive outdated patterns from the instances seen before. Predictions
are made in a hierarchical manner, where each instance is
predicted as a weighted combination of its multiple fea-

We propose a new online learning algorithm tailored to data
streams described by varying feature spaces (VFS), where
new features can emerge constantly, and old features may
stop to be observed over various time spans. Our proposed algorithm, named Online Random Feature Forests for Feature
space Variabilities (ORF3 V), provides a strategy to respect
such feature dynamics by generating, updating, pruning, as
well as online re-weighing an ensemble of what we call feature forests, which are generated and updated based on a compressed and storage efficient representation for each observed
feature. We benchmark our algorithm on 12 datasets, including one novel real-world dataset of government COVID19 responses collected through a crowd-sensing program in
Spain. The empirical results substantiate the viability and effectiveness of our ORF3 V algorithm and its superior accuracy
performance over the state-of-the-art rival models.

Introduction
Data streams can nowadays be generated from real applications in high velocity, thanks to advances in and the ubiquity of sensing techniques (Gama and Gaber 2007; Nittel
2015; Shi and Abdel-Aty 2015; Pardo, Zamora-Martı́nez,
and Botella-Rocamora 2015). These data streams provide a
real-time description of our communities, cities, and natural and societal environments that constantly evolve. Online
Learning (OL) that enables to train decision-making models
on-the-fly in accordance with the evolving patterns of data,
thus leads to many powerful algorithms for streaming data
analytics (Aggarwal 2007; Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2011; Yu,
Neely, and Wei 2017; Leite, Costa, and Gomide 2013).
The initial focus of OL algorithms was dealing with an
incremental sample space, where the instances of training
data emerge one after another and are processed in a single
pass. All data instances are posited to reside in a fixed feature space. However, this assumption can be too restrictive
in practice. For example, consider a crowd-sensing scenario,
where mobile users commit their data collectively to train
an OL model that detects air pollution in local areas (Meng
et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2017). Fixing the set of features to
be used for the learning model prior is next to impossible
for two reasons. On the one hand, when new users join the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4587

