The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Denoising Multi-Similarity Formulation: A Self-Paced Curriculum-Driven
Approach for Robust Metric Learning
Chenkang Zhang1 , Lei Luo2 , Bin Gu 1,3 *
1
2

School of Computer and Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, P.R.China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, P.R.China
3
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
20201221058@nuist.edu.cn, luoleipitt@gmail.com, jsgubin@gmail.com
Abstract

2018a) and zero-shot learning (Zhang and Saligrama 2016;
Yelamarthi et al. 2018; Bucher, Herbin, and Jurie 2016).
The superior performance of machine learning greatly depends on a large number of labeled data sets (Shi et al.
2021), and the performance of DML is no exception. However, manually generating clean data set would involve domain experts evaluating the quality of collected data and thus
is very expensive and time-consuming (Frénay and Verleysen 2013). To address this issue, some researchers utilize
the online key search engine method (Yu et al. 2018b) and
the crowdsourcing method (Li et al. 2017) to gain required
data sets at a low cost, but it is possible to introduce noisy
samples that represent mislabeled ones (Wu et al. 2021; Yao
et al. 2021; Zhai et al. 2020). As far as we know, most existing DML approaches are sensitive to noisy samples since
they directly utilize sample labels to learn the similarity information between samples.
Constructing robust DML models against noisy samples
is a challenging task, and some researchers have paid attention to this problem. Specifically, Wang et al. proposed a
novel objective using the ℓ1 -norm distance (Wang, Nie, and
Huang 2014), and Al-Obaidi et al. utilized the rescaled hinge
loss, which was a general form of the common hinge loss,
to formulate the DML problem (Al-Obaidi, Zabihzadeh, and
Hajiabadi 2020). Moreover, Kim et al. proposed the ProxyAnchor loss that was robust against noisy labels and outliers because of the use of proxies (Kim et al. 2020). Different from the above technical routes, Yuan et al. proposed
a robust distance metric based on the Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR) (Yuan et al. 2019).
Different from mislabeled noisy samples, hard samples
are correctly labeled ones that are difficult to distinguish by
the model (Nguyen et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2021). In the image data set, hard samples can be anything from cats that
look like dogs to images with slightly blurred resolution. Evidently, noisy samples and hard samples have different roles.
Noisy samples are harmful because they would mislead the
training direction. However, hard samples could force the
model to learn more representative features, and thus properly training these hard samples could improve the model
generalization ability (Zhu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2020).
Although noisy samples and hard samples are different, we
would build the connection between them in the perspective
of Self-Paced Learning (SPL) (Kumar, Packer, and Koller

Deep Metric Learning (DML) is a group of techniques that
aim to measure the similarity between objects through the
neural network. Although the number of DML methods has
rapidly increased in recent years, most previous studies cannot effectively handle noisy data, which commonly exists in
practical applications and often leads to serious performance
deterioration. To overcome this limitation, in this paper, we
build a connection between noisy samples and hard samples in the framework of self-paced learning, and propose
a Balanced Self-Paced Metric Learning (BSPML) algorithm
with a denoising multi-similarity formulation, where noisy
samples are treated as extremely hard samples and adaptively
excluded from the model training by sample weighting. Especially, due to the pairwise relationship and a new balance
regularization term, the sub-problem w.r.t. sample weights
is a nonconvex quadratic function. To efficiently solve this
nonconvex quadratic problem, we propose a doubly stochastic projection coordinate gradient algorithm. Importantly, we
theoretically prove the convergence not only for the doubly
stochastic projection coordinate gradient algorithm, but also
for our BSPML algorithm. Experimental results on several
standard data sets demonstrate that our BSPML algorithm has
better generalization ability and robustness than the state-ofthe-art robust DML approaches.

Introduction
DML aims to learn an embedding space in which similar
samples are pulled closer while dissimilar samples are encouraged to stay away from each other (Xing et al. 2002;
Wang, Peng, and Lin 2021; Wang et al. 2022). Compared
with traditional metric learning methods, which may not
capture the nonlinear nature of data, DML utilizes the neural network to obtain representative and discriminative feature embeddings. Thus, DML has attracted increasing attention and been applied to various tasks, including visual
tracking (Leal-Taixé, Canton-Ferrer, and Schindler 2016;
Tao, Gavves, and Smeulders 2016), face recognition (Wen
et al. 2016), image retrieval (Wohlhart and Lepetit 2015; He
et al. 2018; Grabner, Roth, and Lepetit 2018), person reidentification (Hermans, Beyer, and Leibe 2017; Yu et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11183

