The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Embeddings of Logical Variables
for Query Answering over Incomplete Knowledge Graphs
Dingmin Wang1 * , Yeyuan Chen2∗ , Bernardo Cuenca Grau1∗
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
The School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
dingmin.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk, yychen9961@gmail.com, bernardo.cuenca.grau@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

In recent years, however, there has been growing interest in going beyond the prediction of simple logical facts
and tackle the more general problem of answering complex
FOL queries over incomplete KGs. Roughly speaking, given
a query Q(x) with answer variables x and a KG K, the goal
is to compute the answers to Q(x) with respect to the (unknown) completion K∗ of K. One possible solution to this
problem is to exploit the availability of a neural link predictor to first compute the complete KG K∗ and then evaluate
Q(x) directly over K∗ using standard query answering technology in data management. This solution, however, can be
problematic in practice as it may require an unmanageable
number of link prediction tests and may involve the materialisation of a large number of facts in the KG.
As a result, research has focused on techniques for answering queries without the need of completing the graph
first. Query embedding methods, such as box embeddings
(Ren, Hu, and Leskovec 2020), beta embeddings (Ren and
Leskovec 2020), and cone embeddings (Zhang et al. 2021),
compute vector embeddings for the queries and then treat
query answering as a nearest-neighbor search problem in the
latent space. Training such models is, however, problematic,
as they can only deal with query patterns seen during training, and hence training typically requires the availability of
answers to a wide variety of queries.
To address this limitation, Arakelyan et al. proposed the
CQD model, which relies only on the availability of vector
embeddings provided by a trained neural link predictor and
hence does not require example answers to complex queries
for training (Arakelyan et al. 2021). This approach, however,
also comes with a number of limitations. First, it is restricted
to a subclass of positive existential queries—FOL queries
constructed using only conjunction, disjunction and existential quantification; thus, it cannot handle queries involving
other important constructs such as negation. Second, CQD
relies on a computationally expensive combinatorial optimisation problem to search for likely query answers using the
embeddings provided by the neural link predictor; this can
lead to slow inference times and limit the applicability of
CQD to scenarios with low latency requirements.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to query answering over incomplete KGs that addresses these limitations. Our approach extends the query language of CQD to
support negation while at the same time significantly reduc-

The problem of answering complex First-order Logic queries
over incomplete knowledge graphs is receiving growing attention in the literature. A promising recent approach to this
problem has been to exploit neural link predictors, which
can be effective in identifying individual missing triples in
the incomplete graph, in order to efficiently answer complex queries. A crucial advantage of this approach over other
methods is that it does not require example answers to complex queries for training, as it relies only on the availability of
a trained link predictor for the knowledge graph at hand. This
approach, however, can be computationally expensive during
inference, and cannot deal with queries involving negation.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach that addresses all
of these limitations. Experiments on established benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our approach offers superior performance while significantly reducing inference times.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are graph-structured knowledge
bases where nodes and edges represent entities of interest
and their relations (Hogan et al. 2021; Heist et al. 2020).
Formally, a KG can be seen as a set of triples (or logical
facts) and can be represented in standard formats such as
the Resource Description Framework (RDF). KGs are increasingly been used in a wide range of applications, such
as Web search, question answering in digital assistants, recommender system, scientific discovery, or data integration
(Li et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020; Noy et al. 2019). Many largescale KGs used in applications, however, are highly incomplete; as a result, knowledge graph completion—the problem of completing a KG with missing facts that are likely to
hold in the domain of interest—has received a great deal of
attention in recent years (Rossi et al. 2021).
Link predictors are ML models that can predict whether
individual missing facts hold in an incomplete KG. These
models can be very effective for KG completion tasks. They
typically work by first learning vector representations of the
entities and relations in the KG during training, and then
exploiting these embeddings to predict individual facts.
* All authors make equal contributions to this paper.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4652

