The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Causal Effect Identification in Cluster DAGs
Tara V. Anand* 1 , Adele H. Ribeiro* 2 , Jin Tian3 , Elias Bareinboim2
1

Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University
2
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
3
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University
tara.v.anand@columbia.edu, adele@cs.columbia.edu, jtian@iastate.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Bareinboim and Pearl
2016; Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017).
Standard tools necessary for identifying the aforementioned do-distribution, such as d-separation, do-calculus
(Pearl 1995), and the ID-algorithm (Tian and Pearl 2002a;
Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Huang and Valtorta 2006; Lee, Correa, and Bareinboim 2019) take as input a combination of an
observational distribution and a qualitative description of the
underlying causal system, often articulated in the form of a
causal diagram (Pearl 2000). However, specifying a causal
diagram requires knowledge about the causal relationships
among all pairs of observed variables, which is not always
available in many real-world applications. This is especially
true and acute in complex, high-dimensional settings, which
curtails the applicability of causal inference theory and tools.
In the context of medicine, for example, electronic health
records include data on lab tests, drugs, demographic information, and other clinical attributes, but medical knowledge
is not yet advanced enough to lead to the construction of
causal diagrams over all of these variables, limiting the use
of the graphical approach to inferring causality (Kleinberg
and Hripcsak 2011). In many cases, however, contextual
or temporal information about variables is available, which
may partially inform how these variables are situated in a
causal diagram relative to other key variables. For instance,
a data scientist may know that covariates occur temporally
before a drug is prescribed or an outcome occurs. They may
even suspect that some pre-treatment variables are causes
of the treatment and the outcome variables. However, they
may be uncertain about the relationships among each pair
of covariates, or it may be burdensome to explicitly define
them. Given that a misspecified causal diagram may lead
to wrong causal conclusions, this issue raises the question
of whether a coarser representation of the causal diagram,
where no commitment is made to the relationship between
certain variables, would still be sufficient to determine the
causal effect of interest.
In this paper, our goal is to develop a framework for causal
inferences in partially understood domains such as the medical domain discussed above. We will focus on formalizing
the problem of causal effect identification considering that
the data scientist does not have prior knowledge to fully
specify a causal diagram over all pairs of variables. First,
we formally define and characterize a novel class of graphs

Reasoning about the effect of interventions and counterfactuals is a fundamental task found throughout the data sciences.
A collection of principles, algorithms, and tools has been developed for performing such tasks in the last decades. One of
the pervasive requirements found throughout this literature is
the articulation of assumptions, which commonly appear in
the form of causal diagrams. Despite the power of this approach, there are significant settings where the knowledge
necessary to specify a causal diagram over all variables is
not available, particularly in complex, high-dimensional domains. In this paper, we introduce a new graphical modeling tool called cluster DAGs (for short, C-DAGs) that allows
for the partial specification of relationships among variables
based on limited prior knowledge, alleviating the stringent
requirement of specifying a full causal diagram. A C-DAG
specifies relationships between clusters of variables, while
the relationships between the variables within a cluster are
left unspecified, and can be seen as a graphical representation
of an equivalence class of causal diagrams that share the relationships among the clusters. We develop the foundations
and machinery for valid inferences over C-DAGs about the
clusters of variables at each layer of Pearl’s Causal Hierarchy
- L1 (probabilistic), L2 (interventional), and L3 (counterfactual). In particular, we prove the soundness and completeness
of d-separation for probabilistic inference in C-DAGs. Further, we demonstrate the validity of Pearl’s do-calculus rules
over C-DAGs and show that the standard ID identification
algorithm is sound and complete to systematically compute
causal effects from observational data given a C-DAG. Finally, we show that C-DAGs are valid for performing counterfactual inferences about clusters of variables.

1

Introduction

One of the central tasks found in data-driven disciplines
is to infer the effect of a treatment X on an outcome Y ,
which is formally written as the interventional distribution
P (Y |do(X = x)), from observational (non-experimental)
data collected from the phenomenon under investigation.
These relations are considered essential in the construction
of explanations and for making decisions about interventions that have never been implemented before (Pearl 2000;
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12172

