The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Pose-Guided 3D Human Generation in Indoor Scene
Minseok Kim, Changwoo Kang, Jeongin Park and Kyungdon Joo*
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
{hello96min, kangchangwoo, jeonginpark, kyungdon}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of scene-aware 3D human avatar generation based on human-scene interactions.
In particular, we pay attention to the fact that physical contact between a 3D human and a scene (i.e., physical humanscene interactions) requires a geometrical alignment to generate natural 3D human avatar. Motivated by this fact, we
present a new 3D human generation framework that considers geometric alignment on potential contact areas between
3D human avatars and their surroundings. In addition, we introduce a compact yet effective human pose classifier that
classifies the human pose and provides potential contact areas of the 3D human avatar. It allows us to adaptively use
geometric alignment loss according to the classified human
pose. Compared to state-of-the-art method, our method can
generate physically and semantically plausible 3D humans
that interact naturally with 3D scenes without additional postprocessing. In our evaluations, we achieve the improvements
with more plausible interactions and more variety of poses
than prior research in qualitative and quantitative analysis.
Project page: https://bupyeonghealer.github.io/phin/.

1

Figure 1: Examples of the proposed pose-guided 3D human
generation. We visualize such geometric interactions using
different colors; blue color indicates a part of the 3D human
avatar that interacts with the scene, and red color denotes the
opposite case. Green and purple boxes are enlarged view of
scenes and human avatars to show interaction.

depth maps of a scene (Zhang et al. 2020a,b). These studies
also exploit physical rules to avoid collision and interpenetration with scene objects, which enables to generate plausible 3D human avatars with the scene. Inspired by this fact,
we pay attention to physical contacts between 3D human
avatars given a scene. Specifically, when we interact with
various objects in indoor environments, contact areas of 3D
human and scene objects are geometrically aligned. In addition, the contact areas of the human body in contact with the
environment change depending on the posture of the 3D human. For example, when we sit on a chair, our thigh mainly
contacts the chair or when we lie on a bed, the back of our
body in contact with the bed. We observed that this geometrically aligned physical contact could be a clue for natural
3D human generation given a scene.
Based on these observation, we propose a pose-guided 3D
human generation framework that considers geometrically
aligned physical contacts between 3D human avatars and
scene context information (see Fig. 1). Concretely, we leverage two types of geometric alignments; close distance and
surface normal alignment on potential contact areas between
3D human avatars and given a scene. It encourages making physically feasible contacts of a 3D human avatar with
a scene. In addition, we introduce a compact yet effective
pose classifier that classifies the pose of the generated hu-

Introduction

Visual understanding of humans, from 2D human keypoint
detection (Li et al. 2019a; Khirodkar et al. 2021; Jin et al.
2020), skeleton estimation (Jiang, Camgoz, and Bowden
2021) to 3D human mesh estimation (Kanazawa et al. 2018),
has been actively studied in both academic and industry
fields for several decades. With the advent of deep learning,
visual understanding of humans has shown promising results
and its applicability has been proved by interests of AR/VR
companies such as Meta. In particular, generating a 3D human avatar1 in 3D space has started to gain a lot of attention
as a medium describing a human and communicating with
others in the coming metaverse era. To generate a natural
3D human avatar in a given scene, it is essential to consider
scene context information as well as the kinematically feasible pose of 3D human avatars. Based on parametric human
model (Loper et al. 2015), recent works on 3D human generation use scene context information, such as semantic or
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We will interchangeably use terms such as 3D human avatar,
human mesh, and human body to describe 3D humans in a scene.

1133

