The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Script, Language, and Labels:
Overcoming Three Discrepancies for Low-Resource Language Specialization
Jaeseong Lee, Dohyeon Lee and Seung-won Hwang*
Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
{tbvj5914,waylight3,seungwonh}@snu.ac.kr

Therefore, specialization1 of mPLM to the target unseen language has been proposed as a promising alternative. One common technique is performing adaptive pretraining (Gururangan et al. 2020) using a corpus of the new
language (Chau, Lin, and Smith 2020).
Although it was effective for some cases, Muller et al.
(2021a) inspected some languages that struggle to improve,
and attributed the reason to ‘script discrepancy’ (e.g. Latin
vs Arabic script) with their related languages2 in the mPLM.
Due to the script difference, they do not share tokens, thus
the target language could not fully benefit from related
languages via knowledge transfer. A naı̈ve solution is to
transliterate (Muller et al. 2021a) to enforce token overlap
(Figure 1a), where the word in unseen language is replaced
by its romanization.
However, transliteration does not outperform a simple solution (Figure 1b), such as vocabulary augmentation (Chau
and Smith 2021). Moreover, there may exist unexplored discrepancies, impeding better specialization.
In this paper, we propose to examine three discrepancies–
Script, Linguistic, and Label–between mPLM and its specialization, and provide simple yet effective solutions for
them. For ‘script discrepancy’, we first argue that measuring it with token overlap is the main problem of transliteration. Sharing script via naı̈ve transliteration has a positive
effect of token overlaps, but also a negative effect of information loss (Amrhein and Sennrich 2020), when mapping
two homophones to the same romanized word. Next, since
token overlaps, encouraging shared scripts, fail to predict
gains, we propose to measure the script discrepancy without
such requirement, by repurposing representation dissimilarity (Kudugunta et al. 2019; Conneau et al. 2020b), used in
the context of cross-lingual transfer. We optimize this metric
by aligning the word in the unseen language with its transliteration, in the representation space, which we call ‘crossscript alignment’ (Fig. 1 solid line). In this way, we can close
the gap between two different scripts, while avoiding the loss
from sharing.
Although we remedy script discrepancy, we observe that

Abstract
Although multilingual pretrained models (mPLMs) enabled
support of various natural language processing in diverse languages, its limited coverage of 100+ languages lets 6500+
languages remain ‘unseen’. One common approach for an
unseen language is specializing the model for it as target,
by performing additional masked language modeling (MLM)
with the target language corpus. However, we argue that,
due to the discrepancy from multilingual MLM pretraining,
a naı̈ve specialization as such can be suboptimal. Specifically, we pose three discrepancies to overcome. Script and
linguistic discrepancy of the target language from the related seen languages, hinder a positive transfer, for which we
propose to maximize representation similarity, unlike existing approaches maximizing overlaps. In addition, label space
for MLM prediction can vary across languages, for which we
propose to reinitialize top layers for a more effective adaptation. Experiments over four different language families and
three tasks shows that our method improves the task performance of unseen languages with statistical significance, while
previous approach fails to.

1. Introduction
Recently, multilingual pretrained language models
(mPLMs), such as mBERT (Devlin et al. 2019) or
XLM-R (Conneau et al. 2020a), became a de-facto standard
to support natural language processing (NLP) over diverse
languages. These models are pretrained by masked language
modeling (MLM) with multilingual corpora of 100+ languages and shared parameters, mapping diverse languages
to a shared feature space. However, the majority of 6500+
languages inevitably remain ‘unseen’ by existing mPLMs,
calling for approaches to prepare models supporting them.
Meanwhile, training a new mPLM or monolingual PLM
is inappropriate. While training a new mPLM to include
a new language seems to be attractive, capacity conflict
among multiple languages–known as the curse of multilinguality (Conneau et al. 2020a)–makes this solution impractical. Training a monolingual PLM for such low-resource languages is even less practical: Its task performance is reportedly inferior to mPLM (Wu and Dredze 2020).

1
Following Chau and Smith (2021), we use word specialization
as a special case of an adaptation, in the sense of considering the
target language exclusively.
2
Roughly defined as seen languages in the same family as the
target

* Hwang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13004

