The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improved Algorithms for Maximum Satisfiability and Its Special Cases
Kirill Brilliantov1 , Vasily Alferov2 , Ivan Bliznets3
1

Constructor University
Independent Researcher
3
Utrecht University
ki.br178@gmail.com, vasily.v.alferov@gmail.com, iabliznets@gmail.com/i.bliznets@uu.nl
2

Abstract

tional complexity in the worst-case scenario for SAT and
MAXSAT. Moreover, the new upper bounds significantly
improve previously known results, some of which stayed
without progress for decades. For example, Chu et al. (Chu,
Xiao, and Zhang 2021) presented an O∗ (1.234m ) algorithm, Peng and Xiao (Peng and Xiao 2021) constructed a
O∗ (1.0646L ) for the Satisfiability problem where m is the
total numbers of clauses and L is the total number of literals in the input formula. Similar results were obtained for
Maximum Satisfiability in papers (Xu et al. 2019b; Xiao
2022; Alferov and Bliznets 2021) proving O∗ (1.2886m ) and
O∗ (1.0927L ) upper bounds.
All three last-mentioned papers used the branch-andbound method with sophisticated reduction and branching rules, including detailed reasoning. Roughly speaking,
in such algorithms input instance is usually transformed
into an equivalent instance where each variable appears at
most five times. After that, we reduce to an instance where
each variable occurs at most four times, and finally, an instance where each variable appears at most three times is
solved. So, in the worst-case scenario, the algorithm’s efficiency for MAXSAT highly depends on how quickly we can
solve (n, k)-MAXSAT for k ∈ {3, 4, 5}. Recall that (n, k)MAXSAT is a special case of MAXSAT in which the input
CNF contains only variables that appear at most k times. It
is known that (n, k)-MAXSAT is NP-hard for k ≥ 3 (Raman, Ravikumar, and Rao 1998). We note that on its own
(n, 3)-MAXSAT attracts much attention (see table 1). In the
paper we sufficiently improve the running time for (n, 3)MAXSAT and (n, 4)-MAXSAT getting new upper bounds
O∗ (1.1749n ) and O∗ (1.3803n ) correspondingly. These improvements allow us to design a O∗ (1.0911L ) algorithm for
the MAXSAT problem where L is the total number of literals in the input formula (or simply the length of the formula).
Historical progress for MAXSAT in terms of L is shown in
table 2.
Except for measures n, L, there are natural measures/parameters m (the total number of clauses in the input formula) and k (the number of clauses that must be
satisfied). Generally, such measures take a lot of work
to compare. However, we manage to show that our algorithms imply O∗ (1.1554k ) algorithm for (n, 3)-MAXSAT
and O∗ (1.2989k ) algorithm for (n, 4)-MAXSAT. These obtained upper bounds are significantly better than one might

The Maximum Satisfiability (MAXSAT) problem is an optimization version of the Satisfiability problem (SAT) in which
one is given a CNF formula with n variables and needs to find
the maximum number of simultaneously satisfiable clauses.
Recent works achieved significant progress in proving new
upper bounds on the worst-case computational complexity
of MAXSAT. All these works reduce general MAXSAT to
a special case of MAXSAT where each variable appears a
small number of times. So, it is important to design fast algorithms for (n, k)-MAXSAT to construct an efficient exact
algorithm for MAXSAT. (n, k)-MAXSAT is a special case of
MAXSAT where each variable appears at most k times in the
input formula.
For the (n, 3)-MAXSAT problem, we design a O∗ (1.1749n )
algorithm improving on the previous record running time
of O∗ (1.191n ). For the (n, 4)-MAXSAT problem, we construct a O∗ (1.3803n ) algorithm improving on the previous
best running time of O∗ (1.4254n ). Using the results, we develop a O∗ (1.0911L ) algorithm for the MAXSAT where L
is a length of the input formula which improves previous algorithm with O∗ (1.0927L ) running time.

Introduction
The Satisfiability problem (SAT) is one of the most influential problems with applications in Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence, and other fields. Its optimization version,
Maximum Satisfiability problem (MAXSAT), also significantly impacts many areas. It was successfully used in planning, scheduling, configuration problems, AI and data analysis problems, combinatorial problems, verification and security, and bioinformatics (Bacchus, Järvisalo, and Martins
2021). For a detailed survey about SAT and MAXSAT problems, we refer to (Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2021).
It is well-known that SAT and MAXSAT are NP-hard
along with their many special cases (Garey and Johnson
1979). Many approaches were tested to cope with the NPhardness of SAT and MAXSAT: randomized, approximation, exact, parameterized algorithms, and others. In recent years significant progress was achieved from the exact exponential algorithms point of view for both problems. New upper bounds were proved on the computaCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3898

