The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Alignment-Enriched Tuning for Patch-Level Pre-trained Document Image Models
Lei Wang1,2 , Jiabang He1 , Xing Xu1 * , Ning Liu3 , Hui Liu4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Beijing Forestry University, China
4
Beijing Rongda Technology Co., Ltd., China
demolwang@gmail.com, JiaBangH@outlook.com, xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn
liuning0928@bjfu.edu.cn, ryuki122382@gmail.com
Abstract

Alignment between image and text has shown promising improvements on patch-level pre-trained document image models. However, investigating more effective or finer-grained
alignment techniques during pre-training requires a large
amount of computation cost and time. Thus, a question naturally arises: Could we fine-tune the pre-trained models adaptive to downstream tasks with alignment objectives and achieve
comparable or better performance? In this paper, we propose a new model architecture with alignment-enriched tuning
(dubbed AETNet) upon pre-trained document image models,
to adapt downstream tasks with the joint task-specific supervised and alignment-aware contrastive objective. Specifically,
we introduce an extra visual transformer as the alignment-ware
image encoder and an extra text transformer as the alignmentware text encoder before multimodal fusion. We consider
alignment in the following three aspects: 1) document-level
alignment by leveraging the cross-modal and intra-modal contrastive loss; 2) global-local alignment for modeling localized
and structural information in document images; and 3) locallevel alignment for more accurate patch-level information. Experiments on various downstream tasks show that AETNet can
achieve state-of-the-art performance on various downstream
tasks. Notably, AETNet consistently outperforms state-of-theart pre-trained models, such as LayoutLMv3 with fine-tuning
techniques, on three different downstream tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/MAEHCM/AET.

Figure 1: A document image example containing rich contextual text and layout information.
the pre-trained weights for initialization. After that, the initialized model is fine-tuned for a downstream task using a
task-specific supervised objective.
As shown in Figure 1, a document image contains rich contextual text and structural information, requiring fine-grained
interaction modeling between image and text. Although
self-supervision achieves large progress in document image related-tasks, most existing pre-trained document image
models are trained with coarse self-supervised losses, which
ignore fine-grained interaction modeling between image and
text. Inspired by this, DocFormer (Appalaraju et al. 2021)
learns to reconstruct image pixels through a CNN decoder,
SelfDoc (Li et al. 2021c) proposes to regress the masked
region feature, and the latest model LayoutLMv3 (Huang
et al. 2022) introduces a word-patch alignment objective
by reconstructing masked patch tokens of the visual modality. Although alignment between image and text has shown
promising improvements on large-scale self-supervised pretrained document image models, investigating more effective
or finer-grained alignment techniques during the pre-training
requires huge computational cost and time. Thus, a question
naturally arises: Could we fine-tune the pre-trained models

Introduction
Self-pretraining techniques aiming to learn generic representations have recently proved to be highly effective for document image understanding. Notably, transfer learning based
on pre-trained document image models yields strong performance on various document related downstream tasks (Xu
et al. 2020, 2021b; Garncarek et al. 2021; Hong et al. 2022;
Wu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021a,c,d; Lee et al. 2022; Huang
et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022). A typical self-pretraining method
in document image understanding is to pre-train a model on
a large amount of pairs of the document images and OCR
texts with layout information underlying the constraints of
unsupervised losses. Downstream tasks then usually leverage
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2590

