The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Neurosymbolic Reasoning and Learning with Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Son N. Tran1 , Artur d’Avila Garcez2
1

2

The University of Tasmania, Launceston, Tasmania, 7248, Australia
City, University of London, Northampton Square, London, EC1V 0HB, UK
sn.tran@utas.edu.au, a.garcez@city.ac.uk

Abstract

when performing transfer learning. Over the years, many
neurosymbolic approaches have used a form of knowledge
representation based on if-then rules (Towell and Shavlik
1994; França, Zaverucha, and Garcez 2014; Tran and Garcez
2018; Evans and Grefenstette 2018; Yang, Yang, and Cohen
2017; Manhaeve et al. 2018; Tran 2021). Assuming ModusPonens1 as the only rule of inference, given a logical formula
of the form B ← A (read “B is true if A is true”), under
the convention that 1 represents true and 0 represents f alse,
a neurosymbolic network would infer that approximately
B = 1 given A = 1. This has two shortcomings. First,
Modus-Ponens alone may not capture the entire reasoning
required by the application, e.g. the use of Modus-Tollens2
may be needed. Second, other forms of knowledge may need
to be represented by the neural network, including with the
use of negation (¬), conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨) and biconditional (↔), e.g. (¬A∨B) ← (C∧D), read “not A or B
holds true if C and D are true”, or A ↔ B, read “A is true
if and only if B is true”. Although an equivalence between
propositional calculus and connectionist networks has been
shown in (Pinkas 1991, 1995), the translation and representation of knowledge by such networks can become convoluted, making it difficult to integrate with modern learning
techniques.
In this paper, we introduce a method to translate logical
formulae into simple 2-layer neural networks. The networks,
called Logical Boltzmann Machines (LBM), work as a neurosymbolic system capable of (i) representing any formula
in propositional logic, (ii) reasoning efficiently given such
knowledge, (iii) learning from knowledge and data. We introduce an algorithm to translate any set of propositional
logic formulae into a restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM)
and we prove equivalence between the logical formulae and
the energy-based connectionist model. In other words, we
prove soundness of the translation algorithm. Specifically,
the connectionist model (the RBM) is shown to assign minimum energy to the assignments of truth-values that satisfy
the formulae. This provides a new way of performing reasoning in symmetrical neural networks by employing the
network to search for the models of a logical theory, i.e.
search for the assignments of truth-values that map the logi-

Knowledge representation and reasoning in neural networks
has been a long-standing endeavour which has attracted much
attention recently. The principled integration of reasoning
and learning in neural networks is a main objective of the
area of neurosymbolic Artificial Intelligence. In this paper,
a neurosymbolic system is introduced that can represent any
propositional logic formula. A proof of equivalence is presented showing that energy minimization in restricted Boltzmann machines corresponds to logical reasoning. We demonstrate the application of our approach empirically on logical
reasoning and learning from data and knowledge. Experimental results show that reasoning can be performed effectively
for a class of logical formulae. Learning from data and knowledge is also evaluated in comparison with learning of logic
programs using neural networks. The results show that our
approach can improve on state-of-the-art neurosymbolic systems. The theorems and empirical results presented in this
paper are expected to reignite the research on the use of neural networks as massively-parallel models for logical reasoning and promote the principled integration of reasoning and
learning in deep networks.

Introduction
Increasing attention has been devoted in recent years to
knowledge representation and reasoning in neural networks.
The principled integration of reasoning and learning in neural networks is a main objective of the area of neurosymbolic
Artificial Intelligence (AI) (d’Avila Garcez and Lamb 2020).
In neurosymbolic AI, neural networks and symbolic AI are
combined. Typically, an algorithm is provided to translate
some form of symbolic knowledge representation into the
architecture and initial set of parameters of a neural network.
Ideally, a theorem then shows that the neural network can be
used as a massively-parallel model of computation capable
of reasoning about such knowledge. Finally, when trained
with data and knowledge, the network is expected to produce a better performance - either a higher accuracy or faster
learning - than when trained from data alone.
Symbolic knowledge may be provided to a neural network
in the form of general rules which are known in a given domain, or rules which are expected to be true across domains

1

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

6558

If P implies Q and P is true then Q must also be true.
If P implies Q and Q is f alse then P must also be f alse.

