The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Forecasting with Sparse but Informative Variables:
A Case Study in Predicting Blood Glucose
Harry Rubin-Falcone1 , Joyce Lee2 , Jenna Wiens1
1

Division of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
2
Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University of Michigan

Abstract
In time-series forecasting, future target values may be affected by both intrinsic and extrinsic effects. When forecasting blood glucose, for example, intrinsic effects can be inferred from the history of the target signal alone (i.e. blood
glucose), but accurately modeling the impact of extrinsic effects requires auxiliary signals, like the amount of carbohydrates ingested. Standard forecasting techniques often assume that extrinsic and intrinsic effects vary at similar rates.
However, when auxiliary signals are generated at a much
lower frequency than the target variable (e.g., blood glucose
measurements are made every 5 minutes, while meals occur once every few hours), even well-known extrinsic effects
(e.g., carbohydrates increase blood glucose) may prove difficult to learn. To better utilize these sparse but informative
variables (SIVs), we introduce a novel encoder/decoder forecasting approach that accurately learns the per-timepoint effect of the SIV, by (i) isolating it from intrinsic effects and
(ii) restricting its learned effect based on domain knowledge.
On a simulated dataset pertaining to the task of blood glucose forecasting, when the SIV is accurately recorded our approach outperforms baseline approaches in terms of rMSE
(13.07 [95% CI: 11.77,14.16] vs. 14.14 [12.69,15.27]). In the
presence of a corrupted SIV, the proposed approach can still
result in lower error compared to the baseline but the advantage is reduced as noise increases. By isolating their effects
and incorporating domain knowledge, our approach makes it
possible to better utilize SIVs in forecasting.

Figure 1: An overview of the SIV problem. In this toy example, the target variable exhibits oscillatory behavior when
only zero SIV values are present (intrinsic dynamics), and
the presence of a non-zero SIV value causes the target signal to increase linearly (extrinsic [SIV] dynamics).

physiological variables like blood glucose. Auxiliary signals
like carbohydrates consumed and bolus insulin administered
both have well-known effects on blood glucose, but their inclusion as inputs to forecasting models has not, in general,
led to significant improvements in performance over models based on blood glucose alone (Rubin-Falcone, Fox, and
Wiens 2020; Hameed and Klienberg 2020; McShinsky and
Marsha 2020). We hypothesize that this is due in part to a
mismatch in the relative frequency of non-zero values between the auxiliary signal and the target signal. We refer
to forecasting tasks where an auxiliary signal is sparse but
has a known effect on the target signal as the sparse but informative variable (SIV) problem. A forecasting model that
successfully addresses this problem will leverage the SIV
despite its sparsity, leading to overall improved predictions.
Problem Definition. In this work, we introduce and address the SIV problem (Figure 1), which arises when an
auxiliary variable that occurs infrequently is known to cause
an increase or decrease in the target variable’s magnitude
over time, although the exact effect may be unknown. The
sparsity of the SIV often results in the failure of standard
multi-input forecasting approaches in leveraging the auxiliary variable, i.e., models that include the variable perform
similarly to univariate-input approaches. A model that has
overcome the SIV problem utilizes the SIV in making its
predictions, resulting in improved forecasting accuracy relative to a model that does not use the additional variable. The

Introduction
In time-series forecasting, the future values of a target signal
can depend on both intrinsic and extrinsic effects. Intrinsic
effects are dynamics that depend only on the current and
past values of the target signal. In contrast, extrinsic effects
are dynamics that arise due to auxiliary variables. In many
cases, the inclusion of such auxiliary signals as input to a
forecasting model, in addition to the target signal, results in
more accurate forecasts (Chakraborty et al. 1992; Rockwell
and Davis 2016). However, in other settings, including auxiliary variables as input to a forecasting model produces little
to no improvement in forecast accuracy, even when there
is a known relationship between the additional variables
and the target signal. This is particularly true in forecasting
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9650

