The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robustness to Spurious Correlations Improves Semantic Out-of-Distribution
Detection
Lily H. Zhang, Rajesh Ranganath
New York University
60 5th Avenue
New York, NY 10011
lily.h.zhang@nyu.edu, rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu
Abstract

shared-nuisance OOD (SN - OOD) examples. For example, in
the Waterbirds dataset (Sagawa et al. 2020), the image background (water or land) is a nuisance in the task of classifying
bird type (waterbird vs. landbird), and an image of a boat
on water is an SN - OOD input, given the familiar background
nuisance value but novel object label. Detection of SN - OOD
images is worse than detection of OOD images with novel
nuisance values. Moreover, the stronger the correlation between the nuisance and label in the training distribution, the
worse the detection of SN - OOD inputs. Even when classifiers
are trained via domain generalization algorithms intended for
generalizing to new test domains, detection does not improve
(Ming, Yin, and Li 2022).
This failure mode is far from a rare edge case, given the
relevance of SN - OOD inputs in real-world applications. While
an instance can be OOD with respect to labels (e.g. new object)
or nuisances (e.g. new background), in most cases, the goal
is semantic OOD detection, or detecting out-of-scope inputs
(Yang et al. 2021). For instance, manufacturing plants are
interested in product defects on the factory floor, not working
products in new settings.
In this work, we introduce nuisance-aware OOD detection
to address SN - OOD detection failures detection. Our contributions:

Methods which utilize the outputs or feature representations
of predictive models have emerged as promising approaches
for out-of-distribution (OOD) detection of image inputs. However, these methods struggle to detect OOD inputs that share
nuisance values (e.g. background) with in-distribution inputs.
The detection of shared-nuisance out-of-distribution (SN - OOD)
inputs is particularly relevant in real-world applications, as
anomalies and in-distribution inputs tend to be captured in
the same settings during deployment. In this work, we provide a possible explanation for SN - OOD detection failures
and propose nuisance-aware OOD detection to address them.
Nuisance-aware OOD detection substitutes a classifier trained
via Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) and cross-entropy
loss with one that 1. is trained under a distribution where the
nuisance-label relationship is broken and 2. yields representations that are independent of the nuisance under this distribution, both marginally and conditioned on the label. We can
train a classifier to achieve these objectives using NuisanceRandomized Distillation (NURD), an algorithm developed for
OOD generalization under spurious correlations. Output- and
feature-based nuisance-aware OOD detection perform substantially better than their original counterparts, succeeding even
when detection based on domain generalization algorithms
fails to improve performance.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is the task of identifying
inputs that fall outside the training distribution. A natural
approach is to estimate the training distribution via a generative model and flag low-density inputs as OOD (Bishop
1994), but such an approach has been shown to perform
worse than random chance on several image tasks (Nalisnick
et al. 2019), likely due to model estimation error (Zhang,
Goldstein, and Ranganath 2021). Instead, many detection
methods utilize either the outputs or feature representations
of a learned classifier, yielding results much better than those
of deep generative models on many tasks (Salehi et al. 2021)
However, classifier-based OOD detection has been shown
to struggle when OOD and in-distribution (ID) inputs share
the same values of a nuisance variable that is of no inherent interest to the semantic task, e.g. the background of an
image (Ming, Yin, and Li 2022). We call such OOD inputs
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15305

1. We present explanations for output- and feature-based SN OOD detection failures based on the role of nuisances in
the learned predictor and its representations (Section 3).
2. We illustrate why models that are robust to spurious correlations can yield better output-based SN - OOD detection
and identify a predictor with such robustness guarantees
to use for OOD detection (Section 4).
3. We explain why removing nuisance information from representations can improve feature-based SN - OOD detection
and propose a joint independence constraint to achieve
this end (Section 4).
4. We describe how domain generalization algorithms can
fail to improve SN - OOD detection, providing insight into
the empirical failures seen previously (Section 5).
5. We show empirically that nuisance-aware OOD detection
improves detection on SN - OOD inputs while maintaining
performance on non-SN - OOD ones (Section 7).

