The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Robust Sequence Networked Submodular Maximization
Qihao Shi12 , Bingyang Fu1 , Can Wang1 * , Jiawei Chen1 , Sheng Zhou1 , Yan Feng1 , Chun Chen1
1

2

School of Computing and Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
School of Computing and Computer Science, Zhejiang University City College, Hangzhou, China
{shiqihao321, todobe, wcan, sleepyhunt, zhousheng zju, fengyan, chenc}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

then, the study of submodular functions has been extended
by a variety of different scenarios, such as non-monotone
scenario, adaptive scenario, and continuous scenario, etc
(Feige, Mirrokni, and Vondrak 2007; Golovin and Krause
2011; Das and Kempe 2011; Bach 2019; Shi et al. 2019).
The above works focus on the set functions. In real applications, the order of adding elements plays an important
role and affects the function value significantly. Recently,
the submodularity has been generalized to sequence functions (Zhang et al. 2015; Tschiatschek, Singla, and Krause
2017; Streeter and Golovin 2008; Zhang et al. 2013). Considering sequences instead of sets causes an exponential increase in the size of the search space, while allowing for
much more expressive models.
In this paper, we consider that the elements are networked
by a directed graph. The edges encode the additional value
when the connected elements are selected in a particular order. Such setting is not given a specific name before. To
distinguish from the classic submodularity, we in this paper
name it as networked submodularity (Net-submodularity for
short). More specifically, the Net-submodular function f (σ)
is a sequence function, which is not submodular on the induced element set by σ but is submodular on the induced
edge set by σ. The Net-submodularity is first considered in
(Tschiatschek, Singla, and Krause 2017), which mainly focuses on the case where the underlying graph is a directed
acyclic graph. General graphs and hypergraphs are considered in (Mitrovic et al. 2018).
Recently, robust versions of the submodular maximization problem have arisen (Orlin, Schulz, and Udwani 2018;
Mitrovic et al. 2017; Bogunovic et al. 2017; Sallam et al.
2020) to meet the increasing demand in the stability of the
system. The robustness of the model mainly concerns with
its ability in handling the malfunctions or adversarial attacks, i.e., the removal of a subset of elements in the selected
set or sequence. Sample cases of elements removal in real
world scenarios include items sold out or stop production in
recommendation (Mitrovic et al. 2018), web failure of user
logout in link prediction (Mitrovic et al. 2019) and equipment malfunction in sensor allocation or activation (Zhang
et al. 2015). In this paper, we take one step further and study
a new problem of robust sequence networked submodular
maximization (RoseNets). We show an example in Figure 1
to illustrate the importance of RoseNets problem.

In this paper, we study the Robust optimization for sequence
Networked submodular maximization (RoseNets) problem.
We interweave the robust optimization with the sequence
networked submodular maximization. The elements are connected by a directed acyclic graph and the objective function
is not submodular on the elements but on the edges in the
graph. Under such networked submodular scenario, the impact of removing an element from a sequence depends both
on its position in the sequence and in the network. This makes
the existing robust algorithms inapplicable. In this paper, we
take the first step to study the RoseNets problem. We design a
robust greedy algorithm, which is robust against the removal
of an arbitrary subset of the selected elements. The approximation ratio of the algorithm depends both on the number of
the removed elements and the network topology. We further
conduct experiments on real applications of recommendation
and link prediction. The experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Introduction
Submodularity is an important property that models a diminishing return phenomenon, i.e., the marginal value of
adding an element to a set decreases as the set expands.
It has been extensively studied in the literature, mainly accompanied with maximization or minimization problems of
set functions (Nemhauser and Wolsey 1978; Khuller, Moss,
and Naor 1999). This is called submodularity. Mathematically, a set function f : 2V → R is submodular if for any
two sets A ⊆ B ⊆ V and an element v ∈ V \B, we have
f (A ∪ v) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ v) − f (B). Such property finds a
wide range of applications in machine learning, combinatorial optimization, economics, and so on. (Krause 2005; Lin
and Bilmes 2011; Li et al. 2022; Shi et al. 2021; Kirchhoff
and Bilmes 2014; Gabillon et al. 2013; Kempe, Kleinberg,
and Tardos 2003; Wang et al. 2021).
Further equipped with monotonicity, i.e., f (A) ≤ f (B)
for any A ⊆ B ⊆ V , a submodular set function can be
maximized by the cardinality constrained classic greedy algorithm, achieving an approximation ratio up to 1 − 1/e
(Nemhauser and Wolsey 1978) (almost the best). Since
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15100

