The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Dynamics and Task Decoupled Reinforcement Learning Architecture for
High-Efficiency Dynamic Target Intercept
Dora D. Liu* 1,3 , Liang Hu* †2,1 , Qi Zhang†4,1 , Tangwei Ye1 , Usman Naseem5 , Zhong Yuan Lai1
1

DeepBlue Academy of Sciences
2
Tongji University
3
BirenTech Research
4
University of Technology Sydney
5
University of Sydney
liudongmei 0506@163.com, lianghu@tongji.edu.cn, qi.zhang-13@student.uts.edu.au
ytw email@163.com, usman.naseem@sydney.edu.au, abrikosoff@yahoo.com
Abstract
Predictive Path Planning

Non-predictive Path Planning

Due to the flexibility and ease of control, unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) have been increasingly used in various scenarios and applications in recent years. Training UAVs with
reinforcement learning (RL) for a specific task is often expensive in terms of time and computation. However, it is known
that the main effort of the learning process is made to fit the
low-level physical dynamics systems instead of the high-level
task itself. In this paper, we study to apply UAVs in the dynamic target intercept (DTI) task, where the dynamics systems equipped by different UAV models are correspondingly
distinct. To this end, we propose a dynamics and task decoupled RL architecture to address the inefficient learning procedure, where the RL module focuses on modeling the DTI task
without involving physical dynamics, and the design of states,
actions, and rewards are completely task-oriented while the
dynamics control module can adaptively convert actions from
the RL module to dynamics signals to control different UAVs
without retraining the RL module. We show the efficiency
and efficacy of our results in comparison and ablation experiments against state-of-the-art methods.

Time

Time

(a)
t

(b)
t

t+1
t

t
t+1

t+1

t+2

Legend

Target

(d)

(c)

Target's True
Trajectory

Predictive
Target Location

Agent

t+1

t+2

Agent's
Planning Path

Figure 1: The demonstration of dynamic target intercept
(DTI) process without predictive path planning (a, b) and
with predictive path planning (c, d).

However, environments of many real-life tasks, e.g., aerial
interception, are generally open and complex with limited
information available to preset a complete rule base. As
a result, rule-based FCSs may fail to accomplish missions
with highly uncertain configurations. For example, Figure 1
demonstrates a case of intercepting a moving target UAV
without knowing its flying trajectory. Figure 1 (a) and (b)
depict an agent (i.e., the UAV serves as the interceptor),
equipped with traditional FCSs, attempting to intercept a
flying UAV by taking its current position as the target. Intuitively, this maneuver will fail to intercept the target for
every subsequent time step, since the target has moved to
the next waypoint whenever the agent arrives at the target
position. This leads to the modern version of Zeno’s paradox — “Achilles (the interceptor) will never catch up with
a tortoise (the target UAV)”. To successfully intercept the
dynamic target, a feasible maneuver is to predict the trajectory of the target in advance. Figure 1 (c) and (d) depict the
predictive path planning strategy for the agent to move, so
it is possible to intercept the target at the predicted waypoints at future time steps. In this paper, we aim to find a
general method that can effectively address the challenge of
dynamic target intercept (DTI).
In the traditional FCSs, proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controllers are the most widely adopted. The most sig-

Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have seen increasingly
widespread use in various fields of activity in recent years,
mainly due to their flexibility and ease of control. Nowadays, most use cases for UAVs are recreational in nature,
e.g., photography and video-making, but this situation is
changing rapidly to include usage in tasks, e.g., industrial
maintenance. Increasingly, they are being deployed in more
mission-critical tasks, e.g., path following (Rysdyk 2003),
aerial refueling (Nalepka and Hinchman 2005), and aerial
interception (Beard et al. 2002). These applications are often
tightly dependent on flight control systems (FCSs), which
need to preset different navigation, tracking, and interception rules for a specific task with clear boundaries, e.g., fixed
rendezvouses and trajectories.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12049

