The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

RLogist: Fast Observation Strategy on Whole-Slide Images with
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Boxuan Zhao1, 2 * , Jun Zhang1 * , Deheng Ye1 † , Jian Cao2 , Xiao Han1 , Qiang Fu1 , Wei Yang1
1

Tencent AI Lab
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
b-x-zhao@sjtu.edu.cn, junejzhang@tencent.com, dericye@tencent.com, cao-jian@sjtu.edu.cn,
haroldhan@tencent.com, leonfu@tencent.com, willyang@tencent.com
2

Abstract
Whole-slide images (WSI) in computational pathology have
high resolution with gigapixel size, but are generally with
sparse regions of interest, which leads to weak diagnostic relevance and data inefficiency for each area in the slide. Most
of the existing methods rely on a multiple instance learning framework that requires densely sampling local patches
at high magnification. The limitation is evident in the application stage as the heavy computation for extracting patchlevel features is inevitable. In this paper, we develop RLogist,
a benchmarking deep reinforcement learning (DRL) method
for fast observation strategy on WSIs. Imitating the diagnostic logic of human pathologists, our RL agent learns how
to find regions of observation value and obtain representative features across multiple resolution levels, without having
to analyze each part of the WSI at the high magnification.
We benchmark our method on two whole-slide level classification tasks, including detection of metastases in WSIs of
lymph node sections, and subtyping of lung cancer. Experimental results demonstrate that RLogist achieves competitive
classification performance compared to typical multiple instance learning algorithms, while having a significantly short
observation path. In addition, the observation path given by
RLogist provides good decision-making interpretability, and
its ability of reading path navigation can potentially be used
by pathologists for educational/assistive purposes. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/tencent-ailab/RLogist.

Figure 1: Metastatic and normal regions in H&E stained
WSIs of lymph node sections. In most datasets, diseasepositive tissue sections take only a small portion of the
whole slide and pixel-level annotations are not available.
negative, and there exists at least one positive instance otherwise. MIL methods aggregate instance-level information
to obtain bag-level representations for bag-level classification. Existing deep learning based MIL methods try to localize the diagnostic relevant areas by applying feature embedding non-parametric pooling (e.g., mean/max pooling), selfattention (Ilse, Tomczak, and Welling 2018; Lu et al. 2021),
non-local attention with Transformer (Shao et al. 2021), etc,
resulting in densely sampling for feature aggregation.
Current methods usually extract patch-level features for
each instance based on a pretrained visual embedding, e.g.,
the training with ImageNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), and self-supervised training using pathology data
(Wang et al. 2021; Li, Li, and Eliceiri 2021). Such operation
can be performed once for all and then cached in the training stage to reduce the burden of feature extraction, which
alleviates the computational intensity. To date, most weaklysupervised studies focus on extracting informative instance
(patch) features and aggregating these features.
However, during the inference stage, the drawback of having a heavy computational cost for extracting local patch
features in an exhausted manner has often been neglected.
With pretrained visual embeddings, e.g., ResNet50 (He et al.
2016), the feature extraction process usually requires dozens
of minutes. Such a limitation becomes evident in clinical applications, as the MIL models require all instance features to
perform the classification or regression. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a data-efficient method that can manage to
avoid densely sampling all image patches in the high magnification and process informative features sparsely.
To this end, we aim to develop a fast observation strategy to avoid the aforementioned exhausting feature extraction. Motivated by the decision-making process of human

Introduction
Deep learning methods have contributed much to the domain
of medical image analysis, by solving image-/pixel-level
classification and regression problems. However, wholeslide image (WSI) analysis remains to be challenging for
deep learning, due to its uniqueness on the gigapixel size and
the lack of pixel-level annotations, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The task of WSI classification, such as cancer classification,
lymph node metastasis detection, and immunohistochemical
scoring, is formulated as a weakly supervised learning problem that can be solved by multiple instance learning (MIL).
Generally, all image patches from one WSI are regarded
as instances to construct a bag, i.e., a collection of unlabeled
instances, where all instances are negative if the WSI label is
* Equal contribution; †Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3570

