The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

High-Resolution Iterative Feedback Network for Camouflaged Object Detection
Xiaobin Hu1 , Shuo Wang2 , Xuebin Qin3 , Hang Dai4 * , Wenqi Ren5 , Donghao Luo1 ,
Ying Tai1 , Ling Shao6
1

Tencent Youtu Lab
2
ETH Zurich
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
University of Glasgow
5
Sun Yat-sen University
6
Terminus Group
{xiaobinhu, michaelluo, yingtai}@tencent.com, shawnwang.tech@gmail.com, xuebin@ualberta.ca,
Hang.Dai@glasgow.ac.uk, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org
Abstract

Our HitNet

0.8

Spotting camouflaged objects that are visually assimilated
into the background is tricky for both object detection algorithms and humans who are usually confused or cheated by
the perfectly intrinsic similarities between the foreground objects and the background surroundings. To tackle this challenge, we aim to extract the high-resolution texture details
to avoid the detail degradation that causes blurred vision in
edges and boundaries. We introduce a novel HitNet to refine
the low-resolution representations by high-resolution features
in an iterative feedback manner, essentially a global loopbased connection among the multi-scale resolutions. To design better feedback feature flow and avoid the feature corruption caused by recurrent path, an iterative feedback strategy is
proposed to impose more constraints on each feedback connection. Extensive experiments on four challenging datasets
demonstrate that our HitNet breaks the performance bottleneck and achieves significant improvements compared with
35 state-of-the-art methods. In addition, to address the data
scarcity in camouflaged scenarios, we provide an application
to convert the salient objects to camouflaged objects, thereby
generating more camouflaged training samples from the diverse salient objects. Code will be made publicly available.

7.5% higher

0.75

w
Fβ

0.7

0.65

ZoomNet

SegMaR

3.1% higher

BSA-Net
DCO-FD

UCNet

LSR
SCRN PFNet

MGL
UGTR
SINet-v2

CSNet
PraNet
F3Net
0.6 ITSD

GCPANet

0.55

SINet

0.78

0.8

Sα0.82

0.84

0.86

Figure 1: Weighted F-measure (Fβw ) vs. Structure-measure
(Sα ) of top 17 models from 35 SOTA methods and our HitNet on COD10k-Test dataset. Fβw is a comprehensive metric
to evaluate the weighted precision and recall of the prediction map, and Sα aims to analyze the structural information
of the prediction map. Our framework achieves a remarkable
performance milestone.

(Chu et al. 2010), species discovery (Pérez-de la Fuente et al.
2012), and crack inspection (Fang et al. 2020).
In the last two decades, a growing interest is witnessed
in developing algorithms capable of seeing targets through
camouflage. Early methods aim to utilize the handcrafted
low-level features (e.g., texture and contrast (Huerta et al.
2007), 3D convexity (Pan et al. 2011) and motion boundary (Yin et al. 2011)). These features still suffer from the
limited capability of discriminating the foreground and the
background in complex scenes. Recently, some CNNs-based
frameworks have been proposed to analyze the visual similarities around boundaries between the camouflaged objects and their surroundings. The auxiliary information is extracted from the shared context as the boundary guidance for
COD, such as features for identification (Fan et al. 2020a),
classification (Le et al. 2019), boundary detection (Zhai et al.
2021) and uncertainties (Yang et al. 2021).
Although the approaches mentioned above have improved

Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD) is a bio-inspired research area to detect hidden objects or animals that blend
with their surroundings (Fan et al. 2021). From biological
and psychological studies (Cuthill 2019; Stevens and Merilaita 2009), the camouflage skill helps some animals prevent
being the prey of their predators, and it also can cheat the human perception system that is sensitive to the coloration and
the illumination around the edges. The camouflaged studies not only provide an effective way to deeply understand
human perception system, but also benefit a wide range of
downstream applications, such as medical image segmentation (Dong et al. 2021; Fan et al. 2020b,c), artistic creation
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

881

