The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Identification and Estimation of the Probabilities of Potential Outcome Types Using
Covariate Information in Studies with Non-compliance
Yuta Kawakami, Ryusei Shingaki, Manabu Kuroki
Department of Mathematics, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Graduate School of Engineering Science, Yokohama National University
79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya-ku, Yokohama 240-8501 JAPAN
kawakami-yuta-yd@ynu.jp
Abstract

with a placebo, as reported by Cohen (2020):
“An EUA (emergency use authorization) for a vaccine might also make it more difficult to recruit
people for clinical trials of that vaccine and others
because participants might not want to take the risk
of receiving a placebo when they can get a shot of
a product that’s authorized for use.”

We propose novel identification conditions and a statistical estimation method for the probabilities of potential outcome
types using covariate information in randomized trials in
which the treatment assignment is randomized but subject
compliance is not perfect. Different from existing studies,
the proposed identification conditions do not require strict
assumptions such as the assumption of monotonicity. When
the probabilities of potential outcome types are identifiable
through the proposed conditions, the problem of estimating
the probabilities of potential outcome types is reduced to that
of singular models. Thus, the probabilities cannot be evaluated
using standard statistical likelihood-based estimation methods.
Rather, the proposed identification conditions show that we
can derive consistent estimators of the probabilities of potential outcome types via the method of moments, which leads to
the asymptotic normality of the proposed estimators through
the delta method under regular conditions. We also propose
a new statistical estimation method based on the bounded
constrained augmented Lagrangian method to derive more
efficient estimators than can be derived through the method of
moments.

“Vaccines go into healthy people, so putting them
into use before fully assessing their risks and benefits is a bigger gamble than issuing an EUA for an
experimental treatment for someone already ill.”

Introduction
Practical Background
A central concern in practical sciences is to elucidate the
cause-effect relationship between a treatment and an outcome.
Randomized trials have been regarded as a more reliable and
powerful tool with which to evaluate causal effects than observational studies, where confounding, information bias, and
selection bias all hinder the evaluation of causal effects from
observed data. In contrast, to evaluate the likelihood that
one event will cause another event, it is necessary to simultaneously derive the results for the same subjects receiving
experimental and control treatments. However, doing so is
difficult, even in successful randomized trials.
The importance of this topic can be seen in various fields
of the practical sciences. For example, consider the following statements regarding the randomized clinical trial (RCT)
comparing the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12234

Cohen’s report implies that there are two issues in RCTs
in terms of evaluating the causal effect of the COVID-19
vaccine. First, there may be subjects who do not comply with
their treatment assignment. In such a situation, the RCT may
fail to evaluate the causal effect, even if it successfully recruits a sufficient number of subjects. To derive the relevant
results in this situation, it is important to classify the subject’s
situation into four types: “compliance,” “defiance,” “always
take,” and “never take.” Here, “compliance” denotes a situation in which subjects receive the vaccine if and only if they
are assigned to the vaccination group. “Defiance” denotes
a situation in which subjects do the opposite of their treatment assignment status. “Always-take” denotes a situation
in which subjects always receive the vaccine even if they
are assigned to the placebo group. “Never-take” denotes a
situation in which subjects do not receive the vaccine even if
they are assigned to the vaccination group. Here, “defiance,”
“always-take,” and “never-take” are collectively called “noncompliance” or “imperfect compliance.” Second, it is uncertain whether the severity of the disease would decrease if unvaccinated healthy subjects are (counterfactually) vaccinated.
To administer the vaccine to subjects who are most likely to
benefit from it, classification of the subject’s situation into
four types – “causative,” “preventive,” “doomed,” and “immune” – is useful. Here, “causative” denotes a situation in
which the disease occurs if and only if the subject receives
the placebo. “Preventive” denotes a situation in which the
disease occurs if and only if the subject receives the vaccine.
“Doomed” denotes a situation in which the treatment received
is irrelevant in the sense that the disease occurs regardless
of whether the vaccine or the placebo is received. “Immune”
denotes a situation in which the treatment received is irrele-

