The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Safety Verification of Nonlinear Systems with Bayesian Neural Network
Controllers
Xia Zeng1 , Zhengfeng Yang2 * , Li Zhang2 , Xiaochao Tang2 , Zhenbing Zeng3 , Zhiming Liu1
1

School of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
Shanghai Key Lab of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Department of Mathematics, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
xzeng0712@swu.edu.cn, zfyang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, zbzeng@shu.edu.cn, zhimingliu88@swu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

weights (Neal 1996). This allows learning uncertainty in
the data and the network’s prediction, while preserving the
strong modelling capabilities of DNNs (Lee et al. 2019;
McAllister et al. 2017). BNNs are proper choice for controllers of safety-critical systems by introducing redundancies to tackle the safe control problem more robustly (Lee
et al. 2019).
Because of the probabilistic nature of BNNs, the closedloop systems may exhibit unsafe behaviors under the BNN
controllers. So safety verification of BNN controlled systems amounts to computing a safe weight set from the support set of the distribution of the BNN’s weights, such that
when restricted to the safe weight set, the BNN controller
not only retains the redundancies of control but also guarantee the safe behaviors of the systems. A similar research
topic is verifying safety of the closed-loop systems under
DNN controllers, which has been extensively studied (Zhao
et al. 2021; Deshmukh et al. 2019; Ivanov et al. 2019; Tran
et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021). Comparably speaking, the
safety verification of BNN controllers has drawn less attention except for (Lechner et al. 2021). Verifying even simple
properties about DNN is NP-complete (Katz et al. 2017),
and verification for BNN means at least verifying any deterministic DNN sampled from the BNN’s posterior distribution (Wicker et al. 2020). So it is conceivable that the verification of closed-loop systems with BNN controllers is a big
challenge, and results on verification of systems with DNN
controllers cannot be employed straightforwardly.
Recently, (Lechner et al. 2021) first defined the safety verification problem for discrete-time dynamical systems with
BNN controllers. They compute the safe weight set Wϵ with
width ϵ, and iteratively increase ϵ to explore a Wϵ as large
as possible, which ensures the infinite time horizon safety
condition, i.e. existence the safe inductive invariants. They
use supervised learning to synthesize neural network invariants as safety certificates, whose rigorousness is checked
by mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) solvers. For
their method to work, the original continuous dynamical systems in the safety control benchmarks need to be discretized
first. In addition, the scalability and efficiency of the method
is limited by MILP/SMT-solver-based inductive invariants
checking. Furthermore, when seeking for larger safe weight
sets, results about smaller safe weight sets and corresponding invariants cannot be reused, which makes their iterative

Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) retain NN structures with
a probability distribution placed over their weights. With the
introduced uncertainties and redundancies, BNNs are proper
choices of robust controllers for safety-critical control systems. This paper considers the problem of verifying the
safety of nonlinear closed-loop systems with BNN controllers
over unbounded-time horizon. In essence, we compute a safe
weight set such that as long as the BNN controller is always applied with weights sampled from the safe weight set,
the controlled system is guaranteed to be safe. We propose
a novel two-phase method for the safe weight set computation. First, we construct a reference safe control set that constraints the control inputs, through polynomial approximation
to the BNN controller followed by polynomial-optimizationbased barrier certificate generation. Then, the computation of
safe weight set is reduced to a range inclusion problem of the
BNN on the system domain w.r.t. the safe control set, which
can be solved incrementally and the set of safe weights can
be extracted. Compared with the existing method based on
invariant learning and mixed-integer linear programming, we
could compute safe weight sets with larger radii on a series
of linear benchmarks. Moreover, experiments on a series of
widely used nonlinear control tasks show that our method can
synthesize large safe weight sets with probability measure as
high as 95% even for a large-scale system of dimension 7.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are capable of dealing with
decision making tasks in a variety of areas, such as medical diagnosis, face recognition and so on. Especially, DNNs
have been used successfully in control of cyber-physical systems such as unmanned aerial vehicles, self-driving cars, etc
(Squires, Pierpaoli, and Egerstedt 2018). However, DNNs
are still not widely applied to safety-critical systems in practice because they may behave in unexpected ways in response to inputs leaving known grounds. In fact, uncertainty
is everywhere in the real-world situation including modeling uncertainty (also called epistemic uncertainty) and data
uncertainty (Oliver Dürr 2020; Han, Jasour, and Williams
2022). Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) retain the structures of neural networks and place distributions over their
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15278

