The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Almost Cost-Free Communication in Federated Best Arm Identification
Srinivas Reddy Kota, P. N. Karthik, and Vincent Y. F. Tan
National University of Singapore
Emails: ksvr1532@gmail.com, karthik@nus.edu.sg, vtan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Uplink, cost

Server

Downlink,
cost-free

We study the problem of best arm identification in a federated
learning multi-armed bandit setup with a central server and
multiple clients. Each client is associated with a multi-armed
bandit in which each arm yields i.i.d. rewards following a
Gaussian distribution with an unknown mean and known variance. The set of arms is assumed to be the same at all the
clients. We define two notions of best arm—local and global.
The local best arm at a client is the arm with the largest mean
among the arms local to the client, whereas the global best
arm is the arm with the largest average mean across all the
clients. We assume that each client can only observe the rewards from its local arms and thereby estimate its local best
arm. The clients communicate with a central server on uplinks that entail a cost of C ≥ 0 units per usage per uplink.
The global best arm is estimated at the server. The goal is
to identify the local best arms and the global best arm with
minimal total cost, defined as the sum of the total number of
arm selections at all the clients and the total communication
cost, subject to an upper bound on the error probability. We
propose a novel algorithm F ED E LIM that is based on successive elimination and communicates only in exponential time
steps, and obtain a high probability instance-dependent upper bound on its total cost. The key takeaway from our paper is that for any C ≥ 0 and error probabilities sufficiently
small, the total number of arm selections (resp. the total cost)
under F ED E LIM is at most 2 (resp. 3) times the maximum
total number of arm selections under its variant that communicates in every time step. Additionally, we show that the latter is optimal in expectation up to a constant factor, thereby
demonstrating that communication is almost cost-free under
F ED E LIM. We numerically validate the efficacy of F ED E LIM
on two synthetic datasets and the MovieLens dataset.

Client 1

Client 2
Arm 1
Arm 2
Arm 3
Arm 4

Client 3
Arm 1
Arm 2
Arm 3
Arm 4

Arm 1
Arm 2
Arm 3
Arm 4

Figure 1: An illustration of our problem setup with M = 3
clients and K = 4 arms per client. The mean of arm k of
client m is µk,m , where k ∈ [K] and m ∈ [M ]. Communication of a scalar to the server is assumed to entail a cost of
C ≥ 0 units per usage of the uplink, whereas the downlink
from the server to the client is cost-free.
assume that the set of arms is identical at all the clients. As
in Shi, Shen, and Yang (2021), we consider two notions of
best arm—local and global. The local best arm at a client
is defined as the arm with the largest mean among the arms
local to the client. The global best arm is the arm with the
largest average of the means averaged across the clients (we
define these terms precisely later in the paper). We assume
that each client can observe the rewards generated only from
its local arms and thereby estimate its local best arm. The
clients do not communicate directly with each other, but instead communicate with the central server. Communication
from each client to the server entails a fixed cost of C ≥ 0
units per usage per uplink. The information transmitted by
the clients on the uplink is used by the server to estimate
the global best arm. In contrast to the work of Shi, Shen,
and Yang (2021) where the goal is to minimise the regret accrued over a finite time horizon, the goal of our work is to
find the local best arms of all the clients and the global best
arm in a way so as to minimise the sum of the total number
of arm pulls at the clients and the total communication cost,
subject to an upper bound on the error probability. Figure 1
summarises our problem setup.

Introduction
We study an optimal stopping variant of the federated learning multi-armed bandit (FLMAB) regret minimisation problem of Shi, Shen, and Yang (2021). The specifics of our
problem setup are as follows. We consider a federated multiarmed bandit setup with a central server and M > 1 clients.
Each client is associated with a multi-armed bandit with
K > 1 arms in which each arm yields independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) rewards following a Gaussian distribution with an unknown mean and known variance. We

Motivation
The following example from the movie industry motivates
our problem setup. Movies are typically categorised into various genres (for e.g., comedy, romance, action, thriller, etc.)
and released in several parts (regions) of the world. The people of a region develop preferences for one or more genres

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8378

