The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Defending Black-Box Skeleton-Based Human Activity Classifiers
He Wang* †1 , Yunfeng Diao* 2 , Zichang Tan3 , Guodong Guo3
1
University of Leeds, UK
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei China
3
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing China
h.e.wang@leeds.ac.uk, diaoyunfeng@hfut.edu.cn, tanzichang@baidu.com, Guodong.Guo@mail.wvu.edu
2

Abstract

Defense on HAR presents several challenges. First, while
most AT methods seek to resist attacks from the most aggressive adversarial sample (Silva and Najafirad 2020), the
whole adversarial distribution should be considered (Ye and
Zhu 2018; Dong et al. 2020). But this has been mainly done
on images assuming a simple structure of the adversarial
distribution (e.g. Gaussian). How to model the adversarial
distribution of skeletal motions has not been explored. Further, adversarial samples are near or on the data manifold
constrained by the motion dynamics (Wang et al. 2021a;
Diao et al. 2021) which is different different from other
time-series data, e.g. videos. Naive adaptation of existing AT
methods (Madry et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2019b), e.g. image-based, leads to crude approximation of
this manifold, resulting in either ineffective defense or compromise of classification accuracy. While mitigation is possible for images (Miyato et al. 2018; Carmon et al. 2019;
Song et al. 2020), it is under-explored for skeletal motions.
Finally, most AT methods try to find the best model that can
resist attacks. From the Bayesian perspective, this is a point
estimation on the model. An ensemble of different models
can provide better robustness (Ye and Zhu 2018; Bortolussi
et al. 2022) but how to find them for skeletal motions has not
been explored.
To address the challenges, we present a new framework
for robust skeleton-based HAR. Extending Energy-based
methods (Hill, Mitchell, and Zhu 2021; Zhu et al. 2021;
Lee, Yang, and Oh 2020) which model the data distribution
p(x, y) of data x and labels y, and sample the adversaries
x̃ based on simplified adversarial distributions, we consider
the full adversarial distribution by jointly modeling x, y, x̃
and the classifier parameterized by θ: p(x, y, x̃, θ), to give a
full Bayesian treatment on all relevant factors. This involves
new Bayesian treatments on both x̃ and θ.
We first re-interpret discriminative classifiers into an
energy-based model that maximizes the joint probability
p(x, y) (Grathwohl et al. 2020). Then one key novelty is
we assume we can observe all adversarial samples x̃ during training, so that we can model the clean-adversarial
joint probability p(x, x̃, y). This joint probability considers the full adversarial distribution p(x̃|x, y) conditioned on
the clean data where we propose a new adversary sampling
scheme along the natural motion manifold. Overall, this
leads to a more general adversarial distribution parameteri-

Skeletal motions have been heavily relied upon for human
activity recognition (HAR). Recently, a universal vulnerability of skeleton-based HAR has been identified across a variety of classifiers and data, calling for mitigation. To this end,
we propose the first black-box defense method for skeletonbased HAR to our best knowledge. Our method is featured
by full Bayesian treatments of the clean data, the adversaries
and the classifier, leading to (1) a new Bayesian Energy-based
formulation of robust discriminative classifiers, (2) a new adversary sampling scheme based on natural motion manifolds,
and (3) a new post-train Bayesian strategy for black-box defense. We name our framework Bayesian Energy-based Adversarial Training or BEAT. BEAT is straightforward but elegant, which turns vulnerable black-box classifiers into robust ones without sacrificing accuracy. It demonstrates surprising and universal effectiveness across a wide range of
skeletal HAR classifiers and datasets, under various attacks.
Appendix and code are available.

Introduction
Classification is a fundamental task where deep learning has achieved the state-of-the-art performance. However, deep learning models are vulnerable to strategically
computed perturbations on the inputs, a.k.a. adversarial attack (Chakraborty et al. 2018). The universality of the vulnerability has caused alarming concerns because the perturbations are imperceptible to humans but destructive to
machine intelligence. Subsequently, defense methods have
emerged as a new field recently (Chakraborty et al. 2018)
most of which are focused on static data (Akhtar et al. 2021).
More recently, adversarial attack has started to appear on
time-series data (Karim, Majumdar, and Darabi 2020; Wei
et al. 2019; Liu, Akhtar, and Mian 2020), but the corresponding defense research has been largely unexplored, especially for skeleton-based HAR, an important time-series
data where a universal vulnerability has been recently identified (Wang et al. 2021a; Diao et al. 2021), urgently calling
for mitigation. To this end, we fill this gap by proposing a
new defense framework based on adversarial training (AT).
* These authors contributed equally.
†

corresponding author, h.e.wang@leeds.ac.uk
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2546

