The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Detecting Anomalous Networks of Opioid Prescribers and Dispensers in
Prescription Drug Data
Katie Rosman, Daniel B. Neill
Machine Learning for Good Laboratory, New York University
ksr351@nyu.edu, daniel.neill@nyu.edu

Abstract

representative survey of heroin users, 80% of respondents
reported using prescription opioids prior to heroin (Lankenau et al. 2012).
To better monitor the prescribing and dispensing of opioids, states have created electronic databases known as prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs), which collect data on dispensed prescriptions of controlled substances
statewide. By providing prescribers and dispensers with full
visibility into their patient’s prescription history, PDMPs are
intended to help reduce or prevent “doctor shopping” and
“pharmacy shopping,” behaviors in which patients request
prescriptions from multiple prescribers or dispensaries simultaneously. As of 2022, all 50 states operate PDMPs, and
most licensed clinicians are required to check patient records
in the PDMP before prescribing or dispensing controlled
substances (PDMP Training and Technical Assistance Center 2022).
Over the last decade, PDMP data has also been used to
evaluate effects on clinical decision-making, identify public
health trends, and help plan for community-level interventions (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2017; Schell et al. 2022). However, the potential of
this rich data source for detecting high-risk and potentially
illicit behavior among opioid prescribers and dispensers remains largely unexamined. Because clinicians are largely responsible for determining the recipients of legally prescribed
opioids, down to the specific drug, duration, and dosage, and
are afforded wide discretion while doing so, the individual
behaviors of prescribers and dispensers can significantly affect patients’ exposure to and supply of opioids. In some
cases, most prominently illustrated by Purdue Pharma’s targeted marketing of OxyContin to physicians and the subsequent lawsuits and settlement, unsafe prescribing can lead to
or exacerbate incidents of opioid abuse and addiction. Furthermore, given their essentially unfettered access to highly
addictive and in-demand substances, some clinicians have
participated in illicit monetary schemes to divert prescription opioids to illegal channels, a process known as drug
diversion. By increasing the supply of opioids sold on the
“black market,” drug diversion further increases the risk
of adverse opioid-related public health outcomes. For these
reasons, we believe it is imperative for state governments to
develop systems that proactively monitor opioid prescribers
and dispensers for unsafe and potentially illicit prescribing

The opioid overdose epidemic represents a serious public
health crisis, with fatality rates rising considerably over the
past several years. To help address the abuse of prescription
opioids, state governments collect data on dispensed prescriptions, yet the use of these data is typically limited to manual searches. In this paper, we propose a novel graph-based
framework for detecting anomalous opioid prescribing patterns in state Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP)
data, which could aid governments in deterring opioid diversion and abuse. Specifically, we seek to identify connected
networks of opioid prescribers and dispensers who engage in
high-risk and possibly illicit activity. We develop and apply a
novel extension of the Non-Parametric Heterogeneous Graph
Scan (NPHGS) to two years of de-identified PDMP data from
the state of Kansas, and find that NPHGS identifies subgraphs
that are significantly more anomalous than those detected by
other graph-based methods. NPHGS also reveals clusters of
potentially illicit activity, which may assist law enforcement
and regulatory agencies. Our paper is the first to demonstrate
how prescription data can systematically identify anomalous
opioid prescribers and dispensers, illustrating the efficacy of
a network-based approach. Additionally, our technical extensions to NPHGS offer both improved flexibility and graph
density reduction, enabling the framework to be replicated
across jurisdictions and extended to other domains.

Introduction
Misuse and abuse of opioids represents a widespread public
health crisis in the United States. Between 2019 and 2020,
deaths from opioid overdoses increased by nearly 40%, and
opioid overdoses now account for 75% of all fatal drug overdoses (National Institutes of Health 2022). While the majority of opioid overdoses involve illicit substances, such
as fentanyl and heroin, prescription opioids contribute to
this crisis in several ways. Like illicit opioids, prescription
opioids contain highly addictive properties that can lead to
abuse. They are often diverted from the healthcare system
to be shared or sold illegally and consumed in high-risk volumes. In 2020, prescription opioids accounted for 24% of all
fatal opioid-related overdoses (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention 2021). In addition, prescription opioids commonly serve as a gateway to illicit opioids; in a nationally
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14470

