The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Query Your Model with Definitions in FrameNet:
An Effective Method for Frame Semantic Role Labeling
Ce Zheng, Yiming Wang, Baobao Chang*
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, China
zce1112zslx@pku.edu.cn, w10y20ming@gmail.com, chbb@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2020; Lin, Sun, and Zhang 2021) or modeled in a sophisticated and time-consuming interaction module (Chen,
Zheng, and Chang 2021; Zheng et al. 2022) where the arguments of one frame are identified sequentially. Besides, label
semantics of FEs are ignored. For regular role classifiers,
representations of FEs are learned from labeled instances.
However, limited by amount of training data of FSRL, such
methods may perform poorly, especially for low-resource
and few-shot frames because they cannot capture label semantics directly.
In relevant tasks, e.g. SRL (Carreras and Màrquez 2005)
and Event Argument Extraction (EAE) (Ebner et al. 2020),
some researches propose query-based frameworks to handle
problems mentioned above. They treat these tasks as Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) (Liu et al. 2020) or
fill-in-the-bank Clozing (Ma et al. 2022). Queries are generated from role-specific questions (Meng et al. 2019) or event
(or event role) templates to extract argument spans, where
label semantics can be captured in label-specific templates.
Recent work in EAE (Ma et al. 2022) uses event templates
to extract all arguments simultaneously, where interactions
between arguments are highlighted in the event templates.
However, the templates or questions used by them are either
too simple or in need of elaborative manual design. The simple questions format is not informative enough for FSRL,
and manually designed templates cannot be easily applied to
FrameNet because there are nearly 1000 frames and 10000
frame elements in FrameNet.
FrameNet describes frames and FEs with frame definitions and FE definitions. As shown in Figure 1, the
frame definition of Attack describes an event where an
Assailant attacks a Victim, and other FEs of Attack
such as Weapon are also included. The definition of
Attack also describes how they interact with each other;
FE definitions show fine-grained descriptions of FEs and
FE relations, for example, the definition of Assailant
shows the relation be attack by between Victim and
Assailant and vice versa.
We find that frame definitions and FE definitions are suitable for the above problems. First, frame definitions describe how FEs of this frame interact with each other, and
FE definitions also show fine-grained relations between FEs
(e.g. the definition of FE Victim describes relations between Victim and Assailant). We can model relations

Frame Semantic Role Labeling (FSRL) identifies arguments and labels them with frame semantic roles defined in
FrameNet. Previous researches tend to divide FSRL into argument identification and role classification. Such methods
usually model role classification as naive multi-class classification and treat arguments individually, which neglects label
semantics and interactions between arguments and thus hindering performance and generalization of models. In this paper, we propose a query-based framework named ArGument
Extractor with Definitions in FrameNet (AGED) to mitigate
these problems. Definitions of frames and frame elements
(FEs) in FrameNet can be used to query arguments in text.
Encoding text-definition pairs can guide models in learning
label semantics and strengthening argument interactions. Experiments show that AGED outperforms previous state-ofthe-art by up to 1.3 F1-score in two FrameNet datasets and
the generalization power of AGED in zero-shot and few-shot
scenarios. Our code and technical appendix is available at
https://github.com/PKUnlp-icler/AGED.

Introduction
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) aims to identify arguments
and label them with semantic roles for each predicate in
a sentence. Frame Semantic Role Labeling (FSRL) is proposed based on frame semantics theory (Gildea and Jurafsky 2000), where predicates are target words that can evoke
semantic frames, and arguments are labeled with frame elements (FEs). Frames and FEs are described in the lexical resource FrameNet (Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998). Frames
represent different events, relations, objects, and situations.
FEs of a frame are frame-specific roles. FSRL can extract
frame semantic structures from text and thus can be helpful
to many downstream tasks such as information extraction
(Surdeanu et al. 2003), question answering (Shen and Lapata 2007), reading comprehension (Guo et al. 2020).
Previous work tends to divide the FSRL into argument
identification and role classification, and they usually identify the arguments first and then assign an FE to each argument. There are two flaws in such methods. First, interactions between arguments are either neglected (Kalyanpur
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14029

