The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Inferential Knowledge-Enhanced Integrated Reasoning
for Video Question Answering
Jianguo Mao1,2‡ , Wenbin Jiang3 * , Hong Liu1 , Xiangdong Wang1 , Yajuan Lyu3
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{maojianguo20s, xdwang, hliu}@ict.ac.cn, {jiangwenbin, lvyajuan}@baidu.com

Abstract

answer. Many prior works have leveraged vision domain
technologies to obtain a fine-grained understanding of visual
modality. For instance, Kim et al. (Kim, Tang, and Bansal
2020) explored dense image captioning (Johnson, Karpathy,
and Fei-Fei 2016) to extract local-to-global visual semantics to obtain a deep understanding of video content. Chadha
et al. (Chadha, Arora, and Kaloty 2020) explored an unsupervised visual causal inference method to correct commonsense errors while generating dense image captioning. Garcia et al. (Garcia and Nakashima 2020a) adopted symbolized
scene graphs to model the visual semantics. Due to the consistency and complementarity of multi-modal information,
the linguistic modality also plays an essential role in video
understanding and answer reasoning, especially for videos
that contain character dialogues. To this end, Kim et al. Engin et al. (Engin et al. 2021) retrieved the plot summary of
the video as external knowledge to complementary the background information related to the question. Kim et al. (Kim
et al. 2021) applied contrastive learning to promote the representation learning of linguistic modality. Despite the success, it is still in its infancy. We believe that the understanding of linguistic modality can be further deepened by imitating the inference behavior of humans when watching videos.
When watching a video, humans can understand a complex story by leveraging their powerful inference ability.
Based on the video dialogues, they usually infer implicit
causes and effects of the event and the characters’ mental states. This inferred implicit information is essential for
video content understanding, called Inferential Knowledge
in this paper. Intuitively, it is also beneficial for the intelligent system to understand the video content and reason the
answer.
To this end, we propose the Inferential KnowledgeEnhanced Integrated Reasoning method to achieve this goal
in two steps. First, generating inferential knowledge for
linguistic inputs (subtitles-based dialogues, questions,
and candidate answers). We design an Inferential Knowledge Reasoner, which receives a sentence and an inferential knowledge label as input, and generates corresponding inferential knowledge in an autoregressive manner. E.g.,
given a sentence “She is drunk” and a knowledge label
“<xWant>” as input, it generates the inferential knowledge “to go to sleep”. It enables such inference ability by
training on a large-scale knowledge graph containing vari-

Recently, video question answering has attracted growing attention. It involves answering a question based on a finegrained understanding of video multi-modal information.
Most existing methods have successfully explored the deep
understanding of visual modality. We argue that a deep understanding of linguistic modality is also essential for answer reasoning, especially for videos that contain character
dialogues. To this end, we propose an Inferential KnowledgeEnhanced Integrated Reasoning method. Our method consists
of two main components: 1) an Inferential Knowledge Reasoner to generate inferential knowledge for linguistic modality inputs that reveals deeper semantics, including the implicit
causes, effects, mental states, etc. 2) an Integrated Reasoning
Mechanism to enhance video content understanding and answer reasoning by leveraging the generated inferential knowledge. Experimental results show that our method achieves
significant improvement on two mainstream datasets. The ablation study further demonstrates the effectiveness of each
component of our approach.

Introduction
Video question answering raises high demands on multimodal representation learning and answer reasoning
(Tapaswi et al. 2016; Jang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2017; Lei
et al. 2018, 2020; Garcia et al. 2020a). It requires a comprehensive understanding of visual and linguistic modality inputs (subtitles-based dialogues, questions, and candidate answers) to determine the answer (Lei et al. 2018;
Garcia et al. 2020a). Recently, we have witnessed significant improvements in visual modality understanding (Gao
et al. 2018; Fan et al. 2019; Kim, Tang, and Bansal 2020;
Chadha, Arora, and Kaloty 2020; Garcia and Nakashima
2020a; Huang et al. 2020; Le et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020;
Zellers et al. 2021). However, a deeper understanding of linguistic modality needs to be explored (Kim et al. 2021; Engin et al. 2021).
The general paradigm of video question answering is to
encode the visual and linguistic inputs individually, then
fuse them and feed them into a classifier to determine the
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author.
‡
This work was done during internship at Baidu Inc.

13380

