The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Inconsistent Cores for ASP: The Perks and Perils of Non-monotonicity
Johannes K. Fichte* 1 , Markus Hecher* 2 , Stefan Szeider* 3
2

1
TU Wien, Research Unit Databases and AI, Vienna, Austria
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States
3
TU Wien, Research Unit Algorithms and Complexity, Vienna, Austria
johannes.fichte@tuwien.ac.at, hecher@mit.edu, sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

the concept of an unsatisfiable core is quite strict as it does
not support identifying the source of inconsistency in terms
of rules but only in terms of atoms. Therefore, we consider
the more general concept of an inconsistent core (IC), which
for a given program Π is a subset of rules Π′ ⊆ Π that is already inconsistent.
In the context of S AT, the counterpart of ICs are unsatisfiable subsets. There, one is mainly interested in finding
minimal unsatisfiable subsets (MUSes) of a CNF formula F ,
which are subsets F ′ ⊆ F of clauses that are unsatisfiable,
but F ′ \ {c} is satisfiable for any clause c ∈ F ′ . MUSes
are actively used in product configuration, knowledge-based
validation, and hardware and software design and verification (McCarthy 1980; Schlobach et al. 2007; Andraus, Liffiton, and Sakallah 2008; Soh and Inoue 2010; Bendı́k and
Meel 2020; Endriss 2020). Finding MUSes is among the
standard solving repertoires in the SAT community, with a
long list of works on extracting them (Nadel 2010; MarquesSilva and Lynce 2011; Belov, Manthey, and Marques-Silva
2013; Lagniez and Biere 2013; Belov, Heule, and MarquesSilva 2014; Mencı́a et al. 2019).
In S AT, the complexity of finding and recognizing MUSes
is well studied (Papadimitriou and Wolfe 1988; Szeider
2004; Fleischner, Kullmann, and Szeider 2002). For instance, deciding whether a formula is an MUS is D P -complete. However, the complexity of problems involving ICs in
the setting of A SP is primarily unexplored, despite plenty of
investigations on A SP problems of higher complexity (Bogaerts, Janhunen, and Tasharrofi 2016; Amendola, Ricca,
and Truszczynski 2019) and considerations on strong inconsistency in A SP (Mencı́a and Marques-Silva 2020).

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a prominent modeling and
solving framework. An inconsistent core (IC) of an ASP program is an inconsistent subset of rules. In the case of inconsistent programs, a smallest or subset-minimal IC contains crucial rules for the inconsistency. In this work, we study finding minimal ICs of ASP programs and key fragments from a
complexity-theoretic perspective. Interestingly, due to ASP’s
non-monotonic behavior, also consistent programs admit ICs.
It turns out that there is an entire landscape of problems involving ICs with a diverse range of complexities up to the
fourth level of the Polynomial Hierarchy. Deciding the existence of an IC is, already for tight programs, on the second
level of the Polynomial Hierarchy. Furthermore, we give encodings for IC-related problems on the fragment of tight programs and illustrate feasibility on small instance sets.

1

Introduction

Answer set programming (A SP) is a declarative programming paradigm with roots in non-monotonic reasoning and
logic programming (Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczyński 2011).
It has many applications in knowledge representation, artificial intelligence, and planning and supports compact problem modeling (Baral 2003; Pontelli et al. 2012). In A SP,
a problem is encoded as a set of rules, called a logic program, and evaluated under the stable model semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988, 1991), where solutions are called
answer sets. Solvers such as clingo (Gebser et al. 2011,
2014), WASP (Alviano et al. 2015a), or DLV (Alviano et al.
2017) have been developed.
A well-known concept for A SP are unsatisfiable cores,
which are also widely used for guiding the search for optimal answer sets (Alviano, Dodaro, and Ricca 2015; Alviano et al. 2015b, 2018a). An unsatisfiable core of a given
program Π is a subset C of literals that make the program Π ∪ {← ¬ℓ | ℓ ∈ C} under the (literal) assumptions C inconsistent. Besides core-guided optimization, assumptions and unsatisfiable cores are relevant for cautious
reasoning (Alviano et al. 2018b), explainability (Alviano
et al. 2019), belief revision (Garcia et al. 2018), and forgetting rules (cf. Gonçalves, Knorr, and Leite 2021). However,

Contributions. Here, we chart the complexity map of various computational problems arising from ICs. It turns out
that there is an entire landscape of problems involving ICs
with a diverse range of complexities up to the fourth level of
the Polynomial Hierarchy (PH). Our main contributions are:
1. We establish the computational complexity of finding
ICs, minimal inconsistent cores (MICs), and smallest
ICs for A SP. Additionally, we provide A SP encodings
to compute the respective set of rules for the considered
problems.
2. We present detailed complexity results for reasoning
problems using ICs, namely, credulous and skeptical

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6363

