The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fair Representation Learning for Recommendation:
A Mutual Information Perspective
Chen Zhao1 , Le Wu1,2,* , Pengyang Shao1 , Kun Zhang1 , Richang Hong1,2 , Meng Wang1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
2
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zhaochen.hfut.lmc, lewu.ustc, shaopymark, zhang1028kun, hongrc.hfut, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com

Abstract

2009; Chen et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2022). By learning accurate user and item embeddings from historical user-item interactions, CF-based algorithms have made impressive performance on recommendation accuracy. However, historical interactions can be biased by sensitive attributes (e.g.,
race and gender). As a consequence, CF-based algorithms
may inherit or even amplify these data biases for embedding learning, and finally lead to unfairness in recommendation results (Ekstrand et al. 2018a; Li et al. 2021; Ekstrand
et al. 2018b). For example, news recommender systems may
recommend news with a clear political bias, manipulating
users’ options (Wu et al. 2021a; Li et al. 2022). Career
recommender systems may disproportionately recommend
relatively low-income jobs to female users (Lambrecht and
Tucker 2019).
Recently, fairness in recommender systems has gained increasing attention (Li et al. 2022). One of promising directions is to learn fair embeddings from biased user-item interactions, which is also known as embedding fairness (Zemel
et al. 2013; Madras et al. 2018). The core idea of embedding
fairness is to impose constraints on the independence between learned embeddings and sensitive attributes. Following this principle, numerous works have been proposed, such
as adversarial learning based debias (Bose and Hamilton
2019; Wu et al. 2021a), regularization based methods (Yao
and Huang 2017). (Wu et al. 2021a) proposed to decompose
users’ embeddings into bias-aware embeddings and biasfree embeddings with orthogonality regularization. Further,
some researchers argued that these models are not satisfactory for fair recommendation (Shao et al. 2022). Most of
them assume each instance is independent, however, users
and items in recommendation are not independent but tightly
correlated. To solve the problem, researchers proposed to
filter both user and item embeddings with the adversarial
learning of a user-centric graph (Wu et al. 2021c). These
models achieve better fairness, however, they also decrease
recommendation accuracy. Therefore, how to avoid accuracy reduction when achieving fair recommendations becomes a key challenge for embedding fairness in CF-based
recommendations.
As mutual information (MI) is a more general measure of
the mutual dependence between two variables, this inspires
us to quantitatively describe the recommendation fairness
process with MI. In this paper, we propose a Fair Mutual

Recommender systems have been widely used in recent
years. By exploiting historical user-item interactions, recommender systems can model personalized potential interests of
users and have been widely applied to a wide range of scenarios. Despite their impressive performance, most of them
may be subject to unwanted biases related to sensitive attributes (e.g., race and gender), leading to unfairness. An intuitive idea to alleviate this problem is to ensure that there is
no mutual information between recommendation results and
sensitive attributes. However, keeping independence conditions solely achieves fairness improvement while causing an
obvious degradation of recommendation accuracy, which is
not a desired result. To this end, in this paper, we re-define
recommendation fairness with a novel two-fold mutual information objective. In concerned details, we define fairness as
mutual information minimization between embeddings and
sensitive information, and mutual information maximization
between embeddings and non-sensitive information. Then, a
flexible Fair Mutual Information (FairMI) framework is designed to achieve this goal. FairMI first employs a sensitive
attribute encoder to capture sensitive information in the data.
Then, based on results from the sensitive attribute encoder, an
interest encoder is developed to generate sensitive-free embeddings, which are expected to contain rich non-sensitive
information of input data. Moreover, we propose novel mutual information (upper/lower) bounds with contrastive information estimation for model optimization. Extensive experiments over two real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed FairMI in reducing unfairness and
improving recommendation accuracy simultaneously.

Introduction
Recommender systems have been widely applied to plenty
of open platforms due to its ability of helping users explore their potential interests (Covington, Adams, and Sargin 2016; Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009). Plenty of algorithms have been proposed to mine users’ preference to
items from historical data. Among them, Collaborative Filtering (CF) is one of the representative algorithms due to
its relatively-high performance and easy-to-collect user-item
behavior data (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009; Rendle et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4911

