The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Differentially Private Nonlinear Causal Discovery from Numerical Data
Hao Zhang1 , Yewei Xia1 , Yixin Ren1 , Jihong Guan2 , Shuigeng Zhou1∗
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
{haoz15, ywxia21, yxren21, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; jhguan@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, several methods such as private ANM, EM-PC and
Priv-PC have been proposed to perform differentially private
causal discovery in various scenarios including bivariate, multivariate Gaussian and categorical cases. However, there is little effort on how to conduct private nonlinear causal discovery
from numerical data. This work tries to challenge this problem.
To this end, we propose a method to infer nonlinear causal relations from observed numerical data by using regression-based
conditional independence test (RCIT) that consists of kernel
ridge regression (KRR) and Hilbert-Schmidt independence
criterion (HSIC) with permutation approximation. Sensitivity analysis for RCIT is given and a private constraint-based
causal discovery framework with differential privacy guarantee is developed. Extensive simulations and real-world experiments for both conditional independence test and causal discovery are conducted, which show that our method is effective
in handling nonlinear numerical cases and easy to implement. The source code of our method and data are available at
https://github.com/Causality-Inference/PCD.

Introduction
Causal discovery is to reason the causal relations among observed variables, which is generally a challenging task if no
controlled experiments are available. From the computational
perspective, causal discovery is usually formulated as a probabilistic graphical model on a set of variables such that each
directed edge between two variables represents a causal link.
In constraint-based methods (Pearl and Mackenzie 2018), the
conditional independence (CI) X y Y|Z enables us to separate two nodes X − Y when constructing a probabilistic model
based on the joint distribution, which leads to a parsimonious
representation (Zhang et al. 2011).
Up to now, a series of independence and CI tests have been
proposed to support constraint-based causal discovery, including conventional tests such as Spearman’s ρ (Spiegelman
2010), Kendall’s τ (Kendall 1938), G-test (McDonald 2009)
and X2 test (Rao 2002), Kernel-based tests such as HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) (Gretton et al. 2005)
and KCIT (Zhang et al. 2011), and regression-based CI tests
(RCIT) (Ramsey 2014; Zhang et al. 2017). With these tests,
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12321

constraint-based causal discovery can be effectively fulfilled
in different scenarios.
Recently, some methods are proposed to address differential private causal discovery due to increasing privacy violation concerns. (Kusner et al. 2016) studies the problem of
causal inference using the additive noise model (ANM) while
simultaneously ensuring privacy of the users, and conducts
sensitivity analysis for different dependence scores, including
Spearman’s ρ, Kendall’s τ, interquartile range (IQR) and HSIC. As causal direction learning with ANM can be achieved
by comparing the two scores between X → Y and Y → X,
there is no need to consider the sensitivity of independence
statistics, such a private ANM is easy to implement but works
only in bivariate cases. (Xu, Yuan, and Wu 2017) presents
the EM-PC algorithm to handle differentially private causal
discovery in multivariate cases. This algorithm is a modification to the well-known PC algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour, and
Scheines 2000) to guarantee differential privacy by using the
exponential mechanism. Instead of perturbing each independence test with noise, EM-PC randomly decides how many
and which edges to delete using the exponential mechanism.
In this way, EM-PC manages to achieve a relative balance
between utility and privacy. The state-of-the-art solution to
differentially private causal discovery is Priv-PC (Lun, Qi,
and Dawn 2020), which achieves better utility and efficiency
than EM-PC. Sensitivity analyses for conditional Kendall’s
τ and conditional Spearman’s ρ are also performed, showing that conditional Spearman’s ρ can be used only to large
datasets due to the large coefficient in its sensitivity while
conditional Kendall’s τ works better in generally cases. For
treatment effect analysis, (Lee et al. 2019) proposes a differentially private inverse probability weighting method for
average treatment effect, and (Niu et al. 2022) provides a
meta-algorithm for differentially private estimation of the
conditional average treatment effect.
These works above significantly advance differential privacy causal discovery in different scenarios. However, this
area has not yet been extensively explored. Particulary, as
(Lun, Qi, and Dawn 2020) points out, an important research
issue in this area is how to perform private causal discovery
in nonlinear numerical cases where neither Spearman’s ρ nor
Kendall’s τ and other existing tests with differential privacy
guarantee are effective. In fact, nonlinear numerical cases are
more common than the linear, categorical cases in real-world

