The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Improved Algorithm for Regret Ratio Minimization
in Multi-Objective Submodular Maximization
Yanhao Wang1 , Jiping Zheng2,3 , Fanxu Meng2
1

2

School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
yhwang@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, {jzh, mengfanxu}@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract

are NP-hard (Feige 1998), several polynomial-time approximation algorithms have been proposed for these problems
in various settings.
Most existing studies focus on maximizing a single submodular function, while we are often faced with the problems of optimizing multiple possibly conflicting objectives
simultaneously. For example, fairness-aware influence maximization problems (Tsang et al. 2019; Fu et al. 2021) aim to
spread information fairly among all d demographic groups
in a social network, which is modeled by maximizing d
submodular functions, each denoting the influence diffusion in one group. As another example, data summarization
tasks (Lin and Bilmes 2011; Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru,
and Karbasi 2016) are often considered as maximizing two
submodular objective functions, which are used to measure
coverage and diversity, respectively. In such cases, a natural
problem is finding a set of solutions with different trade-offs
among multiple objectives.
A naive approach to finding such “representative” solution sets is to enumerate all Pareto optimal solutions (Qian,
Yu, and Zhou 2015), i.e., all the solutions attaining an optimal trade-off for at least one combination of multiple objective functions. However, this approach suffers from two
limitations. First, computing an optimal solution w.r.t. any
given trade-off is infeasible due to the NP-hardness of submodular maximization. Second, the total number of Pareto
optimal solutions might be prohibitively large due to the
combinatorial nature of subset selection. To tackle these issues, the notion of regret ratio has been introduced to measure how well a set of solutions approximates a Pareto optimal solution (Soma and Yoshida 2017; Feng and Qian
2021). Suppose that a trade-off among d objectives is denoted as a nonnegative linear combination of d objective
Pd
functions f1 , . . . , fd , i.e., fw (X) =
i=1 wi fi (X) for a
vector w ∈ Rd+ . The Pareto optimal solution w.r.t. w is the
∗
one that maximizes fw , i.e., Xw
= arg maxX∈I fw (X).
Then, for a set S of solutions, its regret ratio w.r.t. w is defw (X)
fined as 1− maxfX∈S
. Intuitively, it captures the relative
∗
w (Xw )
loss of using the best solution in S to approximate the Pareto
optimal one w.r.t. w. To approximate all Pareto optimal solutions, we need to find a set of solutions with small regret
ratios w.r.t. all possible vectors. This is formalized as the Regret Ratio Minimization (RRM) problem in multi-objective

Submodular maximization has attracted extensive attention
due to its numerous applications in machine learning and artificial intelligence. Many real-world problems require maximizing multiple submodular objective functions at the same
time. In such cases, a common approach is to select a representative subset of Pareto optimal solutions with different
trade-offs among multiple objectives. To this end, in this paper, we investigate the regret ratio minimization (RRM) problem in multi-objective submodular maximization, which aims
to find at most k solutions to best approximate all Pareto optimal solutions w.r.t. any linear combination of objective functions. We propose a novel HS-RRM algorithm by transforming RRM into H ITTING S ET problems based on the notions
of ϵ-kernel and δ-net, where any α-approximation algorithm
for single-objective submodular maximization is used as an
oracle. We prove that the maximum regret ratio (MRR) of the
2 
output of HS-RRM is bounded by 1 − α + O (k − d)− d−1 ,
where d is the number of objectives, which improves upon
1 
the previous best-known bound of 1 − α + O (k − d)− d−1
and is nearly asymptotically optimal for any fixed d. Experiments on real-world and synthetic data confirm that HS-RRM
achieves lower MRRs than existing algorithms.

Introduction
Submodularity is a property of set functions arising in numerous machine learning and artificial intelligence problems, such as feature selection (Krause and Guestrin 2005;
Amiridi, Kargas, and Sidiropoulos 2021), influence maximization (Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Becker et al.
2022), data summarization (Kumari and Bilmes 2021), and
sensor placement (Ohsaka and Matsuoka 2021). Given a
ground set V , a set function f : 2V → R is said to be submodular if f (X ∪ {v}) − f (X) ≥ f (Y ∪ {v}) − f (Y ) for
any X ⊂ Y ⊆ V and v ∈ V \ Y , which is well known as the
“diminishing returns” property. The submodular maximization problem which aims to select a subset of items to maximize f subject to a certain constraint, i.e., maxS∈I f (S)
where I ⊆ 2V is the set of all feasible solutions, has been
well-studied in combinatorial optimization due to its deep
theoretical foundations and broad practical applications. Although many classes of submodular maximization problems
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12500

