The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Voting with Preference Intensities
Anson Kahng1 , Mohamad Latifian2 , Nisarg Shah2
1

University of Rochester
University of Toronto
akahng2@cs.rochester.edu, latifian@cs.toronto.edu, nisarg@cs.toronto.edu
2

case (b ą d ąą c ą a), perhaps the four restaurants should
be awarded 3, 2.5, 0.5, and 0 points in order. Or should it
be 3, 2.1, 0.9, and 0 points? Professor X is not satisfied with
this, and for a more systematic approach, she looks towards
the distortion framework.
Introduced by Procaccia and Rosenschein (2006), the distortion framework posits that ordinal preferences reported
by the agents stem from their underlying numerical utility
functions over the set A of m alternatives. That is, when
agent i reports that she prefers alternative a to b (denoted
a ą b), it must be the case that ui paq ě ui pbq according to
her underlying utility function ui : A Ñ Rě0 . The goal of
the distortion framework is to seek voting rules which, subject to the available partial information about agents’ utility
functions, minimize the worst-case approximation ratio between the highest possible utilitarian social welfare (sum of
agent utilities) and that of the outcome picked by the rule;
this quantity is termed distortion. For aggregating preference rankings (without intensities), the best possible distortion for deterministic and randomized voting rules is known
to be Θpm2 q (Caragiannis
and Procaccia 2011; Caragiannis
?
et al. 2017) and Θp mq (Boutilier et al. 2015; Ebadian et al.
2022), respectively.
The distortion framework is extremely versatile. It can be
used not only to analyze how to aggregate ranked preferences, but also to analyze how to aggregate other ballot formats such as top-t preferences (Borodin et al. 2022), threshold approval votes (Benade et al. 2021), and ranked preferences coupled with additional queries (Amanatidis et al.
2021; Brams and Sanver 2009); compare different ballot formats (Benade et al. 2021); and even design optimal ballot
formats (Mandal et al. 2019; Mandal, Shah, and Woodruff
2020).
We argue that this framework also provides a systematic
approach to aggregating preference rankings with intensities. Let α P r0, 1s be a parameter that governs how decisive
an agent must be for her to use a ‘ąą’ sign. When agent i
reports a ą b, we still assume that ui paq ě ui pbq. But when
agent i reports aąąb, we assume that the agent has an αdecisive preference for a over b given by α ¨ ui paq ě ui pbq.
Thus, when α “ 0, ‘ąą’ signs provide significant additional
information since the agent’s utility must drop to 0 starting
with the alternative after the first ‘ąą’ sign (if it exists). In
contrast, when α « 1, ‘ąą’ signs provide little additional in-

Abstract
When an agent votes, she typically ranks the set of available
alternatives. Occasionally, she may also wish to report the
intensity of her preferences by indicating adjacent pairs of
alternatives in her ranking between which her preference is
acutely decisive; for instance, she may suggest that she likes
alternative a more than b, but b much more than c. We design near-optimal voting rules which aggregate such preference rankings with intensities using the recently-popular distortion framework. We also show that traditional voting rules,
which aggregate preference rankings while ignoring (or not
eliciting) intensities, can incur significant welfare loss.

Introduction
Professor X wants to take her students out for a group lunch.
Being a computational social choice researcher, she realizes
that this is the perfect opportunity to conduct real-life voting,
so she offers them the choice between four popular restaurants (a, b, c, and d) and asks the ambiguously worded —
though, perhaps intentionally so — question: “Tell me your
preferences over these restaurants”. One of her students,
Sam, responds with the preference ranking a ą b ą c ą d,
which means he likes a the most and d the least. Meera has
a slightly different preference ranking, b ą d ą c ą a.
Additionally, she also wants to convey that she likes b and
d much more than a or c (she is vegetarian and the latter
two lack good vegetarian options). Thus, she responds with
a preference ranking with intensities, b ą d ąą c ą a; the
‘ąą’ between d and c indicates that her preference intensity
drops sharply from d to c.1
Professor X was planning to use the Borda count, a wellestablished voting rule for aggregating preference rankings
that would give each restaurant 3, 2, 1, and 0 points each
time it is ranked first, second, third, and fourth, respectively,
and pick the restaurant with the most points as the winner.
But now, she begins to wonder how she should aggregate
preference rankings with intensities indicated by ‘ąą’ signs.
A natural approach would be to modify Borda count so that
there is a steeper drop in points awarded when encountering
a ‘ąą’ sign. But exactly how steep should it be? In Meera’s
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We use “intensity” and “decisiveness” interchangeably.

5697

