The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SRoUDA: Meta Self-Training for Robust Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Wanqing Zhu1,2 , Jia-Li Yin1,2* , Bo-Hao Chen3 , Ximeng Liu1,2*
1

Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Information Security and Network Systems, Fuzhou 350108, China
2
College of Computer Science and Big Data, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan
wqingzhu00@163.com, jlyin@fzu.edu, bhchen@saturn.yzu.edu.tw, snbnix@gmail.com

Abstract
Accuracy

94.50%

As acquiring manual labels on data could be costly, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), which transfers knowledge learned from a rich-label dataset to the unlabeled target dataset, is gaining increasingly more popularity. While
extensive studies have been devoted to improving the model
accuracy on target domain, an important issue of model robustness is neglected. To make things worse, conventional
adversarial training (AT) methods for improving model robustness are inapplicable under UDA scenario since they train
models on adversarial examples that are generated by supervised loss function. In this paper, we present a new meta selftraining pipeline, named SRoUDA, for improving adversarial
robustness of UDA models. Based on self-training paradigm,
SRoUDA starts with pre-training a source model by applying
UDA baseline on source labeled data and taraget unlabeled
data with a developed random masked augmentation (RMA),
and then alternates between adversarial target model training
on pseudo-labeled target data and fine-tuning source model
by a meta step. While self-training allows the direct incorporation of AT in UDA, the meta step in SRoUDA further helps
in mitigating error propagation from noisy pseudo labels. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of SRoUDA where it
achieves significant model robustness improvement without
harming clean accuracy.

Clean

Accuracy

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)

75.81%

Clean

0.00%
Robust

62.90%

Robust

Robust unsupervised domain adaptation (RoUDA)

Accuracy

95.97%

Clean

84.68%

Robust

Meta self-training for robust unsupervised domain adaptation (SRoUDA)
Source data
Target data

Classifier boundary
Adversarial examples

Push away
Push towards

Domain adaptaion
Meta step

Figure 1: Overview of different UDA schemes and their
performance. Upper row: Conventional UDA. Middle row:
Naive self-training for injecting AT into UDA. Bottom row:
Our proposed SRoUDA. The statics are tested on ResNet50 backbone on A −
→ W task in Office-31 dataset. We use
MDD (Zhang et al. 2019b) as the UDA baseline, and PGD20 for evaluating model robustness.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive advances across a variety of machine learning tasks. However, these leaps come only when sufficient and well-labeled
training data is available. For various label-scarce real-world
scenarios, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) (Long
et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2019b; Park et al. 2022; Fan et al.
2022) is widely studied and used. This process starts with
a label-rich source dataset, and then transfers knowledge
learned from the source domain to the target domain, usually
by minimizing the distribution discrepancy between source
and target domains.
While UDA approaches greatly reduce data requirements
and are more practical for real-world scenarios, it neglects an important issue of model robustness. Recent stud-

ies (Szegedy et al. 2014; Madry et al. 2018; Sehwag et al.
2022) have revealed that the DNN models are vulnerable
to adversarial attacks, i.e., maliciously hand-crafted images
which are similar looking to the original images but can lead
to dramatic changes in model predictive behavior. For instance, given the UDA task A −
→ W, the model trained with
UDA baseline can achieve 94.50% accuracy on clean target
data; however, the model robustness against adversarial examples is 0.00%, as shown in the upper row of Figure 1. Obviously, the robustness vulnerability of DNNs significantly
hinders their applications in many real-world scenarios. Approaches to effectively improve the adversarial robustness of

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3852

