The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Trusted Fine-Grained Image Classification through Hierarchical Evidence Fusion
∗

Zhikang Xu1 , Xiaodong Yue1, 2, 3 , Ying Lv1 , Wei Liu4 , Zihao Li1
1

School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
2
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
3
VLN Lab, NAVI MedTech Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China
4
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{xuzhikangnba, yswantfly, lvying, zihao}@shu.edu.cn, ldachuan@outlook.com
Abstract

Without
Evidence Fusion

Fine-Grained Image Classification (FGIC) aims to classify
images into specific subordinate classes of a superclass. Due
to insufficient training data and confusing data samples, FGIC
may produce uncertain classification results that are untrusted
for data applications. In fact, FGIC can be viewed as a hierarchical classification process and the multilayer information facilitates to reduce uncertainty and improve the reliability of FGIC. In this paper, we adopt the evidence theory to
measure uncertainty and confidence in hierarchical classification process and propose a trusted FGIC method through fusing multilayer classification evidence. Comparing with traditional approaches, the trusted FGIC method not only generates accurate classification results but also reduces the uncertainty of fine-grained classification. Specifically, we construct
an evidence extractor at each classification layer and extract
multilayer (multi-grained) evidence in hierarchical classification. To fuse the extracted multi-grained evidence from coarse
to fine, we formulate evidence fusion with the Dirichlet hyper probability distribution and thereby hierarchically decompose the evidence of coarse-grained classes into fine-grained
classes to enhance the performance of FGIC and reduce uncertainty. The ablation experiments validate that the hierarchical evidence fusion can improve the precision and also reduce the uncertainty of fine-grained classification. Comparison with the state-of-the-art FGIC methods shows that the
proposed method achieves competitive performance.

0

0

psoftmax

0.18

0.33

psoftmax

Untrusted

Hierarchical
Evidence Fusion
0.75

0

0.08

Trusted
0.76

0

0.07

pevidential
uncertainty

pevidential
uncertainty

Trusted

Figure 1: Comparison between the traditional FGIC method
and the trusted FGIC method.

In addition, the relationship between classes and the correlation among class attributes are incorporated into FGIC to
enhance the refined classification of similar images (Zhou
and Lin 2016; Zhang et al. 2016). However, due to the insufficient training data and confusing samples (Van Horn et al.
2015), extant FGIC methods may produce uncertain classification results that are untrusted for data applications.
Trustworthy machine learning has received a lot of attention in recent years. Sensoy et al. (Sensoy, Kaplan, and
Kandemir 2018) combined evidence theory and deep neural networks to implement the trusted deep learning method,
where evidence theory is used to quantify the uncertainty of
data samples and predictions with high uncertainty are seen
as untrustworthy. Some researchers further introduced evidence theory into different fields and achieved trusted learning methods, e.g., trusted multi-view classification(Liu et al.
2022) and trusted long-tailed classification (Li et al. 2021).
In fact, FGIC can be viewed as a hierarchical classification process. In the class hierarchy (e.g., label tree), label
nodes near the root node represent the coarser-grained concepts, while label nodes away from the root node represent
the finer-grained concepts. Motivated by this, we adopt the
evidence theory to measure the uncertainty and confidence
in hierarchical classification process and propose a trusted
FGIC method through fusing multilayer classification evidence. At each layer of classification granularity, we extract
evidence that data samples belong to different classes. Evidence extracted from all layers is considered as multilayer

Introduction
Fine-grained image classification (FGIC) aims to classify
samples into correct categories with more specific concepts,
e.g., the models of car and the species of bird. With the rapid
development of deep neural networks, the performance of
FGIC has made a significant progress (Zhao et al. 2017; Wei
et al. 2021). In recent years, FGIC has been widely applied
in some fields, such as image retrieval (Wei et al. 2017; Bhunia et al. 2021), personalized recommendation (Bai et al.
2020; Wei et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2016), and so on.
Discriminative information is exploited to improve the
fine-grained classification, such as the discriminative subregions and features interactively extracted from images (Sun
et al. 2018; Gao et al. 2020; Zhuang, Wang, and Qiao 2020).
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10657

