The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Constrained Submodular Optimization for Vaccine Design
Zheng Dai, David K. Gifford
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 USA
zhengdai@mit.edu, gifford@mit.edu

Abstract

ulation remains challenging despite progress on the peptideMHC display task.
In this work we introduce a framework for evaluating and
designing peptide vaccines that uses probabilistic interpretations of machine learning models, and demonstrate its ability
to produce designs for the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine design task
that outperform previous designs. We complement this with
a theoretical analysis of the approximability, scalability, and
complexity of our framework, which may be of independent
interest.

Advances in machine learning have enabled the prediction
of immune system responses to prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines. However, the engineering task of designing vaccines remains a challenge. In particular, the genetic variability of the human immune system makes it difficult to design
peptide vaccines that provide widespread immunity in vaccinated populations. We introduce a framework for evaluating and designing peptide vaccines that uses probabilistic machine learning models, and demonstrate its ability to produce
designs for a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine that outperform previous
designs. We provide a theoretical analysis of the approximability, scalability, and complexity of our framework.

Our Contribution
To improve the effectiveness of a vaccine it is important to
introduce redundancies into its design so the failure of a single displayed peptide to elicit an immune response does not
become a single point of failure (Liu et al. 2022). Vaccines
designed with an n-times coverage objective aim to obtain at
least n immunogenic peptide “hits” in each person. Having
more than one “hit” provides redundancy to expand multiple
T cell clonotypes in an individual to fight disease, protects
against peptide sequence drift resulting from pathogen or tumor mutations, protects against the loss of an MHC gene,
and accounts for the variability of peptide immunogenicity
between individuals.
We show that optimizing the population coverage for
strict n-times coverage guarantees cannot be tractably approximated to any constant factor assuming the intractability
of the G AP -S MALL -S ET E XPANSION problem (Raghavendra and Steurer 2010), a result which may be of independent
interest. We therefore propose a diminishing returns framework that uses a soft redundancy guarantee as its objective.
The resulting objective is both submodular and monotonic,
and can therefore be approximated via a greedy approach
which we call Optivax-P. We supplement the theoretical improvement with an empirical comparison of vaccines designed using our approach and previous designs. Our proposed framework also contributes the following desirable
properties: it makes explicit the utility of having redundancy,
does not discount the benefits of being covered without redundancy, and is able to reason with uncertainty. We demonstrate how uncertainty values for epitope identification can
be derived by calibrating state-of-the-art peptide-MHC display predictors.
While redundancies in a design are important, it is also

Introduction
Peptide vaccines that expand and activate T cells have
emerged as a promising prophylactic and therapeutic approach for addressing health related challenges including infectious diseases and cancer (Malonis, Lai, and Vergnolle
2019). In contrast to more conventional live-attenuated vaccines that are based on entire organisms, or subunit vaccines
that are based on entire protein subunits, peptide vaccines
are based on a small set of protein fragments (peptides) that
are sufficient to induce a T cell immune response, enabling
the elicitation of far more targeted responses that avoid allergenic and reactogenic responses (Li et al. 2014).
The design of a peptide vaccine consists of selecting immunogenic protein fragments, usually referred to as epitopes
(Li et al. 2014), that when included in a vaccine expand epitope specific T cells. Advances in machine learning have enabled our ability to predict which peptides will be presented
by major histocompatibilty complex (MHC) molecules for
surveillance by the adaptive immune system (Ching et al.
2018; Reynisson et al. 2020), which can be used to identify
which epitopes will be displayed (Sohail et al. 2021).
The epitopes displayed by an individual depend upon the
specific alleles of their MHC genes, and thus the peptides
displayed by the immune system can vary greatly from individual to individual (Zaitouna, Kaur, and Raghavan 2020).
Therefore, the engineering task of finding a set of peptides
that is predicted to be displayed by a large portion of the popCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5045

