The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Hierarchical Contrastive Learning for Temporal Point Processes
Qingmei Wang1 , Minjie Cheng1 , Shen Yuan1 , Hongteng Xu1, 2 *
1

2

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

be too short, censored, and/or with missing events and noisy
timestamps, and learning TPPs from such data may lead to
poor generalization power and unsatisfactory performance.
Many efforts have been made to learn TPPs robustly from
imperfect observations. Typically, when learning TPPs via
the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) (Ozaki 1979),
sparse and/or low-rank regularization is often applied to
avoid the over-fitting of the models (Zhou, Zha, and Song
2013b; Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016). Besides adding regularizers, various data augmentation methods, like random
stitching (Xu, Luo, and Zha 2017), superposition (Xu et al.
2018), counterfactual inference (Noorbakhsh and Rodriguez
2021), and model-driven data imputation (Mei, Qin, and Eisner 2019), have been introduced to improve the quality of
observed event sequences. Additionally, leveraging generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
and reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 2018), we can
introduce discriminators (Xiao et al. 2017a, 2018; Yan et al.
2018) or reward functions (Li et al. 2018; Upadhyay, De,
and Gomez-Rodrizuez 2018; Zhu et al. 2021) to guide the
learning of TPP models.
More recently, to simplify the learning task itself, discriminative learning (Xu et al. 2016) and contrastive learning (Guo, Li, and Liu 2018; Mei, Wan, and Eisner 2020)
are applied. In particular, instead of maximizing the likelihood of event sequences, these methods focus on a relatively easier task — distinguishing the real observations
from potential negative samples. Although these methods
have achieved some encouraging results, they often suffer
from the following challenges. Firstly, the side information
associated with the data, e.g., a pretrained TPP model (Mei,
Wan, and Eisner 2020), is required to design the corresponding contrastive loss and simulate negative events, which is
often unreliable and even unavailable. Secondly, the generation of negative events depends on time-consuming thinning
algorithms (Lewis and Shedler 1979; Ogata 1981), which
limits the scalability and efficiency of the methods. Thirdly,
existing methods only consider negative events and the corresponding event-level contrastive learning while ignoring
the necessity of “negative sequences”, which may still lead
to the over-fitting issue because of the natural uncertainty of
individual events in TPPs.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose a novel
learning method, called hierarchical contrastive learning

As an essential sequential model, the temporal point process
(TPP) plays a central role in real-world sequence modelling
and analysis, whose learning is often based on the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). However, due to imperfect observations, such as incomplete and sparse sequences
that are common in practice, the MLE of TPP models often
suffers from overfitting and leads to unsatisfactory generalization power. In this work, we develop a novel hierarchical
contrastive (HCL) learning method for temporal point processes, which provides a new regularizer of MLE. In principle, our HCL considers the noise contrastive estimation
(NCE) problem at the event-level and that at the sequencelevel jointly. Given a sequence, the event-level NCE maximizes the probability of each observed event given its history while penalizing the conditional probabilities of the unobserved events. At the same time, we generate positive and
negative event sequences from the observed sequence and
maximize the discrepancy between their likelihoods through
the sequence-level NCE. Instead of using time-consuming
simulation methods, we generate the positive and negative
sequences via a simple but efficient model-guided thinning
process. Experimental results show that the MLE method assisted by the HCL regularizer outperforms classic MLE and
other contrastive learning methods in learning various TPP
models consistently. The code is available at https://github.
com/qingmeiwangdaily/HCL TPP.

Introduction
Continuous-time event sequences are ubiquitous in realworld scenarios, such as earthquakes (Lewis and Shedler
1979), financial transactions (Bacry, Mastromatteo, and
Muzy 2015), social behaviors (Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013a),
e-commercial behaviors (Xu, Carin, and Zha 2018), etc. Facing such event sequences, temporal point processes (TPPs)
have been widely used as typical sequential models and
achieved encouraging performance in various applications,
including healthcare data modeling (Xu et al. 2016), social
network analysis (Zhao et al. 2015), high-frequency trading
prediction (Rambaldi, Bacry, and Lillo 2017), and so on.
However, the learning of TPPs often suffers from the imperfectness issue of data: Real-world event sequences may
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10166

