The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

The Value of AI Guidance in Human Examination
of Synthetically-Generated Faces
Aidan Boyd, Patrick Tinsley, Kevin Bowyer, Adam Czajka
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA
{aboyd3,ptinsley,kwb,aczajka}@nd.edu

Abstract

Human perception-driven guidance
of AI training

Face image synthesis has progressed beyond the point at
which humans can effectively distinguish authentic faces
from synthetically-generated ones. Recently developed synthetic face image detectors boast “better-than-human” discriminative ability, especially those guided by human perceptual intelligence during the model’s training process. In
this paper, we investigate whether these human-guided synthetic face detectors can assist non-expert human operators
in the task of synthetic image detection when compared to
models trained without human-guidance. We conducted a
large-scale experiment with more than 1,560 subjects classifying whether an image shows an authentic or syntheticallygenerated face, and annotating regions supporting their decisions. In total, 56,015 annotations across 3,780 unique face
images were collected. All subjects first examined samples
without any AI support, followed by samples given (a) the
AI’s decision (“synthetic” or “authentic”), (b) class activation maps illustrating where the model deems salient for its
decision, or (c) both the AI’s decision and AI’s saliency map.
Synthetic faces were generated with six modern Generative
Adversarial Networks. Interesting observations from this experiment include: (1) models trained with human-guidance,
which are also more accurate in our experiments, offer better support to human examination of face images when compared to models trained traditionally using cross-entropy loss,
(2) binary decisions presented to humans results in their better
performance than when saliency maps are presented, (3) understanding the AI’s accuracy helps humans to increase trust
in a given model and thus increase their overall accuracy. This
work demonstrates that although humans supported by machines achieve better-than-random accuracy of synthetic face
detection, the approaches of supplying humans with AI support and of building trust are key factors determining high
effectiveness of the human-AI tandem.

Human
perceptual
intelligence

AI
model
AI interpretations
supporting human experts (this paper)

Figure 1: We present human-AI supervision, in which training of the AI is first guided by human perceptual intelligence to increase AI’s generalization capabilities, and then
the AI supervises humans examining unknown samples. We
explore this approach in the context of synthetic face detection and, focusing on the lower part of the figure, investigate
the value added by the AI when supporting humans in detecting synthetic images.
than authentic faces (Nightingale and Farid 2022). There are,
however, situations, in which reliable judgment about face
image authenticity is required by both laymen and professional examiners. The former relates to, for instance, our capabilities to safely exist in social media environment, and
the latter relate to forensic examination of face images.
A natural next step toward improving human capabilities
in detecting synthetic faces is to pair AI and humans together
(Fig. 1). In this “partnership”, both humans and AI guide
their counterparts to salient information, helping them to understand the problem and ultimately make better decisions.
In (Boyd, Bowyer, and Czajka 2022; Boyd et al. 2021), the
first step of human-AI supervision (humans guiding the AI)
was implemented for the task of synthetic iris and face detection. Human annotations of salient image regions were either used to augment the training data, or were incorporated
into the loss function to guide the network’s training process, resulting in better generalization against unseen image
types. Taking inspiration from those works, this paper proposes the first known attempt at implementing the second
step of human-AI supervision (AI guiding human subjects)
for the task of synthetic face detection.
More specifically, we summarize results of the large-scale
experiment of synthetic face detection carried out by 1,560
humans supported by deep learning-based synthetic face detection algorithms, trained with and without prior human

Introduction
Visual realism of synthetically-generated faces is now so
high that humans, for whom face recognition is a core social
capability, cannot effectively distinguish authentic and synthetic face images (Shen et al. 2021). Recent studies even
suggest that face images synthesized by modern generative
models may be perceived by humans as more “trustworthy”
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5930

