The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

READ: Aggregating Reconstruction Error into Out-of-Distribution Detection
Wenyu Jiang, Yuxin Ge, Hao Cheng, Mingcai Chen, Shuai Feng, Chongjun Wang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{lygjwy, yuxinge, chengh, chenmc, shuaifeng}@smail.nju.edu.cn, chjwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

of posterior distribution from the pre-trained softmax classifier. They find that ID data tends to have greater prediction
probabilities than OOD data. By temperature scaling and input perturbation, ODIN (Liang, Li, and Srikant 2017) improves the baseline method. However, it has been observed
that softmax classifier can produce high confidence prediction for inputs far away from the training data (Hendrycks
and Gimpel 2016; Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015). The
rationale is that the softmax classifier can have a labeloverfitted output space (Lee et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2020). Instead of using the softmax outputs for OOD detection, Maha
(Lee et al. 2018) assumes that pre-trained features of test
data can be fitted well by a class-conditional Gaussian distribution and defines the confidence score using the Mahalanobis distance with respect to the closest class-conditional
distribution in feature spaces. From probabilistic perspective
of decomposing confidence, G-ODIN (Hsu et al. 2020) uses
a dividend/divisor structure for classifier. Then, the distance
of input to the closest class is calculated with penultimate
layer output of classifier to detect OOD samples.

Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is crucial to the
safe deployment of a classifier in the real world. However,
deep neural networks are known to be overconfident for abnormal data. Existing works directly design score function
by mining the inconsistency from classifier for in-distribution
(ID) and OOD. In this paper, we further complement this inconsistency with reconstruction error, based on the assumption that an autoencoder trained on ID data can not reconstruct OOD as well as ID. We propose a novel method,
READ (Reconstruction Error Aggregated Detector), to unify
inconsistencies from classifier and autoencoder. Specifically,
the reconstruction error of raw pixels is transformed to latent space of classifier. We show that the transformed reconstruction error bridges the semantic gap and inherits detection performance from the original. Moreover, we propose an
adjustment strategy to alleviate the overconfidence problem
of autoencoder according to a fine-grained characterization
of OOD data. Under two scenarios of pre-training and retraining, we respectively present two variants of our method,
namely READ-MD (Mahalanobis Distance) only based on
pre-trained classifier and READ-ED (Euclidean Distance)
which retrains the classifier. Our methods do not require access to test time OOD data for fine-tuning hyperparameters.
Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
methods through extensive comparisons with state-of-theart OOD detection algorithms. On a CIFAR-10 pre-trained
WideResNet, our method reduces the average FPR@95TPR
by up to 9.8% compared with previous state-of-the-art.

The above methods are based on the observation that
OOD data should be relatively far away from the ID classes.
In this paper, we further complement the discrepancy of distance to the closest class in latent space. Based on the assumption that test data from the distribution same as training
data can be better reconstructed than other distributions, we
propose a reconstruction error aggregated detector (READ).
The extracted representations by autoencoder are enforced
to contain important regularities of the ID data. However,
OOD inputs are poorly reconstructed from the resulting representations due to the irregular patterns. Our high-level idea
is to mine the discrepancy of ID and OOD from classifier
and autoencoder. To unify both discrepancies, i.e., the distance to the closest class and reconstruction error, we transform raw pixels reconstruction error to the latent space of
classifier. Overall, the transformed reconstruction error exhibits competitive OOD detection performance compared
with the raw pixels. Based on the same reconstruction error assumption, Gong et al. (Gong et al. 2019) and Zhang et
al. (Zhang et al. 2021) incorporate memory module to autoencoder and directly use raw pixels reconstruction error to
detect OOD samples. However, they find that this assumption does not always hold and the autoencoder can reconstruct specific OOD data well with low reconstruction error.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have attained high accuracy in image classification task (Zagoruyko and Komodakis
2016). However, the classifier often fails silently by providing overconfident prediction for input that belongs to a
distribution different from the in-distribution (ID) of training data. Therefore, it is necessary to detect those out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples for the deployment of classifier
in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving
and medical diagnosis.
For detecting OOD samples, the baseline method
(Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016) utilizes the maximum value
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14910

