The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Adaptive Dynamic Filtering Network for Image Denoising
Hao Shen1,2,4 , Zhong-Qiu Zhao1,2,3,4 * , Wandi Zhang1,2,4
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology (HFUT)
2
Intelligent Interconnected Systems Laboratory of Anhui Province (HFUT)
3
Guangxi Academy of Sciences
4
Intelligent Manufacturing Institute of HFUT
haoshenhs@gmail.com,z.zhao@hfut.edu.cn,wandizhang@mail.hfut.edu.cn
Abstract

In image denoising networks, feature scaling is widely used
to enlarge the receptive field size and reduce computational
costs. This practice, however, also leads to the loss of highfrequency information and fails to consider within-scale characteristics. Recently, dynamic convolution has exhibited powerful capabilities in processing high-frequency information
(e.g., edges, corners, textures), but previous works lack sufficient spatial contextual information in filter generation.
To alleviate these issues, we propose to employ dynamic
convolution to improve the learning of high-frequency and
multi-scale features. Specifically, we design a spatially enhanced kernel generation (SEKG) module to improve dynamic convolution, enabling the learning of spatial context
information with a very low computational complexity. Based
on the SEKG module, we propose a dynamic convolution
block (DCB) and a multi-scale dynamic convolution block
(MDCB). The former enhances the high-frequency information via dynamic convolution and preserves low-frequency
information via skip connections. The latter utilizes shared
adaptive dynamic kernels and the idea of dilated convolution to achieve efficient multi-scale feature extraction. The
proposed multi-dimension feature integration (MFI) mechanism further fuses the multi-scale features, providing precise
and contextually enriched feature representations. Finally, we
build an efficient denoising network with the proposed DCB
and MDCB, named ADFNet. It achieves better performance
with low computational complexity on real-world and synthetic Gaussian noisy datasets. The source code is available
at https://github.com/it-hao/ADFNet.

Figure 1: Dynamic convolution and multi-scale dynamic
convolution schemes.
the noisy image to the corresponding clean image in a datadriven manner, have been used to perform image denoising
and have achieved superior performance.
Deep CNN-based methods (Zhang et al. 2019, 2020) were
recently proposed to expand the receptive field and pursue better performance. However, these methods also result in high computation consumption and time consuming,
and could produce over-smoothed results with some highfrequency information (e.g., edge, texture) lost. There are
two reasons to explain it. First, regular static convolutions
mainly focus on processing low-frequency information but
are short of the capability to process high-frequency information (Hu et al. 2022). Second, feature downsampling operation is widely used in deep CNNs to reduce parameters
and computation. This practice, however, inevitably degenerates high-frequency signals, thus losing some informative
image details (Zou et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021a). Compared to static convolution, dynamic convolution has distinct
properties with spatial-anisotropy and content-adaptiveness,
endowing the network with powerful capabilities to restore
complex and delicate high-frequency information. The kernel generation module is an essential component of dynamic
convolution, which predicts the corresponding kernels based
on the input features. Therefore, this module should be

Introduction
Image denoising aims to recover the clean image from the
observed noisy image, which is an essential step in improving image perception. In the early, most methods (Aharon,
Elad, and Bruckstein 2006; Zoran and Weiss 2011) were
based on image priors derived from the statistics of natural
images to remove noise. However, the performance degradation will appear once the noise distribution is inconsistent with the image priors. For the past few years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs), learning the mapping from
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2227

