The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Conceptual Reinforcement Learning for Language-Conditioned Tasks
Shaohui Peng1, 2, 3 , Xing Hu1 , Rui Zhang1, 3 , Jiaming Guo1, 2, 3 , Qi Yi1, 3, 4 ,
Ruizhi Chen2, 5 , Zidong Du1, 3 , Ling Li2, 5, , Qi Guo1 , Yunji Chen1, 2, †
1

SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Cambricon Technologies
4
University of Science and Technology of China
5
SKL of Computer Science, Institute of Software, CAS
{pengshaohui18z, huxing, zhangrui, guojiaming18s, duzidong, guoqi, cyj}@ict.ac.cn,
yiqi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {ruizhi, liling}@iscas.ac.cn
Abstract

description. The joint representation should catch the compact and invariant information about the actual cause of the
reward that is shared in various training environments, so
that the policy can generalize to unseen environments. Existing studies of language-conditioned reinforcement learning
methods often implicitly learn the joint representation as a
simple latent layer for the given instances (episode-specific
observation and text), which cannot guarantee to catch the
invariant factors across different instances (Zhong et al.
2020; Hanjie et al. 2021; Branavan et al. 2011; Narasimhan
et al. 2018). Such a strategy inevitably includes noisy or irrelevant information and causes spurious correlations that
are dependent on instances, thus hurting generalization performance and training efficiency (Zhong et al. 2021).
Inspired by the human activities that extract the similarities across numerous instances in the real-world to form
“concept” for better understanding the world from the abstract perspective and solving similar tasks efficiently, we
propose to explicitly learn the concept-like representation
for language-conditioned policy. Concretely, we mainly consider two important features for such representation, invariance and compactness, which boost both transfer performance and training efficiency. Based on the invariance of
concepts, policies can be quickly transferred between similar environments. Meanwhile, based on the abstraction of
concepts, the learned joint representation is more compact,
and thus the complexity of policies can be reduced to improve training efficiency. For example, when playing video
games, we can treat various monster instances with different
names or appearances as the same concept “enemy”, and
handle them in a similar policy such as attacking them to get
drops, thereby adapting to an unseen environment quickly.
Based on the above analyses, we propose a conceptual reinforcement learning (CRL) framework which learns
concept-based representation (referred as concepts) for
language-conditioned policy to promote sample efficiency
and generalization performance in unseen testing environments. In CRL, we propose a multi-level attention concept
encoder and two mutual information constraints for learning
concepts. Specifically, in the concept encoder, each level of
the attention module generates one concept, and the generated concepts participate in subsequent levels of the attention module. All outputs of the concept encoder are con-

Despite the broad application of deep reinforcement learning (RL), transferring and adapting the policy to unseen
but similar environments is still a significant challenge. Recently, the language-conditioned policy is proposed to facilitate policy transfer through learning the joint representation of observation and text that catches the compact and invariant information across environments. Existing studies of
language-conditioned RL methods often learn the joint representation as a simple latent layer for the given instances
(episode-specific observation and text), which inevitably includes noisy or irrelevant information and cause spurious correlations that are dependent on instances, thus hurting generalization performance and training efficiency. To address this
issue, we propose a conceptual reinforcement learning (CRL)
framework to learn the concept-like joint representation for
language-conditioned policy. The key insight is that concepts
are compact and invariant representations in human cognition through extracting similarities from numerous instances
in real-world. In CRL, we propose a multi-level attention encoder and two mutual information constraints for learning
compact and invariant concepts. Verified in two challenging
environments, RTFM and Messenger, CRL significantly improves the training efficiency (up to 70%) and generalization
ability (up to 30%) to the new environment dynamics.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning has been successfully applied
in various areas such as video games (Mnih et al. 2013) and
robot control (Lillicrap et al. 2016). However, it is still a
significant challenge to transfer and adapt the policy to unseen but similar environments (Kirk et al. 2021). Recently,
researchers propose language-conditioned policy that adopts
the language as an intermediate information channel to facilitate policy transfer (Narasimhan et al. 2018; Oh et al.
2017). Based on extra-textual descriptions that specify environment dynamics, the language-conditioned policy can
learn the connection between training and testing environments to promote generalization ability.
The key challenge of language-conditioned policy is how
to learn the joint representation of observation and textual
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
† Corresponding author.

9426

