The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Domain Adaptative Learning for
Online Advertisement Customer Lifetime Value Prediction
Hongzu Su1 , Zhekai Du1 , Jingjing Li1,2 * , Lei Zhu3 , Ke Lu1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering of UESTC in Guangdong
3
Shandong Normal University
{hongzus, zhekaid}@std.uestc.edu.cn, lijin117@yeah.net, leizhu0608@gmail.com, kel@uestc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Accurate estimation of customer lifetime value (LTV), which
reflects the potential consumption of a user over a period of
time, is crucial for the revenue management of online advertising platforms. However, predicting LTV in real-world applications is not an easy task since the user consumption data
is usually insufficient within a specific domain. To tackle this
problem, we propose a novel cross-domain adaptative framework (CDAF) to leverage consumption data from different
domains. The proposed method is able to simultaneously mitigate the data scarce problem and the distribution gap problem caused by data from different domains. To be specific,
our method firstly learns a LTV prediction model from a different but related platform with sufficient data provision. Subsequently, we exploit domain-invariant information to mitigate data scarce problem by minimizing the Wasserstein discrepancy between the encoded user representations of two domains. In addition, we design a dual-predictor schema which
not only enhances domain-invariant information in the semantic space but also preserves domain-specific information
for accurate target prediction. The proposed framework is
evaluated on five datasets collected from real historical data
on the advertising platform of Tencent Games. Experimental results verify that the proposed framework is able to significantly improve the LTV prediction performance on this
platform. For instance, our method can boost DCNv2 with
the improvement of 13.7% in terms of AUC on dataset G2.
Code: https://github.com/TL-UESTC/CDAF.

request

>40M

exposure

~50K

conversion

~1K

consumption

<10

(a) quantitative comparison (b) distribution comparison

Figure 1: Illustration of the data statistical results in the evaluation datasets. Figure (a) illustrates the quantitative comparison on different advertising stages and (b) illustrates the
consumption distributions of two different platforms.
which is commonly used in Marketing and Customer Relationship Management (Bauer and Jannach 2021; Xing et al.
2021). LTV prediction is therefore a promising methodology
to estimate potential payment for online advertising.
Currently, a variety of LTV prediction approaches have
been proposed in the community. A multitude of early approaches that rely on statistics of historical customer consumption data are know as probabilistic methods since
they are assumed to follow a specific probability distribution (Bauer and Jannach 2021; Borle, Singh, and Jain 2008;
Khajvand et al. 2011). In real-world applications, however,
the customer consumption data is volatile and complicated,
which usually leads to an inferior performance of probabilistic methods. With the recent rapid development of deep
learning technology, researchers propose to leverage Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) to mine the information from temporal customer data. Recent studies have verified that DNNbased methods are able to achieve more accurate LTV prediction performance than probabilistic methods (Bauer and
Jannach 2021; Xing et al. 2021; Guidotti et al. 2018).
Despite the superior performance achieved in laboratory
environment, previous DNN-based methods rely heavily on
sufficient and reliable training samples. Unfortunately, the
data of customer consumption is usually scarce and volatile
in real-world online advertising scenarios. We analyze the
real-world online advertising data and report the statistical
results in Figure 1. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the huge
quantitative gap between advertising request and consumption indicates that collecting sufficient consumption samples

Introduction
With the prosperity of the digital economy, a mass of entities begin to provide online services, which largely leads to
the maturity of online advertisement. Among the business
of online advertisement, the potential revenue from a piece
of advertisement attracts the most attention of advertisers.
Hence, it is crucial for the advertising platform to effectively
manage customer relationship and accurately predict potential customer payment. Customer Lifetime Value (LTV) is
defined as a metric that indicates how much a customer contributes to the profit during the whole lifetime relationship,
* Jingjing Li is the corresponding author. Work done when
Hongzu Su was an intern at Tencent.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4605

