The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Efficient Top-K Feature Selection Using Coordinate Descent Method
Lei Xu1,2 * , Rong Wang2 * , Feiping Nie1,2† , Xuelong Li2
1

2

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P.R. China
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072,
P.R. China

Abstract

commonly used technique for selecting task-shared features
(Nie et al. 2010; He et al. 2012), which is defined as
v
d uX
X
u c 2
t
∥W∥2,1 =
(1)
wi,j ,

Sparse learning based feature selection has been widely investigated in recent years. In this study, we focus on the
l2,0 -norm based feature selection, which is effective for exact top-k feature selection but challenging to optimize. To
solve the general l2,0 -norm constrained problems, we novelly develop a parameter-free optimization framework based
on the coordinate descend (CD) method, termed CD-LSR.
Specifically, we devise a skillful conversion from the original problem to solving one continuous matrix and one discrete selection matrix. Then the nontrivial l2,0 -norm constraint can be solved efficiently by solving the selection matrix with CD method. We impose the l2,0 -norm on a vanilla
least square regression (LSR) model for feature selection and
optimize it with CD-LSR. Extensive experiments exhibit the
efficiency of CD-LSR, as well as the discrimination ability
of l2,0 -norm to identify informative features. More importantly, the versatility of CD-LSR facilitates the applications
of the l2,0 -norm in more sophisticated models. Based on the
competitive performance of l2,0 -norm on the baseline LSR
model, the satisfactory performance of its applications is reasonably expected. The source MATLAB code are available at:
https://github.com/solerxl/Code For AAAI 2023.

i=1

j=1

where W ∈ Rd×c denotes the coefficient matrix and
wi,j denotes the (i, j)-th entry of W. Most previous work
performs feature selection by adding the regularization
λ∥W∥2,1 to the objective function, with λ being the regularization parameter. For example, (Nie et al. 2010) proposed a Robust Feature Selection model to simultaneously
overcome outliers issues and solve feature selection problems by imposing l2,1 -norm on the objective function and
the regularization term. Although satisfactory performance
was achieved via l2,1 -norm, its sparsity heavily depends on
the parameter λ, which does not have an explicit meaning.
Thus, we are not clear about how many features are actually
selected. Therefore, we have to spend a long time searching
for the appropriate λ to select the exact number of features.
In contrast, the l2,0 -norm, which is defined as
∥W∥2,0 =

Introduction

d
X
i=1

Feature selection techniques aim to select the most informative feature subset from the original data, thereby eliminating irrelevant features and speeding up the learning process
(Li et al. 2018, 2020). It has a wide range of real-world applications, such as image processing (Sun, Bebis, and Miller
2004), text mining (Forman and Kirshenbaum 2008), mass
spectrometry (Saeys, Inza, and Larrañaga 2007), and so on.
Sparse learning methodologies, which impose sparse regularization on the coefficient matrix to limit the number of
non-zero entries, are favored in feature selection (Pang et al.
2019; Chang et al. 2014; Nie et al. 2010). Based on sparse
learning techniques, the features corresponding to the nonzero entries will be selected, and the others will be discarded. Among them, the l2,1 -norm constraint is the most

∥

c
X

2
wi,j
∥0 ,

(2)

j=1

dispenses with the heavy burden of parameter tuning in feature selection. Specifically, we can select k features by simply imposing the constraint ∥W∥2,0 = k, where the value of
l2,0 -norm intuitively indicates the exact number of selected
features k, such that the parameter tuning process is avoided.
Although l2,0 -norm is more desirable from the sparsity
perspective, it is hard to solve l2,0 -norm constraint due to
its non-convexity. To date, there are mainly two types of algorithms proposed to solve this nontrivial problem, that is,
augmented Lagrangian method(ALM) based algorithms and
projection gradient descent (PGD) based algorithms. The
former introduces the auxiliary variables to solve l2,0 -norm
separately and iteratively updates the original solution variable and the auxiliary variable based on ALM (Bertsekas
1982). For example, Cai et al. (Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013)
proposed a robust and pragmatic feature selection method
with l2,0 -norm constraint and solved the model with ALM.
Besides, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2021) proposed to transform the l2,0 -norm constraint into an equivalent 0-1 integer

* These authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author: Feiping Nie (email: feipingnie@gmail.
com).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10594

