The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Concurrent Multi-Label Prediction in Event Streams
Xiao Shou1,2 , Tian Gao3 , Dharmashankar Subramanian3
Debarun Bhattacharjya3 , Kristin P. Bennett1,2
1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3
Research AI, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Abstract

pable of capturing more complex dependencies (Du et al.
2016; Mei and Eisner 2016; Xiao et al. 2017; Upadhyay, De,
and Gomez-Rodriguez 2018; Omi, Ueda, and Aihara 2019;
Shchur, Biloš, and Günnemann 2019; Zuo et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2020a; Shchur et al. 2020; Boyd et al. 2020; Gao et al.
2020; Gu 2021).
Many real-world applications involve event streams with
concurrent labels, i.e. multiple labels that occur simultaneously in an event (for the recorded temporal granularity). For
example, in the aforementioned applications of e-commerce
and healthcare, multiple items can be purchased at the time
of a transaction, and multiple diseases can be diagnosed during a single provider visit. Importantly, concurrent event label occurrences can be highly correlated. For instance, Amazon’s recommender system has the ‘frequently bought together’ option, and comorbidities such as type 2 diabetes and
Alzheimer’s disease for the elderly (Chatterjee and Mudher
2018) are very common in healthcare.
Although many proposed neural TPPs excel at solving
prediction problems, most are not directly applicable for
concurrent multi-label event streams. A notable exception
is a recent approach for modeling EHR data using attentionbased neural TPP models (Enguehard et al. 2020). This class
of model captures long-term, nonsequential dependencies of
contexts (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) and also jointly
models dependence of time with the associated labels.
As far as we are aware, existing approaches however fail
to provide meaningful structural dependence among coinciding event labels at a given timestamp, and are unable to
incorporate such dependence for label prediction. We note
that although there is some prior work on graphical representations of TPPs (Didelez 2008; Bhattacharjya, Subramanian, and Gao 2018), these are directed graphs that capture
historical dependence when each event is associated with exactly one event label. In contrast, our approach involves an
undirected graph for representing relations between concurrent labels; it is conceptually similar to prior work on time
series graphs (Eichler 1999).
In this paper, we propose a new approach for modeling
concurrent event labels using neural TPPs. Our main contributions are as follows:

Streams of irregularly occurring events are commonly modeled as a marked temporal point process. Many real-world
datasets such as e-commerce transactions and electronic
health records often involve events where multiple event
types co-occur, e.g. multiple items purchased or multiple
diseases diagnosed simultaneously. In this paper, we tackle
multi-label prediction in such a problem setting, and propose
a novel Transformer-based Conditional Mixture of Bernoulli
Network (TCMBN) that leverages neural density estimation
to capture complex temporal dependence as well as probabilistic dependence between concurrent event types. We also
propose potentially incorporating domain knowledge in the
objective by regularizing the predicted probability. To represent probabilistic dependence of concurrent event types
graphically, we design a two-step approach that first learns
the mixture of Bernoulli network and then solves a leastsquares semi-definite constrained program to numerically approximate the sparse precision matrix from a learned covariance matrix. This approach proves to be effective for event
prediction while also providing an interpretable and possibly
non-stationary structure for insights into event co-occurrence.
We demonstrate the superior performance of our approach
compared to existing baselines on multiple synthetic and real
benchmarks.

Introduction
Various types of human activities consist of irregularly occurring events over a period of time. For example, online
customer transaction records involve purchases at a particular time for an account associated with an individual, and
electronic health records (EHRs) keep track of a patient’s
health history including diagnoses and treatments throughout their life. Temporal point processes (TPPs) provide a
suitable continuous-time mathematical tool for modeling
event streams, where discrete events happen irregularly (Daley and Jones 2003). A classic approach to model event sequences as TPPs is through the Hawkes process, in which
a simple parametric form is used to capture temporal dependence among events (Hawkes 1971). In the past few
years, many researchers have developed neural TPP models that have achieved fruitful results on standard benchmarks for predictive tasks, because neural networks are ca-

• We formalize the multi-label prediction problem in event
streams and propose a general framework for modeling
concurrent labels in event streams. Crucially, our method

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9820

