The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

When Online Learning Meets ODE: Learning without Forgetting
on Variable Feature Space
Diyang Li1 , Bin Gu1,2 *
1

Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
2
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
DiyoungLee@gmail.com, bin.gu@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract

namically changing (Giraud-Carrier 2000; Dekel, Shamir,
and Xiao 2010).
Alongside these motivations, the virtual (or generated /
transformed) feature space is also not static. In polynomial
regression (Max and Burkhart 1976), we need to add / delete
features of the generated polynomial features when altering
the degree or interaction terms. Likewise, by the time of using
random Fourier features (Rahimi and Recht 2007) in kernel
machines, we may want to tune the approximation level of
the kernel space. Similar adjustments exist in deep representation learning for expandable networks (Yoon et al. 2018;
Parisi et al. 2019). The above examples describe scenarios
where new features can be introduced or some of the existing
features can cease to exist. Additional concrete scenarios are
offered in Appendix C.1. The Figure 1 shows a schematic
diagram of our problem setting.
Traditional ML is performed offline and a learning algorithm can go over the full batch of data multiple times
(Beyazit 2021). Rather than attempt to fully re-training from
scratch using batch algorithms, the online learning (Bottou
and Cun 2003; Fontenla-Romero et al. 2013) is now generally
conceded to offer a better approach to solve a model in an
online setup. This leads to a model which is able to readily
extrapolate beyond the current input space, thereby has become an active research field in ML communities (Wu et al.
2019). Whilst a number of previous works have achieved the
feature-wise online learning to a certain extent, they are either
developed for specific statistical problems such as primitive
`1 and `2 regularization with square loss (Freund, Grigas, and
Mazumder 2013; Hoerl and Kennard 1970), or turn out to
be approximate methods, in which their convergence to the
stationarity point on the new feature set cannot be guaranteed
(Beyazit, Alagurajah, and Wu 2019; He et al. 2021). In this
paper, we aim to develop an accuracy guaranteed Dynamic
Feature Learning System (DFLS) to perform training on the
unfixed feature set for a broad class of statistical models, with
the motivation behind this approach being that many realworld ML systems are running with non-static feature spaces.
By utilizing DFLS, the updated model is exactly the same as
the model trained from scratch using the entire new feature
space. i.e., the model can refine its old knowledge (without
suffering from forgetting) when feature space varies.
Training an optimal model on the unfixed feature set is notoriously difficult to solve since it suffers from the following

Machine learning systems that built upon varying feature space
are ubiquitous across the world. When the set of practical or
virtual features changes, the online learning approach can adjust the learned model accordingly rather than re-training from
scratch and has been an attractive area of research. Despite
its importance, most studies for algorithms that are capable
of handling online features have no ensurance of stationarity
point convergence, while the accuracy guaranteed methods
are still limited to some simple cases such as `1 or `2 norms
with square loss. To address this challenging problem, we develop an efficient Dynamic Feature Learning System (DFLS)
to perform online learning on the unfixed feature set for more
general statistical models and demonstrate how DFLS opens
up many new applications. We are the first to achieve accurate & reliable feature-wise online learning for a broad class
of models like logistic regression, spline interpolation, group
Lasso and Poisson regression. By utilizing DFLS, the updated
model is theoretically the same as the model trained from
scratch using the entire new feature space. Specifically, we
reparameterize the feature-varying procedure and devise the
corresponding ordinary differential equation (ODE) system to
compute the optimal solutions of the new model status. Simulation studies reveal that the proposed DFLS can substantially
ease the computational cost without forgetting.

1

Introduction

On a wide range of real-world machine learning (ML) applications, the attributes / features of input may dynamically
change and it is often computationally unrealistic to train
over the entire dataset (Agarwal, Saradhi, and Karnick 2008;
Fontenla-Romero et al. 2013). Practically, in bioinformatics,
acquiring the entire set of features for every training instance
is expensive due to the pricey cost of conducting wet-lab experiments (Wang et al. 2013a). In real-time sensing, inactive
sensors or obsolete historical attributes are demanded to be
dropped from the existing feature space (You et al. 2018),
or new attributes should be included since new sensors are
put into work. For Internet applications like spam filtering or
personalized news feeds, textual data are usually represented
as a bag-of-words and the length of the feature vector is dy* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8545

