The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Can Label-Specific Features Help Partial-Label Learning?
Ruo-Jing Dong1,2,3 , Jun-Yi Hang1,2,3 , Tong Wei1,2,3 * , Min-Ling Zhang1,2,3
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Computer Experimental Teaching Center of Southeast University
{dongrj, hangjy, weit, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

thus reducing the cost of data annotation. Confronting the
expensive cost of manual labeling (Wei et al. 2021, 2022),
PLL has been extensively studied and adopted for various
real-world applications, e.g., image annotation (Zeng et al.
2013), web mining (Luo and Orabona 2010), ecoinformatics
(Liu and Dietterich 2012), and natural language processing
(Zhou et al. 2018).
The key of PLL is to identify the ground-truth labels
from candidate label sets and many effective approaches
have been proposed. Existing approaches work by manipulating label space including the average-based strategy
(Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006; Cour, Sapp, and Taskar
2011) and identification-based strategy (Liu and Dietterich
2012; Yu and Zhang 2016; Ni et al. 2021). Some other works
explore the feature space (Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2016; Bao,
Hang, and Zhang 2021; Wang, Zhang, and Li 2021) to utilize potentially useful structural information. However, none
of them considers the exploration of specific semantic relations between instances and labels because identical features
for all classes are leveraged.
Therefore, this paper attempts to deal with PLL from a
different perspective, i.e., the label-specific features, which
is an effective feature enhancement approach. In particular,
we raise the question that “Can label-specific features help
PLL?”. Originally, the label-specific features are proposed
in multi-label learning(Zhang and Zhou 2013; Zhang and
Wu 2014; Huang et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018b; Wei, Tu,
and Li 2019; Wei and Li 2019; Yu and Zhang 2021). It first
generates a specific feature description for each class and the
classifier is then trained by fitting the label-specific features
and their corresponding labels. By exploiting label-specific
features, it achieves superior classification performance for
its benefits of class discrimination features. For example, in
automatic image annotation, texture-based features would
be preferred in discriminating silk and non-silk images, and
color-based features would be preferred in discriminating
ocean and non-ocean images. For another example, in automatic text categorization, features associated with terms
like “carnivores”, “predator”, and “habitat” would be informative in discriminating ecological and non-ecological
documents while features related to terms like “petroleum”,
“mineral”, and “diastrophism” would be informative in discriminating geological and non-geological documents.
Despite the benefits of the label-specific features, they

Partial label learning (PLL) aims to learn from inexact data
annotations where each training example is associated with
a coarse candidate label set. Due to its practicability, many
PLL algorithms have been proposed in recent literature. Most
prior PLL works attempt to identify the ground-truth labels
from candidate sets and the classifier is trained afterwards
by fitting the features of examples and their exact groundtruth labels. From a different perspective, we propose to enrich the feature space and raise the question “Can labelspecific features help PLL?” rather than learning from examples with identical features for all classes. Despite its benefits,
previous label-specific features approaches rely on groundtruth labels to split positive and negative examples of each
class and then conduct clustering analysis, which is not directly applicable in PLL. To remedy this problem, we propose an uncertainty-aware confidence region to accommodate false positive labels. We first employ graph-based label enhancement to yield smooth pseudo-labels and facilitate the confidence region split. After acquiring label-specific
features, a family of binary classifiers is induced. Extensive experiments on both synthesized and real-world datasets
are conducted and the results show that our method consistently outperforms eight baselines. Our code is released at
https://github.com/meteoseeker/UCL

Introduction
Partial label learning (PLL) is a significant problem which
has been studied a lot in the past decade (Cour, Sapp, and
Taskar 2011; Chen, Patel, and Chellappa 2017; Feng et al.
2020; Lv et al. 2020; Wen et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022).
PLL aims to learn a classifier from training datasets with inexact labels, i.e., each instance is associated with a set of
candidate labels among which only one is correct (Cour,
Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Lyu et al. 2020; Bao, Hang, and
Zhang 2021). Notice that, PLL is also known as superset label learning (Liu and Dietterich 2012; Gong et al. 2017) or
ambiguous label learning (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Chen et al. 2014). Unlike ordinary multi-class classification
problems where each training instance is annotated with one
ground-truth label, PLL aims to train classifiers from ambiguously (inexact) candidate labels directly (Zhou 2018),
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7432

