The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

IterDE: An Iterative Knowledge Distillation Framework for Knowledge Graph
Embeddings
Jiajun Liu, Peng Wang* , Ziyu Shang, Chenxiao Wu
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
{jiajliu, pwang, ziyus1999, chenxiaowu}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

T
S-64
S-32

0.23

Knowledge distillation for knowledge graph embedding
(KGE) aims to reduce the KGE model size to address the
challenges of storage limitations and knowledge reasoning
efficiency. However, current work still suffers from performance drops when compressing a high-dimensional original
KGE model to a low-dimensional distillation KGE model.
Moreover, most work focuses on the reduction of inference
time but ignores the time-consuming training process of distilling KGE models. In this paper, we propose IterDE, a novel
knowledge distillation framework for KGEs. First, IterDE
introduces an iterative distillation way and enables a KGE
model to alternately be a student model and a teacher model
during the iterative distillation process. Consequently, knowledge can be transferred in a smooth manner between highdimensional teacher models and low-dimensional student
models, while preserving good KGE performances. Furthermore, in order to optimize the training process, we consider
that different optimization objects between hard label loss
and soft label loss can affect the efficiency of training, and
then we propose a soft-label weighting dynamic adjustment
mechanism that can balance the inconsistency of optimization direction between hard and soft label loss by gradually
increasing the weighting of soft label loss. Our experimental results demonstrate that IterDE achieves a new state-ofthe-art distillation performance for KGEs compared to strong
baselines on the link prediction task. Significantly, IterDE can
reduce the training time by 50% on average. Finally, more
exploratory experiments show that the soft-label weighting
dynamic adjustment mechanism and more fine-grained iterations can improve distillation performance.

MRR

0.22
0.21
0.20
0.19
256

512

1024

Teacher-dimension

Figure 1: The phenomenon of good teachers cannot always
teach good students in KGEs based on KD: with the increase of dimension (from 256 to 1024) of teacher T, the
performances of students (S-64 denotes 64 dimensions and
S-32 denotes 32 dimensions) drop. Results are obtained on
WN18RR dataset with TransE.

graph completion (Lin et al. 2015). Most KGE models such
as TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), ComplEx (Trouillon et al.
2016), SimplE (Kazemi and Poole 2018), RotatE (Sun et al.
2019) have shown better performances with higher embedding dimensions and larger model sizes, however, that also
leads to slower inference efficiency for practical applications. Specifically, the 512-dimensional KGE models have
7-15 times more embedding layer parameters and 2-6 times
more inference time than the 32-dimensional KGE models (Zhu et al. 2022). Therefore, it is a nontrivial problem
to compress KGEs from high-dimensional teacher models
to low-dimensional student models while maintaining excellent performance. In realistic applications, KGE models are
often required to simultaneously keep high performance and
fast inference speed. For example, financial investors need
to get accurate and fast market decision aids from financial
KGs via edge devices. In this scenario, KGE models can
be compressed by knowledge distillation and then deployed
to edge devices to help financial investors make faster and
more accurate decisions.
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a popular technique for
model compression, where a larger model serves as a teacher
model, and a smaller model as a student model tries to
mimic the output of the teacher model (Hinton et al. 2014).
Recently, although several compression methods for KGEs

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) describe concepts and facts in
graph models (Dong et al. 2014), where knowledge is
stored as triples. With the increasing sizes of KGs such as
Wikipedia (Bizer et al. 2009) and Yago (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007), efficient knowledge graph embedding (KGE), which embeds triples into a continuous vector
space, plays a pivotal role in downstream applications such
as question answering (Bordes, Weston, and Usunier 2014),
recommendation system (Zhang et al. 2016) and knowledge
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4488

