The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Constrained Market Share Maximization
by Signal-Guided Optimization
Bo Hui1 , Yuchen Fang2 * , Tian Xia1 , Sarp Aykent1 , Wei-Shinn Ku1
1

Auburn University
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
1
{bohui,tianxia,sarp,weishinn}@auburn.edu, 2 fangyuchen@bupt.edu.cn
2

Abstract

their corresponding costs are under the settled budget. Considering that there are many routes to be covered and the
flight frequency on each route is an ordinal number, the optimization problem is daunting to solve. For instance, if there
are n routes and the maximum frequency is f max , we need
to find an optimal solution from (f max + 1)n options under constraint. Enumerating and evaluating all solutions on
such a complicated network is prohibitive. Note that traditional combinatorial optimization algorithms (Papadimitriou
and Steiglitz 1998) cannot be used to solve this problem,
since the market share is nondeterministic, and two routes
are usually not independent from each other. A heuristicbased algorithm, called GroupGreedy, is introduced in (An
et al. 2016) to run on a small subset of routes. Unfortunately,
the scalability of this work is far from satisfactory. Another
work (Li et al. 2021) adopts the gradient ascent strategy
for the solution where cost overruns the predefined budget.
However, this work sets the optimization as a maximizing
problem and solves the problem in only one space, where
the constrained maximization is actually a max-min problem and involves two spaces. Therefore, the solution in (Li
et al. 2021) may be trapped in a stationary point and the
global optimal solution is not guaranteed.
Second, plenty of factors (e.g., average ticket price, flight
frequency and on-time performance) will influence the air
market. Intuitively, if the ticket price of an air carrier on a
route decreases, the market share on the route will increase.
Likewise, if the flight frequency increases, the market share
will decrease. Furthermore, the market share on a flight route
involves not only one airline but all airlines with flights on
the route, which makes the market share prediction more
complicated. The butterfly effect in economics refers to the
compounding impact of small changes and states that it is
nearly impossible to make accurate predictions for the future and identify the precise cause of a specific change in
the air market. Therefore, designing an accurate prediction
model is demanding.
In the last few years, spatial dependency (Yu, Yin, and
Zhu 2018; Hui et al. 2021b,a; Fang et al. 2021) has drawn
attention in volume prediction in the transportation system.
To capture the spatial and unseen correlations between any
two flight routes, we use attention mechanism (Vaswani
et al. 2017) to model the correlations among routes for market share prediction. Specifically, we transform the airportwise directed graph into a line graph where the nodes are

With the rapid development of the airline industry, maximizing the market share with a constrained budget is an urgent
econometric problem for an airline. We investigate the problem by adjusting flight frequencies on different flight routes.
Owing to the large search space of solutions and the difficulty of predicting the market, this problem is in general
daunting to solve. This paper proposes a novel two-stage optimization method to address the challenges. On the higher
level, we use a signal to guide the optimization process toward a constrained satisfying solution. On the lower level,
we consider the consecutive itineraries in real scenarios and
model the unseen correlations between routes in itineraries
for market share prediction. In theory, we prove the convergence of our optimization approach. In the experiment,
we empirically verify the superiority of both our prediction
model and optimization approach over existing works with
large-scale real-world data. Our code has been released at:
https://github.com/codingAndBS/AirlineMarket.

Introduction
Since the first aircraft flight in 1903, air travel has emerged
as a crucial means of transportation and the airline industry
has been developing rapidly. There are over 41,700 airports
all over the world. The number of flights performed globally by the airline industry reached 38.9 million in 2019.
While there are considerable airlines in the market and finite market demands, maximizing the market share with a
constrained budget by adjusting flight frequencies on different flight routes is an econometric problem for an airline (Li et al. 2021), where the decision maker sets a budget
constraint to avoid excess of expenditure over income. Intuitively, shifting the flight frequencies and the cost on some
routes to other routes will change the market share of an airline. This research problem is especially challenging since
it not only requires constrained combinatorial optimization
methods to search for the optimal solution but also involves
market share prediction.
The first challenge lies in the large search space of solutions. To maximize its market share, an airline needs to decide the frequency of flights on each route. The constrained
budget implies a solution set including all possible combinations of flight frequencies on different flight routes and
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4330

