The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Finite Based Contraction and Expansion via Models
Ricardo Guimarães1 , Ana Ozaki1 , Jandson S. Ribeiro2
1

University of Bergen
University of Hagen
ricardo.guimaraes@uib.no, ana.ozaki@uib.no, jandson.ribeiro@fernuni-hagen.de
2

Abstract

is not the case for more expressive logics such as first-order
logic (FOL) and several Description Logics (DLs) (Baader
et al. 2017) such as ALC. Computationally, this finiteness
requirement is also important as reasoners for a particular logic usually can only deal with finite sets of formulae. Therefore, it is paramount that Belief Change operations
guarantee that the new epistemic state is finite based. However, the AGM postulates do not address finite representation of epistemic states. In fact, the question of finite representability has not been prioritised in Belief Change. In this
work, we address this issue by devising novel classes of belief operators which ensure that the outcome is finite based.
Moreover, although the AGM rationality postulates do not
depend on any specific logic, classes of Belief Change operations have been devised upon strong assumptions about the
underlying logics. In the last years, effort have been made in
replacing some of these assumptions with weaker conditions
in order to extend the AGM paradigm to more logics such
as logics without classical negation (Ribeiro 2013), Horn
logics (Delgrande and Wassermann 2013, 2010), temporal
logics and logics without compactness (Ribeiro, Nayak, and
Wassermann 2018, 2019a,b). In this work, we consider that
the incoming information is represented as a set of models,
which generalises the AGM paradigm and other classical
Belief Change frameworks where the incoming information
is represented as formulae in the same logic. Moreover, there
are scenarios where it is more convenient that the incoming information is represented as models. This is the case of
the Learning from Interpretations setting (De Raedt 1997),
where a formula needs to be created or changed to either
incorporate or block a set of models. Arias, Khardon, and
Maloberti (2007) use this setting to model the construction
of Horn theories from graphs.
In logics displaying theories that are not finite based, the
‘closest’ finite based epistemic state can be chosen instead.
We present an intuitive notion of ‘closest’ finite base to handle cases in which not every theory is finite based. Using this
notion, we then define model change operations which correspond, in spirit, to expansion and contraction in the AGM
paradigm. We also investigate the rationality consequences
of the finiteness requirement and show that our operators
only gain or lose models (information) when desired or necessary. Furthermore, we analyse the compatibility of logics
with respect to the emerged rationality postulates, that is, we

We propose a new paradigm for Belief Change in which the
new information is represented as sets of models, while the
agent’s body of knowledge is represented as a finite set of formulae, that is, a finite base. The focus on finiteness is crucial
when we consider limited agents and reasoning algorithms.
Moreover, having the input as arbitrary set of models is more
general than the usual treatment of formulae as input. In this
setting, we define new Belief Change operations akin to traditional expansion and contraction, and we identify the rationality postulates that emerge due to the finite representability requirement. We also analyse different logics concerning
compatibility with our framework.

1

Introduction

The field of Belief Change (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and
Makinson 1985; Hansson 1999) studies how an agent should
rationally modify its current beliefs when confronted with a
new piece of information. The agent should preserve most
of its original beliefs, minimising loss of information, which
is known as the principle of minimal change. Traditionally,
Belief Change is studied via two perspectives: (i) set of rationality postulates that conceptualise the principle of minimal
change (ii) and classes of Belief Change operations characterised by such rationality postulates. These two views of
Belief Change are tightly connected via representation theorems which show that these views are equivalent.
The standard paradigm of Belief Change (Alchourrón,
Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985), named AGM due to the
initial of its founders, assumes that an agent’s epistemic state
is represented as a set of sentences logically closed known
as theories. A main issue with theories is that they are often infinite, whilst rational agents are cognitively limited in
the sense that an agent is only capable of carrying a finite
amount of explicit beliefs, and all its implicit beliefs follows
from such a finite body of beliefs.
A theory that can be generated from a finite set of formulae is called finite based (Hansson 1996, 1993b). For this
reason, we will call finite sets of formulae finite bases, as arbitrary sets of formulas simply (belief) bases. While in classical propositional logics, every theory is finite based, this
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6389

