The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Meta-Sketch: A Neural Data Structure
for Estimating Item Frequencies of Data Streams
Yukun Cao , Yuan Feng , Xike Xie*
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
Data Darkness Lab, MIRACLE Center, Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC
{ykcho, yfung}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xkxie@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

were proposed, which attach filters to basic sketches, to capture the preliminary patterns of skewed distributions (e.g.,
high/low-frequency items). By separately maintaining the
filtered high/low-frequency items, augmented sketches strive
to eliminate the estimation error incurred by hash collisions
between the high- and low-frequency items. Further, learned
augmented sketches (Hsu et al. 2019) improve the filters of
the augmented sketches by memorizing short-term high/lowfrequency items via a pre-trained neural network (NN in
short) classifier. But it is not clear how the pre-trained NN
can be adapted to dynamic streaming scenarios, where the
correspondence between items and frequencies varies. In
a nutshell, sketches are structures compactly summarizing
streams to count item frequencies with limited space budgets.
From the retrospective analysis, an observation can be
drawn that the evolution of sketches conforms with the exploitation of data distributions. It is thus a natural evolution
to consider a sketch that generally and automatically captures more distribution patterns with limited space budget.
In this paper, we envision a novel neural sketch, called the
meta-sketch, with techniques of meta-learning and memoryaugmented neural networks. The meta-sketch learns the
sketching abilities from automatically generated meta-tasks.
Depending on the types of meta-tasks, we study two versions
of the meta-sketch, called basic and advanced meta-sketches.
The basic meta-sketch implements the simulation of basic
sketches, through the training process with basic meta-tasks
following Zipf distributions, which are prevalent in the scenes
of real data streams (Kolajo, Daramola, and Adebiyi 2019;
Zeng and Li 2014; Babcock et al. 2002; Cormode et al. 2012;
PhridviRaja and GuruRao 2016). The advanced meta-sketch
extends the basic version to fast adapt to the specific runtime of stream processing, through the training with adaptive
meta-tasks, which are generated by online sampling of real
data streams. Our work follows a typical setting where the
distribution of item frequencies follows a skewed distribution, but the correspondence between items and frequencies
varies. For example, in software-defined networks (SDN),
sketches are deployed to programmable switches to collect
per-flow statistics, where IP packets follow heavy-tailed distributions (Tang, Huang, and Lee 2019; Hsu et al. 2019).
In distributed databases, it gives advances to collect statistics of data shards to optimize data placement and query
caching, where query phrases follow approximate Zipf dis-

To estimate item frequencies of data streams with limited
space, sketches are widely used in real applications, including
real-time web analytics, network monitoring, and self-driving.
Sketches can be viewed as a model which maps the identifier of
a stream item to the corresponding frequency domain. Starting
from the premise, we envision a neural data structure, which
we term the meta-sketch, to go beyond the basic structure of
conventional sketches. The meta-sketch learns basic sketching
abilities from meta-tasks constituted with synthetic datasets
following Zipf distributions in the pre-training phase, and can
be fast adapted to real (skewed) distributions in the adaption
phase. Extensive experiments demonstrate the performance
gains of the meta-sketch and offer insights into our proposals.

Introduction
Estimating item frequency is a basic topic in data stream processing, which finds applications in the fields of networking,
databases, and machine learning, such as real-time data analyzing (Weller 2018; Zhu and Shasha 2002; Tinati et al. 2015;
Irfan and Gordon 2019), network traffic monitoring (Huang,
Lee, and Bao 2018; Madden and Franklin 2002; Wang et al.
2013), natural language processing (Goyal, III, and Cormode
2012) and search ranking (Dzogang et al. 2015). Towards
infinite data streams, a common class of solutions (Cormode
and Muthukrishnan 2005; Charikar, Chen, and Farach-Colton
2002; Estan and Varghese 2002; Roy, Khan, and Alonso 2016;
Zhou et al. 2018; Hsu et al. 2019) use a compact structure taking sublinear space for counting the number of occurrences
of each stream item, called the sketch.
Under the prevalent evidence of skewed distributions in
data streams, basic sketches achieve the space compactness
by hashing and approximately aggregating stream items. Basic sketches, including CM-sketch (Cormode and Muthukrishnan 2005), C-sketch (Charikar, Chen, and Farach-Colton
2002) and CU-sketch (Estan and Varghese 2002), use a 2D
array of counters as the core structure. Some varients (Li
et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2021; Gao et al. 2022; Liu and Xie
2021) broaden application scenarios based on basic sketches.
To optimize the sketching performance, several augmented
sketches (Roy, Khan, and Alonso 2016; Zhou et al. 2018)
* Xike Xie is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6916

