The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Correlation Loss: Enforcing Correlation between Classification and Localization
Fehmi Kahraman* ,1 , Kemal Oksuz* ,1 , Sinan Kalkan†,1,2 , Emre Akbas†,1,2
1

Dept. of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical University (METU), Ankara, Turkey
2
METU Center for Robotics and Artificial Intelligence (ROMER), Ankara, Turkey
{fehmi.kahraman 01, kemal.oksuz, skalkan, eakbas}@metu.edu.tr

Abstract

weighs the examples in the localization task by ranking them
with respect to (wrt.) their classification scores (Fig. 1(c)).
Using localization quality as an additional supervision signal for classification has been more commonly adopted (Fig.
1(d)) (Li et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021; Oksuz et al. 2021a;
Zhang et al. 2021) in two main ways: (i) Score-based approaches aim to regress the localization qualities (Li et al.
2019, 2020; Zhang et al. 2021) in the classification score,
and (ii) ranking-based approaches enforce the classifier to
rank the confidence scores wrt. the localization qualities (Liu
et al. 2021; Oksuz et al. 2021a).
Improving correlation seems to have a positive effect on
performance of a variety of object detectors, as shown in
Fig. 2. However, the effect of correlation on object detectors
has not been thoroughly studied. We fill this gap in this paper and first identify that correlation affects the performance
of object detectors at two levels: (i) Image-level correlation,
the correlation between the classification scores and localization qualities (i.e., IoU for the rest of the paper) of the detections in a single image before post-processing, which is
important to promote NMS performance, and (ii) Class-level
correlation, the correlation over the entire dataset for each
class after post-processing, which is related to the COCOstyle Average Precision (AP). Moreover, we quantitatively
define correlation at each level to enable analyses on how
well an object detector captures correlation (e.g., βcls in
Fig. 2(a)). Then, we provide an analysis on both levels of
correlation and draw important observations using common
models. Finally, to better exploit correlation, we introduce a
more direct mechanism to enforce correlation: Correlation
Loss, a simple plug-in and detector-independent loss term
(Fig. 1(e)), improving performance for a wide range of object detectors including NMS-free detectors, aligning with
our analysis (Fig. 2(b)). Similar to the novel loss functions
(Li et al. 2020; Oksuz et al. 2021a; Zhang et al. 2021), our
Correlation Loss boosts the performance without an auxiliary head, but different from them, it is a simple plug-in
technique that can easily be incorporated into any object detector, whether NMS-based or NMS-free.
Our main contributions are: (1) We identify how correlation affects NMS-based and NMS-free detectors, and design quantitative measures to analyze a detector wrt. correlation. (2) We analyze the effects of correlation at different
levels on various object detectors. (3) We propose Correla-

Object detectors are conventionally trained by a weighted
sum of classification and localization losses. Recent studies
(e.g., predicting IoU with an auxiliary head, Generalized Focal Loss, Rank & Sort Loss) have shown that forcing these
two loss terms to interact with each other in non-conventional
ways creates a useful inductive bias and improves performance. Inspired by these works, we focus on the correlation
between classification and localization and make two main
contributions: (i) We provide an analysis about the effects
of correlation between classification and localization tasks
in object detectors. We identify why correlation affects the
performance of various NMS-based and NMS-free detectors,
and we devise measures to evaluate the effect of correlation and use them to analyze common detectors. (ii) Motivated by our observations, e.g., that NMS-free detectors can
also benefit from correlation, we propose Correlation Loss,
a novel plug-in loss function that improves the performance
of various object detectors by directly optimizing correlation coefficients: E.g., Correlation Loss on Sparse R-CNN,
an NMS-free method, yields 1.6 AP gain on COCO and 1.8
AP gain on Cityscapes dataset. Our best model on Sparse
R-CNN reaches 51.0 AP without test-time augmentation on
COCO test-dev, reaching state-of-the-art. Code is available
at: https://github.com/fehmikahraman/CorrLoss.

1

Introduction

Most object detectors optimize a weighted sum of classification and localization losses during training. Results from
recent work suggest that performance improves when these
two loss functions are forced to interact with each other in
non-conventional ways as illustrated in Fig. 1. For example,
training an auxiliary (aux.) head to regress the localization
qualities of the positive examples, e.g. centerness, IoU or
mask-IoU, has proven useful (Jiang et al. 2018; Kim and Lee
2020; Tian et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020) (Fig. 1(b)). Other
methods remove such auxiliary heads and aim directly to
enforce correlation1 in the classification or localization task
during training; e.g., Average LRP Loss (Oksuz et al. 2020)
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Equal contribution for senior authorship.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In the rest of the paper, “correlation” will refer to the correlation between classification scores and IoUs.

1087

