The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-View Geo-Localization via Learning Disentangled Geometric Layout
Correspondence
Xiaohan Zhang1,2 * , Xingyu Li3 * , Waqas Sultani4 , Yi Zhou5 , Safwan Wshah1,2†
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Vermont, Burlington, USA
Vermont Complex Systems Center, University of Vermont, Burlington, USA
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology, China
4
Intelligent Machine Lab, Information Technology University, Pakistan
5
NEL-BITA, School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, China
2

Abstract

such as autonomous driving (Kim and Walter 2017), unmanned aerial vehicle navigation (Shetty and Gao 2019), and
augmented reality (Chiu et al. 2018). Most of the existing
cross-view geo-localization methods (Shi et al. 2019, 2020a;
Yang, Lu, and Zhu 2021; Hu et al. 2018; Vo and Hays 2016;
Workman, Souvenir, and Jacobs 2015; Toker et al. 2021; Shi
et al. 2020b; Liu and Li 2019; Wang et al. 2021; Zheng, Wei,
and Yang 2020) frame the problem as a retrieval task. These
methods normally train a model to push the corresponding
aerial image and ground image pairs (also known as aerialground pairs) closer in latent space and push the unmatched
pairs further away from each other. At the deployment, the
location of an aerial image with the highest similarity is the
prediction for a given query ground image.
Cross-view geo-localization is considered an extremely
challenging problem because of 1) the drastic change of viewpoints, 2) the difference in capturing time, 3) and the different
resolutions between ground and aerial images (Wilson et al.
2021). Tackling these challenges requires a detailed understanding of the image content and the spatial configuration of
visual features, e.g., buildings and roads. Most existing methods (Shi et al. 2019, 2020b; Hu et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2015;
Cai et al. 2019; Vo and Hays 2016) match ground and aerial
images by exploiting features extracted from convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). For instance, Shi et al. (2019) directly encodes the relative positions among object features by
using the Spatial-aware Position Embedding (SPE) module.
These methods are limited in exploring the spatial configuration of visual features which is a global property. Recently,
with the advancement of Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017),
several methods (Yang, Lu, and Zhu 2021; Zhu, Shah, and
Chen 2022) explore extracting latent features from global
contextual information. However, such methods solely rely
on multi-head attention mechanism to implicitly explore correlations in the input features. Consequently, the correlations
are unavoidably entangled in those approaches.
This paper introduces GeoDTR which processes the lowlevel feature and spatial configuration of visual features separately. To capture spatial configuration, we propose a novel
geometric layout extractor sub-module. This sub-module generates a set of geometric layout descriptors that reflects the
global contextual information among visual features in an
image. We strengthen the quality of the geometric layout

Cross-view geo-localization aims to estimate the location of a
query ground image by matching it to a reference geo-tagged
aerial images database. As an extremely challenging task,
its difficulties root in the drastic view changes and different
capturing time between two views. Despite these difficulties,
recent works achieve outstanding progress on cross-view geolocalization benchmarks. However, existing methods still suffer from poor performance on the cross-area benchmarks, in
which the training and testing data are captured from two
different regions. We attribute this deficiency to the lack of
ability to extract the spatial configuration of visual feature
layouts and models’ overfitting on low-level details from the
training set. In this paper, we propose GeoDTR which explicitly disentangles geometric information from raw features
and learns the spatial correlations among visual features from
aerial and ground pairs with a novel geometric layout extractor module. This module generates a set of geometric layout
descriptors, modulating the raw features and producing highquality latent representations. In addition, we elaborate on two
categories of data augmentations, (i) Layout simulation, which
varies the spatial configuration while keeping the low-level
details intact. (ii) Semantic augmentation, which alters the
low-level details and encourages the model to capture spatial configurations. These augmentations help to improve the
performance of the cross-view geo-localization models, especially on the cross-area benchmarks. Moreover, we propose a
counterfactual-based learning process to benefit the geometric
layout extractor in exploring spatial information. Extensive
experiments show that GeoDTR not only achieves state-ofthe-art results but also significantly boosts the performance on
same-area and cross-area benchmarks. Our code can be found
at https://gitlab.com/vail-uvm/geodtr.

Introduction
Cross-view geo-localization is defined as the estimation of
the location of a ground image (also known as query image) from a set of geo-tagged aerial images (also known as
reference images). The ground images are usually captured
from cameras mounted on vehicles or taken by pedestrians.
Cross-view geo-localization can be applied in different fields
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding and senior author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3480

