The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Posterior Coreset Construction with Kernelized Stein Discrepancy
for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Souradip Chakraborty1 , Amrit Singh Bedi1 , Pratap Tokekar1 , Alec Koppel2 ,
Brian Sadler3 , Furong Huang1 , Dinesh Manocha1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, USA,
2
JP Morgan AI Research, NY, USA,
3
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adeplhi, USA
{schakra3,amritbd,tokekar, furongh, dmanocha}@umd.edu, alec.koppel@jpmchase.com, brian.m.sadler6.civ@army.mil
Abstract

2002; Amortila et al. 2020; Kose and Ruszczynski 2021). In
this work, we restrict focus to regret, as it imposes the fewest
requirements on access to a generative model underlying
state transitions.
In evaluating the landscape of frequentist regret bounds for
RL methods, both model-based and model-free approaches
have been extensively studied (Jin et al. 2018). Value-based
methods in episodic settings
have been shown to achieve
√
regret bounds Õ(dp H q T ) (Yang and Wang 2020) (with
p = 1, q = 2), where H is the episode length, and d is the
aggregate dimension of the state and action space. This result has been improved to p = q = 3/2 in (Jin et al. 2020),
and further to p = 3/2 and q = 1 in (Zanette et al. 2020).
Recently, model-based methods have gained traction for improving upon the best known regret model-free methods with
p = 1 and q = 1/3 (Ayoub et al. 2020). A separate line of
works seek to improve the dependence on T to be logarithmic
through instance dependence (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010;
Zhou, Gu, and Szepesvari 2021). These results typically impose that the underlying MDP has a transition model that is
linearly factorizable, and exhibit regret depends on the input
dimension d. This condition can be relaxed through introduction of a nonlinear feature map, whose appropriate selection
is highly nontrivial and lead to large gaps between regret
and practice (Nguyen et al. 2013), or meta-procedures (Lee
et al. 2021). Aside from the feature selection issue, these
approaches require evaluation of confidence sets which is
computationally costly and lead to statistical inefficiencies
when approximated (Osband and Van Roy 2017a).
Thus, we prioritize Bayesian approaches to RL
(Ghavamzadeh et al. 2015; Kamthe and Deisenroth 2018)
popular in robotics (Deisenroth, Fox, and Rasmussen 2013).
While many heuristics exist, performance guarantees take
the form of Bayesian regret (Osband, Russo, and Van Roy
2013), and predominantly build upon posterior (Thompson) sampling (Thompson 1933). In particular, beyond
the tabular setting,
(Osband and Van Roy
p
p 2014) estab∗
lishes a Õ(σR dK (R)dE (R)T +E[L ]σp dK (P )dE (P ))
Bayesian regret for posterior sampling RL (PSRL) combined
with greedy action selections with respect to the estimated
value. Here L∗ is a global Lipschitz constant for the future
value function, dK and dE are Kolmogorov and eluder dimensions, and R and P refers to function classes of rewards
and transitions. The connection between H and L is left im-

Model-based approaches to reinforcement learning (MBRL)
exhibit favorable performance in practice, but their theoretical
guarantees in large spaces are mostly restricted to the setting
when transition model is Gaussian or Lipschitz, and demands
a posterior estimate whose representational complexity grows
unbounded with time. In this work, we develop a novel MBRL
method (i) which relaxes the assumptions on the target transition model to belong to a generic family of mixture models;
(ii) is applicable to large-scale training by incorporating a
compression step such that the posterior estimate consists of
a Bayesian coreset of only statistically significant past stateaction pairs; and (iii) exhibits a sublinear Bayesian regret.
To achieve these results, we adopt an approach based upon
Stein’s method, which, under a smoothness condition on the
constructed posterior and target, allows distributional distance
to be evaluated in closed form as the kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD). The aforementioned compression step is then
computed in terms of greedily retaining only those samples
which are more than a certain KSD away from the previous
model estimate. Experimentally, we observe that this approach
is competitive with several state-of-the-art RL methodologies,
and can achieve up-to 50 percent reduction in wall clock time
in some continuous control environments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning, mathematically characterized by
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman 2014), has
gained traction for addressing sequential decision-making
problems with long-term incentives and uncertainty in state
transitions (Sutton and Barto 1998). A persistent debate exists
as to whether model-free (approximate dynamic programming (Sutton 1988) or policy search (Williams 1992)), or
model-based (model-predictive control, MPC (Garcia, Prett,
and Morari 1989; Kamthe and Deisenroth 2018)) methods,
are superior in principle and practice (Wang et al. 2019). A
major impediment to settling this debate is that performance
certificates are presented in disparate ways, such as probably
approximate correct (PAC) bounds (Strehl, Li, and Littman
2009; Dann, Lattimore, and Brunskill 2017), frequentist regret (Jin et al. 2018, 2020), Bayesian regret (Agrawal and
Jia 2017; Xu and Tewari 2020; O’Donoghue 2021), and convergence in various distributional metrics (Borkar and Meyn
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6980

