The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fully Computer-Assisted Proofs in Extremal Combinatorics
Olaf Parczyk1 , Sebastian Pokutta2,3 , Christoph Spiegel3 , Tibor Szabó1
1
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Mathematics, Berlin
Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Mathematics, Berlin
3
Zuse Institute Berlin, Department for AI in Society, Science, and Technology, Germany
parczyk@mi.fu-berlin.de, pokutta@zib.de, spiegel@zib.de, szabo@mi.fu-berlin.de
2

Abstract
We present a fully computer-assisted proof system for solving
a particular family of problems in Extremal Combinatorics.
Existing techniques using Flag Algebras have proven powerful in the past, but have so far lacked a computational counterpart to derive matching constructive bounds. We demonstrate
that common search heuristics are capable of finding constructions far beyond the reach of human intuition. Additionally, the most obvious downside of such heuristics, namely
a missing guarantee of global optimality, can often be fully
eliminated in this case through lower bounds and stability results coming from the Flag Algebra approach.
To illustrate the potential of this approach, we study two related and well-known problems in Extremal Graph Theory
that go back to questions of Erdős from the 60s. Most notably,
we present the first major improvement in the upper bound of
the Ramsey multiplicity of K4 in 25 years, precisely determine the first off-diagonal Ramsey multiplicity number, and
settle the minimum number of independent sets of size four
in graphs with clique number strictly less than five.

Figure 1: The blow-up sequence of the Schläfli graph is the
unique solution to the off-diagonal (3, 4)-Ramsey multiplicity problem and was found through search heuristics.

Introduction
Computers and Artificial Intelligence (AI) have always been
an important tool for mathematicians, allowing one to gather
data and extrapolate connections to formulate conjectures,
most notably the conjecture of Swinnerton-Dyer and Birch
(1965), exhaustively execute case analysis too large to be
done by hand, for example to establish the four color theorem (Appel and Haken 1989), or solve convex programming
problems, as was done to prove the Kepler conjecture (Hales
2005). Lately the rigorous formalization and verification of
proofs has also come to the forefront, cf. (Buzzard 2022).
This has opened up the possibility for computers to execute
fully automated reasoning either through traditional heuristics, as was for example done to prove that Robbins algebras are boolean (McCune 1996), or even through Machine
Learning (ML) approaches (Polu et al. 2022).
The use of computer assistance has been particularly fruitful in Extremal Combinatorics, where the primary interest is
to study the behaviour of abstract discrete structures, such
as graphs, with the goal of determining the constructions

that minimize or maximize a given parameter under certain restrictions. When studying locally defined restrictions
and parameters, the most formalized and successful computational approach in this field comes in the form of an application of Flag Algebras, allowing one to establish bounds
through a double-counting argument by solving Semidefinite Programming (SDP) problems. Razborov (2007) introduced the notion of Flag Algebras, citing both Bondy’s work
on the Caccetta-Häggkvist conjecture as well as Lovász and
Szegedy’s work on graph limits as inspiration. Since then
this approach has been for example applied to make progress
on Turán’s conjecture (Razborov 2010; Falgas-Ravry and
Vaughan 2013), determine the maximum number of five cycles in triangle-free graphs (Grzesik 2012), to establish that
jumps exist for hypergraphs (Baber and Talbot 2011), and
prove a conjecture of Brandt about the spectrum of trianglefree graphs (Balogh, Clemen, and Lidickỳ 2022).
In many of these problems the counterpart to the bound
given by the Flag Algebra approach is played by an explicit construction. Such constructions are commonly obtained by hand based on human combinatorial insights, but

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12482

