The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

SVP-T: A Shape-Level Variable-Position Transformer for
Multivariate Time Series Classification
Rundong Zuo1 , Guozhong Li1 , Byron Choi1 , Sourav S Bhowmick2 ,
Daphne Ngar-yin Mah3 , Grace L.H. Wong4
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR
School of Computing Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Geography, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR
4
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
{csrdzuo, csgzli, bchoi}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, assourav@ntu.edu.sg, daphnemah@hkbu.edu.hk, wonglaihung@cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

Several methods have been proposed to solve the issue of
such interactions of variables. (Hao and Cao 2020) proposed
two novel cross-attention modules on their network. However, the model starts with a convolution operation with local
neighborhood information layer by layer, which is known
to be prone to the position-dependent prior bias on variables. ShapeNet captures the potential interactions between
variables by learning subsequence representations (Li et al.
2021). Nevertheless, the representations do not consider the
information about the variables and the positions of subsequences.
Recently, transformer models have exhibited superior
performance in capturing long- and short-term dependencies in the applications of natural language processing
(NLP) (Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin et al. 2019). Moreover, some transformer-based methods have been proposed
for time series applications. For instance, Informer employs
transformer for time series forecasting (Zhou et al. 2021)
for efficiently handling extremely long input sequences.
(Zerveas et al. 2021) have proposed a transformer-based
framework for time series representation learning for downstream tasks (e.g., regression and classification). Applying a
transformer on MTS avoids using a sequence-aligned recurrent architecture, i.e., the models learn the temporal dependencies without position-dependent prior bias.
Challenges. We note that the input token of previous
transformer-based methods (called timestamp-level transformer in this paper) for MTS is taken from one timestamp of
all variables (Zhou et al. 2021; Zerveas et al. 2021), which
means they only consider the temporal dependencies, and do
not yet consider the dependencies between variables, since
the transformer is for learning the dependencies among input
tokens, not the dependencies within each individual token
(shown in Figure 1(a)). Meanwhile, the input length of the
timestamp-level transformer depends on the length of time
series T , and thus the time complexity of the self-attention
mechanism in the transformer is O(T 2 ). Therefore, a time
series with a large T makes a transformer time-consuming.
We are the first to take shapes as the input for the transformer (also called shape-level transformer in this paper,
shown in Figure 1(b)) to handle both the temporal and
variable dependencies. When using these shapes as the input, there are two additional challenges. First, the variable

Multivariate time series classification (MTSC), one of the
most fundamental time series applications, has not only
gained substantial research attentions but has also emerged
in many real-life applications. Recently, using transformers to
solve MTSC has been reported. However, current transformerbased methods take data points of individual timestamps as
inputs (timestamp-level), which only capture the temporal dependencies, not the dependencies among variables. In this paper, we propose a novel method, called SVP-T. Specifically,
we first propose to take time series subsequences, which can
be from different variables and positions (time interval), as
the inputs (shape-level). The temporal and variable dependencies are both handled by capturing the long- and short-term
dependencies among shapes. Second, we propose a variableposition encoding layer (VP-layer) to utilize both the variable
and position information of each shape. Third, we introduce a
novel VP-based (Variable-Position) self-attention mechanism
to allow the enhancing of the attention weights of overlapping
shapes. We evaluate our method on all UEA MTS datasets.
SVP-T achieves the best accuracy rank compared with several competitive state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of the VP-layer and the VPbased self-attention mechanism. Finally, we present one case
study to interpret the result of SVP-T.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series (MTS), recording a group of variables at each timestamp, is ubiquitous in diverse domains,
such as economics, smart city, medicine, and astronautics (Palpanas 2015). Time series classification is one of the
most fundamental time series applications (Bagnall et al.
2017). However, compared to univariate time series classification (UTSC) (Bagnall et al. 2017; Shifaz et al. 2020),
multivariate time series classification (MTSC) has received
less research attention (Li et al. 2021). One of the key issues for MTSC is to capture the interactions among different variables (Ruiz et al. 2020), e.g., one activity (playing badminton) determined by several shapes from different
variables around the same time in human activity recognition (Bagnall et al. 2018).
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11497

