The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Exposing the Self-Supervised Space-Time Correspondence
Learning via Graph Kernels
Zheyun Qin1 , Xiankai Lu1∗ , Xiushan Nie2 , Yilong Yin1 * , Jianbing Shen3
1

2

School of Software, Shandong University
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong Jianzhu University
3
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
zheyunqin@gmail.com, carrierlxk@gmail.com

Abstract

putation burden and unsatisfying performance, especially
for label propagation tasks that require fine-grained localization ability in each frame. One potential solution resorts
to mining temporal correspondence (i.e., cycle-consistency)
across the video as temporal supervision (Vondrick et al.
2017; Wang et al. 2018; Lai and Xie 2019; Wang, Jabri, and
Efros 2019; Wang et al. 2021b; Xu and Wang 2021; Wang
et al. 2021a). On account of the hypothesis about intrinsic
slow feature changing properties (Turner and Sahani 2007;
Wiskott and Sejnowski 2002; Lu et al. 2020a), these methods
have achieved promising performance across several label
propagation tasks, such as video object segmentation (Lu et al.
Jun. 2019,A; Wang et al. 2022), pose tracking (Li et al. 2019),
and semantic part propagation (Zhou et al. 2018). Nevertheless, these methods depend on repeatedly applying complex
greedy tracking and adjacent frame sampling training over
time that may be trapped in local optimality.
Jabri, Owens, and Efros (2020) recently argued that video
temporal correspondences are implicit supervision, and exploit directed graph view to represent the video. This way,
the temporal correspondence can be comprehended as patchlevel similarity learning. While this is a promising direction,
the proposed method needs dense affinity computation among
multiple frames and neglects the underlying structural information in the video (Narayanan and Mitter 2010).
In this paper, we develop an SSL framework via hidden
graph prediction for space-time correspondence learning of
video data, termed as VideoHiGraph (See Fig. 1). Firstly, we
construct a spatial-temporal graph to describe a video, where
each image patch is formulated as a node and the similarity
among the intra-frame and inter-frame as the edge. A good
correspondence for the label propagation task implies that
the nodes inside each frame should automatically cluster
into their respective semantic part (sub-graph); meanwhile,
sub-graphs in adjacent frames share a similar motion trend.
With this spirit, we employ graph kernels to capture spatial
and temporal structure in the video and take the structural
consistency to guide correspondence learning.
We first employ hidden graphs to incorporate reliable
nodes in the spatial graph and build the target-related subgraph automatically. Then, we connect the sub-graphs across
different frames via a random walk graph kernel. Considering
the missing annotations in the videos, we additionally utilize
the idea of temporal consistency as node-level supervision.

Self-supervised space-time correspondence learning is emerging as a promising way of leveraging unlabeled video. Currently, most methods adapt contrastive learning with mining negative samples or reconstruction adapted from the image domain, which requires dense affinity across multiple
frames or optical flow constraints. Moreover, video correspondence predictive models require mining more inherent
properties in videos, such as structural information. In this
work, we propose the VideoHiGraph, a space-time correspondence framework based on a learnable graph kernel. Concerning the video as the spatial-temporal graph, the learning
objectives of VideoHiGraph are emanated in a self-supervised
manner for predicting unobserved hidden graphs via graph
kernel manner. We learn a representation of the temporal coherence across frames in which pairwise similarity defines
the structured hidden graph, such that a biased random walk
graph kernel along the sub-graph can predict long-range correspondence. Then, we learn a refined representation across
frames on the node-level via a dense graph kernel. The selfsupervision of the model training is formed by the structural and temporal consistency of the graph. VideoHiGraph
achieves superior performance and demonstrates its robustness across the benchmark of label propagation tasks involving
objects, semantic parts, keypoints, and instances. Our algorithm implementations have been made publicly available at
https://github.com/zyqin19/VideoHiGraph.

Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm seeks to mine supervisory information from the unsupervised data and design
functional pretext learning tasks. Guided by the idea of SSL,
self-supervised representation learning based on still images
has made a flurry of advances, especially using contrastive
learning (Chen et al. 2020; Xie, Wang, and Ji 2020), yet
this has rarely translated to the field of video understanding (Wang et al. 2021a).
Video is often understood as a variant in that the image extends the time dimension, which limits the progress of video
understanding (Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Jabri, Owens, and
Efros 2020; Araslanov, Schaub-Meyer, and Roth 2021)—extending contrastive learning to videos bringing a huge com* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2110

