The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Winning the CityLearn Challenge: Adaptive Optimization
with Evolutionary Search under Trajectory-Based Guidance
Vanshaj Khattar and Ming Jin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech
vanshajk@vt.edu, jinming@vt.edu

Abstract
Modern power systems will have to face difficult challenges in the years to come: frequent blackouts in urban areas caused by high power demand peaks, grid
instability exacerbated by intermittent renewable generation, and global climate change amplified by rising
carbon emissions. While current practices are growingly
inadequate, the path to widespread adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) methods is hindered by missing
aspects of trustworthiness. The CityLearn Challenge is
an exemplary opportunity for researchers from multiple
disciplines to investigate the potential of AI to tackle
these pressing issues in the energy domain, collectively
modeled as a reinforcement learning (RL) task. Multiple real-world challenges faced by contemporary RL
techniques are embodied in the problem formulation.
In this paper, we present a novel method using the solution function of optimization as policies to compute
actions for sequential decision-making, while notably
adapting the parameters of the optimization model from
online observations. Algorithmically, this is achieved by
an evolutionary algorithm under a novel trajectory-based
guidance scheme. Formally, the global convergence property is established. Our agent ranked first in the latest
2021 CityLearn Challenge, being able to achieve superior performance in almost all metrics while maintaining
some key aspects of interpretability.

Introduction
Rapid urbanization in the past decades has led to a substantial increase in energy use that puts stress on the grid assets,
while the integration of additional renewable generation and
energy storage at the distribution level introduces both opportunities and new challenges (Rolnick et al. 2022). The cornerstone of addressing emerging issues is the deployment of
proper control and coordination strategies, which have a potential impact on enhancing energy flexibility and resilience
in the face of a surge in climate-induced demand (as already
seen in places like California, where rolling blackouts are
increasingly frequent during the summer) (Vazquez-Canteli
et al. 2020). Current industry practice is heavily based on
optimization models, such as energy dispatch and unit commitment, where parameters (e.g., technological and physical
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14286

constraints) are fixed throughout the lifecycle; however, such
an approach is increasingly confronted by environmental
uncertainty, renewable generation stochasticity, and the everincreasing complexity of the distribution grid (Abedi, Gaudard, and Romerio 2019). On the other hand, there has been
a surge in machine learning research, notably RL, because
it allows the agent to act without the need to access the true
model—a feature of particular interest for large-scale, complex systems, where it is not cost-effective to develop models
of such high fidelity. Despite recent progress, real-world RL
is still in its infancy (Dulac-Arnold et al. 2021).
Against this backdrop, the CityLearn Challenge aims to
spur RL solutions for the control of modern energy systems
by providing a set of benchmarks for urban energy management, load shaping, and demand response in a range of
climate zones (Vazquez-Canteli et al. 2020). The agent is
tasked with exploring and exploiting the best control strategy
for energy storage distributed in a community of buildings.
Performance is evaluated against standard metrics such as
ramping costs, peak demands, and carbon emissions. The
CityLearn encapsulates 4 of the 9 real-world RL challenges
identified by (Dulac-Arnold et al. 2021), including 1) the
ability to learn on live systems from limited samples—there
is no training period; 2) dealing with system constraints that
should never or rarely be violated—there are strict balancing
equations for electricity, heating, and cooling energy; 3) the
ability to provide quick action—there is a strict time limit
for completing the 4-year evaluation on Google’s Colab; and
4) providing system operators with explainable policies—a
necessity to facilitate real-world adoption and deployment.
In this paper, we describe our winning solution for the 2021
CityLearn Challenge based on the idea broadly categorized
as adaptive optimization. Indeed, optimization (especially
convex optimization) has become the de facto standard in
industrial systems with profound theoretical foundations, and
various formulations for control and planning applications
(Boyd, Boyd, and Vandenberghe 2004). Such approaches
can easily encode domain-specific constraints (in the form
of nonlinear functions and variational inequalities) and can
gracefully handle problems with millions of decision variables (Facchinei and Pang 2007). Although well established,
optimization models, once built, typically do not adapt to
real-world conditions, rendering current approaches rather
“rigid.”

