The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Cross-Modal Distillation for Speaker Recognition
Yufeng Jin1 , Guosheng Hu2 , Haonan Chen3 , Duoqian Miao1 , Liang Hu1 , Cairong Zhao1 *
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
2
Oosto, UK
3
Alibaba Group, China
jinyufeng@tongji.edu.cn, huguosheng100@gmail.com, haolan.chn@alibaba-inc.com, dqmiao@tongji.edu.cn,
rainmilk@gmail.com, zhaocairong@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract

deep learning, neural networks (Nagrani, Chung, and Zisserman 2017; Snyder et al. 2018; Okabe, Koshinaka, and Shinoda 2018) started to become the mainstream and achieved
promising progress. However, speaker recognition is fundamentally difficult, the voices of two speakers are likely very
similar, since the population (the number of speakers) can
be very large and the information density of speech is very
low. The intuitive solution is to collect bigger data and design more effective neural networks, however, this solution
maybe not very efficient and does not approach the fundamental difficulty: the low information density of speech
data.
Multimodal learning mitigates the challenges of speaker
recognition at their root by introducing richer and more discriminative information as input for speaker recognition. For
identity recognition, face images clearly convey much more
identity-related information than voice, and faces are more
widely applied than speech for identity recognition. It inspires researchers to use both face and speech for identity
recognition (Tao, Das, and Li 2020; Sarı et al. 2021; Qian,
Chen, and Wang 2021). Their experimental results show
that the multimodal speaker recognition is much stronger
than that using speech only as input. However, their multimodal speaker recognition assumes face and speech are always available during the training and test periods. Actually,
many applications have only speech input and do not have
face images as input, e.g. most smart speakers do not have
cameras.
Multimodal learning motivates us to ask a question: can
we use multimodal learning for the scenarios of speech input
only? This question triggers us to bridge the multimodal and
speech only identity recognition by introducing a new setting: training data with both annotated speech and face data
and test set with speech data only. Existing works (Inoue
2021; Cai, Wang, and Li 2022) have a similar multimodal
setting, but their training data is unlabelled.
We think our aforementioned setting is technically feasible. This feasibility results from (1) technical soundness and
(2) available data. For (1), we assume the two modalities
(face and speech) are highly correlated for identity recognition. In this way, the feature space of the networks trained
separately by these two modalities is also correlated. Based
on this assumption, the stronger modality (face) can transfer the knowledge in feature space to the weaker modality

Speaker recognition achieved great progress recently, however, it is not easy or efficient to further improve its performance via traditional solutions: collecting more data and
designing new neural networks. Aiming at the fundamental
challenge of speech data, i.e. low information density, multimodal learning can mitigate this challenge by introducing
richer and more discriminative information as input for identity recognition. Specifically, since the face image is more
discriminative than the speech for identity recognition, we
conduct multimodal learning by introducing a face recognition model (teacher) to transfer discriminative knowledge to
a speaker recognition model (student) during training. However, this knowledge transfer via distillation is not trivial because the big domain gap between face and speech can easily lead to overfitting. In this work, we introduce a multimodal learning framework, VGSR (Vision-Guided Speaker
Recognition). Specifically, we propose a MKD (Marginbased Knowledge Distillation) strategy for cross-modality
distillation by introducing a loose constrain to align the
teacher and student, greatly reducing overfitting. Our MKD
strategy can easily adapt to various existing knowledge distillation methods. In addition, we propose a QAW (Qualitybased Adaptive Weights) module to weight input samples via
quantified data quality, leading to a robust model training. Experimental results on the VoxCeleb1 and CN-Celeb datasets
show our proposed strategies can effectively improve the accuracy of speaker recognition by a margin of 10% ∼ 15%,
and our methods are very robust to different noises.

Introduction
A wealth of information is contained in the speaker’s voice
which can be abstracted into different properties, such as
gender, age, tone, etc. These properties can contribute to
identity recognition, i.e. speaker recognition. Speaker recognition is widely applied in the real world. For example,
in some smart audio devices, personalized configurations
can be loaded by recognizing the speaker. In addition, it
has important applications in security systems, investigation, forensics, etc. I-vector (Dehak et al. 2010) is a traditional speaker recognition method. With the popularity of
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12977

