The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Evaluating Model-Free Reinforcement Learning toward Safety-Critical Tasks
Linrui Zhang1 * , Qin Zhang1 , Li Shen2† , Bo Yuan3 , Xueqian Wang1† , Dacheng Tao2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
JD Explore Academy, JD.com, Inc.
3
Qianyuan Institute of Sciences
{zlr20,zhangqin21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mathshenli,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com,
boyuan@ieee.org, wang.xq@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

trade-off between performance and safety. A trivial penalty
term may fail to obtain a risk-averse policy, whereas an excessive punishment may make the agent too conservative to
explore the environment. Alternatively, incorporating safety
into RL via constraints (Altman 1999) is widely adopted
since the strength of constraints reflects the human-specified
safety requirement, and the agent is desired to optimize its
behavior within the constrained policy search space.
In this paper, we explore model-free reinforcement learning methods that adhere to state-wise safety constraints. To
better understand how this study is developed, two points deserve further clarification. First, our work is aimed at learning a stationary safe policy under the general model-free settings, instead of refusing any safety violations during the
training. The latter is more related to optimal control and
relies on the known dynamic model (Cheng et al. 2019)
or a carefully designed energy function (Zhao, He, and Liu
2021). Second, we focus on the state-wise constraint at every decision-making step and demonstrate that this type of
constraint is more strict and practical toward safety-critical
tasks theoretically and empirically. Our contributions in this
paper are summarized as follows:

Safety comes first in many real-world applications involving
autonomous agents. Despite a large number of reinforcement
learning (RL) methods focusing on safety-critical tasks, there
is still a lack of high-quality evaluation of those algorithms
that adheres to safety constraints at each decision step under complex and unknown dynamics. In this paper, we revisit
prior work in this scope from the perspective of state-wise
safe RL and categorize them as projection-based, recoverybased, and optimization-based approaches, respectively. Furthermore, we propose Unrolling Safety Layer (USL), a joint
method that combines safety optimization and safety projection. This novel technique explicitly enforces hard constraints via the deep unrolling architecture and enjoys structural advantages in navigating the trade-off between reward
improvement and constraint satisfaction. To facilitate further research in this area, we reproduce related algorithms
in a unified pipeline and incorporate them into SafeRL-Kit,
a toolkit that provides off-the-shelf interfaces and evaluation
utilities for safety-critical tasks. We then perform a comparative study of the involved algorithms on six benchmarks
ranging from robotic control to autonomous driving. The
empirical results provide an insight into their applicability
and robustness in learning zero-cost-return policies without
task-dependent handcrafting. The project page is available at
https://sites.google.com/view/saferlkit.

1. We revisit model-free RL following state-wise safety
constraints and present SafeRL-Kit, a toolkit that implements prior work in this scope under a unified
off-policy framework. Specifically, SafeRL-Kit contains projection-based Safety Layer (Dalal et al. 2018),
recovery-based Recovery RL (Thananjeyan et al. 2021),
optimization-based Off-policy Lagrangian (Ha et al.
2020), Feasible Actor-Critic (Ma et al. 2021), and the
new method proposed in this paper.
2. We propose Unrolling Safety Layer (USL), a novel approach that combines safety projection and safety optimization. USL unrolls gradient-based corrections to the
jointly optimized actor-network and thus explicitly enforces the constraints. The proposed method is simpleyet-effective and outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms
in learning risk-averse policies.
3. We perform a comparative study based on SafeRL-Kit
and evaluate the related algorithms on six different tasks.
We further demonstrate their applicability and robustness
in safety-critical tasks with the universal binary cost indicator and a constant constraint threshold.

Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved superhuman performance on many decision-making problems (Mnih et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2019). Typically, the
agent learns from trial and error and requires minimal prior
knowledge of the environment. Such a paradigm features
significant advantages in mastering essential skills for complex systems, but concerns about the systematic safety limit
the extent of adoption of model-free RL in real-world applications, such as human-robot collaboration (Villani et al.
2018) and autonomous driving (Kiran et al. 2021).
Penalizing unsafe transitions via the reward function is
straightforward but sometimes cumbersome to navigate the
* This work was done during Linrui Zhang’s internship at JD

Explore Academy, JD.com, Inc.
†
Correspondence to: Xueqian Wang and Li Shen
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15313

