The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Global-Local Characteristic Excited Cross-Modal Attacks from Images to Videos
Ruikui Wang1 , Yuanfang Guo1,2 * , Yunhong Wang1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{rkwang, andyguo, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

2019), video attacks have also attracted more and more attentions from researchers, because of the applications of
DNNs in various video related tasks (Wu et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2019; Feichtenhofer et al. 2019; Yang
et al. 2020). Recently, a couple of works (Wei et al. 2019;
Jiang et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Wang,
Sha, and Su 2021; Wei et al. 2022c; Wei, Yan, and Li 2022)
have been proposed to perform video attacks and achieved
promising performances. However, most of them are querybased methods, which seem infeasible in reality due to considerable budgets of queries. To ameliorate this problem, a
transfer-based video attack named TT (Wei et al. 2022a,b)
is proposed. TT adopts temporal translations to augment
video data to improve the transferability of adversarial examples. In detail, TT is essentially a transfer-based video
attack on homomodal models, i.e., both the substitute and
target models are video models. Nevertheless, cross-modal
attack is rarely explored, i.e., generating video adversarial
examples using image-based substitute models to attack the
target video models.
Comparing with the query-based attacks and transferbased video attack on homomodal models, cross-modal attack setting has two typical distinctions. Firstly, comparing with the query-based video attacks, no information is
required about the target model, which avoids the hassle
of frequent queries. Secondly, comparing with the transferbased video attacks with video-based substitute models,
image-based substitute models are easier to collect and
the attack process is more simplified. If the attack performance of cross-modal attack is comparable to or even better
than transfer-based video attacks with video-based substitute models, it will be more practical and economical. To
the best of our knowledge, I2V (Wei et al. 2022b) is the first
work to tackle this new challenging attack setting. In detail,
it feeds each frame into the model and craft video adversarial
examples by minimizing the cosine similarity of intermediate feature between clean frames and adversarial frames then
concatenating each adversarial frame according to the temporal order of original video. Unfortunately, it treats a video
as an orderless image set and ignores the inherent temporal
information in videos. Consequently, the cross-modal transferability of I2V (Wei et al. 2022b) is slightly moderate.
In this paper, by considering the characteristic of video
data from both global and local perspectives, we propose

The transferability of adversarial examples is the key property in practical black-box scenarios. Currently, numerous
methods improve the transferability across different models trained on the same modality of data. The investigation of generating video adversarial examples with imagebased substitute models to attack the target video models,
i.e., cross-modal transferability of adversarial examples, is
rarely explored. A few works on cross-modal transferability directly apply image attack methods for each frame and
no factors especial for video data are considered, which
limits the cross-modal transferability of adversarial examples. In this paper, we propose an effective cross-modal attack method which considers both the global and local characteristics of video data. Firstly, from the global perspective, we introduce inter-frame interaction into attack process to induce more diverse and stronger gradients rather
than perturb each frame separately. Secondly, from the local perspective, we disrupt the inherently local correlation
of frames within a video, which prevents black-box video
model from capturing valuable temporal clues. Extensive experiments on the UCF-101 and Kinetics-400 validate the proposed method significantly improves cross-modal transferability and even surpasses stronger baseline using video models as substitute model. Our source codes are available at
https://github.com/lwmming/Cross-Modal-Attack.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in a wide range of computer vision tasks (He et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2015; He et al. 2017). Unfortunately, these DNNs
are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e., the inconspicuous perturbations injected to the input can easily
deceive the model, leading to incorrect decisions. This phenomenon implies the existence of potential safety risks in
current deployed DNN-based systems, such as autonomous
driving, face recognition payment. Thus, researches on adversarial example are necessary and helpful to the development of reliable DNNs.
Analogous to adversarial attacks for images (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Kurakin et al. 2017; Madry et al.
2017; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Dong et al. 2018; Xie et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2635

