The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

HybridPrompt: Bridging Language Models and Human Priors in Prompt Tuning
for Visual Question Answering
Zhiyuan Ma, Zhihuan Yu, Jianjun Li* , Guohui Li
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China
{zhiyuanma,zhihuanyu,jianjunli,guohuili}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

girl
goggles

Q: What is the little girl doing?

Visual Question Answering (VQA) aims to answer the natural language question about a given image by understanding
multimodal content. However, the answering quality of most
existing visual-language pre-training (VLP) methods is still
limited, mainly due to: (1) Incompatibility. Upstream pretraining tasks are generally incompatible with downstream
question answering tasks, which makes the knowledge from
the language model not well transferable to downstream tasks,
and greatly limits their performance in few-shot scenarios;
(2) Under-fitting. They generally do not integrate human priors to compensate for universal knowledge from language
models, so as to fit the challenging VQA problem and generate reliable answers. To address these issues, we propose
HybridPrompt, a cloze- and verify-style hybrid prompt framework with bridging language models and human priors in
prompt tuning for VQA. Specifically, we first modify the input questions into the cloze-style prompts to narrow the gap
between upstream pre-training tasks and downstream VQA
task, which ensures that the universal knowledge in the language model can be better transferred to subsequent human
prior-guided prompt tuning. Then, we imitate the cognitive
process of human brain to introduce topic and sample related
priors to construct a dynamically learnable prompt template
for human prior-guided prompt learning. Finally, we add fixedlength learnable free-parameters to further enhance the generalizability and scalability of prompt learning in the VQA
model. Experimental results verify the effectiveness of HybridPrompt, showing that it achieves competitive performance
against previous methods on widely-used VQAv2 dataset and
obtains new state-of-the-art results. Our code is released at:
https://github.com/zhizhi111/hybrid.

VQA Task

A: Swimming

swimming lap

[CLS]

What

is

the

little

girl

doing

[SEP]
(b) Fine-tuning Stage VLP Methods

(a) Pre-training Stage
ITM

Pre-training
Loss

0/1

[CLS] What

MLM

VQA

little

Swimming

is the [MASK]

girl doing

[SEP]

Question Answering
Loss

[CLS] What

is the [MASK]

girl doing

[SEP]

(c) Topic, Sample and Attribute-aware Prompt-tuning Stage
Ours
country INSERT
AMC
[HARD PROMPT]
Topic sport
Prompt-tuning
food
Swimming
baseball taekwondo yoga
Loss

AFV

yes / no
[CLS]

The

little

and

we

can

girl

is

notice

that

[ANS]

which is

a

[SOFT PROMPT]

[TOP]

such as

[S1]

[S2]

[S3]

[SEP]

Figure 1: Example of VLP methods and our proposed HybridPrompt method for VQA task.

Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) (Yu et al. 2017, 2018) is
a classic and challenging multimodal comprehension task,
which aims to learn cross-modal semantic content from
image-text pair to answer a given natural language question. Inspired by the success of vision-language pre-training
(VLP), we have recently witnessed a boosting number of
research works on VQA (Chen et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020;
Xu et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021b; Radford et al. 2021; Li et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13371

2019b; Lu et al. 2019; Kim, Son, and Kim 2021; Cui et al.
2021; Ma et al. 2022b; Li et al. 2021a; Jia et al. 2021; Ma
et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2022).
Though achieving remarkable progress, existing VLPbased methods still suffer from the following two limitations.
(1) Incompatibility. Firstly, upstream pre-training tasks are
generally incompatible with downstream question answering
task. Taking Figure 1 as an example, the VLP-based methods
mainly exploit the “Pre-training + Fine-tuning” paradigm
to train a vision-language model, aiming at obtaining a correct answer such as “Swimming” for VQA. However, in the
upstream pre-training task, i.e., in the pre-training stage in
Figure 1 (a), previous VLP methods generally only carry
out simple mask-language-modeling (MLM), image-textmatching (ITM) or some extended tasks to respectively learn
masked contextual word representations (e.g., the word “little”
has been replaced by a special token [MASK]) and coarsegrained image-text matching (e.g., “What is the little girl
doing” and its corresponding description image), which are
obviously different from the downstream VQA task depicted
in the next fine-tuning stage in Figure 1 (b). In the VQA
task, the pre-trained model needs to deeply understand the

