The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Continual Pre-training Approach to Tele-Triaging Pregnant Women in Kenya
Wenbo Zhang1 , Hangzhi Guo1 , Prerna Ranganathan1 , Jay Patel2 , Sathyanath Rajasekharan2 ,
Nidhi Danayak1 , Manan Gupta1 , Amulya Yadav1
1

Pennsylvania State University
2
Jacaranda Health
wjz5120@psu.edu, hangz@psu.edu, pvr5208@psu.edu, jpatel@jacarandahealth.org, srajan@jacarandahealth.org,
nmd5606@psu.edu, mfg5480@psu.edu, amulya@psu.edu
Abstract

33% of maternal/neonatal deaths in Kenya occur due to delays in care-seeking, i.e., pregnant or puerperal women do
not have (nearby) doctors available to take care of them at
the right time. Thus, proper and timely decision making is
a huge challenge for these women, especially as they lack
access to timely information about their medical symptoms.
To address this issue, Jacaranda Health (a non-profit organization working towards improving maternity health in
Kenya) developed PROMPTS, a widely used tele-triage
tool that works as follows: (i) it enables pregnant or puerperal women to use a Short Message Service (SMS) based
question-answer system to seek online health counseling and
doctor assistance; (ii) once a pregnant woman registers for
PROMPTS, she will start receiving “prompts” through text
messages providing tips and behaviors based on her current
stage of pregnancy. (iii) women can also use the questionanswer function inside PROMPTS to ask questions regarding their health status by sending an SMS message to a tollfree phone number. (iv) A human helpdesk agent decides
the case emergency level based on the content of the text
message. (v) Finally, the helpdesk agent answers questions
directly if the issue faced is simple and straightforward. On
the other hand, urgent issues are promptly referred to the appropriate hospital or local clinics, so that mothers can get the
necessary care at the right time.
PROMPTS has been successfully deployed in the field
with ∼350,000 women, and has led to a marked improvement in the quality of health care for pregnant/puerperal
women in Kenya. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to scaleup PROMPTS to larger populations. It currently receives
∼1.1 million SMS messages per month (28,000 new users
enroll every month into PROMPTS), and the system currently relies on a small number of well-trained human
helpdesk agents to evaluate case emergency levels and decide which cases should be answered directly and/or which
cases need immediate medical intervention. Thus, these
helpdesk agents are tasked with responding to thousands of
incoming SMS messages every day. At this scale, it is very
challenging for human agents to accurately identify the clinical urgency of the user’s medical condition (based on their
SMS message) to ensure that the most high-risk patients can
be triaged first (to get timely care).
In this paper, we propose to automate the task of predicting emergency levels of a user’s medical condition on the

Access to high-quality maternal health care services is limited
in Kenya, which resulted in ∼36,000 maternal and neonatal
deaths in 2018. To tackle this challenge, Jacaranda Health
(a non-profit organization working on maternal health in
Kenya) developed PROMPTS, an SMS based tele-triage system for pregnant and puerperal women, which has more than
350,000 active users in Kenya. PROMPTS empowers pregnant women living far away from doctors and hospitals to
send SMS messages to get quick answers (through human
helpdesk agents) to questions about their medical symptoms
and pregnancy status. Unfortunately, ∼1.1 million SMS messages are received by PROMPTS every month, which makes
it challenging for helpdesk agents to ensure that these messages can be interpreted correctly and evaluated by their
level of emergency to ensure timely responses and/or treatments for women in need. This paper reports on a collaborative effort with Jacaranda Health to develop a state-of-theart natural language processing (NLP) framework, TRIM-AI
(TRIage for Mothers using AI), which can automatically predict the emergency level (or severity of medical condition) of
a pregnant mother based on the content of their SMS messages. TRIM-AI leverages recent advances in multi-lingual
pre-training and continual pre-training to tackle code-mixed
SMS messages (between English and Swahili), and achieves
a weighted F1 score of 0.774 on real-world datasets. TRIMAI has been successfully deployed in the field since June
2022, and is being used by Jacaranda Health to prioritize
the provision of services and care to pregnant women with
the most critical medical conditions. Our preliminary A/B
tests in the field show that TRIM-AI is ∼17% more accurate
at predicting high-risk medical conditions from SMS messages sent by pregnant Kenyan mothers, which reduces the
helpdesk’s workload by ∼12%.

Introduction
Inadequate, low-quality health care is responsible for 50%
of maternal deaths and 60% of neonatal deaths in hospitals
around the world. This issue is particularly severe in Kenya,
where the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) and neonatal
mortality ratio (NMR) is estimated to be 362 and 3100 per
100,000 live births, respectively (as of 2020) (Scanlon et al.
2021; Maldonado et al. 2020). Unfortunately, more than
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14620

