The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Implicit Bilevel Optimization: Differentiating through Bilevel Optimization
Programming
Francesco Alesiani
NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany
Francesco.Alesiani@neclab.eu

Abstract
Bilevel Optimization Programming is used to model complex and conflicting interactions between agents, for example in Robust AI or Privacy-preserving AI. Integrating
bilevel mathematical programming within deep learning is
thus an essential objective for the Machine Learning community. Previously proposed approaches only consider singlelevel programming. In this paper, we extend existing singlelevel optimization programming approaches and thus propose Differentiating through Bilevel Optimization Programming (B I G RAD) for end-to-end learning of models that use
Bilevel Programming as a layer. B I G RAD has wide applicability and can be used in modern machine learning frameworks. B I G RAD is applicable to both continuous and combinatorial Bilevel optimization problems. We describe a class
of gradient estimators for the combinatorial case which reduces the requirements in terms of computation complexity;
for the case of the continuous variable, the gradient computation takes advantage of the push-back approach (i.e. vectorjacobian product) for an efficient implementation. Experiments show that the B I G RAD successfully extends existing
single-level approaches to Bilevel Programming.

Figure 1: The Forward and backward passes of a Bilevel
Programming (B I G RAD) layer: the larger system has input
d and output u = hψ ◦ H ◦ hθ (d); the bilevel layer has
input z and output x, y, which are solutions of a Bilevel
optimization problem represented by the implicit function
H(x, y, z) = 0.

Proposed gradient estimates either relax the combinatorial problem (Mandi and Guns 2020), perturb the input variables (Berthet et al. 2020; Domke 2010) or linearly approximate the loss function (Pogančić et al. 2019). These approaches though, do now allow to directly express models
with conflicting objectives, for example in structural learning (Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter 2019) or adversarial system
(Goodfellow et al. 2014). We thus consider the use of bilevel
optimization programming as a layer. Bilevel Optimization
Program (Kleinert et al. 2021; Dempe 2018), also known as
a generalization of Stackelberg Games, is the extension of
a single-level optimization program, where the solution of
one optimization problem (i.e. the outer problem) depends
on the solution of another optimization problem (i.e. the
inner problem). This class of problems can model interactions between two actors, where the action of the first depends on the knowledge of the counter-action of the second.
Bilevel Programming finds application in various domains,
as in Electricity networks, Economics, Environmental policy, Chemical plants, defense, and planning (Dempe 2018).
We introduce at the end of the section example applications
of Bilevel Optimization Programming.
In general, Bilevel programs are NP-hard (Dempe 2018),
they require specialized solvers and it is not clear how to
extend single-level approaches since the standard chain rule
is not directly applicable. By modeling the bilevel optimiza-

Introduction
Neural networks provide unprecedented improvements in
perception tasks, however, deep neural networks do not natively protect against adversarial attacks nor preserve the
privacy of the training dataset. In recent years various approaches have been proposed to overcome this limitation
(Shafique et al. 2020), for example by integrating adversarial training (Xiao et al. 2020). Some of these approaches require solving some optimization problems during training.
Recent approaches propose thus differentiable layers that incorporate either quadratic (Amos and Kolter 2017), convex
(Agrawal et al. 2019a), cone (Agrawal et al. 2019b), equilibrium (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2019), SAT (Wang et al.
2019) or combinatorial (Pogančić et al. 2019; Mandi and
Guns 2020; Berthet et al. 2020) programs. The use of optimization programming as a layer of differentiable systems
requires computing the gradients through these layers. With
discrete variables, the gradient is zero almost everywhere,
while with complex (black box) solvers, the gradient may
not be accessible.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14683

