The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DeMT: Deformable Mixer Transformer for Multi-Task Learning of Dense
Prediction
Yangyang Xu1 , Yibo Yang3 , Lefei Zhang1,2 *
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, China
3
JD Explore Academy, China
{yangyangxu, zhanglefei}@whu.edu.cn, ibo@pku.edu.cn
Abstract

tion, saliency estimation, and normal estimation simultaneously, and this model is expected to work efficiently.
Recently, existing works (Liu, Johns, and Davison 2019;
Vandenhende et al. 2020; Phillips et al. 2021; Ghiasi et al.
2021; Bruggemann et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2022b; Bhattacharjee et al. 2022) have adopted CNN and Transformer
technologies to advance the MTL of dense prediction. Although CNN-based MTL models are carefully proposed to
achieve promising performance on the multi-task dense prediction task, these models still suffer from the limitations of
convolutional operations, i.e., lacking global modeling and
cross-task interaction capability. Some works (Bruggemann
et al. 2021; Vandenhende et al. 2020) develop a distillation
scheme to increase the expressiveness of the cross-task and
global information passing via enlarging the receptive field
and stacking multiple convolutional layers but still cannot
build global dependency directly. For modeling global and
cross-task interaction information, Transformer-based MTL
models (Bhattacharjee et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022b) utilize
the efficient attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017) for
global modeling and task interactions. However, such a selfattention approach may fail to focus on task awareness features because the queries, keys and values are based on the
same feature. Regular self-attention may lead to high computational costs and limit the ability to disentangle taskspecific features.
We can see that the CNN-based models better capture the
multiple task context in a local field but suffer from a lack
of global modeling and task interaction. The Transformerbased models better focus on global information of different
tasks. However, they ignore task awareness and introduce
many computation costs. Therefore, a technical challenge in
developing a better MTL model is how to combine the merits of CNN-based and Transformer-based MTL models.
To address the challenges, we introduce the Deformable
Mixer Transformers (DeMT): a simple and effective method
for multi-task dense prediction based on combining both
merits of deformable CNN and query-based Transformer.
Specifically, our DeMT consists of the deformable mixer
encoder and task-aware transformer decoder. Motivated by
the success of deformable convolutional networks (Zhu et al.
2019) in vision tasks, our deformable mixer encoder learns
different deformed features for each task based on more efficient sampling spatial locations and channel location mixing

Convolution neural networks (CNNs) and Transformers have
their own advantages and both have been widely used for
dense prediction in multi-task learning (MTL). Most of the
current studies on MTL solely rely on CNN or Transformer.
In this work, we present a novel MTL model by combining both merits of deformable CNN and query-based
Transformer for multi-task learning of dense prediction. Our
method, named DeMT, is based on a simple and effective encoder-decoder architecture (i.e., deformable mixer encoder and task-aware transformer decoder). First, the deformable mixer encoder contains two types of operators: the
channel-aware mixing operator leveraged to allow communication among different channels (i.e., efficient channel location mixing), and the spatial-aware deformable operator with
deformable convolution applied to efficiently sample more
informative spatial locations (i.e., deformed features). Second, the task-aware transformer decoder consists of the task
interaction block and task query block. The former is applied to capture task interaction features via self-attention.
The latter leverages the deformed features and task-interacted
features to generate the corresponding task-specific feature
through a query-based Transformer for corresponding task
predictions. Extensive experiments on two dense image prediction datasets, NYUD-v2 and PASCAL-Context, demonstrate that our model uses fewer GFLOPs and significantly
outperforms current Transformer- and CNN-based competitive models on a variety of metrics. The code is available
at https://github.com/yangyangxu0/DeMT.

Introduction
Human vision capability is powerful and can perform different tasks from one visual scene, such as classification,
segmentation, recognition, etc. Therefore, multi-task learning (MTL) research is topical in computer vision. We expect
to develop a powerful vision model to do multiple tasks simultaneously in different visual scenarios, and this model
is expected to work efficiently. As shown in Figure 1, in
this paper, we aim to develop a powerful vision model to
learn multiple tasks, including semantic segmentation, human parts segmentation, depth estimation, boundary detec* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3072

