The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards In-Distribution Compatible Out-of-Distribution Detection
Boxi Wu1 * , Jie Jiang2 * , Haidong Ren4 , Zifan Du3 , Wenxiao Wang3 ,
Zhifeng Li2 , Deng Cai1 , Xiaofei He1 , Binbin Lin3† , Wei Liu2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University.
2
Tencent Data Platform.
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University.
4
Ningbo Zhoushan Port Group Co.,Ltd., Ningbo, China.
Abstract

In-Distribution Accuracy

96.5

Energy

96.0

Deep neural network, despite its remarkable capability of
discriminating targeted in-distribution samples, shows poor
performance on detecting anomalous out-of-distribution data.
To address this defect, state-of-the-art solutions choose to
train deep networks on an auxiliary dataset of outliers. Various training criteria for these auxiliary outliers are proposed based on heuristic intuitions. However, we find that
these intuitively designed outlier training criteria can hurt
in-distribution learning and eventually lead to inferior performance. To this end, we identify three causes of the
in-distribution incompatibility: contradictory gradient, false
likelihood, and distribution shift. Based on our new understandings, we propose a new out-of-distribution detection
method by adapting both the top-design of deep models and
the loss function. Our method achieves in-distribution compatibility by pursuing less interference with the probabilistic
characteristic of in-distribution features. On several benchmarks, our method not only achieves the state-of-the-art outof-distribution detection performance but also improves the
in-distribution accuracy.

95.5
95.0
94.5
94.0

OE

ICE

ICE*

Plain Training Accuracy

OE*

Energy*

98.4
98.6
98.8
99.0
Out-of-Distribution Detection (AUROC)

99.2

Figure 1: The in-distribution accuracies and out-ofdistribution detection AUROC scores of different models.
Models annotated with * indicate the model is trained from
scratch; otherwise, the model is fine-tuned.
2019) can be unpredictable when facing OOD data. Various approaches have been proposed to solve this problem.
One of the most effective approaches is Outlier Exposure
(OE) (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019), which
chooses to train deep networks with an auxiliary dataset of
outliers. (Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich 2019) pointed
out that the more realistic the auxiliary dataset is, the better
performance for OOD detection.
The original work of OE adopts the KL-divergence to the
uniform distribution as the training criterion of outliers. Subsequent works followed the framework of Outlier Exposure
and proposed various different training criteria of outliers
for better effectiveness (Liu et al. 2020). Most of these are
designed based on intuition. However, when experimenting
with these methods, we find that training with OE can lead
to inferior in-distribution accuracy. To better understand this
issue, we dive into the detailed design of these OOD training criteria and identify three major factors that cause the
in-distribution incompatibility:

Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved extraordinary performance across a wide range of artificial intelligence and
pattern recognition tasks. Many of these tasks are formulated in a constrained scenario. That is, all the considered training and testing samples are assumed to belong
to a few predefined limited categories. This is the case for
many standard computer vision tasks such as classification (Krizhevsky 2012), detection, and segmentation. Naturally, people start to wonder how deep networks will react
to out-of-distribution (OOD) data, data that do not belong to
any of the predefined categories.
Hendrycks and Gimpel (2017) first studied this question
and found that deep networks tend to assign high confidence scores to OOD samples. This problem hugely hampers safely deploying deep models in the open world. The
behavior of artificial intelligence applications such as autonomous driving and medical image processing (Ren et al.

1. Contradictory Gradient. The training objective of existing OE methods occasionally generates gradients in
the opposite direction of those generated by the indistribution objective, which further hampers the indistribution discriminant learning.
2. False Likelihood. Existing OE algorithms adopt the logit
value generated by neural networks as a surrogate signal
for likelihood estimation. Yet, under Gaussian discrimi-

* These authors contributed equally.
†

Binbin Lin is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10333

