The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

FedNP: Towards Non-IID Federated Learning via Federated Neural Propagation
Xueyang Wu1 * , Hengguan Huang2*† , Youlong Ding3 , Hao Wang4 , Ye Wang2 , Qian Xu1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
4
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA
xwuba@connect.ust.hk, huang.hengguan@u.nus.edu, dingyoulon@gmail.com, hw488@cs.rutgers.edu,
wangye@comp.nus.edu.sg, qianxu@ust.hk
Abstract

turned their attention to a more practical setting where the
data distributions are non-i.i.d (Zhu et al. 2021); in practice,
a federation usually consists of different clients from diverse
sources whose data distributions are intrinsically distinct. In
such non-i.i.d settings, typical FL algorithms often fail to
achieve reasonable performance.
Taking a simple polynomial curve fitting task as an example, as shown in Figure 1(a), our goal is to train a model that
can fit the data points sampled from a polynomial function.
To simulate an extremely non-i.i.d federated data partition,
the data points are split into three groups with disjoint ranges
of x-coordinates, denoted as X = {Xk }3k=1 . Three federated clients, each training a local model (θ = {θ k }3k=1 ),
then collaboratively learn a global model via FL algorithms,
e.g., FedAvg. The result shows that while the local models
successfully fit their local data in the local training steps,
the final prediction is nearly random for test data points.
The reason is that the averaging of defective local models
adopted by FedAvg cannot provide a global model with sufficient capacity to describe the entire data distribution (see
Figure 1(b)). With such insight, we then approach non-i.i.d
FL from a new perspective by explicitly modeling a latent
global data distribution to enforce local models to have a
global view as an auxiliary task.
Existing works in Bayesian federated learning (BFL) (AlShedivat et al. 2020; Chen and Chao 2020) focus on directly
inferring the global model distribution by aggregating over
local model distributions, consequently failing to capture a
latent global data distribution. A BFL framework augmented
with latent global data distribution should offer several advantages, including (1) a lower dimensional representation
of input data uncertainty, caused by limited access to global
data ; and (2) a greater expressive power to capture the complex dependency underlying the input data across clients
than conventional BFL frameworks.
Despite the enormous successes of Bayesian learning and
deep learning, it is still challenging to infer such a global
data distribution. The reason is that in non-i.i.d federated
scenarios, each client only has access to their local data,
and therefore the ground-truth global data distribution is
inaccessible due to their distinct local data distributions.
For instance, Laplace approximation (LA) and Monte-Carlo
(MC) approximation, adopted by conventional BFL frameworks (Al-Shedivat et al. 2020; Chen and Chao 2020; Liu

Traditional federated learning (FL) algorithms, such as FedAvg, fail to handle non-i.i.d data because they learn a global
model by simply averaging biased local models that are
trained on non-i.i.d data, therefore failing to model the global
data distribution. In this paper, we present a novel Bayesian
FL algorithm that successfully handles such a non-i.i.d FL
setting by enhancing the local training task with an auxiliary task that explicitly estimates the global data distribution.
One key challenge in estimating the global data distribution is
that the data are partitioned in FL, and therefore the groundtruth global data distribution is inaccessible. To address this
challenge, we propose an expectation-propagation-inspired
probabilistic neural network, dubbed federated neural propagation (FedNP), which efficiently estimates the global data
distribution given non-i.i.d data partitions. Our algorithm
is sampling-free and end-to-end differentiable, can be applied with any conventional FL frameworks and learns richer
global data representation. Experiments on both image classification tasks with synthetic non-i.i.d image data partitions
and real-world non-i.i.d speech recognition tasks demonstrate
that our framework effectively alleviates the performance deterioration caused by non-i.i.d data.

Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an increasingly more important machine learning paradigm where many clients jointly
train a powerful global model with cross-silo training data.
The major target of FL is to utilize the massive data created and collected by different clients while obeying privacy protection regulations such as the European Union’s
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Voss 2016).
The most representative FL algorithm is FederatedAveraging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al. 2017a), which successfully
trains a powerful global model while keeping training data
on each local client (i.e., each mobile phone). Thanks to
its feasibility and effectiveness, FedAvg has been successfully adopted in many applications, such as speech recognition (Tan et al. 2021) and language modeling (McMahan
et al. 2017b). Recently, more and more FL researchers have
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Correspondence to Hengguan Huang
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10399

