The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Learning to Break Symmetries for Efficient Optimization in
Answer Set Programming
Alice Tarzariol1 , Martin Gebser1,2 , Konstantin Schekotihin1 , Mark Law3
1

University of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
3
ILASP Limited, Grantham, UK
{alice.tarzariol, martin.gebser, konstantin.schekotihin}@aau.at, mark@ilasp.com
2

Abstract

In the context of ASP, Drescher, Tifrea, and Walsh (2011)
suggested an instance-specific approach to symmetry breaking, called SBASS. This approach identifies symmetries of
a ground ASP program by (i) representing the input program as a colored graph, (ii) finding symmetric vertex permutations in the graph using SAUCY (Codenotti et al. 2013;
Darga et al. 2004), and (iii) constructing ground SBCs from
the permutations. Recently, Tarzariol, Gebser, and Schekotihin (2021) suggested an approach that learns first-order constraints by lifting ground SBCs of SBASS using Inductive
Logic Programming (ILP) (Cropper, Dumančić, and Muggleton 2020). Their method applies SBASS to a set of representative problem instances and then uses the obtained permutations to define an ILP task. The learning phase returns
a set of first-order constraints that remove symmetric solutions (classified as negative examples) while preserving the
representative solutions (positive examples).
The main shortcoming of existing methods (Tarzariol,
Gebser, and Schekotihin 2022; Tarzariol et al. 2022), which
learn constraints from SBCs of ASP programs, is their inability to deal with optimization statements. A solver uses
the latter to assign a weight to every solution while searching for a solution with the minimal weight. Consequently,
two solution candidates symmetric in the absence of optimization statements may give rise to different optimization
values in their presence. If a non-optimal solution happens
to be lexicographically smallest and is taken as a witness
by previous methods to discard symmetric solutions, then
learned constraints might preclude a solver from finding optimal solutions.
In this paper, we extend the learning approaches of Tarzariol et al. (2022); Tarzariol, Gebser, and Schekotihin (2022)
to optimization problems and make the following contributions:
• We propose a method that augments a ground ASP program P with auxiliary rules, OP , that do not change the
solutions but tighten the applicable symmetries for optimization problems. We prove that SBASS on P ∪ OP
partitions solutions of P in a way that respects their quality determined by optimization statements. That is, each
cell of the partition is guaranteed to consist of symmetric
solutions sharing the same optimization value.
• We enhance the previous learning approaches to support
the learning of effective first-order constraints for opti-

The ability to efficiently solve hard combinatorial optimization problems is a key prerequisite to various applications
of declarative programming paradigms. Symmetries in solution candidates pose a significant challenge to modern optimization algorithms since the enumeration of such candidates might substantially reduce their optimization performance. This paper proposes a novel approach using Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) to lift symmetry-breaking constraints for optimization problems modeled in Answer Set
Programming (ASP). Given an ASP encoding with optimization statements and a set of small representative instances,
our method augments ground ASP programs with auxiliary
normal rules enabling the identification of symmetries using
existing tools, like SBASS. Then, the obtained symmetries are
lifted to first-order constraints with ILP. We prove the correctness of our method and evaluate it on real-world optimization
problems from the domain of automated configuration. Our
experiments show significant improvements of optimization
performance due to the learned first-order constraints.

Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems appear in various
practical applications, including transportation, manufacturing, healthcare, or power generation and distribution. An efficient and elegant approach to tackle these problems is to
model them in a declarative programming paradigm such
as Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Lifschitz 2019). However, finding optimal solutions to the vast majority of realworld problems is challenging since their search spaces include many symmetric solution candidates, i.e., an isomorphic candidate can be obtained by permuting elements of a
known solution. Therefore, to be effective, the problem encoding must include symmetry-breaking constraints (SBCs)
that prune the search space of solution candidates by removing symmetric ones. In the recent decades, several techniques have been designed to improve performance by automatically identifying and discarding redundant solutions
(Margot 2010; Sakallah 2009; Walsh 2012), based on embedding symmetry breaking in search algorithms or adding
SBCs to a given problem encoding or instance, respectively.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6541

