The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Signed Laplacian Graph Neural Networks
Yu Li1,8 * , Meng Qu2,3 , Jian Tang2,4,5† , Yi Chang6,7,8†
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2
Mila - Québec AI Institute, Canada
3
Univesité de Montréal, Canada
4
HEC Montréal, Canada
5
CIFAR AI Research Chair, Canada
6
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
7
International Center of Future Science, Jilin University, China
8
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, Ministry of Education, China
liyu18@mails.jlu.edu.cn, meng.qu@umontreal.ca, jian.tang@hec.ca, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
Abstract

have attracted considerable attention in various applications,
such as link sign prediction (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and
Kleinberg 2010), recommendation systems (Yoo, Jo, and
Kang 2017), and community analysis (Mercado, Tudisco,
and Hein 2016).
Signed graph representation learning, which aims to map
nodes to low-dimensional representations, is a fundamental
problem for signed graph analysis with a variety of downstream applications. Indeed, graph representation learning
has been extensively studied in the machine learning literature, and the representative methods are graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al.
2018; Li et al. 2020a; Liu et al. 2022). GNNs adopt a
message passing scheme to obtain its node representations
by aggregating representations from neighbors. However,
most of the literature focuses on graphs with only positive links, i.e., unsigned graphs. Until fairly recently, studies
have shown that GNN and its variants on unsigned graphs
only perform low-pass filtering on node representations, i.e.,
retain low-frequency information, resulting in similar representations of connected nodes (Nt and Maehara 2019).
Therefore, GNNs for unsigned graphs cannot be directly applied to signed graphs, as they cannot effectively distinguish
between positive and negative links in signed graphs.
In order to model the coexistence of positive and negative links in signed graphs and characterize the differences between them, most existing signed graph representation learning methods (Derr, Ma, and Tang 2018; Li et al.
2020b; Huang et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021) resort to the balance theory or its variants (Heider 1946; Cartwright and
Harary 1956). The balance theory is a well-known sociopsychological theory, which states that social relationships
follow four rules: “the friend of my friend is my friend”, “the
enemy of my friend is my enemy”, “the friend of my enemy
is my enemy” and “the enemy of my enemy is my friend”.
However, the balance theory has been proven equivalent to
a simple assumption that the nodes can be divided into two
disjoint subsets such that there are only positive links within
the subsets and only negative links between them (Mercado,
Tudisco, and Hein 2016), which is too idealistic for real
world signed graphs. This is a distinct limitation when learn-

This paper studies learning meaningful node representations
for signed graphs, where both positive and negative links
exist. This problem has been widely studied by meticulously designing expressive signed graph neural networks,
as well as capturing the structural information of the signed
graph through traditional structure decomposition methods,
e.g., spectral graph theory. In this paper, we propose a
novel signed graph representation learning framework, called
Signed Laplacian Graph Neural Network (SLGNN), which
combines the advantages of both. Specifically, based on spectral graph theory and graph signal processing, we first design different low-pass and high-pass graph convolution filters to extract low-frequency and high-frequency information
on positive and negative links, respectively, and then combine them into a unified message passing framework. To effectively model signed graphs, we further propose a selfgating mechanism to estimate the impacts of low-frequency
and high-frequency information during message passing. We
mathematically establish the relationship between the aggregation process in SLGNN and signed Laplacian regularization in signed graphs, and theoretically analyze the expressiveness of SLGNN. Experimental results demonstrate
that SLGNN outperforms various competitive baselines and
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
A graph, consisting of a set of nodes and links, is an efficient way to encode the naturally occurring interactions between objects (West et al. 2001). In a number of social and
economic contexts, interactions between objects can be represented as signed graphs with positive and negative links.
Typically, positive and negative links encode opposite relations between objects, and some examples are friendship/enmity, trust/distrust, and similarity/dissimilarity. For instance,
users of Epinions review website can express trust or distrust of each other based on their comments. Such graphs
* Work was done during internship at Mila.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4444

