The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

AEC-GAN: Adversarial Error Correction GANs for
Auto-Regressive Long Time-Series Generation
Lei Wang, Liang Zeng, Jian Li
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University
{wanglei20, zengl18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale high-quality data is critical for training modern deep neural networks. However, data acquisition can be
costly or time-consuming for many time-series applications,
thus researchers turn to generative models for generating synthetic time-series data. In particular, recent generative adversarial networks (GANs) have achieved remarkable success in
time-series generation. Despite their success, existing GAN
models typically generate the sequences in an auto-regressive
manner, and we empirically observe that they suffer from
severe distribution shifts and bias amplification, especially
when generating long sequences. To resolve this problem,
we propose Adversarial Error Correction GAN (AEC-GAN),
which is capable of dynamically correcting the bias in the past
generated data to alleviate the risk of distribution shifts and
thus can generate high-quality long sequences. AEC-GAN
contains two main innovations: (1) We develop an error correction module to mitigate the bias. In the training phase, we
adversarially perturb the realistic time-series data and then
optimize this module to reconstruct the original data. In the
generation phase, this module can act as an efficient regulator to detect and mitigate the bias. (2) We propose an augmentation method to facilitate GAN’s training by introducing
adversarial examples. Thus, AEC-GAN can generate highquality sequences of arbitrary lengths, and the synthetic data
can be readily applied to downstream tasks to boost their performance. We conduct extensive experiments on six widely
used datasets and three state-of-the-art time-series forecasting models to evaluate the quality of our synthetic time-series
data in different lengths and downstream tasks. Both the qualitative and quantitative experimental results demonstrate the
superior performance of AEC-GAN over other deep generative models for time-series generation.

1

0

500

1000

0

(a) Real Data

0

500

(c) SigCWGAN

500

1000

(b) TimeGAN

1000

0

500

1000

(d) AEC-GAN

Figure 1: (a) is the time series used for training. (b-d)
are the synthetic time series auto-regressively generated
by corresponding methods. The time series generated by
(b) TimeGAN exhibits unstable frequency, and that generated by (c) SigCWGAN suffers from amplitude attenuation.
pacity, large-scale high-quality data is required to fully realize the potential of time-series forecasting (Lim and Zohren
2021). For sufficient data, synthesizing data via deep generative models has achieved remarkable progress and has attracted much attention (reviewed in Brophy et al. (2021)).
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) is a versatile generative framework for generating data and has shown excellent performance in computer
vision (Karras et al. 2020b, 2021). Meanwhile, much effort
has been devoted to applying GANs to time-series generation (Brophy et al. 2021). To name a few: (1) In a recursive
manner, Recurrent Condition GAN (RCGAN) (Esteban, Hyland, and Rätsch 2017) and QuantGAN (Wiese et al. 2020)
exploit LSTM or TCN to replace the Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) for time-series generation. (2) Considering
the temporal nature, TimeGAN (Yoon, Jarrett, and Van der
Schaar 2019) borrows ideas from auto-regressive models
and explicitly models the temporal transitions p(xt |x1:t−1 )
in the latent space. SigCWGAN (Ni et al. 2020) captures
the auto-regressive structure of sequences and builds a highquality conditional generative model.
Despite the encouraging progress in time-series generation, we argue that generating long sequences in an autoregressive manner still exhibits the inherent difficulty of distribution shifts. To demonstrate this problem, we implement

Introduction

Time-series forecasting has been widely applied in both
academia and industry, such as disease propagation (Kapoor
et al. 2020), energy deployment (Zhou et al. 2021), and
quantitative investment (Ding et al. 2020). Recent research
has achieved significant progress in time-series forecasting with the development of the temporal convolutional
network (TCN) (Bai, Kolter, and Koltun 2018) and transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). With the increasing model caCopyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10140

