The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Enhanced Tensor Low-Rank and Sparse Representation Recovery for
Incomplete Multi-View Clustering
Chao Zhang1 , Huaxiong Li1 * , Wei Lv1 , Zizheng Huang1 , Yang Gao2 , Chunlin Chen1
1

Department of Control Science and Intelligence Engineering, Nanjing University
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{chaozhang, weilv, zizhenghuang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {huaxiongli, gaoy, clchen}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

able. However, in real scenarios, the collected multi-view
data are usually incomplete with missing views. For example, some webpages contain texts, images, and videos, while
some others only have texts. In industrial monitor, the multisource data are often collected independently by a set of
detectors, which can be incomplete due to detector failure.
Traditional MVC methods cannot handle this problem, and
increasing attention has been paid to incomplete multi-view
clustering (IMVC) (Zhao, Liu, and Fu 2016; Liu et al. 2021;
Wen et al. 2020; Lin et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022a).
Most existing IMVC methods can be categorized into
non-imputation and imputation based approaches. Nonimputation based methods usually learn a common representation or subspace from existing data. Partial multiview clustering (PVC) learns a common representation for
aligned samples and a private representation for unaligned
ones by non-negative matrix factorization (Li, Jiang, and
Zhou 2014). Anchor based partial multi-view clustering
(APMC) selects anchors from paired samples and captures the pairwise similarities based on anchors (Guo and
Ye 2019). Consensus bipartite graph based IMVC (IMVCCBG) adaptively learns latent anchors and bipartite graphs
in a unified framework (Wang et al. 2022). Different from
the above methods that neglect the underlying information
of missing views, imputation based methods try to fill the
missing information. Early works directly fill the missing
views by zero values or average features, which will introduce large errors under high data missing rates. Some
recent methods attempt to explore the multi-view correlations for filling the missing views (Wen et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2022b). Zhang et al. recently proposed a Low-rank tensor regularized views recovery (LATER) method to fill the
missing views for IMVC (Zhang et al. 2022b). It assumes
a shared latent representation for all views to recovery the
missing views, and the inter-view correlations are regularized by a low-rank tensor (Xie et al. 2018; Wu, Lin, and Zha
2019; Zhang et al. 2020) to enhance the recovery quality.
Incomplete multi-view tensor spectral clustering with missing view inferring (IMVTSC-MVI) (Wen et al. 2021b) fills
the missing views by error matrices, and learns view-specific
self-expression graphs with low-rank tensor regularization.
More recently, instead of directly filling the original
views, some researchers perform imputation on incomplete
similarity graphs which essentially transfers the missing data

Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) has attracted remarkable attention due to the emergence of multi-view data
with missing views in real applications. Recent methods
attempt to recover the missing information to address the
IMVC problem. However, they generally cannot fully explore the underlying properties and correlations of data similarities across views. This paper proposes a novel Enhanced
Tensor Low-rank and Sparse Representation Recovery (ETLSRR) method, which reformulates the IMVC problem as a
joint incomplete similarity graph learning and complete tensor representation recovery problem. Specifically, ETLSRR
learns the intra-view similarity graphs and constructs a 3-way
tensor by stacking the graphs to explore the inter-view correlations. To alleviate the negative influence of missing views
and data noise, ETLSRR decomposes the tensor into two
parts: a sparse tensor and an intrinsic tensor, which models
the noise and underlying true data similarities, respectively.
Both global low-rank and local structured sparse characteristics of the intrinsic tensor are considered, which enhances
the discrimination of similarity matrix. Moreover, instead of
using the convex tensor nuclear norm, ETLSRR introduces
a generalized nonconvex tensor low-rank regularization to
alleviate the biased approximation. Experiments on several
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our
method compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
In the big data era, multi-view data become very common
in real-world applications, and multi-view learning has attracted much attention in the machine learning and data mining communities (Han et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023; Xia et al.
2022b; Hassani and Khasahmadi 2020; Zhang et al. 2022d).
As one of the most important tasks of multi-view learning,
multi-view clustering (MVC) aims to partition the multiview data into groups by exploiting the potential consistent
and complementary information across views. Recently, various successful MVC methods have been developed (Zhang
et al. 2017; Peng et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Chen et al.
2020; Tang et al. 2020; Pan and Kang 2021; Xu et al. 2022b).
These methods have achieved promising clustering performance in the case that the information of all views is avail* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11174

