The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Self-Supervised Action Representation Learning from
Partial Spatio-Temporal Skeleton Sequences
Yujie Zhou1, 4 , Haodong Duan3 , Anyi Rao3 , Bing Su1, 2* , Jiaqi Wang4
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
yujiezhou@ruc.edu.cn, anyirao@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {dhd.efz, subingats, wjqdev}@gmail.com
2

Abstract

2012; Shotton et al. 2011) and human pose estimation methods (Cao et al. 2017; Hua et al. 2022), skeleton data becomes
easier to obtain. Its robustness against the variation of appearance and backgrounds has attracted many researchers
to explore fully supervised methods for action recognition,
such as applying CNN (Ke et al. 2017), RNN (Du, Wang,
and Wang 2015) or GCN (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Shi
et al. 2019) on skeleton data.
However, fully supervised learning relies on abundant manually annotated labels, which is time-consuming
and expensive. Therefore, self-supervised frameworks, e.g.,
MoCo (He et al. 2020), SimCLR (Chen et al. 2020), Barlow
Twins (Zbontar et al. 2021), and MAE (He et al. 2022) have
received a lot of attention. For self-supervised learning on
skeleton data, early methods also apply pretext tasks (Lin
et al. 2020; Su, Liu, and Shlizerman 2020; Zheng et al.
2018). While nowadays, most researchers focus on contrastive learning and apply MoCo structure to the skeleton
squences (Thoker, Doughty, and Snoek 2021; Li et al. 2021;
Rao et al. 2021; Guo et al. 2022).
The key of current contrastive learning-based methods is
finding effective global data augmentation and using them
to create various views of the skeleton carefully. However,
due to the rich action clues stored in the skeleton sequence,
this paradigm can readily discriminate different views from
a global perspective without thoroughly leveraging the local relationship between different skeleton joints and video
frames. As a result, it limits the performance and robustness
of the model in real-world scenarios. Moreover, a large batch
size or a memory bank is necessary for contrastive learning,
which is unsuitable for a small amount of skeleton data. To
evaluate the robustness of the current methods in real-world
scenarios (such as video surveillance), we formulate a new
evaluating setting where only a partial skeleton is available
for downstream tasks to simulate that the skeleton data captured by the camera are shaded. In this challenging setting,
previous works suffer severe performance drops. We conjecture that if the local spatial and temporal relationship can be
explored and captured, it will boost the representation ability
and robustness of the model on downstream tasks.
Therefore, we propose a Partial Spatio-Temporal Learning (PSTL) framework to exploit the local relationship from
a partial skeleton sequence built by a unique spatio-temporal
masking strategy. Specifically, we construct a negative-

Self-supervised learning has demonstrated remarkable capability in representation learning for skeleton-based action recognition. Existing methods mainly focus on applying global data augmentation to generate different views of
the skeleton sequence for contrastive learning. However, due
to the rich action clues in the skeleton sequences, existing methods may only take a global perspective to learn to
discriminate different skeletons without thoroughly leveraging the local relationship between different skeleton joints
and video frames, which is essential for real-world applications. In this work, we propose a Partial Spatio-Temporal
Learning (PSTL) framework to exploit the local relationship from a partial skeleton sequences built by a unique
spatio-temporal masking strategy. Specifically, we construct
a negative-sample-free triplet steam structure that is composed of an anchor stream without any masking, a spatial
masking stream with Central Spatial Masking (CSM), and
a temporal masking stream with Motion Attention Temporal Masking (MATM). The feature cross-correlation matrix
is measured between the anchor stream and the other two
masking streams, respectively. (1) Central Spatial Masking
discards selected joints from the feature calculation process,
where the joints with a higher degree of centrality have a
higher possibility of being selected. (2) Motion Attention
Temporal Masking leverages the motion of action and remove
frames that move faster with a higher possibility. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on NTURGB+D 60,
NTURGB+D 120 and PKU-MMD under various downstream
tasks. Furthermore, to simulate the real-world scenarios, a
practical evaluation is performed where some skeleton joints
are lost in downstream tasks. In contrast to previous methods
that suffer from large performance drops, our PSTL can still
achieve remarkable results under this challenging setting, validating the robustness of our method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/YujieOuO/PSTL.git.

Introduction
In recent years, human action recognition has been extensively studied for various applications in the real world,
such as security, human-robot interaction, and virtual reality. With the development of sensor technology (Zhang
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3825

