The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rank Aggregation Using Scoring Rules
Niclas Boehmer1 , Robert Bredereck2 , Dominik Peters3
1

Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Technische Universität Berlin
2
Institut für Informatik, TU Clausthal
3
CNRS, LAMSADE, Université Paris Dauphine–PSL
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de, robert.bredereck@tu-clausthal.de, dominik.peters@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Abstract

indeed a Kemeny ranking (Fitzsimmons and Hemaspaandra
2021). Thus, third parties cannot easily audit, interpret, or
understand the outcome, making systems based on Kemeny’s
method potentially unaccountable. This limits its applicability in democratic contexts.
These two drawbacks motivate the search for computationally simpler and more transparent methods for aggregating rankings. There is a significant literature on polynomialtime approximation algorithms for Kemeny’s method (Coppersmith, Fleischer, and Rudra 2006; Kenyon-Mathieu and
Schudy 2007; Ailon, Charikar, and Newman 2008; van
Zuylen and Williamson 2009), but these algorithms are typically not attractive beyond their approximation guarantee. In
particular, they would typically not fare well in an axiomatic
analysis, and are unlikely to be understood by and appealing
to the general public (many are based on derandomization).
Instead, we turn to one of the fundamental tools of social
choice: positional scoring rules. These rules transform voter
rankings into scores for the candidates. For example, under
the Plurality scoring rule, every voter gives 1 point to their
top-ranked candidate. Under the Veto (or anti-plurality) scoring rule, voters give −1 point to their last-ranked candidate
and zero points to all others. Under the Borda scoring rule, every voter gives m points to their top-ranked candidate, m − 1
points to their second-ranked candidate, and so on, giving 1
point to their last-ranked candidate. We study three ways of
using scoring rules to aggregate rankings:

To aggregate rankings into a social ranking, one can use scoring systems such as Plurality, Veto, and Borda. We distinguish
three types of methods: ranking by score, ranking by repeatedly choosing a winner that we delete and rank at the top, and
ranking by repeatedly choosing a loser that we delete and rank
at the bottom. The latter method captures the frequently studied voting rules Single Transferable Vote (aka Instant Runoff
Voting), Coombs, and Baldwin. In an experimental analysis,
we show that the three types of methods produce different
rankings in practice. We also provide evidence that sequentially selecting winners is most suitable to detect the “true”
ranking of candidates. For different rules in our classes, we
then study the (parameterized) computational complexity of
deciding in which positions a given candidate can appear in
the chosen ranking. As part of our analysis, we also consider
the W INNER D ETERMINATION problem for STV, Coombs,
and Baldwin and determine their complexity when there are
few voters or candidates.

1

Introduction

Rank aggregation, the task of aggregating several rankings
into a single ranking, sits at the foundation of social choice as
introduced by Arrow (1951). Besides preference aggregation,
it has numerous important applications, for example in the
context of meta-search engines (Dwork et al. 2001), of juries
ranking competitors in sports tournaments (Truchon 1998),
and multi-criteria decision analysis.
One of the best-known methods for aggregating rankings
is Kemeny’s (1959) method: A Kemeny ranking is a ranking that minimizes the average swap distance (Kendall-tau
distance) to the input rankings. It is axiomatically attractive (Young and Levenglick 1978; Can and Storcken 2013;
Bossert and Sprumont 2014) and has an interpretation as a
maximum likelihood estimator (Young 1995) making it wellsuited to epistemic social choice that assumes a ground truth.
However, Kemeny’s method is hard to compute (Bartholdi,
Tovey, and Trick 1989; Hemaspaandra, Spakowski, and Vogel
2005) which makes the method problematic to use, especially
when there are many candidates to rank (for example, when
ranking all applicants to a university). Even if computing the
ranking is possible, it is coNP-hard to verify if a ranking is

• Score: We rank the candidates in order of their score,
higher-scoring candidates being ranked higher.
• Sequential-Winner: We take the candidate c with the highest score and rank it top in the aggregate ranking. We then
delete c from the input profile, re-calculate the scores, and
put the new candidate with the highest score in the second
position, and so on.
• Sequential-Loser: We take the candidate c with the lowest
score and rank it last. We then delete c, re-calculate the
scores, and put the new candidate with the lowest score in
the second-to-last position, and so on.
Ranking by score is the obvious way of using scoring rules
for rankings, and so it has been studied in the social choice
literature (Smith 1973; Levenglick 1977). These rules are
frequently used in practice. Examples include the European
Song Contest, the “ARTU” aggregation of university rank-

Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5515

