The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Untangled: A Complete Dynamic Topological Logic
David Fernández-Duque1 * and Yoàv Montacute2 *
1

ICS of the Czech Academy of Sciences
Ghent University
2
University of Cambridge
fernandez@cs.cas.cz, yoav.montacute@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract

Dynamical systems are also found in their linear form in
the shape of Markov chains, linear recurrence sequences
and linear differential equations. It is therefore not surprising that connections have been established between dynamical systems and algorithms. Such links can be found for
example in the work of Hanrot, Pujol and Stehlé (2011), and
in the work of Chu (2008). Dynamical reasoning can also be
found in the study of Modal Logic in, for example, spatiotemporal knowledge representation (Galton 2009) and in
the study of liveness (Alpern and Schneider 1985), relating
some algorithmic properties to topology and hints at formal
languages. This list is by no means exhaustive.
The applications above warrant the need for an effective formal reasoning framework about topological dynamics, i.e. the action of a (typically continuous) function on a
topological space. Modal logic was first suggested to serve
that purpose in the 1990s by Artemov et al. (1997), who
envisioned dynamic topological logic as a bimodal logic
for reasoning about topological dynamics. They defined the
logic S4C and showed that it possesses desirable properties such as a natural axiomatisation and the finite model
property. Kremer and Mints (2005) suggested that including a third modality, ‘henceforth’ from linear temporal logic (LTL), would lead to a logic powerful enough to reason
about the asymptotic behaviour of dynamical systems, possibly leading to applications in automated theorem proving. They dubbed the resulting system dynamic topological
logic (DTL). They proposed a natural axiomatisation for
DTL and conjectured it to be sound and complete for the
class of dynamical systems. However, the situation turned
out to be much more intricate than that of S4C, as DTL is
not finitely axiomatisable (Fernández-Duque 2014). Instead,
Fernández-Duque proposed an extension of DTL, denoted
by DTL∗ , which enriches the original language with topological fixed points known as tangled operators; given subsets A1 , . . . , An of a topological space X, their tangled closure, c∞ {A1 , . . . , An }, is the largest subspace of X within
which every Ai is dense. Fernández-Duque (2012) showed
that DTL∗ has a natural infinite axiomatisation.
In order to overcome this difficulty, we restrict our attention to a specific class of dynamical systems, namely,
those based on scattered spaces. Scattered spaces are topological spaces where every nonempty subspace has an isolated
point. They have gathered attention lately in the context of

Dynamical systems are general models of change or movement over time with a broad area of applicability to many
branches of science, including computer science and AI. Dynamic topological logic (DTL) is a formal framework for
symbolic reasoning about dynamical systems. DTL can express various liveness and reachability conditions on such
systems, but has the drawback that the only known axiomatisation requires an extended language. In this paper, we
consider dynamic topological logic restricted to the class of
scattered spaces. Scattered spaces appear in the context of
computational logic as they provide semantics for provability
and enjoy definable fixed points. We exhibit the first sound
and complete dynamic topological logic in the original language of DTL. In particular, we show that the version of
DTL based on the class of scattered spaces is finitely axiomatisable, and that the natural axiomatisation is sound and
complete.

Introduction
In a nutshell, dynamical systems are mathematical models
of movement in space over time. The interaction between
space and time is a fundamental aspect of reality, making
such models ubiquitous in many scientific disciplines, ranging from physics to economics. Artificial intelligence is no
exception, which should not be surprising given the temporal
aspect of processes and the deep connections between topology and computation, as demonstrated by abstract models
of computation such as the well-known Scott domains (Scott
1982).
There are many recent examples from pure and applied
work in artificial intelligence involving dynamical systems.
Lin and Antsaklis (2014) use hybrid dynamical systems in
the research of artificial intelligence and computer-aided
verification. Brunton and Kutz (2019) proposed approaching data-related problems and machine learning through dynamical systems, and Weinan (2017) suggested modelling
nonlinear functions implemented in machine learning using
dynamical systems. Mortveit and Reidys’s (2007) sequential
dynamical systems generalise cellular automata and provide
a framework for studying dynamical processes in graphs.
* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6355

