The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Unsupervised Multi-Exposure Image Fusion Breaking Exposure Limits via
Contrastive Learning
Han Xu* , Haochen Liang* , Jiayi Ma†
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
xu han@whu.edu.cn, njnu lianghaochen@163.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper proposes an unsupervised multi-exposure image
fusion (MEF) method via contrastive learning, termed as
MEF-CL. It breaks exposure limits and performance bottleneck faced by existing methods. MEF-CL firstly designs similarity constraints to preserve contents in source images. It
eliminates the need for ground truth (actually not exist and
created artificially) and thus avoids negative impacts of inappropriate ground truth on performance and generalization.
Moreover, we explore a latent feature space and apply contrastive learning in this space to guide fused image to approximate normal-light samples and stay away from inappropriately exposed ones. In this way, characteristics of fused
images (e.g., illumination, colors) can be further improved
without being subject to source images. Therefore, MEFCL is applicable to image pairs of any multiple exposures
rather than a pair of under-exposed and over-exposed images
mandated by existing methods. By alleviating dependence on
source images, MEF-CL shows better generalization for various scenes. Consequently, our results exhibit appropriate illumination, detailed textures, and saturated colors. Qualitative,
quantitative, and ablation experiments validate the superiority
and generalization of MEF-CL. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/hanna-xu/MEF-CL.

Figure 1: Example of single-image enhancement by singleimage enhancement method (Afifi et al. 2021) and the proposed multi-exposure image fusion method. By integrating
more information, the fusion result shows better scene description than the single-image enhancement result.

fused image preserves the details and colors of source images and exhibits higher dynamic range and better scene description. Thus, MEF has been widely used in many fields,
such as industrial welding, remote sensing, medical imaging, unmanned driving and other fields (Xing et al. 2018).
In the past few decades, a variety of MEF algorithms have
been proposed, which can be divided into traditional and
deep learning-based methods. The traditional methods use
the relevant digital transformation to analyze and design fusion rules in the spatial or transformation domain. However,
these methods extract features manually and thus show limited generality to complex scenes and various illumination
environments. Moreover, considering the fusion feasibility,
they forcibly use the same transformation for images with
different exposures without considering differences, resulting in limited expression ability of extracted features.
Recently, deep learning has driven the development of
image fusion. The deep learning-based methods can rely
on distinctive network branches to achieve differentiated
and targeted feature extraction. Moreover, based on deep
learning, the methods can also learn adaptive feature fusion
strategies (Xu, Zhang, and Ma 2021). These methods can
be divided into supervised and unsupervised methods. Supervised methods rely on ground truth (GT) for supervision,
while GT in MEF does not actually exist and is created artificially, which maybe inaccurate and unrealistic. The un-

Introduction
The dynamic range of a natural scene is usually much
larger than that of a digital camera (Kou et al. 2017). The
camera can only capture scenes within a limited dynamic
range, resulting in unsatisfactory image illumination, content, and other characteristics. As shown in the source images in Fig. 1, it is difficult for a single image to describe all
the scene contents. These improperly exposed images can
be enhanced by single-image enhancement methods. However, under-exposed regions suffer from not only poor visualization but also low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Besides, the missing contents in over-exposed regions cannot
be recovered by correction. Thus, the single-image based
enhancement still shows limited performances. By comparison, multi-exposure image fusion (MEF) can merge the information in multi-exposure images into a fused image. The
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3010

