The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Label-Specific Feature Augmentation for Long-Tailed Multi-Label Text
Classification
Pengyu Xu, Lin Xiao, Bing Liu, Sijin Lu, Liping Jing* , Jian Yu
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{pengyu, 17112079, 22120391, 22120406, lpjing, jianyu}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-label text classification (MLTC) involves tagging a
document with its most relevant subset of labels from a label
set. In real applications, labels usually follow a long-tailed
distribution, where most labels (called as tail-label) only contain a small number of documents and limit the performance
of MLTC. To facilitate this low-resource problem, researchers
introduced a simple but effective strategy, data augmentation (DA). However, most existing DA approaches struggle in
multi-label settings. The main reason is that the augmented
documents for one label may inevitably influence the other
co-occurring labels and further exaggerate the long-tailed
problem. To mitigate this issue, we propose a new pair-level
augmentation framework for MLTC, called Label-Specific
Feature Augmentation (LSFA), which merely augments positive feature-label pairs for the tail-labels. LSFA contains two
main parts. The first is for label-specific document representation learning in the high-level latent space, the second is
for augmenting tail-label features in latent space by transferring the documents second-order statistics (intra-class semantic variations) from head-labels to tail-labels. At last, we
design a new loss function for adjusting classifiers based on
augmented datasets. The whole learning procedure can be effectively trained. Comprehensive experiments on benchmark
datasets have shown that the proposed LSFA outperforms the
state-of-the-art counterparts.

(a) Label distribution

(b) Classification performance

Figure 1: (a) EUR-Lex shows a long-tailed distribution of labels (denoted as Original). Only 3% of the labels have more
than 100 training instances. Sample-level denotes the distribution after augmenting 10 times for tail-labels in samplelevel, and Pair-level denotes the distribution after augmenting 10 times for tail-labels in pair-level. (b) The classification performance of HTTN and LSFA (ours) on the EURLex dataset. The bars show the macro-averaged P@5 scores
of each algorithm over the label bins (with 400 labels per
bin).

In this situation, training classification models for the taillabels is much more difficult than that for head-labels, which
suffers severely from the lack of sufficient training instances.
Figure 1 (b) shows the performance of HTTN (Xiao et al.
2021), one of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) MLTC models on
the EUR-Lex dataset. The vertical axis is the text classification performance measured in macro-averaged P@5 (higher
the better) for binned labels (400 labels per bin). The green
bars have the scores below to 0.2 for more than half of the
total labels. In other words, even SOTA methods in MLTC
perform poorly on the tail-labels.
One immediate approach to address the problem is data
augmentation (DA) which can compensate the scarce data
for tail-labels (Wang et al. 2019; Chu et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2020, 2022a). Meanwhile, DA has shown its effectiveness
in many low-resource data scenarios, such as low-resource
NLP (Wei and Zou 2019; Wang et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022),
and zero/few-shot learning (Schwartz et al. 2018; Keshari,
Singh, and Vatsa 2020; Xu and Le 2022).

Introduction
Multi-label text classification (MLTC) is a task of finding
the most relevant labels for each text from a label set. It has
a wide range of applications, such as topic recognition (Rubin et al. 2012), tag recommendation (Zhang et al. 2019),
sentiment analysis (Yilmaz et al. 2021), profile identification
(Gérardin et al. 2022) and so on.
Even though various techniques have been proposed for
MLTC, it is still a challenging task due to the “long-tailed”
label distribution (Wu et al. 2020; Guo and Wang 2021;
Xiao et al. 2021). Figure 1 (a) illustrates the long-tailed label distribution in the EUR-Lex dataset (Loza Mencı́a and
Fürnkranz 2008). Only 3% of the labels have more than 100
training instances (i.e., head-labels), while the remaining
97% are long-tail labels with much fewer training instances.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10602

