The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

DesNet: Decomposed Scale-Consistent Network for
Unsupervised Depth Completion
Zhiqiang Yan, Kun Wang, Xiang Li, Zhenyu Zhang, Jun Li* , Jian Yang*
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{Yanzq,kunwang,xiang.li.implus,junli,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, zhangjesse@foxmail.com

Abstract

Sparse depth

Unsupervised depth completion aims to recover dense depth
from the sparse one without using the ground-truth annotation. Although depth measurement obtained from LiDAR is
usually sparse, it contains valid and real distance information,
i.e., scale-consistent absolute depth values. Meanwhile, scaleagnostic counterparts seek to estimate relative depth and have
achieved impressive performance. To leverage both the inherent characteristics, we thus suggest to model scale-consistent
depth upon unsupervised scale-agnostic frameworks. Specifically, we propose the decomposed scale-consistent learning
(DSCL) strategy, which disintegrates the absolute depth into
relative depth prediction and global scale estimation, contributing to individual learning benefits. But unfortunately,
most existing unsupervised scale-agnostic frameworks heavily suffer from depth holes due to the extremely sparse depth
input and weak supervisory signal. To tackle this issue, we
introduce the global depth guidance (GDG) module, which
attentively propagates dense depth reference into the sparse
target via novel dense-to-sparse attention. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our method on outdoor KITTI
benchmark, ranking 1st and outperforming the best KBNet
more than 12% in RMSE. In addition, our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on indoor NYUv2 dataset.

Dense depth

(a) Previous unsupervised depth completion methods

Absolute scale

Dense depth

Sparse depth
Relative depth

(b) Our decomposed scale-consistent framework

RGB

KBNet

Ours

(c) Visual comparison of depth results

Figure 1: (a) Previous methods directly predict the absolute
dense depth, whilst (b) our approach decomposes it into relative depth prediction and absolute scale estimation, contributing to (c) not only higher accuracy but denser depth
than the excellent KBNet (Wong and Soatto 2021).

Introduction
Depth completion, converting sparse depth to the dense one
with or without the help of the corresponding image, is an
indispensable part of many computer vision applications,
e.g., autonomous driving (Godard et al. 2019; Yan et al.
2022c), augmented reality (Zhong et al. 2016; Yan et al.
2022b), and 3D scene reconstruction (Zhang et al. 2019; Yan
et al. 2022a). In these scenarios, dense ground-truth depth
annotations are usually expensive and hard to obtain for
supervised depth completion while sparse depth maps can
be easily measured by depth sensors (e.g., LiDAR). Hence,
plenty of unsupervised approaches (Yang, Wong, and Soatto
2020; Wong and Soatto 2021) have been proposed to reduce the high cost since S2D (Ma, Cavalheiro, and Karaman 2019) establishes the first unsupervised framework for
depth completion. In general, for one thing, these methods

are supervised by the sparse depth input and photometric
reconstruction, which directly output scale-consistent absolute depth upon the real scale information in sparse depth.
For another thing, unsupervised depth estimation counterparts (only with color images as input) often suffer from
scale ambiguity issues (Bian et al. 2019), which could only
predict relative depth. However, in recent months, the counterparts have shown promising prospect that contributes to
high depth accuracy (Petrovai and Nedevschi 2022; Mu et al.
2022). These analyses motivate us to leverage the scale information in sparse depth and the high accuracy of scaleagnostic counterparts for unsupervised depth completion.
Consequently, in this paper we attempt to explore a new
solution to the unsupervised depth completion task, i.e., the
decomposed scale-consistent learning (DSCL) strategy. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and (b), totally different from previous
approaches that directly estimates scale-consistent depth,
our DSCL first learns scale-agnostic relative depth & real

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3109

