The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Label Refurbishment: Model Robustness under Label Noise
Yangdi Lu, Zhiwei Xu, Wenbo He
McMaster University, Department of Computing and Software, Canada
{luy100, xuz131, hew11}@mcmaster.ca

Abstract

label. LS has been widely studied for improving the model
performance (Szegedy et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017), improving calibration (Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019),
and its close relationship with knowledge distillation (Yuan
et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2020). Empirical studies (Lukasik
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021; Wei et al. 2022) have demonstrated the effectiveness of LS in improving the model performance in the presence of noisy labels.
Although label refurbishment methods are commonly
adopted as “add-on tricks” to boost the classification performance in the label noise literature (Ma et al. 2018; Arazo
et al. 2019; Li, Socher, and Hoi 2020; Zhou, Wang, and
Bilmes 2020), the individual performance gains of these
methods have hardly been evaluated, and their corresponding theoretical guarantees remain underexplored.
In this paper, we conduct an in-depth study of four label
refurbishment methods, including bootstrapping loss (BL)
(Reed et al. 2015), label smoothing (LS) (Szegedy et al.
2016), back correction (BC) (Patrini et al. 2017), and energy
regularized loss (ERL) (Pereyra et al. 2017). Specifically,
we first generalize these methods by introducing a transformation matrix, which helps to reveal the intrinsic relationship between them. By investigating their effects on loss
functions, we discover that two of them (BC and BL), proposed to improve model robustness against label noise, force
the model to produce high-confidence predictions, while the
other two (LS and ERL), proposed for regularization under
clean labels, have the opposite effect. We wonder if we can
reverse the effect of LS and ERL by using a negative hyperparameter (i.e. α), so that LS and ERL will yield highconfidence predictions as BC and BL. By evaluating their
classification performance under label noise, we observe two
interesting phenomena.

A family of methods that generate soft labels by mixing the
hard labels with a certain distribution, namely label refurbishment, are widely used to train deep neural networks. However, some of these methods are still poorly understood in the
presence of label noise. In this paper, we revisit four label
refurbishment methods and reveal the strong connection between them. We find that they affect the neural network models in different manners. Two of them smooth the estimated
posterior for regularization effects, and the other two force
the model to produce high-confidence predictions. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate related methods and
observe that both effects improve the model generalization
under label noise. Furthermore, we theoretically show that
both effects lead to generalization guarantees on the clean
distribution despite being trained with noisy labels.

Introduction
In supervised learning tasks, we always expect and assume
a large amount of correct-annotated training data. However, noisy labels are inevitably introduced in real-world
datasets collected from crowdsourcing or automatic labeling
systems. Zhang et al. (2018) have demonstrated that deep
neural networks end up memorizing noisy labels and lead
to poor generalization. Therefore, it is essential to develop
techniques for learning with noisy labels.
Numerous approaches have been proposed to improve robustness of deep neural networks, wherein a family of label
refurbishment methods generate soft targets by mixing the
hard labels with a certain distribution, are of great attraction.
Intuitively, label refurbishment methods can mitigate the influence of label noise, as a wrong label after refurbishing is
likely to be corrected or less “poisonous” to the networks.
For example, label smoothing (LS) (Szegedy et al. 2016)
utilizes soft labels by taking a positively weighted average
between the hard training labels and the uniform distribution. Take image classification as an example. Suppose we
have three classes (i.e. dog, cat, monkey) and a dog image
mislabeled as cat with one-hot noisy label [0, 1, 0]. After applying LS with smoothing rate α ∈ [0, 1), the refurbished
label [α/3, 1−2α/3, α/3] contributes less misleading information but still retains the maximal probability on assigned

1. The LS achieves superior performance when the smoothing rate α is close to 1.0 (e.g. α = 0.9), referred to in this
paper as ”extreme” label smoothing (ELS).
2. When the methods restrict the model to produce highconfidence predictions, their classification performance
under label noise is substantially improved, including
BL, BC, reversed LS and reversed ERL.
To explain the first phenomenon, we find that training with
ELS restricts the network parameters close to its initialization. Based on the theory of neural tangent kernel (Jacot,

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15000

