The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Fairness Concepts for Indivisible Items with Externalities
Haris Aziz1 , Warut Suksompong2 , Zhaohong Sun3 , Toby Walsh1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
AI Lab, CyberAgent, Japan

Abstract

when an agent outside the group is allocated the item. Likewise, negative externalities can arise in various resource allocation settings. For example, when dividing assets among
conflicting groups, the allocation of a critical asset to another group may hamper one group’s functionality. Yet another example of negative externalities is the case of sport
drafts, where a team may incur negative value if a valuable
player is given to a competing team.
Although externalities have been considered in some prior
work on resource allocation problems, the focus was on either allocation of divisible resources (Brânzei, Procaccia,
and Zhang 2013; Li, Zhang, and Zhang 2015) or concepts
based on maximin fair share (Seddighin, Saleh, and Ghodsi
2021). In this paper, we revisit important fairness concepts
such as envy-freeness and consider suitable relaxations in
the context of indivisible items under externalities.
Since there may not exist an envy-free allocation in general, much of the recent research has focused on relaxations
of envy-freeness by removing one or more items from consideration, e.g., envy-freeness up to one item (EF1) (Lipton
et al. 2004; Budish 2011). Caragiannis et al. (2019) proposed
a stronger concept than EF1 called envy-freeness up to any
item (EFX). The intuition is that if agent i envies agent j’s
assignment, then the envy should be eliminated when any
item is removed from j’s assignment. Aziz et al. (2022a)
generalized EFX to the setting of goods and chores (i.e., negative values) when there are no externalities. The difference
is that the envy from i towards j can be eliminated by removing agent i’s least preferred good from j’s bundle, and also
by removing agent i’s favorite chore from i’s own bundle.
For allocation problems under externalities, envy-freeness
needs to be carefully extended. When we consider fair allocation of goods without externalities, if agent i envies agent
j’s assignment, then removing any item from agent j’s bundle decreases the envy. However, this no longer holds when
externalities exist. For instance, assume that agent i receives
value 5 when item a is assigned to agent i and receives value
10 when a is assigned to agent j. In that case, it is unclear
that removing item a from j’s bundle decreases i’s “envy”
towards j, since i actually derives more utility when the item
is allocated to j than when it is allocated to i herself. This issue becomes more complicated when both positive and negative externalities are allowed.
Another widely studied fairness concept under additive

We study a fair allocation problem of indivisible items under
additive externalities in which each agent also receives utility
from items that are assigned to other agents. This allows us
to capture scenarios in which agents benefit from or compete
against one another. We extend the well-studied properties of
envy-freeness up to one item (EF1) and envy-freeness up to
any item (EFX) to this setting, and we propose a new fairness concept called general fair share (GFS), which applies
to a more general public decision making model. We undertake a detailed study and present algorithms for finding fair
allocations.

1

Introduction

Fair allocation of indivisible items is an active field of
research within computer science and economics (Brams
and Taylor 1996; Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and Maudet 2016;
Thomson 2016). The general problem is to allocate the items
among the agents so as to satisfy certain fairness criteria. For
example, one important fairness concept is envy-freeness,
which stipulates that no agent wants to swap her bundle with
another agent’s bundle. The field has witnessed several new
solution concepts, algorithms, and applications.
In most of the work on fair allocation, agents are assumed
to derive value only from the set of items allocated to them.
In this paper, we consider a significantly more general model
in which an agent’s value for an allocation may depend both
on the agent’s own bundle as well as on the bundles of items
given to other agents. The latter aspect is referred to in the
economics literature as externalities. Whereas the theory of
fair allocation has progressed tremendously, the topic is relatively less developed when externalities are involved in the
valuations of the agents.
Externalities in agent preferences are present in many
real-world scenarios. When resources are allocated among
agents, an agent may derive positive value from resources
given to the agent’s friend or family member because the
agent has access rights to the resource. Positive externalities can also capture settings where agents are divided into
groups and each agent receives the same utility whenever
some agent in the group is allocated an item, and no utility
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5472

