The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Super-efficient Echocardiography Video Segmentation
via Proxy- and Kernel-Based Semi-supervised Learning
Huisi Wu1 * , Jingyin Lin1 , Wende Xie1 , Jing Qin2
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic segmentation of left ventricular endocardium in
echocardiography videos is critical for assessing various cardiac functions and improving the diagnosis of cardiac diseases. It is yet a challenging task due to heavy speckle noise,
significant shape variability of cardiac structure, and limited labeled data. Particularly, the real-time demand in clinical practice makes this task even harder. In this paper, we
propose a novel proxy- and kernel-based semi-supervised
segmentation network (PKEcho-Net) to comprehensively address these challenges. We first propose a multi-scale region proxy (MRP) mechanism to model the region-wise
contexts, in which a learnable region proxy with an arbitrary shape is developed in each layer of the encoder, allowing the network to identify homogeneous semantics and
hence alleviate the influence of speckle noise on segmentation. To sufficiently and efficiently exploit temporal consistency, different from traditional methods which only utilize
the temporal contexts of two neighboring frames via feature warping or self-attention mechanism, we formulate the
semi-supervised segmentation with a group of learnable kernels, which can naturally and uniformly encode the appearances of left ventricular endocardium, as well as extracting
the inter-frame contexts across the whole video to resist the
fast shape variability of cardiac structures. Extensive experiments have been conducted on two famous public echocardiography video datasets, EchoNet-Dynamic and CAMUS.
Our model achieves the best performance-efficiency trade-off
when compared with other state-of-the-art approaches, attaining comparative accuracy with a much faster speed. The code
is available at https://github.com/JingyinLin/PKEcho-Net.

Figure 1: Challenges in echocardiography video segmentation. (a) speckle noise and blurred contours. (b)-(c) the interand intra- sequence shape variabilities of cardiac structures.
end-diastolic (ED) and end-systolic (ES) frames in echocardiography videos is time-consuming and limited by interand intra- observer variability (Leclerc et al. 2019). Therefore, there is a high demand for automatic segmentation approaches to accurately segment the key structures and estimate the EF from echocardiography videos.
However, it remains a challenging task due to the following reasons. First, compared to other commonly used medical imaging modalities, such as CT scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound (US) images are full of
speckle noise, which makes the boundaries of the targeting
objects difficult to be determined (Figure 1 (a)). Second, in
inter- and intra-frames of echocardiography videos, cardiac
structures often have significant shape variability (Figure 1
(b, c)). Third, due to the busy schedule of physicians, they
have no time to provide pixel-level annotations across the
whole video, and only ED and ES frames are manually annotated. Fourth and more importantly, to fulfill the routine
clinical requirements, we have to tackle these challenges in
a real-time manner; in such a case, efficiency is of great significance as accuracy in this task.
In recent years, several deep learning models have been
proposed to address these challenges. The success of optical flow based methods in natural video segmentation motivated their application to echocardiographic videos (Ta et al.
2020; Wei et al. 2020). These methods employ motion field
estimation to generate smooth pseudo-labels for unlabeled
frames and rely on various constraints to enhance the temporal consistency of segmentation results. However, speckle
noise significantly affects the quality of the estimated motion field and results in unsatisfactory performance. To deal
with the influence of speckle noise, several methods (Chen
et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2021) exploit the
inherent characteristics of 2D or 3D convolutions or local

Introduction
Echocardiography has been widely used for cardiac function assessment and cardiovascular disease (CVD) diagnosis (Chen et al. 2020) owing to its advantages of being
real-time, economical, and noninvasive. The assessment and
diagnosis are often based on the interpretation of ejection
fraction (EF) and chamber volume, which depends on the
accurate segmentation of key structures, such as left ventricular endocardium. In clinical practice, even for experienced clinicians, the accurate annotation of key structures in
* Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2803

