The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rawlsian Fairness in Online Bipartite Matching: Two-Sided, Group, and
Individual
Seyed Esmaeili 1 , Sharmila Duppala 1 , Davidson Cheng 2 , Vedant Nanda 1 , Aravind Srinivasan 1 ,
John P. Dickerson 1
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Colorado College
{esmaeili,sduppala,vedant,srin,john}@cs.umd.edu, d cheng@coloradocollege.edu
Abstract

overall profit for the platform operator or a proxy of that
objective. However, fairness considerations were largely ignored. This is troubling especially given that recent reports
have indicated that different demographic groups may not
receive similar treatment. For example, in rideshare platforms once the platform assigns a driver to a rider’s request, both the rider and the driver have the option of rejecting the assignment and it has been observed that membership in a demographic group may cause adverse treatment
in the form of higher rejection. Indeed, (Cook 2018; White
2016; Wirtschafter 2019) report that drivers could reject riders based on attributes such as gender, race, or disability.
Conversely, (Rosenblat et al. 2016) reports that drivers are
likely to receive less favorable ratings if they belong to certain demographic groups. A similar phenomenon exists in
crowdsourcing (Galperin and Greppi 2017). Moreover, even
in the absence of such evidence of discrimination, as algorithms become more prevalent in making decisions that directly affect the welfare of individuals (Barocas, Hardt, and
Narayanan 2019; Dwork et al. 2012), it becomes important
to guarantee a standard of fairness. Also, while much of our
discussion focuses on the for-profit setting for concreteness,
similar fairness issues hold in not-for-profit scenarios such
as the fair matching of individuals with health-care facilities, e.g., in the time of a pandemic.
In response, a recent line of research has been concerned
with the issue of designing fair algorithms for online bipartite matching. (Lesmana, Zhang, and Bei 2019; Ma and Xu
2022; Xu and Xu 2020) present algorithms which give a
minimum utility guarantee for the drivers at a bounded drop
to the operator’s profit. Conversely, (Nanda et al. 2020) give
guarantees for both the platform operator and the riders instead. Finally, (Sühr et al. 2019) shows empirical methods
that achieve fairness for both the riders and drivers simultaneously but lacks theoretical guarantees and ignores the
operator’s profit.
Nevertheless, the existing work has a major drawback in
terms of optimality guarantees. Specifically, the two sides
being matched along with the platform operator constitute
the three main interacting entities in online matching and despite the significant progress in fair online matching none of
the previous work considers all three sides simultaneously.
In this paper, we derive algorithms with theoretical guarantees for the platform operator’s profit as well as fairness

Online bipartite-matching platforms are ubiquitous and find
applications in important areas such as crowdsourcing and
ridesharing. In the most general form, the platform consists
of three entities: two sides to be matched and a platform operator that decides the matching. The design of algorithms for
such platforms has traditionally focused on the operator’s (expected) profit. Since fairness has become an important consideration that was ignored in the existing algorithms a collection of online matching algorithms have been developed
that give a fair treatment guarantee for one side of the market
at the expense of a drop in the operator’s profit. In this paper,
we generalize the existing work to offer fair treatment guarantees to both sides of the market simultaneously, at a calculated
worst case drop to operator profit. We consider group and individual Rawlsian fairness criteria. Moreover, our algorithms
have theoretical guarantees and have adjustable parameters
that can be tuned as desired to balance the trade-off between
the utilities of the three sides. We also derive hardness results
that give clear upper bounds over the performance of any algorithm.

1

Introduction

Online bipartite matching has been used to model many
important applications such as crowdsourcing (Ho and
Vaughan 2012; Tong et al. 2016; Dickerson et al. 2019),
rideshare (Lowalekar, Varakantham, and Jaillet 2018; Dickerson et al. 2021; Ma, Xu, and Xu 2021), and online ad allocation (Goel and Mehta 2008; Mehta 2013). In the most
general version of the problem, there are three interacting
entities: two sides of the market to be matched and a platform operator which assigns the matches. For example, in
rideshare, riders on one side of the market submit requests,
drivers on the other side of the market can take requests, and
a platform operator such as Uber or Lyft matches the riders’ requests to one or more available drivers. In the case of
crowdsourcing, organizations offer tasks, workers look for
tasks to complete, and a platform operator such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) or Upwork matches tasks to
workers.
Online bipartite matching algorithms are often designed
to optimize a performance measure—usually, maximizing
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5624

