The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Progressive Neighborhood Aggregation for Semantic Segmentation Refinement
Ting Liu1 * , Yunchao Wei2 , Yanning Zhang1
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
liuting@nwpu.edu.cn, wychao1987@gmail.com, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn

Coarse prediction

Abstract
Multi-scale features from backbone networks have been
widely applied to recover object details in segmentation tasks.
Generally, the multi-level features are fused in a certain manner for further pixel-level dense prediction. Whereas, the spatial structure information is not fully explored, that is similar
nearby pixels can be used to complement each other. In this
paper, we investigate a progressive neighborhood aggregation
(PNA) framework to refine the semantic segmentation prediction, resulting in an end-to-end solution that can perform the
coarse prediction and refinement in a unified network. Specifically, we first present a neighborhood aggregation module,
the neighborhood similarity matrices for each pixel are estimated on multi-scale features, which are further used to progressively aggregate the high-level feature for recovering the
spatial structure. In addition, to further integrate the highresolution details into the aggregated feature, we apply a selfaggregation module on the low-level features to emphasize
important semantic information for complementing losing
spatial details. Extensive experiments on five segmentation
datasets, including Pascal VOC 2012, CityScapes, COCOStuff 10k, DeepGlobe, and Trans10k, demonstrate that the
proposed framework can be cascaded into existing segmentation models providing consistent improvements. In particular, our method achieves new state-of-the-art performances
on two challenging datasets, DeepGlobe and Trans10k. The
code is available at https://github.com/liutinglt/PNA.

Backbone

Progressive refinement

Similarity matrix of the pixel with its neighbors

Figure 1: The core idea of our proposed PNA. Each pixel
has its neighborhood weight matrix corresponding to the
semantic similarity. The neighborhood weight matrices is
estimated on the multi-scale features from the backbone
network, which can be used to progressively aggregate the
neighborhood information so that the coarse prediction can
be refined by similar neighbors.

or exploited for edge detection as the complementary task in
which the learned semantic edge or edge-aware features are
further used to refine the segmentation outputs (Chen et al.
2016b; He et al. 2021).
Different from the way the existing methods utilizing
the multi-level features, we explore a novel method to utilize multi-level backbone features, which can explicitly take
advantage of the spatial structure knowledge to aggregate
the high-level semantic feature. The core idea of the proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 1. Based on the observation that pixels belonging to the same category always have
similar characteristics, we figure that it should be consistent in the feature space as well. Although previous methods (Krähenbühl and Koltun 2011; Lin et al. 2016) have attempted to exploit such structure property, they usually introduce it in the energy or loss functions by constraining the
pairwise pixel relations. For example, the pairwise potential function in Dense CRFs (Krähenbühl and Koltun 2011)
is based on the pixel-to-pixel color similarity and positional
relations, and RNNs are used to model the relationship between pixels and their neighbors (Lin et al. 2016). We argue
that multi-level features obtained from backbone networks
can naturally be used to estimate the semantic similarity be-

Introduction
Semantic image segmentation aims to predict the class label for each pixel of an image. Nowadays, many state-ofthe-art models are built upon Fully Convolutional Networks
(FCNs) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) which successfully applies the deep convolutional networks into pixelwise semantic segmentation tasks and showes impressive
improvement. Whereas, the generated low-resolution results
are too coarse to preserve the object details.
To refine the segmentation outputs, low-level features
with rich spatial details from the backbone networks are
usually adopted in the existing refinement framework. The
multi-scale features are either fused in a certain manner (Kirillov et al. 2019, 2020) to complement the missing details,
* Ting Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1737

