The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Task and Model Agnostic Adversarial Attack on Graph Neural Networks
Kartik Sharma1∗ , Samidha Verma2 , Sourav Medya3 ,
Arnab Bhattacharya4 , Sayan Ranu2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
2
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
3
University of Illinois, Chicago, USA
4
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
ksartik@gatech.edu, csy207575@iitd.ac.in, medya@uic.edu, sayanranu@iitd.ac.in, arnabb@iitk.ac.in
Abstract

1. White-box attack (WBA): In a white-box attack (Liu
et al. 2019; Wang and Gong 2019; Wu et al. 2019; Xu
et al. 2019a), the attacker has access to all information
such as model architecture, model parameters and training hyperparameters.
2. Black-box attack (BBA): In a black-box attack (Bojchevski and Günnemann 2019; Chang et al. 2020; Chen
et al. 2021; Dai et al. 2018; Gupta and Chakraborty 2021;
Li et al. 2020; Ma, Ding, and Mei 2020; Ma et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2020), the attacker does not have access to the
training model parameters. The attacker can only pose
black-box queries on a test sample and get the model output in return (such as a label or score).
3. Grey-box attack (GBA): A grey-box attack is a mix of
white-box and black-box attacks (Liu et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2020; Wang and Gong 2019; Zügner, Akbarnejad,
and Günnemann 2018; Zügner and Günnemann 2019),
where the attacker has partial information of the training
model. The extent of partial information depends on the
particular attack.
In this work, we focus on targeted black-box, evasion attacks (Dai et al. 2018). Specifically, we consider an input
test graph G = (V, E, X ), a target node t ∈ V and a budget B. Our goal is to introduce at most B edge alterations
(additions or deletions) in G such that the performance of an
unknown G NN model M is maximally reduced on node t.
Limitations of Existing Works: Although a black-box attack does not require any information on the model parameters, they operate under three key assumptions:
1. Task-specific strategy: Most G NN models are trained
for a specific task (e.g., node classification) using an appropriately chosen loss function. Existing techniques for
adversarial attacks tailor their strategy towards a specific prediction task under the assumption that this task
is known. Hence, they do not generalize to unseen tasks.
While this assumption acts as an added layer of security
for G NN models, we ask the question: Is it possible to
design task-agnostic adversarial attacks?
2. Knowledge of the G NN model: Although black-box attacks do not need knowledge of the model parameters,
they often assume the model type. For example, an attack
may be customized for G CN and rendered ineffective if
the victim model switches to Locality-aware G NNs (You,

Adversarial attacks on Graph Neural Networks (G NNs) reveal their security vulnerabilities, limiting their adoption in
safety-critical applications. However, existing attack strategies rely on the knowledge of either the G NN model being
used or the predictive task being attacked. Is this knowledge
necessary? For example, a graph may be used for multiple downstream tasks unknown to a practical attacker. It is
thus important to test the vulnerability of G NNs to adversarial perturbations in a model and task agnostic setting. In
this work, we study this problem and show that G NNs remain vulnerable even when the downstream task and model
are unknown. The proposed algorithm, TANDIS (Targeted
Attack via Neighborhood DIStortion) shows that distortion of
node neighborhoods is effective in drastically compromising
prediction performance. Although neighborhood distortion is
an NP-hard problem, TANDIS designs an effective heuristic
through a novel combination of Graph Isomorphism Network
with deep Q-learning. Extensive experiments on real datasets
and state-of-the-art models show that, on average, TANDIS
is up to 50% more effective than state-of-the-art techniques,
while being more than 1000 times faster.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Graph neural networks (G NNs) (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017; Kipf and Welling 2017; Velickovic et al.
2018; Nishad et al. 2021; Bhattoo, Ranu, and Krishnan
2022), have received much success in structural prediction
tasks (Goyal, Jain, and Ranu 2020; Ranjan et al. 2022;
Thangamuthu et al. 2022; Jain et al. 2021; Manchanda
et al. 2020). Consequently, G NNs have witnessed significant
adoption in the industry (Pal et al. 2020; Bose et al. 2019).
It is therefore imperative to ensure that G NNs are secure and
robust to adversarial attacks. In this work, we investigate
this aspect, identify vulnerabilities, and link them to graph
properties that potentially hold the solution towards making
G NNs more secure.
An attack may occur either during training (poisoning)
or testing (evasion). The attack strategy depends on the extent of information access. In the literature, primarily, three
modes of information access has been studied.
∗

Work done as undergraduate thesis at IIT-Delhi
Copyright c 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15091

