The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Inter-image Contrastive Consistency for Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Xixia Xu1† , Yingguo Gao2 , Xingjia Pan2 , Ke Yan2 * , Xiaoyu Chen1 , Qi Zou1 *
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
{19112036, 22110103, qzou}@bjtu.edu.cn, {yingguogao, kerwinyan}@tencent.com, xjia.pan@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation (MPPE) has achieved impressive progress in recent years. However, due to the large variance of appearances among images or occlusions, the model
can hardly learn consistent patterns enough, which leads to
severe location jitter and missing issues. In this study, we
propose a novel framework, termed Inter-image Contrastive
consistency (ICON), to strengthen the keypoint consistency
among images for MPPE. Concretely, we consider two-fold
consistency constraints, which include single keypoint constrastive consistency (SKCC) and pair relation contrastive
consistency (PRCC). The SKCC learns to strengthen the consistency of individual keypoints across images in the same
category to improve the category-specific robustness. Only
with SKCC, the model can effectively reduce location errors
caused by large appearance variations, but remains challenging with extreme postures (e.g., occlusions) due to lack of relational guidance. Therefore, PRCC is proposed to strengthen
the consistency of pair-wise joint relation between images
to preserve the instructive relation. Cooperating with SKCC,
PRCC further improves structure aware robustness in handling extreme postures. Extensive experiments on kinds of
architectures across three datasets (i.e., MS-COCO, MPII,
CrowdPose) show the proposed ICON achieves substantial
improvements over baselines. Furthermore, ICON under the
semi-supervised setup can obtain comparable results with the
fully-supervised methods using only 30% labeled data.

(a) Baseline

(b) +SKCC

(c) +SKCC+PRCC

Figure 1: Challenges existed in MPPE: (a) the results with
the current intra-image baseline; (b) the SKCC results based
on baseline; (c) the final results are refined by PRCC.

Su et al. 2019b; Sun et al. 2019) design elaborate architectures to learn more precise features or adopt the attention mechanism(Su et al. 2019a; Chu et al. 2017) to capture
discriminative features for accurate result. Although these
methods improve feature representations, they still suffer
from the inconsistent joint representations between images
due to lack of explicit consistency constraints.
To strengthen the representation consistency, one line of
researches focus on the graph-based methods (Wang et al.
2020; Qiu et al. 2020a,b) to model the structural relations
(e.g., wrist is adjacent to elbow). GPCNN(Wang et al. 2020)
proposes a refinement module to capture the joint context,
but the relations with less semantic correlations may mislead
the model. To dynamically model rich relations among keypoints, DGCN(Qiu et al. 2020b) propose a dynamic graph
to tolerate the large variations of human pose. Either empirically picking out edges or dynamically learning relations
from the graph, these methods consider most of relations,
which inevitably involve redundant relations with dedicate
module design. Besides, only considering intra-image relations also limits further improvement for MPPE.

Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation (MPPE) aims to locate human keypoints (e.g., neck, wrist) for each person in an image, which is a basic yet challenging task in computer vision. Benefiting from the development of deep learning(He
et al. 2016), CNN-based methods made significant progress.
However, the ability in handling keypoints with large appearance variations or extreme postures is still limited.
Model training is a procedure from special to general and
aims to learn consistent representations. Large variation of
appearances or extreme postures make it hard to learn consistent patterns across images for accurate estimation. To address these issues, some existing methods(Chen et al. 2018;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Works done while interning at Tencent Youtu Lab.
* Corresponding author.

3063

