The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Contrastive Open Set Recognition
Baile Xu1,2 , Furao Shen1,3 * , Jian Zhao4
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
4
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University
blxu@smail.nju.edu.cn, frshen@nju.edu.cn, jianzhao@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

known classes due to its closed nature, so it is not suitable for OSR. A direct solution is thresholding the softmax scores (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016) to reject estimations with low confidence, which provides a simple baseline
for OSR research. However, the over-confidence phenomena have been witnessed when test samples from unknown
categories are input to deep neural networks.
Although great progress has been made in the OSR research area, a recent study (Vaze et al. 2021) suggests that
simply using state-of-the-art training mechanisms on closedset classifiers could significantly boost their performances in
OSR tasks. This discovery shows the potential of using better representation learning techniques to improve the OSR
capability of the classifier. Inspired by this discovery, we
intend to develop a more effective representation learning
mechanism specifically for OSR tasks.

In conventional recognition tasks, models are only trained to
recognize learned targets, but it is usually difficult to collect training examples of all potential categories. In the testing phase, when models receive test samples from unknown
classes, they mistakenly classify the samples into known
classes. Open set recognition (OSR) is a more realistic recognition task, which requires the classifier to detect unknown
test samples while keeping a high classification accuracy of
known classes. In this paper, we study how to improve the
OSR performance of deep neural networks from the perspective of representation learning. We employ supervised contrastive learning to improve the quality of feature representations, propose a new supervised contrastive learning method
that enables the model to learn from soft training targets, and
design an OSR framework on its basis. With the proposed
method, we are able to make use of label smoothing and
mixup when training deep neural networks contrastively, so
as to improve both the robustness of outlier detection in OSR
tasks and the accuracy in conventional classification tasks.
We validate our method on multiple benchmark datasets and
testing scenarios, achieving experimental results that verify
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Traditional recognition algorithms work under a closed set
assumption that the training data and test data share the same
labels and feature space. However, it is usually difficult to
collect training examples covering all potential classes of
test samples in reality, and a traditional classifier would classify any test sample into one of the training classes, even if
its true category has not been learned. A realistic recognition
scenario for this challenge is open set recognition (OSR),
where samples from unknown classes may appear during
testing, and the recognition algorithm is required to detect
unknown test samples while keeping a high classification
accuracy of known classes (Scheirer et al. 2012).
In a traditional multi-class classification network, the
output layer usually uses the softmax function to produce
a probability distribution over the training classes. The
softmax function does not estimate the probability of un-

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed method. Supervised
contrastive learning pulls the positive examples from the
same class towards the anchor example, while pushing the
negative examples away. Virtual examples generated by the
mixup algorithm simulate unknown samples in the open
space.
In our research, we use supervised contrast learning to
learn high-quality representations by comparing the positive and negative pairs of training examples. We observed
that the contrastively learned representations work better for
detecting unknown targets. We also use the mixup algorithm to generate semantically vague virtual examples, so
that the model could contrast real training examples from

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10546

