The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

User-Oriented Robust Reinforcement Learning
Haoyi You, Beichen Yu, Haiming Jin* , Zhaoxing Yang, Jiahui Sun
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yuri-you, polarisybc, jinhaiming, yiannis, jhsun1997}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, improving the robustness of policies across different
environments attracts increasing attention in the reinforcement
learning (RL) community. Existing robust RL methods mostly
aim to achieve the max-min robustness by optimizing the policy’s performance in the worst-case environment. However, in
practice, a user that uses an RL policy may have different preferences over its performance across environments. Clearly, the
aforementioned max-min robustness is oftentimes too conservative to satisfy user preference. Therefore, in this paper, we
integrate user preference into policy learning in robust RL, and
propose a novel User-Oriented Robust RL (UOR-RL) framework. Specifically, we define a new User-Oriented Robustness
(UOR) metric for RL, which allocates different weights to the
environments according to user preference and generalizes the
max-min robustness metric. To optimize the UOR metric, we
develop two different UOR-RL training algorithms for the scenarios with or without a priori known environment distribution,
respectively. Theoretically, we prove that our UOR-RL training algorithms converge to near-optimal policies even with
inaccurate or completely no knowledge about the environment
distribution. Furthermore, we carry out extensive experimental evaluations in 6 MuJoCo tasks. The experimental results
demonstrate that UOR-RL is comparable to the state-of-the-art
baselines under the average-case and worst-case performance
metrics, and more importantly establishes new state-of-the-art
performance under the UOR metric.

Introduction
Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) raises a high level of
interest in both the research community and the industry due
to its satisfactory performance in a variety of decision-making
tasks, such as playing computer games (Mnih et al. 2013),
autonomous driving (Kiran et al. 2021), robotics (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013). Among existing RL methods, modelfree ones, such as DQN (Mnih et al. 2013), DDPG (Silver
et al. 2014), PPO (Schulman et al. 2017), which typically
train policies in simulated environments, have been widely
studied. However, it is highly possible that there exist discrepancies between the training and execution environments,
which could severely degrade the performance of the trained
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15269

policies. Therefore, it is of significant importance to robustify
RL policies across different environments.
Existing studies of RL robustness against environment
discrepancies (Wiesemann, Kuhn, and Rustem 2013; Rajeswaran et al. 2016; Tessler, Efroni, and Mannor 2019; Curi,
Bogunovic, and Krause 2021) mostly aim to achieve the maxmin robustness by optimizing the performance of the policy
in the worst-case environment. However, such max-min robustness could oftentimes be overly conservative, since it
only concentrates on the performance of the policy in the
worst case, regardless of its performance in any other case.
As a matter of fact, it is usually extremely rare for the worst
case (e.g., extreme weather conditions in autonomous driving,
power failure incidence in robot control) to happen in many
applications. Therefore, we should take the environment distribution into consideration and pay more attention to the
environments with higher probabilities though they are not
the worst.
Besides, a user that uses an RL policy for real-world tasks
may have different preferences over her performance across
environments. Furthermore, for the same decision-making
task, the preferences of different users may vary, resulting
that they are in favor of different policies. For instance, in
computer games, some users prefer to attack others and take
an aggressive policy, while others may prefer a defensive
policy. Therefore, user preference is a crucial factor that
should be considered in RL policy training, which is ignored
by the max-min robustness.
Due to the significance of user preference and environment distribution, we design a new User-Oriented Robustness (UOR) metric, which integrates both user preference and
environment distribution into the measurement of robustness.
Specifically, the UOR metric allocates different weights to
different environments, based on user preference, environment distribution, and relative policy performance. In fact,
the max-min robustness is a special case of the UOR metric
that the user prefers extremely conservative robustness, and
thus, the UOR metric is a generalization of the max-min robustness. Hence, in this paper, we focus on optimizing the
UOR metric during policy training, which can help obtain
policies better aligned with user preference.
To optimize the UOR metric, we propose the UserOriented Robust RL (UOR-RL) framework. One of the
training algorithms of the UOR-RL framework, namely

