The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Evaluating and Improving Interactions with Hazy Oracles
Stephan J. Lemmer and Jason J. Corso
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
lemmersj@umich.edu, jjcorso@umich.edu

Abstract
Please fetch my mug
from the table.

Many AI systems integrate sensor inputs, world knowledge,
and human-provided information to perform inference. While
such systems often treat the human input as flawless, humans
are better thought of as hazy oracles whose input may be ambiguous or outside of the AI system’s understanding. In such
situations it makes sense for the AI system to defer its inference while it disambiguates the human-provided information by, for example, asking the human to rephrase the query.
Though this approach has been considered in the past, current
work is typically limited to application-specific methods and
non-standardized human experiments. We instead introduce
and formalize a general notion of deferred inference. Using
this formulation, we then propose a novel evaluation centered
around the Deferred Error Volume (DEV) metric, which explicitly considers the tradeoff between error reduction and the
additional human effort required to achieve it. We demonstrate this new formalization and an innovative deferred inference method on the disparate tasks of Single-Target Video
Object Tracking and Referring Expression Comprehension,
ultimately reducing error by up to 48% without any change
to the underlying model or its parameters.

I’m not sure. Can
you try again?
p( ) = p( ) = p( )
Get the orange
one.

Standard Inference

Deferred Inference

(Oracle Assumption)

(Hazy Oracle Assumption)

Figure 1: A simple example of the benefit of our approach.
The human provides an ambiguous request that standard inference will misinterpret two-thirds of the time. By assuming a hazy oracle, the robot is able to defer the inference
and obtain additional information to solve the task. Robot
image via Wikimedia commons (CC-SA), mug images via
freepik.com. Best viewed in color.

Introduction
Many artificial intelligence systems are motivated by intuitive interaction with humans: by combining sensor inputs,
world knowledge, and human-provided information, they
perform useful inferences such as answering visual questions (Antol et al. 2015), propagating an initial segmentation through a video (Perazzi et al. 2016), or integrating semantic information to resolve perceptual ambiguity (Szeto
and Corso 2017). Despite the well-understood ambiguities
and difficulties of human-provided information explored in
the human-computer interaction domain (Ipeirotis, Provost,
and Wang 2010; Bhattacharya, Li, and Gurari 2019; Gordon et al. 2021), state-of-the-art works in machine learning
generally treat the human as an oracle that provides a single piece of flawless information then disappears. While this
formulation simplifies dataset-based evaluation, we believe
it more appropriate to treat humans as hazy oracles: the information they provide may be incorrect, ambiguous, or outside of the system’s understanding of the world, but they can
provide clarifying information after the initial query.

For example, consider the scenario shown in Figure 1:
a robot must perform the task of retrieving an orange mug
given a verbal command by a user. While the robot is likely
to misunderstand please fetch my mug from the table if it
does not know which mug belongs to the speaker, it can accomplish the desired task by delaying its response and requesting more information from the human. While conceptually simple, this mechanism of deferred inference is a challenge in practice: the robot must determine whether to defer
and, if it chooses to defer, determine how best to integrate
the potentially noisy additional information.
Although the benefit of deferred inference is intuitive
both for individual (Gurari et al. 2018) and crowd (Lemmer, Song, and Corso 2021) interactions, no standard approach for implementation or evaluation has emerged. Selective prediction approaches (Chow 1970; Geifman and ElYaniv 2017) evaluate performance thoroughly but do not

Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6039

