The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Noise Based Deepfake Detection via Multi-Head Relative-Interaction
Tianyi Wang, Kam Pui Chow*
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{tywang, chow}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract

Chow 2022). In specific, most of them focus on the video
itself and boost their performance through the techniques
of computer vision. While the hyper-realistic synthesized
faces are hard to find differences from the authentic ones
visually, forensic traces are left within the face area regardless of different face identity swap, fine-tuning, or smoothing techniques. On the contrary, the background area in each
image frame is usually unmodified as the purpose of Deepfake is face identity swap, and the less the original video is
modified, the more authentic the synthesized one is likely to
be. However, besides the studies employing the Photo Response Non-Uniformity (PRNU) (Lukas, Fridrich, and Goljan 2006) but failing in the Deepfake detection task, few approaches resort to forensic traces such as noise. Moreover,
many existing methods do not utilize video keyframes for
Deepfake detection, leading to huge information loss. This
is because the keyframes contain the most integrated video
information after common video compression.

Deepfake brings huge and potential negative impacts to our
daily lives. As the real-life Deepfake videos circulated on
the Internet become more authentic, most existing detection
algorithms have failed since few visual differences can be
observed between an authentic video and a Deepfake one.
However, the forensic traces are always retained within the
synthesized videos. In this study, we present a noise-based
Deepfake detection model, NoiseDF for short, which focuses
on the underlying forensic noise traces left behind the Deepfake videos. In particular, we enhance the RIDNet denoiser
to extract noise traces and features from the cropped face and
background squares of the video image frames. Meanwhile,
we devise a novel Multi-Head Relative-Interaction method to
evaluate the degree of interaction between the faces and backgrounds that plays a pivotal role in the Deepfake detection
task. Besides outperforming the state-of-the-art models, the
visualization of the extracted Deepfake forensic noise traces
has further displayed the evidence and proved the robustness
of our approach.

In this work, we present a novel noise-based Deepfake detection method, NoiseDF for short. In particular, we
study the underlying forensic noise traces of the Deepfake
videos. We crop the face and a background square from
each video keyframe and investigate the different noise patterns between real and fake ones, given the background
squares are unmodified. Also, we adopt the Siamese (Bromley et al. 1993) architecture and train the enhanced RIDNet
denoiser (Anwar and Barnes 2019) to extract the underlying Deepfake forensic noise traces from the face and background squares. Thereafter, we propose a new Multi-Head
Relative-Interaction method to measure the degree of interaction within each face-background pair in multiple views
of dimension and perform Deepfake detection accordingly.
The specialty of the Siamese design is to share the learnable weights for both branches so that heterogeneous inputs lead to distinct output features. In specific, the level
of relative-interaction is higher for a real face-background
pair than that for a fake face-background pair since only
the fake face contains Deepfake forensic noise traces. We
further apply depth-wise separable convolution for the projection of the noise features to overcome the efficiency decay of the convolutional neural network (CNN). Overall, our
proposed NoiseDF approach achieves promising Deepfake
detection performance against many existing state-of-the-art
baseline methods. Furthermore, we have visualized the ex-

Introduction
The video of a synthesized Barack Obama giving a speech
insulting the former president of the United States, Donald
Trump, is widely spread on YouTube1 . Without knowing the
truth that the face is synthesized using Jordan Peele’s, people
would possibly get tricked and believe it to be genuine. The
video is generated via deep neural networks that perform
face identity swap and generate hyper-realistic fake videos
appearing authentic, also known as Deepfake (Chawla 2019;
Maras and Alexandrou 2019). Deepfake is first introduced
by the Reddit user ‘deepfakes’ in 2017, utilizing deep neural
networks to swap a source person’s facial identity onto the
target one, maintaining the target person’s facial expression.
Since the first occurrence of the Deepfake face identity
swap technique, methods have been explored to perform
Deepfake detection with the help of deep neural networks
(Afchar et al. 2018; Nguyen, Yamagishi, and Echizen 2019;
Zhao et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2022b; Wang
et al. 2022; Hu et al. 2022a; Cheng et al. 2022; Wang and
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQ54GDm1eL0

14548

