The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Towards Efficient and Domain-Agnostic Evasion Attack
with High-Dimensional Categorical Inputs
Hongyan Bao1 , Yufei Han2 , Yujun Zhou1 , Xin Gao1 , Xiangliang Zhang3,1, *
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
INRIA
3
University of Notre Dame
hongyan.bao@kaust.edu.sa, yfhan.hust@gmail.com, yujun.zhou@kaust.edu.sa, xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa, xzhang33@nd.edu
Abstract

et al. 2022) and medical diagnosis. For instance, detecting
cyber attacks usually depends on categorical behavioral
signatures of the target IT infrastructures, including malware
execution traces, malicious network communication logs,
and system event logs (van Ede et al. 2022; Pendlebury et al.
2019). Machine Learning-based medical diagnosis is often
conducted by combining and encoding qualitative results of
various medical tests. Unlike continuous measurements such
as pixel intensities, each categorical feature is valued with
mutually exclusively category values. These optional category
values have no intrinsic ordering. Conducting adversarial
perturbations on categorical features is therefore in nature an
NP-hard knapsack problem (Wang et al. 2020). On one hand,
popular gradient-guided evasion attack methods against deep
learning models (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015)
become infeasible as computing gradients directly over
categorical variables is not applicable. On the other hand,
classic heuristic search solutions, e.g., Branch-and-Bound and
trial-and-error methods, suffer from high complexity and lack
guaranteed quality of the derived attack results, which can lead
to arbitrarily bad attack performances. It is therefore difficult
to define a computationally efficient strategy to produce
effective adversarial perturbations over categorical inputs.

Our work targets at searching feasible adversarial perturbation
to attack a classifier with high-dimensional categorical inputs
in a domain-agnostic setting. This is intrinsically a NP-hard
knapsack problem where the exploration space becomes explosively larger as the feature dimension increases. Without the
help of domain knowledge, solving this problem via heuristic
method, such as Branch-and-Bound, suffers from exponential
complexity, yet can bring arbitrarily bad attack results. We
address the challenge via the lens of multi-armed bandit based
combinatorial search. Our proposed method, namely FEAT,
treats modifying each categorical feature as pulling an arm in
multi-armed bandit programming. Our objective is to achieve
highly efficient and effective attack using an Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP)-enhanced Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
exploration strategy. Our theoretical analysis bounding the
regret gap of FEAT guarantees its practical attack performance.
In empirical analysis, we compare FEAT with other state-ofthe-art domain-agnostic attack methods over various real-world
categorical data sets of different applications. Substantial
experimental observations confirm the expected efficiency and
attack effectiveness of FEAT applied in different application
scenarios. Our work further hints the applicability of FEAT for
assessing the adversarial vulnerability of classification systems
with high-dimensional categorical inputs.

The current study in solving the adversarial attack problem
over categorical inputs falls into two groups. First, domainspecific knowledge is applied to narrow down the combinatorial perturbation space, and used as constraints to preserve
semantic/function integrity of the perturbed instances (Li et al.
2020; Zang et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Jin et al.
2020; Samanta and Mehta 2017; Papernot et al. 2016; Ma
et al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2020; Suciu, Coull, and Johns 2019;
Narodytska and Kasiviswanathan 2017; Croce and Hein 2019;
Pierazzi et al. 2020). Such domain-specific dependency limits
the adaptive potential of the attack method across different applications. Moreover, domain-specific knowledge may not be
always readily available. For example, the threat settings of cyber attacks vary drastically across different attack techniques
and IT system architectures (van Ede et al. 2022). Encoding
domain-specific contexts of various intrusion incidents require
expensive investigation overheads on a case-by-case basis.
Besides, system threats may stay unknown to security analysts
when an attack is delivered. It is impossible to define domainspecific rules for the zero-day attack events. The absence of
a principled and domain-agnostic adversarial attack protocol

Introduction
Adversarial evasion attacks have been witnessed in many
real-world data analytical applications(Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014; Cartella et al. 2021; Suciu, Coull, and
Johns 2019; Stringhini, Kruegel, and Vigna 2010; Imam and
Vassilakis 2019), including text processing (Yang et al. 2020;
Papernot et al. 2016) and image recognition (Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Szegedy et al. 2013). Despite the
flourish efforts on evasion attacks with continuous inputs,
such as image and video contents (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014; Szegedy et al. 2013; Carlini and Wagner 2018;
Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012), much less attention has
been paid to explore the adversarial threat against on machine
learning systems with categorical inputs. Categorical data
exist prevalently in real-world trust-critical applications, like
cyber attack detection (Shu et al. 2020; Wang 2017; van Ede
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6753

