The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Selector-Enhancer: Learning Dynamic Selection of Local and Non-local Attention
Operation for Speech Enhancement
Xinmeng Xu1 , Weiping Tu1,2 * , Yuhong Yang1,3∗
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, China
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{xuxinmeng, tuweiping, yangyuhong}whu.edu.cn
Abstract

Attention mechanisms, such as local and non-local attention,
play a fundamental role in recent deep learning based speech
enhancement (SE) systems. However, natural speech contains many fast-changing and relatively brief acoustic events,
therefore, capturing the most informative speech features by
indiscriminately using local and non-local attention is challenged. We observe that the noise type and speech feature
vary within a sequence of speech and the local and nonlocal operations can respectively extract different features
from corrupted speech. To leverage this, we propose SelectorEnhancer, a dual-attention based convolution neural network
(CNN) with a feature-filter that can dynamically select regions from low-resolution speech features and feed them to
local or non-local attention operations. In particular, the proposed feature-filter is trained by using reinforcement learning (RL) with a developed difficulty-regulated reward that is
related to network performance, model complexity, and “the
difficulty of the SE task”. The results show that our method
achieves comparable or superior performance to existing approaches. In particular, Selector-Enhancer is potentially effective for real-world denoising, where the number and types
of noise are varies on a single noisy mixture.

1

Figure 1: Comparison with (c) local and non-local attention
with feature-filter, (d) local attention, (e) non-local attention,
and (f) local and non-local attention based SE model enhanced speech spectrogram, in which most obvious details
of spectrogram distinction are framed by a gray and green
dotted box. Note that (a) is a noisy speech spectrogram, and
(b) is a clean speech spectrogram.

(Park and Lee 2017). However, the speech also exhibits nonlinguistic long-term dependencies, such as gender, dialect,
speaking rating, and emotional state (Bengio, Simard, and
Frasconi 1994). For aggregating more informative speech
features, several strategies are proposed, such as encoderdecoder architecture (Park and Lee 2017), dilated convolutions (Pirhosseinloo and Brumberg 2019) or applying longshort term memory (LSTM) networks (Tan and Wang 2018;
Oostermeijer, Wang, and Du 2021), to enlarge the receptive
field.
Furthermore, the non-local operation (Wang et al. 2018a),
which takes the advantage of self-similarity within the whole
speech to recover a local speech segment, is effective to establish the long-range dependence based on time-frequency
(T-F) units of speech spectra. However, T-F units of noisy
speech are usually corrupted, therefore, establishing the correlation between T-F units is unreliable, especially when
speech is heavily corrupted. Besides, the non-local operation
has O(T 2 ) computational complexity for a sequence length
of T , which increases the computational burden for the SE
model, hence the practical usage is limited. In addition to
non-local attention, local attention processes the local neigh-

Introduction

Speech enhancement (SE) aims at separating the underlying high quality and intelligently speech s from a noisecorrupted speech signal y = s + n, where n represents
additive noise. For many applications such as mobile communication and hearing aids, SE algorithms are restricted
to operate with low latency and often also to use only
single-channel inputs. With the recent advances in supervised learning, deep neural networks (DNNs) have become
state-of-the-art for single-channel SE. They typically operate in the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) domain and
estimate the target clean speech from the noisy signal via
direct spectral mapping (Xu et al. 2013) or time-frequency
masking (Wang, Narayanan, and Wang 2014).
Several studies have shown the efficiency of local processing by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for STFTdomain SE, which are structurally well-suited to focus on local patterns such as harmonic structures in the speech spectra
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13853

