The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Rethinking Safe Control in the Presence of Self-Seeking Humans
Zixuan Zhang* , Maitham AL-Sunni* , Haoming Jing* , Hirokazu Shirado, Yorie Nakahira
Carnegie Mellon University
{zzhang4, malsunni, haomingj}@andrew.cmu.edu, {shirado, yorie}@cmu.edu

100

Safe control methods are often designed to behave safely
even in worst-case human uncertainties. Such design can
cause more aggressive human behaviors that exploit its conservatism and result in greater risk for everyone. However,
this issue has not been systematically investigated previously.
This paper uses an interaction-based payoff structure from
evolutionary game theory to model humans’ short-sighted,
self-seeking behaviors. The model captures how prior humanmachine interaction experience causes behavioral and strategic changes in humans in the long term. We then show
that deterministic worst-case safe control techniques and
equilibrium-based stochastic methods can have worse safety
and performance trade-offs than a basic method that mediates human strategic changes. This finding suggests an urgent
need to fundamentally rethink the safe control framework
used in human-technology interaction in pursuit of greater
safety for all.

0.00105

80

Resulting Reward

0.00110

Resulting Risk

Abstract

0.00100
0.00095
0.00090

HAs
AAs
Average

60
40
20

0.00085
DWSC MSNE Proposed
Policy of AAs

DWSC

MSNE Proposed
Policy of AAs

Figure 1: Resulting risk (left) and reward (right) when Autonomous Agents use different safe control methods in a
Type A interaction. Types of interactions are defined in the
Problem Statement.

strategic human behaviors, i.e., how rational humans change
their strategy over time based on past experience. Control
theory is used to characterize the impact of such changes
on the performance and safety of the overall human-in-loop
system. We classified diverse scenarios into four qualitatively different types and studied when safety is intended
for worst-case human uncertainties, denoted as deterministic worst-case safe control (DWSC), and when equilibriumbased stochastic strategies, denoted as mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium (MSNE). Surprisingly, the deterministic safe
control discourages collaborative human behaviors, resulting in more risky interactions (Lemma 1, Figure 1).
Building on these insights, we then introduce a basic
method that encourages humans to behave in a way that improves the safety of the overall system (Theorem 1, Figure
1, Figure 4). Interestingly, existing safe control methods can
have worse safety and performance levels when compared to
the proposed method that mediates human strategic behavior
(Figure 1, Figure 5). A comparison between risk management in existing methods and the proposed method is shown
in Figure 2.

Introduction
This paper focuses on the safety-critical interactions of human agents and autonomous agents in the mixture of selfseeking and altruistic behaviors. Many safe control methods intend to behave safely in worst-case human uncertainties. The uncertainties can be great due to the complexity
and difficulty of modeling human behaviors, which forces
these methods to maintain a large safety margin and behave
conservatively. However, when we assume humans are selfseeking actors, the standard safe methods might elicit the
opposite effect. For example, when a human driver realizes
that autonomous vehicles (AVs) always yield their right of
way, the driver may cut in and change lanes aggressively toward AVs, which would pose greater risks for everyone. Safe
control technology could be improved by incorporating how
humans behave in response to autonomous systems.
Motivated by this potential, this work investigates how
safe control methods change human behavior and the safety
of the overall system in the long term. The human-machine
interaction is modeled using game and control theory as follows. The principles of evolutionary games are used to approximate the causal influence of the machines’ policy on

Related Work
Safe Control Many safe control methods exist for the
design of autonomous systems that interact with humans.
Some model human behaviors as uncertainties and noises

* These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15331

