The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

M-sense: Modeling Narrative Structure in Short Personal Narratives Using
Protagonist’s Mental Representations
Prashanth Vijayaraghavan, Deb Roy
MIT Media Lab, 75 Amherst Street, Cambridge, MA, 02139 USA
pralav@mit.edu, dkroy@media.mit.edu

Abstract

My dad just turned 60 and I jus

Climax
sin
gA
cti
on

Ri

Action/ Tension

on

sin
gA
cti

tion

Ri

tion

Ac
ing
Fall

Action/ Tension

Ac
ing
Fall

to bits. Last few days have
Narrative is a ubiquitous component of human communicarollercoaster ride. My dad look
tion. Understanding its structure plays a critical role in a
less active than usual. My
wide variety of applications, ranging from simple comparadiagnosed with CoVID-19 few d
tive analyses to enhanced narrative retrieval, comprehension,
kept on ventilator. So I felt so p
Dénouement
or reasoning capabilities. Prior research in narratology has
my strong dad turn so sick and
Exposition
highlighted the importance of studying the links between cogResolution
week of treatment, he has Hina
Inciting Incident
nitive and linguistic aspects of narratives for effective comand now I feel so relie
prehension. This interdependence is related to the textual seNarrative Progression
mantics and mental language in narratives, referring to characters’ motivations, feelings or emotions, and beliefs. HowMy dad just turned 60 and I just love my dad
Climax
ever, this interdependence is hardly explored for modeling
to bits. Last few days have been a
narratives. In this work, we propose the task of automatically
rollercoaster ride. My dad looked tired and
detecting prominent elements of the narrative structure by
less active than usual. My dad was
analyzing the role of characters’ inferred mental state along
diagnosed with CoVID-19 few days back and
with linguistic information at the syntactic and semantic levkept on ventilator. So I felt so pained to see
Dénouement
Climax
my strong dad turn so sick and meek. After a
els. We introduce a S TORIES dataset of
short personal narraExposition
week of treatment, he has Hinally recovered
tives containing manual annotations of key elements of nar-Resolution
Incident
and now I feel so relieved.
rative structure, specifically climax and Inciting
resolution.
To this
Resolution
end, we implement a computational model that
leverages
Narrative
Progression
the protagonist’s mental state information obtained from a
Figure 1: (Top) Freytag’s Pyramid. (Bottom) Highlights of
pre-trained model trained on social commonsense knowledge
climax and resolution for a sample personal narrative.
and integrates their representations with contextual semantic
embed-dings using a multi-feature fusion approach. Evaluating against prior zero-shot and supervised baselines, we find
that our model is able to achieve significant improvements in
always. Some of these characteristics provide the basis for
the task of identifying climax and resolution.
the organizational framework of a story, commonly referred

to as the narrative structure or the storyline. The growing
amount of personal narrative text information in the form
of social media posts, comments, life stories, or blog posts
presents new challenges in keeping track of the storyline or
events that form the defining moments of the narrative.
Several recent works (Dore et al. 2018; Yuan et al.
2017; Chung, Lee, and Glass 2017; Kočiskỳ et al. 2018;
Mostafazadeh et al. 2017) have made efforts to advance the
research in narrative comprehension. However, the development of computational models that automatically detect and
interpret different structural elements of a narrative remains
an open problem. Discovery of structural elements of a narrative has many applications in: (a) retrieval of narratives
based on similar dramatic events or concepts instead of keywords (McCabe, Allyssa, and Peterson 1991; Finlayson and
Winston 2006; Marchionini, Liebscher, and Lin 1991), (b)
linking related stories that form a narrative thread towards
theme generation (Berman and Slobin 2013), (c) summarization of stories (Lehnert 1981; Papalampidi et al. 2020)

Introduction
Narratives are the fundamental means by which people organize, understand, and explain their experiences in the world
around them. Researchers in the field of psychology maintain that the default mode of human cognition is a narrative mode (Beck 2015). Humans share their personal experiences by picking specific events or facts and weaving
them together to make meaning. These are referred to as personal narratives, a form of autobiographical storytelling that
gives shape to experiences. Polkinghorne (1988) suggested
that personal narratives, like other stories, follow broad characteristics involving: (a) typically a beginning, middle, and
end, (b) specific plots with different characters and settings,
or events. Often, characters learn something or change as a
result of the situation or a conflict and resolution, but not
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13664

