The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

A Survey on Model Compression and Acceleration
for Pretrained Language Models
Canwen Xu, Julian McAuley
University of California, San Diego
{cxu, jmcauley}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Despite achieving state-of-the-art performance on many NLP
tasks, the high energy cost and long inference delay prevent
Transformer-based pretrained language models (PLMs) from
seeing broader adoption including for edge and mobile computing. Efficient NLP research aims to comprehensively consider computation, time and carbon emission for the entire
life-cycle of NLP, including data preparation, model training
and inference. In this survey, we focus on the inference stage
and review the current state of model compression and acceleration for pretrained language models, including benchmarks,
metrics and methodology.

Introduction
The recent success of applying pretrained deep Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) on different NLP tasks (Devlin et al.
2019; Raffel et al. 2020; Le Scao et al. 2022) has raised concerns about its efficiency. The high computational cost also
prevents these pretrained language models (PLMs) from being deployed in production (Sun et al. 2020). To address this
problem, efficient inference refers to techniques that aim to
make inference of an ML model faster (time-efficient), consume fewer computational resources (computation-efficient),
less memory (memory-efficient) and less disk space (storageefficient). One popular class of techniques is model compression and acceleration, where a large and slow model is
compressed to a lightweight model that can be stored with
limited disk space on a mobile device, or accelerated to run
with low latency (or both). Also, training a large model and
then compressing it to a small one can be efficient for training
and good for generalization (Li et al. 2020).
In addition to technical considerations, large models also
raise environmental and ethical concerns (Bender et al. 2021).
Large models have a high carbon footprint which a compressed model can reduce, potentially with little sacrifice in
performance. Meanwhile, large models set obstacles for engineers and researchers from developing countries who cannot
afford the necessary hardware for running the model (Bender et al. 2021). Thus, model compression and acceleration
can be critical to make state-of-the-art NLP techniques more
accessible and facilitate inclusiveness.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10566

What’s covered? In this survey, we aim to highlight the
most important works in the field of model compression and
acceleration for PLMs. We review the metrics, benchmarks,
and methods, organizing these works in a new taxonomy.
Widely-used techniques, including weight sharing, low-rank
factorization, pruning, quantization, knowledge distillation,
early exit, and token skipping, are covered with comparative
analysis. We also highlight current challenges and future research directions in the field, calling for community efforts to
build an environmentally-friendly, inclusive and sustainable
future of NLP.
What’s not covered? This survey does not cover (1) methods that design a new architecture for training from scratch
(e.g., long-range Transformers, Mixture-of-Experts models);
(2) data-efficient or parameter-efficient model tuning that focuses more on the training efficiency rather than inference
efficiency (e.g., few-shot learning, prompt learning, partial
model tuning); (3) works that use the techniques surveyed in
this paper but for other purposes or are application-specific
(e.g., self-distillation, representation distillation for retrieval).
There have been surveys (Qiu et al. 2020; Han et al. 2021;
Xu et al. 2021b) that cover some aspects of this topic. Different from these works, we focus on the latest progress on
model compression and acceleration for pretrained language
models, highlighting the intersection between language technology and efficient ML.

Metrics and Benchmarks
Metrics
There are various metrics to depict inference efficiency in different dimensions. These metrics are often reported together
with accuracy to evaluate an NLP model.
Floating point operations (FLOPs) directly measures the
number of floating points operations needed for executing an
instance. FLOPs can serve as a metric for computational efficiency and is somewhat hardware-agnostic. However, FLOPs
cannot accurately reflect the real runtime since the degree of
parallelism (DOP) varies for different algorithms.
Inference time (i.e., delay) is used to measure the runtime
of an algorithm in its inference stage. Inference time can
vary on different infrastructures. When testing on the same
architecture, compared to FLOPs, inference time can better approximate the real-world performance of a system by

