The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

HALOC: Hardware-Aware Automatic Low-Rank Compression for Compact
Neural Networks
Jinqi Xiao1 , Chengming Zhang2 , Yu Gong1 , Miao Yin1 ,
Yang Sui1 , Lizhi Xiang3 , Dingwen Tao2 , Bo Yuan1
1

Rutgers University
Indiana University
3
Washington State University
jinqi.xiao@rutgers.edu, czh5@iu.edu, yg430@soe.rutgers.edu, miao.yin@rutgers.edu,
yang.sui@rutgers.edu, lizhi.xiang@wsu.edu, ditao@iu.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu
2

Abstract

Deng et al. 2021) and quantization (Rastegari et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2018), have been widely studied and developed
to reduce model redundancy with different granularity.
Among the existing compression methods, low-rank compression is a unique solution that explores the low-rankness
of DNN model at the structure level. By decomposing
the original large-size weight matrices or tensors to a series of small cores, low-rank compression can bring significant storage and computational savings. To date, many
decomposition-based compression approaches have been
proposed. Based on their differences in the factorization
schemes, they can be categorized to 2-D matrix decomposition based (Klema and Laub 1980) and high-order tensor
decomposition based (Tucker 1966).
Low-Rank Compression in Practice. From the perspective of real-world deployment, practical low-rank DNN
compression should satisfy two requirements: Automatic
Rank Selection and Hardware-awareness. First, assume
that using Tucker-2 decomposition (Kim et al. 2016) to compress an N -layer DNN with maximum rank value as M per
layer, there are total M 2N possible rank settings. Consider in
practice N is typically tens to hundreds and M can be up to
tens, the overall rank selection space is extremely huge. Evidently, automatic rank selection is highly desired to reduce
the expensive search efforts and the potential sub-optimality
incurred by the heuristic manual setting. Second, because
the decomposed DNN models are essentially executed on
the practical computing hardware, low-rank compression
should be performed towards reducing the hardware-cost
metrics, e.g., latency and energy, to obtain the actual benefits in the real-world scenarios. Also, consider the large diversity of current DNN computing hardware (e.g., desktop
GPU, embedded GPU, application-specific integrated circuit
(ASIC) accelerator, etc.) and different platforms may favor
different network structures, the direct feedback from the
target devices should be included in the low-rank compression process (Xiang et al. 2022).
Limitations of Existing Works. Measured from the
above two practical requirements, the existing low-rank
DNN compression approaches have several limitations.
First, most of the prior works determine the ranks via rounds
of manual trials and adjustments, causing expensive engineering efforts. Second, even for the state-of-the-art solu-

Low-rank compression is an important model compression
strategy for obtaining compact neural network models. In
general, because the rank values directly determine the model
complexity and model accuracy, proper selection of layerwise rank is very critical and desired. To date, though many
low-rank compression approaches, either selecting the ranks
in a manual or automatic way, have been proposed, they suffer
from costly manual trials or unsatisfied compression performance. In addition, all of the existing works are not designed
in a hardware-aware way, limiting the practical performance
of the compressed models on real-world hardware platforms.
To address these challenges, in this paper we propose
HALOC, a hardware-aware automatic low-rank compression
framework. By interpreting automatic rank selection from an
architecture search perspective, we develop an end-to-end solution to determine the suitable layer-wise ranks in a differentiable and hardware-aware way. We further propose design
principles and mitigation strategy to efficiently explore the
rank space and reduce the potential interference problem.
Experimental results on different datasets and hardware platforms demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach. On CIFAR-10 dataset, HALOC enables 0.07% and
0.38% accuracy increase over the uncompressed ResNet-20
and VGG-16 models with 72.20% and 86.44% fewer FLOPs,
respectively. On ImageNet dataset, HALOC achieves 0.9%
higher top-1 accuracy than the original ResNet-18 model with
66.16% fewer FLOPs. HALOC also shows 0.66% higher
top-1 accuracy increase than the state-of-the-art automatic
low-rank compression solution with fewer computational and
memory costs. In addition, HALOC demonstrates the practical speedups on different hardware platforms, verified by the
measurement results on desktop GPU, embedded GPU and
ASIC accelerator.

Introduction
Model compression is an important deep neural network
(DNN) optimization strategy that aims to improve the execution efficiency of deep learning. Motivated by the observation that considerable redundancy exhibits at different levels (e.g., neuron and bit) of DNNs, various compression approaches, such as pruning (Han et al. 2015; Dong et al. 2020;
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10464

