The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

Periodic Multi-Agent Path Planning
Kazumi Kasaura, Ryo Yonetani, Mai Nishimura
OMRON SINIC X Corporation Hongo 5-24-5, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
kazumi.kasaura@sinicx.com, ryo.yonetani@sinicx.com, mai.nishimura@sinicx.com

Abstract

search (Sharon et al. 2015)). It is also not obvious if the
high throughput can be maintained with scalable planners
that nevertheless have to determine agent trajectories adaptively in sequence (e.g., prioritized planning (Silver 2005)).
Furthermore, finding collision-free trajectories in highlycrowded environments would require consideration of planning in the continuous space (i.e., not grid maps) and with
continuous time (i.e., allowing agents to start and stop at an
arbitrary timing in a continuous timeline). However, such
continuous setups are generally challenging and there are
few established approaches (Andreychuk et al. 2021, 2022;
Kasaura, Nishimura, and Yonetani 2022).
In this work, we start by formulating a bit simplified but
new variant of MAPP called periodic multi-agent path planning (periodic MAPP) in which the timing of agent appearances is periodic. The objective with periodic MAPP is to
find a periodic plan, i.e., a set of collision-free trajectories
that streams of agents can use repeatedly over periods. By
finding such plans with periods that are as small as possible, we are able to improve the throughput of agent streams.
Importantly, periodic plans once found can be easily used
for solving a more practical problem called online MAPP,
a variant of online MAPF (Švancara et al. 2019) in which
a stream of agents can appear at random times but can also
wait until the subsequent agents enter the environment.
We develop a constraint-relaxation and optimization
method as a solution method to periodic MAPP. With this
method, we first generate an initial periodic plan under relaxed constraints about the physical size of agents with an
arbitrarily large period they appear. We then solve a continuous optimization problem to improve the initial plan such
that the agent size matches the original one and the period
becomes as small as possible. Therefore, our method can
find a collision-free and repeatable plan while minimizing
the period. We provide insights into the topological aspect
of solutions obtained with the proposed method.
We evaluated the effectiveness of our method on several
scenarios of abstracting AIM tasks, in which the goal is
to move vehicles appearing at intersections to the other
side without collision. Unlike existing methods that require
planning or re-planning for every appearance of a new
vehicle, the proposed method using periodic plans does not
necessitate communications with other vehicles to retrieve
their current locations or to update their trajectories. Nev-

Multi-agent path planning (MAPP) is the problem of planning collision-free trajectories from start to goal locations for
a team of agents. This work explores a relatively unexplored
setting of MAPP where streams of agents have to go through
the starts and goals with high throughput. We tackle this problem by formulating a new variant of MAPP called periodic
MAPP in which the timing of agent appearances is periodic.
The objective with periodic MAPP is to find a periodic plan, a
set of collision-free trajectories that the agent streams can use
repeatedly over periods, with periods that are as small as possible. To meet this objective, we propose a solution method
that is based on constraint relaxation and optimization. We
show that the periodic plans once found can be used for a
more practical case in which agents in a stream can appear
at random times. We confirm the effectiveness of our method
compared with baseline methods in terms of throughput in
several scenarios that abstract autonomous intersection management tasks.

Introduction
Multi-agent path planning (MAPP) refers to the problem of
finding a set of collision-free trajectories from start to goal
locations for a team of multiple agents. MAPP, specifically
multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) that searches for a solution
on a given graph, is a fundamental problem in multi-agent
systems (Stern et al. 2019).
We are particularly interested in the relatively unexplored
problem of MAPP in which, rather than a single agent, a
stream of agents enters each start location and leaves the environment upon reaching the goal. Instead of finding a set
of feasible trajectories with a small total cost, we aim to
improve the throughput for agent streams passing through
the environment. Such settings would be beneficial for several practical applications, such as autonomous intersection
management (AIM) (Dresner and Stone 2008) and automated warehouses (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008).
Handling agent streams in such a problem setting poses
a nontrivial technical challenge. As the throughput increases, the environment would be filled with a large number of agents, making it difficult to use optimal planning algorithms with limited scalability (e.g., conflict-based
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6183

