The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

KerPrint: Local-Global Knowledge Graph Enhanced Diagnosis Prediction for
Retrospective and Prospective Interpretations
Kai Yang1 * , Yongxin Xu3,4 * , Peinie Zou3,4 , Hongxin Ding3,4 , Junfeng Zhao3,4,5 † ,
Yasha Wang2,3,5 † , Bing Xie3,4,5
1
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100094, China
National Engineering Research Center For Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
3
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100871, China
4
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
5
Peking University Information Technology Institute (Tianjin Binhai), Tianjin 300450, China
yangkai@mail.zgclab.edu.cn; {dinghx, zhaojf, wangyasha, xiebing}@pku.edu.cn; {xuyx, zplkq}@stu.pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract

deep learning models still faces various challenges.

While recent developments of deep learning models have led
to record-breaking achievements in many areas, the lack of
sufficient interpretation remains a problem for many specific applications, such as the diagnosis prediction task in
healthcare. The previous knowledge graph(KG) enhanced approaches mainly focus on learning clinically meaningful representations, the importance of medical concepts, and even
the knowledge paths from inputs to labels. However, it is
infeasible to interpret the diagnosis prediction, which needs
to consider different medical concepts, various medical relationships, and the time-effectiveness of knowledge triples
in different patient contexts. More importantly, the retrospective and prospective interpretations of disease processes are
valuable to clinicians for the patients’ confounding diseases.
We propose KerPrint, a novel KG enhanced approach for
retrospective and prospective interpretations to tackle these
problems. Specifically, we propose a time-aware KG attention method to solve the problem of knowledge decay over
time for trustworthy retrospective interpretation. We also propose a novel element-wise attention method to select candidate global knowledge using comprehensive representations
from the local KG for prospective interpretation. We validate
the effectiveness of our KerPrint through an extensive experimental study on a real-world dataset and a public dataset. The
results show that our proposed approach not only achieves
significant improvement over knowledge-enhanced methods
but also gives the interpretability of diagnosis prediction in
both retrospective and prospective views.

Figure 1: An example of the Sepsis process of a patient.
Diagnosis prediction is one of these typical healthcare
scenarios (Choi et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020a). It predicts the future diagnoses of patients based on historical sequences of different clinical events (e.g., Diagnoses, Medications, Laboratory Tests and Procedures) from the Electronic Healthcare Records (EHR) Data. Recently many researchers have made progress by extracting the hierarchical semantics of various medical concepts from external resources (Yang et al. 2021), especially medical knowledge
graphs(KGs), to enhance the diagnosis prediction for better performance (Chen et al. 2018) and interpretations (Ma
et al. 2018b,a; Choi et al. 2017). However, there are still lots
of issues to tackle with.
Some KG enhanced works try to learn clinically meaningful representations of medical concepts (Choi et al. 2017;
Ma et al. 2018b) or the importance of medical concepts and
historical visits (Luo et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020b). These
works can give some knowledge-based clues instead of exact reasons or explicit evidence for the diagnosis prediction
task. Other works aim to learn the importance of paths from
the KG (Ye et al. 2021), as interpretable evidence from input
features to a certain label specifically for a specific disease.
These interpretation approaches are not feasible for the diagnosis prediction task, as the labels of diagnosis prediction
are almost all disease concepts, and the candidate knowledge
paths are enormous and may cover the whole KG.
Moreover, there is also a need for more consideration of
the time-effectiveness of external knowledge for different

Introduction
As the leading approach, deep learning has yielded recordbreaking achievements for its ability of learning deep
representations from a large volume of labeled datasets
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2017; Feng et al. 2021,
2022). But in some areas where high-level model interpretability is required for data analysis tasks, such as healthcare (Choi et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2017), the application of
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5357

