The Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-23)

fmLRE: A Low-Resource Relation Extraction Model Based on Feature Mapping
Similarity Calculation
Peng Wang1 * † , Tong Shao1† , Ke Ji1 , Guozheng Li1 , Wenjun Ke1, 2
1

Southeast University
Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Application
pwang@seu.edu.cn, 22S151082@stu.hit.edu.cn, {keji, gzli}@seu.edu.cn, kewenjun2191@163.com
2

Similarity Based on
Mathematical Calculations

Abstract
Low-resource relation extraction (LRE) aims to extract relations from limited labeled corpora. Existing work takes advantages of self-training or distant supervision to expand the
limited labeled data in the data-driven approaches, while the
selection bias of pseudo-labels may cause the error accumulation in subsequent relation classification. To address this issue, this paper proposes fmLRE, an iterative feedback method
based on feature mapping similarity calculation to improve
the accuracy of pseudo-labels. First, it calculates the similarity between pseudo-label and real-label data of the same category in a feature mapping space based on semantic features of
labeled dataset after feature projection. Then it fine-tunes the
initial model via the iterative process of reinforcement learning. Finally, the similarity is used as a threshold for screening
high-precision pseudo-labels and the basis for setting reinforcement learning rewards, which also acts as a penalty term
for the relation classifier loss. Experimental results demonstrate that fmLRE achieves the state-of-the-art performance
compared with strong baselines on two public datasets.

Similarity Based on Metric Ideas

query set gradient
support set gradient

similarity

bornplace
Institution

similarity
parent

no information of relation category

pseudo label:
bornplace

Figure 1: Comparison with two similarity calculations. The
gradient similarity calculation does not consider the relation
category information, but calculates the average similarity
of the entire dataset. In the right example of metric based
similarity, the dotted box is a type of support set feature,
and the solid circle is the mean of this type of feature. The
predicted pseudo-label bornplace is a query sample and
the average feature of bornplace is the support set. Their
distance in the mapping space is the similarity.

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) (Bach and Badaskar 2007)
aims to extract semantic relations of given entity pairs
and convert unstructured text into the form of triple
(head entity, relation, tail entity). Supervised learning
methods (Liang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022;
Wu and He 2019), which are based on large-scale datasets
and deep neural networks, have shown excellent performance on relation extraction tasks. However, the large-scale
and high-quality labeled data is often not available in industrial scenarios, which is called the low-resource relation
extraction (LRE) problem (Deng, Zhang, and Chen 2022).
Current LRE work can be roughly divided into two categories: task-oriented and data-oriented. The former combines relation extraction with few-shot learning such as
meta-learning (Qu et al. 2020), enables the model to learn information apart from feature representation when performing relation extraction, or to learn novel relations with the
help of external knowledge (Levy et al. 2017), pre-trained

models (Soares et al. 2019), etc. For instance, Ren et al.
(2020) propose the two-stage prototype network with prototype attention alignment and triple loss to improve the generalization of the model, which can dynamically identify new
relations with a small number of supporting instances without catastrophic forgetting. However, this method has drawbacks on task generalization and model complexity. To handle these problems, Dong, Pan, and Luo (2021) leverage the
idea of metric learning to optimize the LRE problem in the
pre-training stage. Peng et al. (2020) also discuss the impact
of different semantic feature selections on classification network performance in low-resource situations to reduce the
complexity. Therefore, the metric learning is beneficial for
better task generalization and less model complexity.
For the data-oriented LRE work, a traditional way is distant supervision (Mintz et al. 2009), while it often introduces
noise due to the assumption that the same relation must exist
between the same entity pair (Hu et al. 2019). To take full advantage of the unlabeled data in the low-resource scenario,
Rosenberg, Hebert, and Schneiderman (2005) propose selftraining by labeling the unlabeled data to expand the labeled

* Corresponding author.
†

These authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13700

